CERTAIN CONSIDERATIONS touching the better pacification, and Edification of
the Church of ENGLAND: Dedicated to his most Excellent Majesty.

Printed for HENRY TOMES.

CERTAIN CONSIDERATIONS touching the better pacification, and Edification of
the Church of ENGLAND: Dedicated to his most Excellent Majesty.
THE Unity of Your Church, ( Excellent Sovereign) is a thing no less
precious, than the Union of your Kingdoms, being both Works wherein your
happiness may contend with your worthiness. Having therefore presumed not
without your Majesty's gracious acceptance, to Joy somewhat of the one, I am
the more encouraged not to be silent in the other; the rather, because it is
an Argument that I have traveled heretofore: But Solomon commends a word
spoken in season; and as our Savior (speaking of the discerning of seasons)
says, when you see a cloud rising in the west, you say it will be a shower: So
your Majesty, rising to this Monarchy in the West parts of the World, does
promise a sweet and fruitsull hour of many blessings upon this Church and
Commonwealth, a shower of that influence, as the very first dewes and drops
thereof, have already laid the storms and winds throughout Christendom,
reducing the very sace of Europe, to a more peaceable and amiable Countenance.
But to the purpose.

It is very true that these Ecclesiastical matters, are things not properly
appertaining to my profession, which I was not so inconsiderate, but to object
to my self: but finding that it is many times seen, that a man that stands
off, and somewhat removed srom a plot of ground, does better suruay it and
discover it, than those which are upon it, I thought it not impossible, but
that I as a looker on, might cast mine eyes upon some things which the Actors
themselves, (especially some being interessed, some led and addicted, some
declared and engaged) did not, or would not see; And that knowing in my
conscience, whereto God bears witness, that the things which I shall speak,
spring out of no vain of popularitie, oftentation, desire of novelty,
parcialitie to either side, disposition to intermeddle, or any the like Leven I
may conceive hope, that what I want in depth of judgment, may be
counteruailed in simplicity, and sincerity of affection. But of all things,
this did most animate me, that I found in these opinions of mine, (which I have
long held and embraced, as may appear by that which I have many years since
written of them, according to the proportion nevertheless of my weakness) a
consent and conformity with that which your Majesty has published, of your
own most Christian, most wise and moderate sense in these causes: wherein you
have well expressed to the World, that there is infused in your sacred breast
from God, that high principle and position of Government, That you ever hold
the whole more dear, than any part.

For who sees not, that many are affected and give opinion in these matters,
as if they had not so much a desire to purge the evil from the good, as to
countenance and protect the evil by the good. Others speak as if their scope
were only to set forth what is good, and not to seek forth what is possible,
which is to wish and not to propound. Others proceed, as if they had rather a
mind of remoouing, than of reforming. But howsoever either side as men, though
excellent men shall run into extremities, yet your Majesty, as a most wise,
equal, and christian Moderator, is disposed to find out the golden
mediocritie, in the establishment of that which is sound, and in the reparation
of that which is corrupt and decayed. To your Princely judgment then I do in
all humbleness, submit whatsoever I shall propound, offering the same but as a
mite into the Treasury of your wisdom? For as the Astronomers do well observe,
that when three of the superior Lights do meet in conjunction, it brings
forth some admirable effects: so there being joined in your Majesty the light
of Nature, the light of Learning, and above all the light of Gods holy spirit,
it cannot be but your government must be as a happy constellation ouet the
States of your Kingdoms. Neither is there wanting to your Majesty that fourth
Light, which though it be but a borrowed Light, yet is of singular efficacy
and moment added to the rest, which is the Light of a most wise, and well
compounded Council, to whose Honorable and grave Wisdoms I do likewise
submit whatsoever I shall say; Hoping that I shall not need to make protestation
of my mind and opinion, that until your Majesty does otherwise determine and
order, all actual and full obedience is to be given to Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction, as it now stands, and when your Majesty has determined and
ordered, that every good Subject ought to rest satisfied, and apply his
obedience to your Majesty's Laws, Ordinances, and Royal commandments. Nor of
the dislike I have of all immodest bitterness, peremptory presumption,
popalar handling, and other courses tending rather to rumor and impression in
the vulgar sort, than to likelihood of effect, joined with observation of
duty.

But before I enter into the points contronerted, I think good to remove (if
it may be) two opinions, which do directly confront and oppone to reformation,
the one bringing it to a nullitie, and the other to an impossibility. The
first is, That it is against good policy to innouate any thing in Church
matters. The other, That all reformation must be after one Platform.

For the first of these, it is excellently said by the Prophet, State super
vias antiquas, and videte quanam fit via recta and vera, and ambulate in ea. So
as he does not say, State super vias antiquas, and ambulare in eis. For it is
true, that with all wise and moderate persons, custom and usage obtains that
reverence, as it is sufficient matter to move them to make a stand, and to
discover and take a view, but it is no warrant to guide or conduct the; a just
ground I say it is of deliberation, but not of direction. But on the other
side, who knows not that time is truly compared to a stream, that carries
down fresh and pure waters into that salt sea of corruption which inuironeth
all humane actions? And therefore if man shall not by his industry, virtue,
and policy, as it were with the oar row against the stream and inclination
of time, all institutions and ordinances be they never so pure will corrupt and
degenerate. But not to handle this matter co^mon-place-like, I would only
ask, why the civil State, should be purged and restored by good and wholesome
Laws made every third or fourth year in Parliaments assembled, devising
remedies as fast as time breeds misehiess, and contrariwise the
Ecclesiastical State should still continue upon the dregs of time, and receive
no alteration now for these five and sortie years and more? If any man shall
object, that if the like intermission had been used in Civil causes also, the
error had not been great. Surely, the wisdom of the Kingdom has been
otherwise in experience, for three hundred years space at the least. But if it
be said to me, that there is a difference between Civil causes and
Ecclesiastical, they may as well tell me, that Churches and Chapels need no
reparations, though Castles and houses do; whereas commonly to speak truth,
dilapidations of the inward and spiritual edifications of the Church of God
are in all times as great, as the outward and material. Sure I am, that the
very word and style of Reformation used by our Savior, ab initio non suit it
a, was applied to Church matters, and those of the highest nature concerning
the Law moral.

Nevertheless, he were both unthankful and unwise that would deny, but
that the Church of England during the time of Queen Elizabeth of famous
memory did flourish. If I should compare it with foreign churches, I would
rather the comparison shouldbe in the virtues, then as some make it in the
defects, rather I say, as between the Vine and the Olive, which should be most
fruitful, and not as between the bryer and the thistle, which should be most
unprofitable. For that reverence should be used to the Church which the good
sons of Noah used to their fathers nakedness; that is, as it were to
goebackwards, and to help the defects thereof, and yet to dissemble them. And
it is to be acknowledged, that scarcely any church since the Primitive Church,
yielded in like manner of years and Latitude of Country, a greater number of
excellent Preachers, Famous Writers, and grave Governors; but for the
discipline and Orders of the Church, as, many and the chiefest of them are very
holy and good, so yet if Saint John were to indite an Epistle to the church of
England, as he did to them of Asia, it would sure have the clause Habeo aduers
us to pauca. And no more for this point, saving that as an appendixe thereunto,
it is not amisle to touch that objection, which is made to the time and not to
the matter, pretending that is Reformation were necessary, yet it were not now
seasonable at your Matesties first entrance. Yct Hippocrates says, si quid
moves a principio move. And the wisdom of all examples does show, that the
wisest Princes, as they have eve: been the most sparing in remoouing or
alteration of servants and officers upon their coming in; so for remoouing of
abuses and enormities, and for reforming of Laws and the policy of their
States, they have chiefly sought to enable and commend their beginnings
therewith, knowing that the first impression with people continues long, and
when men's minds are most in expectation and suspense, then are they best
wrought and managed. And therefore it seems to me, that as the spring of
nature, I mean the spring of the year, is the best time for purging and
medicining the natural body; so the spring of Kingdoms, is the most proper
season for the purging and rectifying of politic bodies.

There remains yet an objection rather of suspicion then of reason, and yet
such as I think makes a great impression in the minds of very wise and well
affected persons; which is, That if way be given to mutation, though it be in
taking away abuses, get it may so acquaint men with sweetness of change, as it
will undermine the stabilitie even of that which is sound and good. This surely
had been a good and true allegation in the ancient contentions and divisions
between the people and the Senate of Reme, where things were carried at the
appetites of multitudes which can never keep within the compass of any
moderation. But these things being with us to have an orderly passage under a
King who has a Royal power, and approved judgment, and knows as well the
measure of things, as the nature of them, is surely a needless fear. For they
need not doubt, but your Majesty with the advice of your Council, will
discern what things are intermingled like the rares amongst the wheat, which
have their roots so inwrapped and entangled, as the one cannot be pulled up
without indangering the other, and what are mingled, but as the chafe and the
corn, which needs but a fan to fifth and sever them. So much therefore for
the first point of no reformation to be admitted at all.

For the second point. That there should be but one form of Discipline in all
Churches, and that imposed by a necessity of a commandment and prescript out
of the word of God; it is a matter Volumes have been compiled of, and
therefore cannot receive a brief redargution. I for my part do confess, that
in revealing the Scriptures, I could never find any such thing, but that God
had left the like liberty to the Church-gouernment, as he has done to the
Civil government, to be varied according to time and place and accidents, which
nevertheless, his high and divine providence does order and dispose; for all
civil governments are restrained from God unto the genarall grounds of Justice
and manners, but the policies and forms of them are left free. So that
Monarchies and Kingdoms, Senates and Seignories, popular States and
Communalties, are all lawful and where they are planted ought to be
maintained inuiolate.

So likewise in Church matters, the substance of Doctrine is immutable, and so
are the general Rules of government; but for Rites and Ceremonies and for the
particular Hierarchies, policies, and disciplines of Churches, they be left at
large. And therefore it is good we return unto the ancient bonds of unity,
in the Church of God, which was one Faith, one Baptism, and not one
Hierarchy, one Discipline, and that we observe the league of Christians as it
is penned by our Savior Christ which is in substance of doctrine this, He
that is nos with us, is against us. But in things indifferent and but of
circumstance, this, He that is not against us, is with us. In these things so
as the general rules be observed that Christ's Flocks be fed; that there be a
succession in Bishops and Ministers, which are the Prophets of the New
Testament, that there be a due and reverent use of the power of the Keys; that
these that Preach the Gospel, live of the Gospel; that all things tend to
edification; that all things be done in order and with decency, and the like;
the rest is left to the holy wisdom and spiritual discretion of the
master builders and inferior builders in Christ's Church, as it is excellently
alluded by that Father that noted that Christ's Garment was without seame, and
yet the Churches garment was of diverse colors, and thereupon sets down for
a Rule; In vest varies as sit scissura non sit.

In which variety nevertheless it is a safe and a wise course to follow good
examples and presidents. But then the rule of imitation and example, is to
consider not only which are the best, but which are the likest, as namely the
government of the Church, in the purest times of the first good Emperors that
embraced the Faith. For the times of persecution before temporal Princes
received the Faith, as they were excellent times for doctrine and ma^ners, so
they be improper and unlike examples of outward government and policy. And so
much for this point: now to the particular points of Controversies or rather of
Reformation.

Circumstances in the Government of Bishops.
FIrst therefore for the Government of Bishops, I for my part not prejudging
the Presidents of other reformed Churches, do hold it warranted by the word of
God and by the practice of the ancient Church in the better times, and much
more convenient for Kingdoms then parity of Ministers, and government by
Synodes. But then further it is to be considered, that the Church is not now to
plant or build, but only to be pruned from corruptions and repaired, and
restored in some decays.

For it is worth the noting, that the Scripture says, Translato acerdotio,
necesse est us and Legis fiat translatio. It is not possible in respect of the
great and near sympathy between the State Civil, and the State
Ecclesiastical, to make so main an alteration in the Church, but it would
have a perilous operation upon the Kingdom; and therefore it is fit, that
controversy be in peace and silence.

But there be two circumstances in the administration of Bishops, wherein I
confess I could never be satisfied. The one, The sole exercise of their
authority; The other, the Deputation of their authority.

For the first, the Bishop gives orders alone, excommunicateth alone, judges
alone. This seems to be a thing almost without example in government, and
therefore not unlikely to have crept in the degenerate and corrupt times. We
see the greatest Kings and Monarchs have their Councels. There is no temporal
Council in England of the higher sort where the authority does rest in one
person. The King's Bench, Co^mon-pleas, and the Exchequer, are benches of a
certain number of Judges. The Chancellor of England has an Assistance of 12.
Masters of the Chancerie. The Master of the Wards has a council of the
Court; So has the Chancellor of the Duchy. In the Excliequer Chamber, the
Lord Treasuror is joined with the Chancellor and the Barrons; The Masters of
the Requests are ever more than one. The Justices of Assile are two. The Lord
Presidents in the Marches and in the North, have councels of diverse. The
Star Chamber is an assembly of the Kings privy Council aspersed with Lords
Spiritual and Temporal. So as in all Courts the principal person has ever
either Colleagues or Assessors.

The like is to be found in other well governed Kingdoms abroad where the
jurisdiction is yet more distributed, as in the Courts of Parliament of France,
and in other places. No man will deny, but the Acts that pass the Bishops
jurisdiction, are of as great importance as those that pass the Civil Courts;
for men's souls are more precious then their bodies or goods, and so are their
good names. Bishops have their infirmities, and have no exception from that
general malediction which is pronounced against all men living, Va sole, nam
si occiderit, etc. Nay, we see that the first warrant in Spiritual causes is
directed to a number Dei Ecclesia, which is not so in temporal matters; And we
see that in general causes of Church government, there are aswol Assemblies of
all the Clergy in Councels, as of the States in Parliament, whence should this
sole exercise of jurisdiction come? Surely, I do suppose and think upon
ground, that ab initio non fuit ita; and that the Deanes and Chapters were
Counsels about the Seas and chayres of Bishops at the first, and were unto them
a Presbiterie, or Consistory, and intermedled not only in the disposing of
their revenues and endowments, but much more in jurisdiction Ecclesiastical.
But it is probable, that the Deane and Chapter stuck close to the Bishops in
matters of profit and the world, and would not loose their hold; but in matters
of jurisdiction, (which they accounted but trouble and attendance) they
suffered the Bishops to encroach and usurp, and so the one continues, and the
other is lost. And we see that the Bishop of Rome, (f^^ est and ab host
doceri, and no question in that Church the first institutions were excellent)
performs all Ecclesiastical jurisdiction as in Consistory.

And whereof consists this Consistory, but of the parish Priests of Rome,
which term themselves Cardinals, a cardivibus mundi, because the Bishop
pretends to be universal over the whole world. And hereof again we see
diverse shadows, yet remaining; As that the Deane and Chapter, Proforma
chooses the Bishop, which is the highest point of jurisdiction. And that the
Bishop when he gives orders, if there be any Ministers casually present,
calls them to join with him in imposition of hands, and some other
particulars. And therefore it seems to me a thing reasonable and religious,
and according to the first institution, that Bishops in the greatest causes,
and those which require a spiritual discerning, namely in ordayning,
suspending or depriving Ministers in excommunication being restored to the true
and proper use as shall be afterward touched, in sentencing the validity of
Marriages, and legittimations, in judging causes criminous as Symonie, incest,
blasphemy and the like, should not proceed sole and vnassisted, which point as
I understand, is a Reformation that may be planted sine strepitu, without any
perturbation at all, and is a matter which will give strength to the Bishops,
countenance to the inferior degrees of Prelates or Ministers, and the better
issue or proceeding in those causes that shall pass.

And as I wish this strength given to the Bishops by Council, so it is not
unworthy your Majesty's Royal consideration, whether you shall not think fit
to give strength to the general Council of your Clergy, the Convocation
House, which was then restrained, when the state of the Clergy was thought a
suspected part to the Kingdom in regard of their late homage to the Bishop of
Rome, which state now will give place to none in their loyalty and devotion
but to your Majesty.

For the second point, which is the Deputation of their Authority, I see no
perfect and sure ground for that neither, being somewhat different from the
examples and rules of government. The Bishop exercises his jurisdiction by his
Chancellor and Comissarie, Official, etc. We see in all Laws in the world;
Offices of confidence and skill cannot be put over nor exercised by deputy,
except it be especially contained in the original grant, and in that case it
is dutisull. And for experience, there was never any Chancellor of England,
made a Deputy. There was never any judge in any Court, made a Deputy. The
Bishop is a Judge, and of a high Nature, whence comes it that he should
depute, considering that all trust and confidence as was said is personal and
inherent, and cannot or ought not to be transposed? Surely in this again ab
initio nonfuitsta, but it is probable, that Bishops when they gave themselves
too much to the glory of the world, and became Grandes in Kingdoms, and great
Counselors to Princes, then did they deleague their proper jurisdiction as
things of too inferior a nature for their greatness; and then aster ths
similitude and immitation of Kings and Counts Palatine, they would have their
Chancellors and Judges.

But that example of Kings and Potentates gives no good defense. For the
reasons why Kings administer by their Judges, although themselves are supreme
Judges, are two. The one because the offices of Kings are for the most part of
inheritance, and it is a Rule in all Laws; That Offices of inheritance, are
rather matters that sound in interest, then in confidence, forasmuch as they
may fall upon womon, upon Infants; upon Lunatiques and idiots, persons
incapable to execute judicature in person, and therefore such Offices by all
Laws might ever be exercised and administered by delegation. The second reason
is, because of the amplitude of their Jurisdiction, which is as great as either
their birthright from their Ancestors, or their sword-right from God, makes
it. And therefore if Moses that was Governor over no great people, and those
collected together in a camp, and not scattered in Provinces and cities,
himself likewise of an extraordinary spirit, was nevertheless not able to
suffice and hold out in person-to judge the people, but did by the advice of
Iethro approved from God, substitute Elders and Judges; how much more other
Kings and Princes.

There is a third Reason likewise, not much to the present purpose, and that
is: That Kings either in respect of the Common, wealth, or of the greatness of
their own Patrimonies, are usually parties in suits, and then their Judges
stand indifferent between them and the subject. But in the case of Bishops,
none of these reasons hold. For first, their Office is elective and for life,
and not patrimoniall or hereditarie; an Office merely of confidence, science
and qualification. And for the second reason, it is true that their
jurisdiction is ample and spacious, and that their time is to be divided
between the labors as well in the word and doctrine, as in government and
jurisdiction. But yet I do not see, supposing the Bishops Courts to be used
incorruptly, and without any indirect course held to multiply causes for gain
of fees, but that the Bishop might very well for causes of moment, supply his
judicial function in his own person. For we see before our eyes, that one
Chauncellor of England dispatcheth the suites in equity of the whole Kingdom;
which is not by reason of the excellency of that rare honorable Person which
now holds that place, but it was ever so, though more and less burdenous to
the suitor, as the Chauncellor was more or less able to give dispatch. And if
heed be taken to that which was said before, that the Bishops labor in the
word must take up a principal part of his time, so I may say again, that
matters of State have ever taken up most of the Chauncellors time, having bin
for the most part persons upon whom the Kings of this Realm have most relied
for matters of Council. An therefore there is no doubt, but the Bishop, whose
circuit is less ample, and the causes, in nature not so multiplying, with the
help of references and certificates to and from fit persons for the better
ripening of causes in their mean proceedings, and such ordinary helps
incident to jurisdiction, may very well suffice his Office. But yet there is an
other help, for the causes that come before him are these, Tithes, Legacies
and Administrations, and other teftamentary causes, causes Matrimonial,
accusations against Ministers tending to their suspension, deprivation or
degrading, Symonie, incontinencie, Heresy, Blasphemy, breach of Saboth, and
other like causes of scandal. The first two of these in mine opinion, differ
from the rest, that is, Tithes and Testaments, for those be matters of profit
and in their nature Temporal, though by a favor and conniuence of the
temporal jurisdiction, they have been allowed and permitted to the Courts
Ecclesiastical; the one, to the end the Clergy might sue for that that was
their sustentation, before their own Judges; and the other in a kind of piety
and Religion, which was thought incident to the performance of dead men's Wills.
And surely for these two, the Bishop in mine opinion, may with less danger
discharge himself upon his ordinary Judges. And I think likewise it will fall
out that those suits are in the greatest number. But for the rest, which
require a Spiritual science and discretion in respect of their nature, or of
the scandal, it were reason in my opinion there were no audience given, but by
the Bishop himself, he being also assisted as was touched before, but it were
necessary also he were attended by his Chauncellor or some others his
Officers, being learned in the Civil Law, for his better instruction in points
of formalitie, or the courses of the Court, which if it were done, then were
there less use of the Officials Court; where of there is now so much
complaint. And causes of the nature aforesaid being only drawn to the Audience
of the Bishop, it would repress frivolous and poling suits, and give a grave
and incorrupt proceeding to such causes as shall be fit for the Court.

There is a third point also, not of jurisdiction, but of form of proceeding,
which may discern Reformation; the rather because it is contrary to the Laws
and Customs of this Land and State, which though they do not rule those
proceedings, yet may they be advised with for better direction, and that is,
the Oath ex Officio, whereby men are enforced to accuse themselves, and that
that is more, are sworn unto Blanques, and not unto accusations and charges
declared. By the Laws of England, no man is bound to accuse him self. In the
highest cases of treason, torture is used for discovery, and not for evidence.
In capital matters, no delinquents answer upon oath is required, no not
permitted. In criminal matters not capital, handled in the Star Chamber,
and in causes of Conscience handled in the Chauncerie, for the most part
grounded upon trust and secrecy, the oath of the party is required. But how?
where there is an accusation and an Accusor, which we call bills of complaint,
(from which the complainant cannot vary, and out of the compass of the which
the defendant may not be examined) exhibited unto the Court, and by Proccs
notified unto the defendant. But to examine a man upon oath out of the
insinuation of fame, or out of accusations secret and vndeclared, though it
have some countenance from the Ciuill-Law, yet is so opposite ex diametro to
the sense and course of the Common Law, as it may well receive some limitation.

Concerning the Liturgy, the Ceremonies, and Subscription.
FOr the Liturgy, great respect and heed would be taken, least by inueighing
against the dumb Ministry due reverence be not with drawn from the Liturgy.
For though the gift of Preaching, be far above that of Reading, yet the
action of the Liturgy is as high and holy as that of the Sermon. It is said,
Domus me a domus or ationis vocabitur, The house of Prayer, not the house of
Preaching. And whereas the Apostle says: How shall men call upon him on whom
they have not belerued? and how shall they believe unless they hear? and how
shall they bear without a Preacher? It appears that as Preaching is the more
original, so Prayer is the more final, as the difference is between the seed
and the fruit for the keeping of Gods Law; is the fruit of the teaching of the
Law, and Prayer, or Inuecation, or Divine service, or Liturgy (for these be
but variety of terms) is the mediate hallowing of the Name of God, and the
principal work of the first Table, and of the great Commandment of the Law
of God. It is true that the Preaching of the holy word of God, is the sowing of
the seed, it is the lifting up of the brazen serpent, the Ministry of Faith
and the ordinary means of salvation, but yet it is good to take example, how
that the best Actions of the worship of God may be extolled excessiuely and
superstitiously. As the extolling of the Sacrament bred the superstition of the
Mass; the extolling of the Liturgy and prayers, bred the superstition of the
Monastical orders and oraisons; And so no doubt Preaching likewise may be
magnified and extolled superstitioufly, as if all the whole body of Gods
worship should be turned into an ear. So as none (as I suppose) of sound
judgment, will derogate from the Liturgy, if the form thereof be in all
parts agreeable to the word of God, the example of the Primitive Church, and
that holy decency which S. Paul commends. And therefore first, that there be
a set form of prayer, and that it be not left, either to an extemporall form,
or to an arbitrarie form. Secondly, that it consist as well of lawdes, hymns,
and thankesgiuings, as of petitions, prayers and supplications. Thirdly, that
the form thereof be quickened with some shortness, and diversities of prayers and
hymns and with some interchanges of the voice of the people, as well as of the
voice of the Minister. Fourthly, that it admit some distinctions of times and
commemorations of Gods principal benefits, as well general as particular.
Fifthly, that prayers likewise be appropriated to several necessities and
occasions of the Church. Sixthly, that there be a form likewise of words and
Liturgy in the administration of the Sacraments, and in the denouncing of the
censures of the Church, and other holy actions and solemnities. These things I
think will not be much controuerted.

But for the particular exceptions to the Liturgy in form as it now stands, I
think diverse of them allowing they were just, yet seem they not to be
weighty, otherwise then that nothing ought to be accounted light in matters
of Religion and piety, as the Heathen himself could say, Etiam vultu sape
laeditur pietas. That the word Priest should not be continued especially with
offense, the word Minister being already made familiar. This may be said that
it is a good Rule in translation, never to confound that in one word in the
translation, which is precisely distinguished in two words in the original,
for doubt of aequiuocation and traducing. And therefore seeing the word (...)
and (...) be always distinguished in the original, and the one used for a
Sacrificer, the other for a Minister, the word Priest being made common to
both, whatsoever the deriuation be, yet in use it confounds the Minister with
the Sacrificer. And for an example, of this kind, I did ever allow the
discretion and tenderness of the Rhemish translation in this Point, that
finding in the original the Word (...) and never (...), do ever translate
Charity, and never Love, because of the indifferency and equivocation of the
word with impure Love.

Touching the Absolution, it is not unworthy consideration whether it may not
be thought improper and unnecessary, for there are but two sorts of
Absolution, both supposing an obligation precedent: the one upon an
Excommunication, which is Religious and Primitive; the other upon Confession
and Penance which is superstitious, or at least positive, and both particular,
neither general. Therefore since the one is taken away, and the other has his
proper case, what does a general Absolution wherein there is neither Penance
nor Excommunication precedent. For the Church never loses, but where the
Church has bound. And surely, I may think, this at the first was allowed in a
kind of Spiritual discretion, because the Church thought the people could not
be suddenly weaned from their conceit of assoyling, to which they bad heene so
long accustomed.

For Confirmation, to my understanding the state of the Question is, whether it
be not a matter mistaken and altered by time, and whether that be not now made
a subsequent to Baptism, which was indeed an inducement to the Communion. For
whereas in the Primitive Church, children were examined of their Faith before
they were admitted to the Communion, time may seem to have turned it to
refer as if it had been to receive a confirmation of their Baptism.

For Private Baptism, by Women or Laypersons, the best Divines do utterly
condemn it, and I hear it not generally defended, and I have often marvelled,
that when the Book in the Preface to public Baptism, does acknowledge that
Baptism in the practice of the Primitive Church, was anniuersarie and but at
set and certain times, which shows that the Primitive Church, did not
attribute so much to the Ceremony, as they would break an outward and
general order for it, the Book should afterward allow of Private Baptism,
as if the Ceremony were of that necessity as the very Institution, which
committed Baptism only to the Ministers, should be broken in regard of the
supposed necessity. And therefore this point of all others, I think was but a
concessum propter duritiam cordis.

For the form of celebrating Matrimony; the Ring seems to many even of
vulgar sense and understanding, a Ceremony not grave, specially to be made (as
the words make it) the essential part of the action: besides some other of the
words are noted in speech to be not so decent and fit.

For Music in Churches. That there should be singing of Psalms and
spiritual songs, is not denied, so the Question is De modo; wherein if a man
will look attentively into the order and observance of it, it is easy to
discerue, between the wisdom of the institution, and the excesseof the late
times. For first, there are no Songs or Verses sung by the Quire, which are not
supposed, by continual use, to be so familiar with the people as they have
them without book, whereby the sound hutteth not the understanding, and those
which cannot read upon the book, are yet partakers of the sense and may follow
it with their mind. So again, after the reading of the Word of God, it was
thought fit there should be some pawse for holy meditation before they
proceeded to the rest of the service; which pawse was thought fit to be filled
rather with some grave sound, then with a still silence, which was the reason
of the plaving upon the Organs after the Scriptures read. All which was decent
and tending to edification. But then the curiosity of division and reports,
and other figures of Music, have no affinity with the reasonable service of
God, but were added in the more pompous times.

For the Cap and Surplsce, since they be things in their nature indifferent,
and yet by some held superstitious, and that the question is between Science
and Conscience, it seems to fall within the compass of the Apostles rule,
which is, that the stronger do descend and yield to the weaker. Only, the
differenceis, that it will be materially said, that the rule holds between
private man, and private man, but not between the conscience of a private man,
and the order of a Church. But yet since the question at this time is of a
tolleration, not by conniuence which may encourage disobedience, but by law
which may give a liberty, it is good again to be advised, whether it fall not
within the equity of the former rule. The rather because the silencing of
Ministers by this occasion, is in this scarcity of good Preachers, a
punishment that lights upon the people, as well as upon the party. And for the
Subscription it seems to be in the nature of a consession, and therefore
more proper to bind in the unity of Faith, and to be urged rather for
Articles of doctrine, then for Rites and Ceremonies and points of outward
government. For howsoever politic considerations and reasons of State may
require uniformity, yet Christian and divine grounds look chiefly upon unity.

Touching a Preaching Ministry.
TO speak of a learned Ministry, it is true, that the worthiness of the
Postors and Ministers is of all other points of religion the most summary; I
do not say the greatest, but the most effectual toward all the rest. But
herein to my understanding, while men go on in Zeal to hasten this work;
they are not aware of as great or greater inconvenience then that which they
seek to remove. For while they inueigh against a dumb Ministry, they make
too easy and too promiscuous an allowance of such as they account Preachers;
having not respect enough to their learnings in other Arts, which are
hand-maides to Divinity; nor respect enough to the gift it self which many
times is none at all. For God forbid that every man that can take unto himself
boldness to speak an hour together in a Church upon a Text, should be
admitted for a Preacher though he mean never so well, I know there is a great
latitude in gifts and a great variety in Auditories and Congregations, but
yet so, as there is aliquid infionum, below which you ought not to descend. For
you must rather leave the Arc to shake, as it shall please God, then put
unworthy hands to hold it up, and when we are in Gods Temple, we are warned
rather to put our hands upon our mouth, then to offer the Sacrifice of fools.
And surely, it may be justly thought, that amongst manycauses of Athiesme,
which are miserably met in our Age, as Schisms and controversies, profane
scoffing in holy matters and others, it is not the least that diverse do
adventure to haudle the word of God, which are unfit and unworthy. And herein I
would have no man mistake me, as if I did extol curious and affected
Preaching, which is as much on the other side to be disliked, and breeds
Atheism and scandal as well as the other (for who would not be offended at
one that comes into the pulpit, as if he came upon the Stage, to play parts or
prizes,) neither on the other side, as if I would discourage any who has any
tolerable gift.

But upon this point, I ground three considerations, whether it were not
requisite to renew that good Exercise which was practiced in this Church some
years, and afterward put down, by order indeed from the Church in regard of
some abuse thereof, inconvenient for those times, and yet against the advice
and opinion, of one of the greatest and grauest Prelates of this Land, and was
commonly called Prophesying; which was this; That the Ministers within a
Precinct, did, meet upon a week day, in some principal Town, where there
was some ancient grave Minister, that was President, and an Auditorie admitted
of Gentlemen, or other persons of leisure; then every Minister successively,
beginning with the youngest, did handle one and the same piece of Scripture,
spending severally some quarter of an hour or better, and in the whole, some
two hours; and so the Exercise being begun and concluded with prayer, and the
President giving a Text for the next meeting, the Assembly was dissolved. And
this was as I take it, a fort-nights Exercise, which in my opinion was the best
way to frame and train up Preachers to handle the Word of God as it ought to
be handled, that has been practiced. For we see Orators have their
Declamations, Lawyers have their mootes, Logicians their Sophems, and every
practice of Science has an exercise of erudition and imitation, before men
come to the life, only Preaching which is the worthiest, and wherein it is
most danger to do amiss, wants an introduction, and is ventred and rushed
upon at the first; but unto this Exercise of the Prophecy, I would wish these
two additions; the one, that after this Exercise which is in some sort
public, there were immediately a private meeting of the same Ministers where
they might brotherly admonish the one the other, and especially the elder sort
the younger, of any thing that had passed in the Exercise in matter or manner
unsound and uncomely. And in a word might mutually use such advise,
instruction, comfort or encouragement, as occasion might minister for public
reprehension were to be debarred.

The other addition that I mean is, that the same Exercise were used in the
Universities for young Divines before they presumed to Preach, as well as in
the Country for Ministers, for they have in some Colleges an exercise called a
Commonplace which can m no degree, be so profitable, being but the speech of
one man at one time. And if it be feared that it may be occasion to whet men's
speeches for Controversies, it is easily remedyed by some strict prohibition,
that matters of Controversy tending any way to the violating or disquicting of
the peace of the Church be not handled or entered into; which prohibition in
regard there is ever to be a grave person President or Moderator, cannot be
suffered. The second consideration is, whether it were not convenient there
should be a more exact probation and examination of Ministers. Namely, that the
Bishops do not ordain alone but by advise, and then that the ancient holy
orders of the Church might be revived, by the which the Bishop did ordain
Ministers but at four set times in the year, which were called, Quatuor
tempora which are now called Ember-weekes; it being thought fit to accompany so
high an action with general Fasting, and Prayer, and Sermons, and all holy
exerciles. And the names likewise of those that were ordained were published
some days before their ordination, to the end exceptions might be taken if
just cause; were.

The third consideration is, that if the case of the Church of England be,
that where a computation is taken of all the perochian Parishes, as allowing
the union of such as were too small, and adjacent, and again a computation to
be taken of the persons who are worthy to be Paftors. And if upon the said
account it fall out, that there are many more Churches then Pastors, then of,
necessity, recourse must be had to one of these remedies; either that
Pluralities must be allowed, specially if you can by permutations make the
benefices more compatible, as there be allowed Preachers to have a more
general charge to supply and serve by turn Parishes unfurnished. For that
some Churchas should be provided of Pastors able to teach, and other wholly
destitute, seems to me to be against the Communion of Saints, and
Christians, and against the practice of the Primitive Church.

Touching the abuse of Excommunication.
EXcommunication is the greatest judgment upon the earth, being that which is
ratified in Heaven, and being a precursorie or prelasorie judgment of Christ
in the end of the world; and therefore for this to be used irreverently, and to
be made an ordinary process to lackie up and down for Fees, how can it be
without derogation to Gods honor, and making the power of the keys
contemptible? I know very well the defense thereof, which has no great force,
That it issues forth not for the thing it self, but for the contumacie. I do
not deny but this judgment is as I said before, of the nature of Gods
judgment, of the which it is a model; For as the judgment of God takes hold
upon the least sin of the impenitent, so excommunicatio, may in case issue upon
the smallest offense, and in case not issue upon the greatest, but is this
co^tumacy, such a contumacie as Excommunication is now used for? for the
contumacie must be such, as the party, as far as the eye and wisdom of the
Church can discern, stands in state of reprobation and damnation, as one
that for that time seems given over to final impenitencie. Upon this
observation I ground 'two considerations; The one, that this censure be
restored to the true dignity and use thereof, which is that it proceed not but
in cases of great weight, and that it be decreed not by any Deputy or
substitute of the Bishop, but by the Bishop in person; and not by him alone,
but by the Bishop assisted.

The other Consideration is, that in lieu thereof, there be given to the
Ecclesiastical Courts, some ordinary process, with such force and coertion,
as appertains. That so the dignity of so high a sentence being retained, and
the necessity of mean process supplied, the Church may be indeed restored
to the Ancient vigor and splendour. To this purpose joined with some other holy
and good purposes, was there a Bill drawn in Parliament in the three and
twenty year of the reign of the Queen deceased, which was the grauest
Parliament that I have known, and the Bill recommended by the grauest
Counselor of Estate in Parliament, though afterward it was stayed by the
Queens special commandment, the nature of those times considered.

Touching the Non-residents and Pluralities.
FOR Non residents except it be just of necessary absence, it seems to be an
abuse drawn out of covetousness and sloth; for that men should live of the
flock that they do not feed, or at the Altar at which they do not serve, is
a thing that can hardly receive just defense, And to exercise the office of a
Pastor in matter of word and doctrine by deputy, is a thing not warranted as
has been touched before. The question upon this point does chiefly arise
upon the cases of exception, and excusation, which shall be thought reasonable
and sufficient, and which not, for the case of Chaplains, let me speak that
with your Majesty's pardon, and with due reverence toward oother Peers and
grave persons, which are by Statutes privileged, I should think that the
attendance which Chaplains give to your Majesty's Court, and in the Houses and
Families of their Lords, were a juster reason why they should have no Benifice,
then why they should be qualified to have two, for as it stands with
Christian policy, that such attendance be in no wise neglected; because that
good which ensues thereof to the Church of God, may excced or counteruaile
that which may sollow of their labors in any, though never so large a
congregation, so it were reasonable that their maintenance should liberally
proceed thence whence their labors be employed. Neither are there wanting in
the Church, Dignities and preferments not joined with any exact cure of souls,
by which and by the hope of which such attendants in ordinary who ought to be
as for the most part they are of the best gifts and sort, may be further
encouraged and rewardeds And as for extraordinary attendants they may very well
retain the grace and countenance of their places and duties at times incident
thereunto without discontinuance or non-residence in their pastoral charges.

Next, for the case of Intending studies in the Universities, it will now
easily receive an Answer, for studies do but serve and tend to the practice of
those studies; And theref ore by that which most principal and final to be
left undone, for the attending of those which is subseruient and subministrant,
seems to be against proportion of reason. Neither do I see but that they
proceed Rightwell in all knowledge which do couple study with their practice,
and do not first study altogether and then practice altogether. And therefore
they may very well study at their benefice. Thirdly, for the case of
extraordinary service of the Church, as if some Pastor be sent to a general
Counsel, or here to a Convocation, and likewise for the case of necessity, as
in the particular of infirmity of body and the like, no man will contradict,
but there may be some substitution for such a time. But the general case of
necessity, is the case of Pluralities, the want of Pastors and insufficiency of
Livings considered. Posilo, that a man does faithfully and incessantly divide
his labors between two Cures, which kind of necessity I come now to speak
of, in the handling of Pluralities.

For Pluralities, in case the number of able Ministers were sufficient, and the
value of the Benefices were sufficient, then Pluralities were in no sort
tolerable. But we must take heed we desire not contraries; For to desire that
every parish should be furnished with a sufficient Preacher, and to desire
that Pluralities be forthwith taken away, is to desire things contrary,
considering de facto, there are not sufficient Preachers for every Parish;
whereto add likewise, that there is not sufficient living and maintenance in
many parishes to maintain a Preacher, and it makes the impossibility yet much
the greater. The remedies in rerum natura are but three, Union, Permutation,
and Supply. Union, of such Benefices as have the Living too small, and the
parish not too great, and are adjacent. Permutation, to make Benefices more
compatible men be ouer-ruled to some loss in changing a better for a nearer.
Supply, by stipendarie Preachers to be rewarded with some liberal stipends to
supply as they may, such places which are unfurnished of sufficient Pastors, as
Queen Elizabeth amongst other her Christian acts, did erect certain of them
in Lancashire, toward which persons, I see no reason but reading Ministers if
they have rich Benefices should be charged.

Touching the Provision for sufficient maintenance in the Church.
TOuching Church maintenance it is well to be weighed, what is Iure divino, and
what is Iure positive; it is a constitution of the Divine law, where-from
Human laws cannot derogate; that those that feed the flock, should live of
the flock; that those which serve at the Altar, should live at the Altar; and
which dispense Spiritual things, should reap Temporal things. Of which it is
also an appendix, that the preportion of this maintenance be not small or
necessitious, but plentiful and liberal; so that all the places and offices
in the Church have such a donation, that they may be maintained according to
their several degrees, is a constitution parmanent and perpetual. But for
particularitie of the endowment, whether it should consist in Tithes, or Lands,
or persons, or mixed, it may make a question of conuenience; but, no question of
precise necessity: Again, that the case of the Church De facto is such, that
there is want in the Church of patrimony, is confessed for the principal
places; namely, the Bishops livings are in some particulars not sufficient; and
therefore enforced to be supplied by toleration of Commendams, things in
themselves unfit and ever held of no good report.

And as for the Benefices and Pastors places, it is manifest, that many of them
were very weak and penurious; on the other side, that there was a time when
the Church was rather burdened with superfluity then with lack; that is
likewise apparent, but it was long since, so as the fault was in others, the
want redoundeth upon us again. And therefore, that it were to be wished that
Impropriations were returned to the Church as the proper and natural endowment
thereof. As a thing likewise whereon men's judgments will not much vary. Also,
that it is an Impossibility to proceed either to their resumption or
redemption, is as plain on the other side; for men are stated in them by the
highest assurence of the Kingdom, which is Act of Parliament, and the value of
them amounts much above ten Subsidies. And the Restitution must of
necessity pass their hands in whose hands there is interest and possession.

But of these things which are manifestly true, to infer and ground some
conclusions; First, for mine own opinion and since I must confess, let me
speak it with reverence, that all the Parliaments since the 27. and 31. of
King Hen.8. who gave away Impropriations from the Church, seem to me to stand
in some sort obnoxious and obliged to God in Conscience to do somewhat for the
Church, to reduce the Patrimony thereof to a competencie; for since they have
debarred Christ's wife of a great part of her Dowry, it were reason they made
her a competent Ioynture. Next to say, that Impropriations should be only
charged, that carries neither possibility nor reason. Not possibility for
the reason touched before. Not reason because if it be conceived that any other
persons be charged it should be a recharge or double charge, in as much as
he pays tithes to the Church, so the Realm has taken that away again from
the Church, and gave them to the King, as they might give their tenth sheaffe,
or ninth sheaffe; and therefore, the first guist being evacuated, it cannot
go in deseazance or disgrace of that perpetual bond whereby men are bound to
maintain Gods Ministers. As we see in example, that diverse godly and well
disposed persons do put in ure who are content to increase their Preachers
livings, which though in Law it be but a benevolence; yet before God, it is
but a conscience. Farther that Impropriations should not be somewhat more
deeply charged then other revenewes of like value; me thinks cannot well be
denied, both in regard of the ancient claim of the Church and the intention of
the first giver. And again, because they have passed in valuation between man
and man somewhat at the less rate, in regard of the said presence or claim in
Conscience before God: But of this point touching Church maintenance, I do
not think fit to enter into a farther particularitie, but relieve the same to
a fitter time.

Thus have I in all humblenes and sincerity of heart, to the best of mine
understanding, given your Majesty tribute of my cares and cogitations in this
holy business, so highly tending to Gods glory, your Majesty's honor, and the
peace and welfare of your States; in so much, as I am persuaded the Papists
themselves should not need so much the severitie of the penal Laws, if the
sword of the Spirit were better edged, by strengthening the authority and
suppressing the abuses in the Church.

To conclude therefore, renewing my most humble submission of all that I have
said, to your Majesty's most high wisdom; and again, most humbly craving
pardon for my error committed in this writing, with the same weakness of
Judgment which suffered me to commit them, would not suffer me to discover
them. I end with my devout and servent prayer to God, that as he has made
your Majesty the corner stone in joining your two Kingdoms, so you may be
also as a corner stone to unite and knit together these differences in the
Church of GOD, to whose heavenly grace, and never erring Direction, I commend
your Majesty's Sacred person and all your doings.

FINIS.

