AN ANSWER to M.I. Forbes of Corse, His peaceable Warning.

2. Cor. 11.14.15. 14. And no marvel, for Satan himself is transformed into
an Angel of light.

15. Therefore there is no great thing, if his Ministers also be transformed,
as the Ministers of righteousness, whose ends shall be according to their
works.

Printed, Anno Dom. 1638.

TO THE READER.
I Do not believe (good Reader) that any judicious man is persuaded, that our
Confession of Faith, solemnly sworn and subscribed by persons of all ranks
throughout the whole Kingdom, is worn out of date, for any thing he has
seen in M. I. F. of Corse his late Pamphlet: Yet lest any of weak judgment
give credit to his allegations, I have undertaken to clear the Truth for thy
farther information and their confirmation, He has entitled it, A peaceable
Warning, whereas it tends to division, and to annihilate the authority of
that general Confession sworn and subscribed universally now the third time.
Jeremy complains* that from the Prophet to the Priest every one deals
falsely: Icr. 3.11.
for they have healed the hurt of my daughter slightly, saying, peace, peace,
when there is no peace. So now many pretend a care for the peace of the Kirk,
when they intend no peace farther than their opinions shall be followed, and
the course they have laid down to themselves. It is true, he has disclamed
what he has written amiss, or to the offense of any in his former copies
spread abroad in writ. But is that a sufficient satisfaction for these vile
imputations of rebellion, sedition, disobedience, refractarinesse, temeritie,
unduetifulnesse to Ministers, and reproching them as blind guides. Howsoever
he now seems more modest, yet you may take up of what spirit he is. But I
will not, nor need not make Apology, but proceed to my answer to this Copy,
directing the same to the Author himself.

An answer to the first Chapter.
YOur historical discourse upon the Con^ession of Faith. which you call, The
short negative Confession, is unsufficient. For it was not only approved by the
general assemblyes holden in the year 1581; and then subscribed universallie,
but also in the year 1590. by a charge from the secreet Counsel procured by
the general Assembly. There was an Act made in the Assembly holden in June
1587. that Students in Vnivrsities subscribe the Religion then established and
professed by the mercy of God within this Realm, before they be promoved to
Degries. Whereupon, all such as have been laureat in the College of Edinburgh
since that time to this present year to the number of 1500 or therabout have
subscribed that Confession.

In the Assembly holden in March 1589 some were appointed to seek from the
Clerk of Register a copy of the act made lately before concerning the new
subscription of the Band, and the same Confession of Faith. Some were sent to
petition the Counsel, that Commissions might be given to such persons, as
were agried upon before the holding of the Assembly, to receive de novo
subscriptions to the Band of maintenance of Religion subscribed by his
Majesty, and the same Confession of Faith, which was put in execution, and the
Band was printed with the Confession. Whereby you may perceive, what is meant
by Religion in the Band of maintenance.

As you have your self cited sundry acts of Parliament for the first
Confession, you might have added an act of approbation of this Confession also.
In the 12 Parliament holden in June anno 1592. and act 123 it is declared, that
no Subject shall enjoy the benefit of the act of Pacification made in Februar
1572. of aboltion made in December 1585. or of both ratified in Iulie 1587.
unless they profess the true Religon, as the same was then professed within
this Realm, and acknowledge his Highness Authority. But the heads contained
in that Confession were the points of Religion then professed within this
Realm; was not universal subscription p^eceeding a sign of profession, Was
any subscription accepted but to that Confession since it was first subscribed.
The title of the Act shows, that by profession, is meant giving confession of
their Faith. The conjoyning of the acknowledegment of the Kings authority with
professing the true Religion, as it was then professed, leads ^s to that
Confession: For in the end of that act, there (...) a clause binding the
subscribers to acknowledge K. James to be their Sovereign Lord, which agrieth
not with any other Confession. No other Confession of Faith can be meant in
the acts of Parliament following.

Whereas you say, it was called The Kings Confession, because it was set out
in the Kings Name, We say, it might have been as well so called, because it
was first subscribed by the King and Court. But there is no great matter, upon
what ground it was so called by any. This is undoubted, that it was the
Confession of the Kirk of Scotland that it was so taken by foreign Kirks, and
therefore insert in the harmony of the Confessions of the reformed Kirks, and
there called in the superscription The Confession of the Faith of Scotland,
which is a larger title, than to call it The Kings Confession. If that
Confession which was universally subscribed by direction from Authority, and
of the national assembly, may not justly be called, The Confession of the
Kirk, let any man judge.

You say, because it insisteth most in rejecting of errors, it is also called
The negative Confession. It is so called by Papists, and such as look back to
Popery, but not justly. For it consists of an affirmative part,
comprehending the first Confession as these words do expressly bear. We
believe with our hearts, confess with our mouths, subscribe with our hands,
and constantly affirm before God, and the World etc. and of rejection of
errors, for which you call it often The negative Confession, taking the
denomination from a part, from the lesser part, and from the negative part,
rather than from the affirmative. Nay rather from the quality of the appendix
to the old Confession, than of the Confession it self. For the rejection of
errors is appended to the old Confession. This course to join the rejection
of errors with positive points of doctrine was followed at the Counsel at
Dort. Your self confess that many masked Papists subscribed the old
Confession deceitfully, and therefore that this form of consenting to the old,
with a rejection of all contrary Religion, and sundry popish errors
particularly expressed, was drawn up to discover them. Was not that needful,
and the course lawful? Whereas you say, a certain reverend Brother, meaning
Master Craig did it. Will any man think, that none did perceive the deceit of
masked Papists, but he alone? Or that he presumed to draw up that form
without the consent of other reverend Brethren. finding this course to be
necessary, or that it could pass without approbation of the general
Assembly. M. Alexander Anderson Principal, M. Andrew Galloway Sub-principall.
M. Andrew Anderson, M. Duncan Norie, Regents of the College of Aberdene, were
called before the Earl of Murrey Regent, and the Lords of privy Counsel, who
were present with him in Aberdene in Iulie 1569. and were required to approve
by subscription the old Confession of Faith, with all other Acts made
concerning Christian Religion in the Parliamenrs holden at Edinburgh in August
1560. and December 1567. They were deprived for their refusal of all honors,
dignities, functions, preheminences, faculties, and privileges within the said
College, and of liberty to instruct the youth in any part within this Realm.
The Commissioner of the Kirk to the shirefdomes of Aberdene, and Bamfe,
pronounced the like sentence, by the advice, counsel, and consent of the
Ministers and Elders in these bounds. But so it is, that su^drie of these acts
of Parliament, whereunto they were required to subscribe, were negative, as you
use the term or a rejection of popish errors, either in general or
particular, as the denial of the Popes authority and jurisdiction, the
annulling of all Acts made since K. James the first his time, not agrieing with
the word of God, and contrary to the confession of Faith, then published, the
condemni^g of the Mass, baptising conform to the manner of the popish Kirk,
and the abrogating and annulling of all laws acts, and constit^tions, canons,
civil, or municipall, contrary to the said true Religion. So you see, that
even then they thought it not enough to require subscription to the Confession,
but also to abrenunce contrary errors, specially popish. This Confession,
which you call the negative, explaineth more particularly these acts. And
therefore in the title before it was called, A general Confession of the true
Christian faith and Religion, according to GODS Word, and Acts of Parliaments.
It were good that the like course were taken with you, and your fellows in
Aberdene to that which was taken with these before you, that is, to remove you,
if you subscribe not that Confession, which you seem to despyte so much. In
the mean time, I would have you content to call it not the negative
Confession, but the general Confession; as the title bears.

To the second Chapter.
YOu say, divine authority appertains absolutely to the canonical
Scriptures, conditionally to other writings and sermons, to wit, in so far as
they have the truth revealed in the Scriptures contained in them. What if
there be no error, but all truth which is contained, will you call them
therefore absolutely divine? We profess, we believe with our hearts,
confess with our mouths, subscribe with our hands, and constantly affirm
both before God and the World, that the Religion particularly expressed in the
conf^ssion of Faith confirmed by sundry acts of Parliaments is Gods eternal
Truth, and therefore you are bound to stick to it howbeit we hold not that
or any other confession absolutely divine. For that testimony, whether by
word or writ is called divine, and has absolutely divine authority, which
has God himself for the author of it, either immediately by himself, or by
the ministry of men, to whom he delivered his will by vision, dream, or
immediate inspiration of the Spirit. Both the matter and diction are from GOD.
If the testimony of learned men agreeable with the Scriptures might be called
divine absolutely and simply, then there should be no difference between the
holy Scripture and the same writings of the learned. The Manicheans said, that
what Orpheus Sybilla, and the Philosophers of the Gentiles foretold of Christ,
Contra Faust. l. 13 c. 15.
were of as great authority as the words of the Prophets. Augustine
answers, that if any truth be found in them, it avails to their
conviction, but not to be holden in estimation or authority as the words of
the Prophets. For the Devils, said he, spoke true things of Christ, yet were
not of as great authority as the Angels. See in Gratian did. 37. Sicut very.
But it may be in stead of conditionally divine, you would say in some regard or
respect, that is in respect of the truth of the matter, in which respect it
cannot be called conditionally divine because it is already so far divine.
And this is the expression of Divines, Etsi enim verae Ecclesiae judicium and
testimonium dici possit divinum, non (...) sed (...), Polan syn. lib. cap. 25
nis mirum quatenus cum Scriptura sacra, and proinde cum Spiritu sancto and
revelata Dei voluntate congruit, tamen (...) considaratum non est divinum, sed
humanum. quia non est immediate a spiritu sancto inspiratum. Alioqui omne juo
dicium and testimonium cujuscunque hominis congruens cum sacra scriptura esset
divinum, atque ita jamnulla esset differentia quoad authoritatem interscripta
Prophetarum, and Apostolorum and aliorum ecclesia Doctorum sacris literis
consentanea scribentium. So we say of our Confession of Faith, it is not
simpliciter divine, but in respect of the matter and truth contained into it,
it may be called in that respect, and so far only divine.

Where you say, if we find in the writings of men any thing repugnant to the
holy Scriptures we ought to reject it, correct it, or amend it; as our
progenitors willingly professed in their epistle prefixed to their national
Confession. That epistle or preface seems to have been written in name of
the Barons, Gentlemen, Burgesses, and other Subjects professing the true
Religion, who after that they had in their Supplication to the Estates offered
to prove the doctrine of the Roman Kirk to be repugnant to the word of God,
were commanded to draw up the sum of that doctrine, which they would
maintain. and desire the Parliament to ratify. Within four days after, it
was presented and read, first before the Lords of the Articles, and after.
before the whole Estates. Some of the Ministry were present standing ready to
answer, what might be alleged against it. The Bishops and others of a
contrary mind were charged in the name of GOD to object against it, if they
could. Every Article was read by it self. None would, nor could object in the
contrare. The Eerle of Marshall protested, that no Ecelesiasticall person
should afterward have place to oppone, considering, that time was granted them
to advise, and none opponed in so free and peaceable a Parliament. After that
none opponed by argument. The Confession it self (without their epistle
prefixed, when it was exhibited by the Protestants, as the title bears before
the Confession) was authorized, as a doctrine grounded upon the infallible Word
of God, as you may see, where it is insert in the acts of Parliament.

Apparently you would have no Confession of Faith ratified and authorized, or
to stand firm and stable, but that every man may have liberty to impugn it.
This were to unsettle a Kirk or Estate. After a Confession is ratified, none
should be suffered to be members, let be office-bearers in that Kirk, who
refuse to subscribe or impugneth it private or public, in schools or pulpits,
unless it be first corrected by the Kirk and Estates, which has approved and
ratified it.

You say, that short Confession has humane private authority, and is respected
for the Penner, and many well affected christians subscribers. But that in this
regard we are no more tied to this Confession then any part of Augustine
Ambrose, Luther, or Calvin's works approved by many good Chistians, nor that
the obligation of the subscribers can be extended beyond their own persons and
lifetimes. But we have told you already, that it is the Confession of the Kirk
of Scotland, approved by the Kirk of Scotland, and subscribed universally by
direction of authority at two sundry times, which is more than to be penned
by M. Craig, and subscribed by many good Christians, or has been done to any
part of Aagustine, Ambrose, Luther, or Calvin's works

Beza set forth a notable Confession of faith, which is approved by many good
Christians, yet is esteemed only as a private work. But so is not the general
confession of the Kirk of Scotland. The orthodox confession of a reformed kirk
deserves greater respect than the treatises or works of Ambrose, Luther etc.
Sunt enim hae Confessiones orthodoxae, tanquam tabulae authentica, privatorum
Doctorum scriptis anteponendae. as is said in the Latin preface to the
Confessions of faith. There is good reason for it: for humane authority
admits degrees. The public is more valide than a private. Sententia communi
omnium assensu recepta; long probabilior erit sententia ea, quam unus and
alter statuit. One man speaking according to Scripture is to be prefered
before a great assembly of doctors speaking without criptures: But then his
judgment is preferred because of Gods authority. not for his own. B^r we
are now comparing private men with a whole Kirk ceteris paribus, in regard of
themselves, and consider humane testimony or judgment qua tale in so far as it
is humane. To conclude this point, We are as well tied to the general
Confession as to that which you call the national, for the general is
national as well as the first. In the mean time, you have shown little respect
either to the penner or subscribers, for you call it the negative Confession,
the short negative Confession.

The supreme authority civil you distinguish in royal or legal, and the
legal you make also royal. So then the royal power is royal or legal. Or
you mean, the royal power is either conjunct with the Estates, as in making
Laws, because ne civiles quidem leges ex fua solius authoritate far potest,
as says Burthillus contra Becani controvers. page 66. or without their
concurrence, as in giving remissions etc. But this you may call the royal
Prerogative. The power legal you should call legislative, or law giving power,
which Politicians call (...). for the power of execution, or administration of
justice should be also legal* and ruled by the laws. This short Confession,
you say, had never authority legal, for it was never ratified by act of
Parliament, but all the civil authority it had, was only royal by the Kings
mandat. You would say imposed by virtue of his royal prerogative* I believe
that his Majesty professing lately in his Declaration, that he would not urge
the Service book farther but in a legal manner, would not impose upon us
subseription to the Confession of Faith by his royal mandat, but in a legal
manner. I am sure there is as great reason for the one as for the other. But
we have showed already, that it has been ratified by act of Parliament
universally recived and subscribed, which is equivalent to a Parliament. But
more of this anon.

You say, Authority ecclesiastical was given to this Confession by two
national Synods. But I have cited more, which you have omitted, whether of set
purpose, or otherwise, I refer to your own conscience.

You say, the Authority synodicall immediate, was that approbation, whereby
these Synods declared this Confession to be a true, Christian, faithful, and
godly Confession, and that such as truly profess Jesus Christ ought to agree
thereto. That by this reason it tends to manifest a divine authority of the
confession of the doctrine thereof, and in respect of the matter so approved
does equally oblish all Christians. We have already cleared that point of
divine authority wherein you have fumbled. As for the other point, we do
think that all good Christians should embrace our Confession, We being
persuaded, when we subscribe, that it is the undoubted truth grounded upon
the written Word. But our intention was not to set down a Confession of faith,
whereunto all Christians in the world should be tied, but only such as will
be members of this Kirk, and to make known to the world what we profess.
For as it is well observed in the preface to the harmony of Confessions. If
every man be commanded to make Confession of his Faith, so often as Gods
glory and the edification of the Kirk shall require, what a wonderful and
strange thing ought it to seem, if Cities, if Provinces, if whole Kingdoms
have made profession of their Faith, When they were falselie charged by the
Popish sort, that they had gone from the doctrine of the true Kirk. You
acknowledge you are obliged to reverence the judgment of a national Synod of
our Kirk in matters substantial. Why not in matters also rituall and
disciplinarie? for these I suppose you oppose to matters substantial. Yet in
matters substantial, you profess you are no more oblidged to hearken to those
two Synods, than to the preceding, or following, or to the Synods in foreign
Kirks, or to the ancient Counsels, that is, only by restriction. Yet you ought
to depart from us, if you be not of us; if your judgment be not conform to
the judgment of our Kirk.

The ecclesiastical authority mediat given by these Synods to this Confession
you make to be their injoyning Ministers to give obedience to his Majesty's
commandment anent the said Confession. Is the ordinance of the Assembly
ecclesiastical media^e authority. You vanish in your distinctions. An
ordinance of an Assembly flows immediately from the ecclesiastical authority
or power of the Assembly* But you prove your mediat authority ecclesiastical
thus. Nothing is spoken in these statutes, but in relation to the Kings
Majesty's mandat and for a time, but that does not make the power
ecclesiastical mediate, but only adj^vant or concurrent. I will tell you more,
the Proclamation had taken small or no effect, if it had not been seconded
with the authority of the general Assembly. Yea it had been a dangerous
preparative to command Ministers to crave subscriptions to a Confession of
Faith not approved by the Kirk. The work was good, but the order preposterous.
In the year 1589. the assembly began, and desired Commissions to be given to
that effect and gave in a roll of such, as they had nominat to be
Commissioners, which was performed by the secret Counsel. You must know also
that there have been acts of Assemblies made for subscribing that Confession
without relation to the Kings commandment, as for that students in schools and
Universities made anno 1587 and this following Sess. 3. quarto Martij 1589.
Anent subscriptions to the Confession of Faith with protestation, that the
Subscribers do the same only to obey the King and his Laws, the Assembly
esteems of no such subscriptions, but ordains such persons to be proceeded
against, as against simple refusers. Suppose the two acts cited by your self
make mention of the Kings mandat, yet they injoyne Ministers to do the same
thing that the mandat requyres, not being urged by the King or Counsel, but
of their own accord for furtherance of the work it self. The first Act
required Ministers to follow the tenor of the Proclamation. But the second Act
differs in some points from the tenor of it. Where the King with advice of
the Counsel enjoined Ministers to deliver the Names of the refusers, and the
process led against them to the Ministers of his House, under the pai^e of
forty pounds, the Assembly enjoined them to report their diligence to the
next Synods, that the same might be reported to the general Assembly, and
that under the pain of deprivation.

They intended perpetuity in these Acts: for they acknowledged it to be a
true Christian conf^ssion worthy to be received by all true professors, a
godly and Christian confession, which ought to be embraced by all the Kings
subjects. where-upon they urged subscription. To approve a Confession, and to
urge subscription, import an intent, that such as shall be members of the
Kirk, shall profess conform to that Confession, and subscribe when they are
required. When they ordained Students in time to come to subscribe, before they
past their Degries, did they not intend perpetuity. Did not the continual
practice afterward, when any suspect of Papistrie were required to subscribe,
prove a perpetuity was intended at the first. If the first Confession
stands, because it is national; This other, or the former with this
appendicle continues for the same reason. For a Confession subscribed
universally through the whole Nation by direction of Authorititie both civil
and ecclesiastical may and should be called national, and with as good
reason, as a Confession authorized by Parliament without subscription of the
Subjects, the one being the collective, the other but the representative
body. And yet it was also approved by Parliament, as I showed before. Does any
Nation receive a Confession, but of purpose to continue in the same? If every
generation should change their Confession, what a reproach should it be to a
Kirk? Hear the reproach of Papists. Quoties non mut arunt suam quisque
sententiam. Quod edificant body, cras destruunt say the Professors of Culane
in their Antidiagma, that is, How often have every one of them changed their
opinion. That which they build the day, they demolish the next day, And
Bellarmine says likewise that the Catholic Kirk, meaning the Catholic
Roman, is not like the Synagogues of the Protestants, quae singulis annis non
solum ritus, sed etiam fidem mutant, De Ieiunio. c. 4.
That change every year not only their rites. but their faith also.

You call the Kings charge his royal mandat, and make no mention of the
Counsels advice and consent. You see the second act of the assembly cited by
your self bears, that the Kings Majesty, with advice of his Counsel has
set forth and proclaimed etc. The Commissions given in March 1509 were given
likewise by authority of the King and counsel. Which is more than you do
insinuate, and yet had not been sufficient without approbation and concurrence
of the Assembly.

You say, the vigor of the act of assembly remained no longer than the Kings
mandat stood, which expyring it did expyre also. I have showed alredie, that
these acts of assemblyes were not made by direction or injunction of any royal
mandat, and have cited some acts which make no mention of any act of Counsel,
or royal mandate, but respect the stablished course.

You subsume, and say the mandat royal has expyred long ago, because it was
no perpetual law, but a temporary mandat given out in his Majesty's minor
age. First, I answer that mandat was not only given in his minority, but
again also in his Majoritie. Next, it was not only his Majesty's mandat, but
it was an act of Counsel. Does not an act of counsel stand in force till it
be altered, or annulled. Thirdly, the mandat or act of Counsel began the
work not to continue for a time, but so long as the Kirk continued, Fourthly,
it could not be recalled, nor yet can be either by act of counsel, or act of
Parliament, because res non est integra. When they labored to draw the whole
Nation to subscription, intended they not the perpetuity of a Confession.
After the People were brought on to swear by the great name of the Lord to
continue in the obedience of the doctrine and discipline of this Kirk, how
could the mandat or charge be recalled?

Your sentence therefore cited out of the gloss upon Gratians Decree, Causa
sublata tollitur constitutio ex causa illa orta, makes nothing for the
expyring of the force of the acts of the Assembly. For both the acts of
Counsel and assemblyes tended to establish a perpetual Confession in this
Kirk and Kingdom. So the vigor of these acts yet remains and continues.
Next, this sentence is explained causa 19 quaest. 2. cap. Duae sunt. Glossa,
propter criminosos. Vbi aliquid statuitur propter impulsivam causam* causa
cessante non ideo cessat constitutio, sed ubi aliquid propter finalem causam
est statutum, ibi, si cessat causa, cessat constitutio. That is, A constitution
does not expyre, when the impulsive cause cease, but when the final cause
cease. But here the impulsive cause of bringing in this Confession was, as
your self confess, the deceit of Papists subscribing to the first Confession,
minding thereby to subvert the true Religion, and the end of drawing up that
Confession was to discover them. The same causes both impulsive and final yet
remain. And suppose both should fail, there is another principal end
wherefore Churches set forth the Confessions of their Faith, to wit, to make
known to the World, what they profess, as I have observed before out of the
preface to the harmony of the Confession.

You prove the royal mandat to be expyred first, because he dissallowed this
confession in a certain speech uttered in conference at Hampton Court. There
have been sundry copies of that conference spread abroad, and we have no
reason to believe Bishop Barloes report. Suppose the report were true, we allow
the speech in a part. For it would have made the Book of the English articles
to swel to a great volumne to insert every negative position. But think you
that well applied to this Confession: for it does not contain every negative
position, but is only a rejection of sundry popish errors particularly
expressed, with general clauses for rejection of the rest, as your self
confess in the 9 page. Neither is it a great volumne. How often do your self
call it a short Confession. You say, it may be gathered by that speech that
he did utterly disallow and annull that Confession. He allowed it before both
in his none age, and majoritie. Next, it was necessary for the discovery of
masked Papists, and still is for masked Papists and Ministers to use such
forms of speech I detest, I abhor etc. It is strange, that that should be
dislyked now, which was thought necessary then. But suppose the form of the
Confession was disallowed by that speech, yet could it not annull the former
mandat

A speech uttered in a conference holden out of the Country could not repeal
the acts of Counsel made at home, and his own public Proclamation. Next,
that speech was uttered. if uttered, in a free discourse to such as were there
present, and was not delivered by way of precept, charge or declaration to us.
M. Patrick Galloway in a letter dated the tenth of Februar, 1604. and directed
to the Ptesbyterie of Edinburgh has these words, Sundry, as they favored,
gave out copies of things here concluded. Where-upon I my self took
occasion, as I was an eye and ear witness, to set them down, and presented
them to his Majesty, who with his own hand mended some things, and eeked
other things which I had omitted. Which corrected copy with his own hand I
have, and have sent you heerewith the just transsumpt of it word by word, But
in that transsumpt there is no mention of such a speech, nor the least inkling
against the Confession of our faith, which had been very pertinent and
requisite, if he had intended either a recalling of his mandat, or a
declaration of his disallowance of that Confession. But suppose he had, yet as
I have said, that could not be a recalling of his royal mandat, the
Confession of faith being authorized by acts of Counsel, acts of Assembly,
and Parliament, neither could the Confession be abandoned being already
received, sworn and subscribed by the Subjectes universallie. Doctor Andrews
in his Tortura torti denies, that he might have given liberty of conscience
in respect of his oath, at his Coronation first in Scotland, and then in
England. For then says he, he should be twice perjured. Non semel perjurus
esset quin bis si te andiat. You would draw upon him a greater guilt, that
would have made him to draw others also into perjurie. You prove next, that the
royal mandat was made void by his death, and expyred with the royal breath,
and to this effect you cite the sentence following out of the gloss upon the
19 chapter of the first Book of the Decretalls, Morte mandantis, expirat
mandatum, which as you have cited: is false. But these words of the gloss are
received, Mortuo mandatore, re existente integra, expirat mandatum. The scope
of the text is to determine that the jurisdiction of him that is delegate
expyreth not by the death of him who delegated, if there be litiscontestation
before his death, because then the matter is not whole and untouched. So
likewise Justinian says of that mandatum that is contracted betwixt him that
gives, and him that undertaketh the charge of any business, the Mandator and
Mandatarius that the contract is loosed, if the death of any of them interveene
before entry to execution. Si adhuc integro mandato mors alterius interveniat.
Such like in authorative mandats, if he to whom commission was given to put it
to execution depart before he put it in execution, there can be no farther
proceeding, till another be placed in his rowme. But for the receiving the
Confession of Faith, the Commissions given were put in execution both in the
1580 and 1590 years. The Confession being once received, sworn to and
subscribed, could not be recalled by the death of the King, who was the first
beginner, and ringleader of the work. Does a house fall with the death of the
Master builder? Neither was that Confession received for the Kings Mandat, or
direction alone, but for the act of Counsel also. Now the Counsel never
dies. For politic bodies are immortal, and continue by succession. Nor yet
for the act of Counsel. but most of all and principally, for the ordinances
and directions of the general Assembly. And last of all this Confession of
faith is nothing else but the first Confession enlarged with some general
clauses, and rejection of popish erours.

To the third Chapter.
YOu think it not convenient, that the negative Confession be authorized at
this time, and subscriptions required thereto, and that for the reasons
expressed in the conference at Hampton Court, and because of some ambiguities,
and no small difficulties therein. How valide your reason is alleged by you
out of the conference at Hampton Court let the Reader judge. No man complained
of ambiguities and difficulties in it, till such as you are, began to pretend
the same, because apparently your eyes were dazeled with the light thereof, and
you saw perhaps that which you desired not to see. Howsoever, it is already
sufficiently authorized, and needs not to be authorized again for want of
authoriti^e. And seeing it is authorized, all the members of this Kirk ought to
subscribe it, and at this time especially, when the frame of Religion was like
to be altered. If there be any ambiguities, they may be explained to the
subscribers. Cavillators and tergiversators should be proceeded against as
simple refusers. We aggree to the words of the 18 article in the Confession of
Faith; but that makes nothing against us, who are already persuaded, that our
Confession is grounded upon the holy Scriptures.

It is true, we ought to be busy instructing the people in the positive
grounds of truth, but that hinders us not to explain to them points of
heresy, which were set down for masked Papists, and now Ministers themselves
are leavened with Popery and Arminianisme. Should not the true shepherd be
careful to warn the sheep, if they be in danger of the Wolf.

If any of us have given any other interpretation then the Confession of faith
it self will bear, we shall be ready to pass from it, when we shall be
convinced. You are sorry that some of us in printed works condemn
Episcopacie, and the five Perth articles. What any have writtten I trust they
will be ready to defend. For the present, I maintain that by this Confession,
which you call the negative, we abjure Episcopacie. For in this Confession,
we protest that we detest the Roman Antichrist, his worldly Monarchy, and
wicked Hierarchy. The Popish hierarchy does consist of Bishops, Presbyters,
and Deacons, that is, baptising and preaching Deacons. For it is so determined
by the Council of Trent. in the 4. chap. de Sacramento ordinis, Can. 6. Si
quis dixerit in ecclesia catholica non esse hierarchiam divina ordinatione
instituta^, quae constat ex Episcopis, Presbyteris and ministris; anathemasit.
Bellarmine likewise in his book de clericis cap. 11. answering to Chemnitius,
alleging Dionysius Areopagita, for three orders only, to wit, of Bishops.
priests, and dea^ons, whom he calls Ministers, says, that that Dionysius did
not set down the number of the Orders, but of the hierarchies. For says he,
there are three hierarchies in the militant Kirk, the first of Bishops, the
second of priests; the third of Deacons, and that the deacons are also princes
if they be compared with the people: but for inferior orders, subdeacons,
acolythes, lectors, exorcists, and ostiaries or door keepers, they bear no
rule or charge over the people, but only serve the Deacons or the priests, For
hierarchy properly is sacer principatus, a sacred pre-eminence or rule. The
forenamed counterfeit writer Dionysius, calls the Bishop, the Hierarch,
because he is the chief Hierarch. The Pope himself is not within the
hierarchy, primats, Metropolitans, or Archbishops, but as they are Bishops.
Whereas some allege, that in our Confession we detest and abhor his
hierarchy, that is to be interpret, as the rest are to be interpreted to be
his, as canonization of Saints. dedicating of Kirkes, days, altars. etc. are
called his, not that there is another lawful canonization, or dedicating of
Kirkes, days, altars, etc. Whereas some alledgde, that this hierarchy was
before there was a Pope. We answer, that it is called his, notwithstanding,
as dedicating of Kirks, days, altars, oil, salt, etc. are called his. Because
what ever corruption was in the Kirk, either in doctrine, worship, or
government of the Kirk, since the mystery of iniquity began to work. that is,
Popery began, so much as he retained and maintained, and obtruded by his
authority upon the Kirk are his. Next we must consider the Pope or Roman
Antichrist not only in his growth and perfect age, but from his conception, and
first birth.

Farther this hierarchy is distinguished in the confession from the Popes
Monarchy. Neither can it be interpreted of the manifold orders in the Kirk
of Rome. For that is mentioned before in the Confession of faith; where, we
abjure his manifold orders. Next in the Confession of faith, we profess that
we abhor and detest all kind of Papistrie in general and particulare heads,
even as they were then damned, and confuted by the Word of GOD. and Kirk of
Scotland. But so it is, that the office of a Bishop was condemned by the Kirk
of Scotland, and confuted in the pulpits, by M, Lowson, M. Arburthnot. M. Pont,
and many other godly and learned men. From the year 1575 to 1579, when the
heads of constant policy and plat-forme of discipline were agitate in
Assemblyes, it was declared, that such as had the Bishoprics, and were called
Bishops, should be tied to particulare flocks, that they should be called by
their own names, or the name of brethren, that they should be content with
reasonable rent, and not lift up for the maintenance of their ryotousnesse, the
emoluments of the Kirk, which may sustain many Pastors, the Schools and the
poor: that they should not claim the titles of temporal Lords, that they
should not usurp criminal jurisdiction, that they should not exerce temporal
jurisdiction. that they must not empire above particulare elderships, nor
usurp the power of presbyteries- In reforming the corruptions of that estate,
they abolished Episcopacie, after they had agreed on all the heads of the
constant policy, in Aprile anno 1578 which are extant in the book of policy,
or 2 book of discipline. But besides, there was a special act made in Iulie
1580 at Dundie with full consent of the whole Assembly against the office, as
follows,

For as much as the office of a Bishop, as it is now used, and commonly taken
within this Realm, has no warrant, authority, nor ground in the word of God,
but is brought in by the folly of man's invention, to the great overthrow of the
Kirk of God, The whole Assembly of the Kirk in one voice, after liberty
given to all men to reason in the matter, non^opponing themself in defending
the said pretended office, finds and declares the said pretended office, used
and termed as is abovesaid, unlawful in it self, as having neither fundament,
ground, nor warrant in the scriptures of God. and ordaines, that all such
persons, as brook^, or shall brook hereafter the said office, shall be
charged simply to dimitt* quyte and leave off the same, as an office*
whereunto they are not called by God; and suchlike, to desist and cease from
all preaching of the Word, ministration of the Sacraments, or using any way the
office of Pastors, till they receive de novo admission from the general
Assembly, under the pain of excommunication, wherein if they be found
disobedient, or to contraveene this Act in any point, the sentence of
excommunication after due admonition is to be executed against them.

The Confession of faith was not authorized and subscribed till March, and the
year following. It is clear then, that that office is abjured in the
Confession of Faith, seeing it was consuted by the word of God and Kirk of
Scotland. In the Assembly holden at Glasgow in April 1581 we have this
Declaration in the sixth Session, Anent the act made in the assembly holden at
Dundie against Bishops, because some difficulty appeared to some Brethren to
arise out of the word Office, contained in the said act, what should be meant
thereby, the Assembly consisting for the most part of such as voted, and were
present in the assembly at Dundie, to take away the said difficulty. resolving
upon the true meaning and understanding of the said act, declares, that they
meant wholly to condemce the whole state of Bishops, as they are now in
Scotland, and that the same was the determination and conclusion of the
Assembly at this time.

Thirdly, in that Confession we profess, that we join our selves, willingly
to this true reformed Kirk, in doctrine, faith, Religion, discipline, and use
of the Sacraments, as livelie membere of the same in Christ our head, promising
and swearing by the great name of the LORD our GOD, that we shall continue in
the obedience of the doctrine and discipline of this Kirk, and shall continue
in the same according to our vocation and power all the days of our life,
under the pains contained in the Law, and danger both of body and soul in the
Day of Gods fearful Judgment. But so it is, that the Episcopal government
was damned and the presbyteriall rested upon as most consonant to the word of
God, and to be observed in all time coming, before the Confession of faith was
subscribed. And while the general assemblies wtre about the constitution of
presbyteries, the King sent with the Lord of Capringtoun to the assembly
holden at Glasgow in Aprile 1581 a plot drawn up for that purpose, together
with a letter which was to be sent to the Noblemen and Gentlemen in the
bounds for furtherance of the work, which being considered and made more
perfect, some were appointed by the assembly to see presbyteries erected every
where. The Confession of Faith was subscribed by the King and his household in
Ianuar preceding, and enjoined in March to be subscribed by the subjects,
which Confession was approved by this assembly holden in Aprile, when
directions were given for erection of Presbyteries. The subscription to the
Confession and erection of presbyteries went forward together the same year.
So the discipline by presbyteries was sworn to, and not by diocesian Bishops,
or yet Superintendnets, which ceased in the year 1575. In the general
assembly holden in August 1590, it was ordained as follows,

For as much, as it is certain, that the word of God cannot be kept in
sincerity, unless the holy discipline be observed, it is therefore by common
consent of the whole brethren and Commisioners present concluded, that
whosoever has borne office in the ministry within the Kirk of this realm, or
presently bears, or hereafter shall bear office therein shall be charged by
every particular Presbytery where they are resident, to subscribe the heads of
the discipline of the Kirk in this realm, at length set down and allowed by
act of the whole assembly in the botk of policy, which is registered in the
register of the Kirk, and namely the heads controverted by the adversaries to
discipline of the reformed Kirk within this realm, betwixt and the next
synodall assemblies of the Provinces under the pain of Excommunication to be
executed against the none subscribers. and that the presbyteries which shall
be found remiss or negligtnt herein shall be rebuked publickely by the
whole assembly, and to the end the said discipline be known as it ought to
be, by the whole brethren, it is ordained, that the Moderator of each
Presbytery shall receive from the clerk of the assembly a copy of the said
book under his subscription upon the expensses of the presbytery, betwixt and
the first day of September next to come, under the pain to be accused openly
in face of the whole Assembly. The same year 1590 the Confession of faith was
again subscribed universally throghout the whole realm. It is clear then what
policy or discipline was then allowed and meant in the Confession of faith. In
the Parliament holden anno 1592 it was ordained, that all presentations to
benefices be directed to particular presbyteries in time coming with full
power to give collation thereupon, and to put order to all matters and causes
ecclesiastical within their bounds, according to the discipline of the Kirk.
Whenever their was any meaning to erect that estate of Bishops, the
Confession of faith was alleged in the contrare, as first in a dialogue written
anno 1585 by some learned and reverend Minister, and more at length anno 1606,
when their estate was restored by Parliament; M. Andrew Melvill, M. James
Melvill, and sundry other Ministers commissioners from presbyteries subscribed
that protestation, which is extant in print in that book, which is entitled
the Course of conformity, and among the rest M. William Cowper, late Bishop of
Galloway. M. Adam Ballendine now Bishop of Aberdene, and M. John Aburnethie now
Bishop of Cathnesse, who therefore are guilty of that heinous crime, which the
estates were desired to avoyde.

In this Protestation the reverend brethren have these words following, Above
all things, my Lords, beware to strive against God with an open and displayed
banner, by building up again the walls of Jericho, which the Lord has not
only cast down, but also has laid them under a terrible int^rdiction and
execration, etc. But the Noblemen and Sates of this realm have the reverence
of the oath of GOD made by themselves, and subscribed with their own hands in
the Confession of Faith, called the Kings Majesty's Confession, published more
than once or twice, and sworn by his most excellent Majesty, and by his
highness Nobility, Estates, and whole Subjects of the realm, to hold them
back from the setting up the dominion of Bishops. Because it is of verity,
that they subscrived and swore the said Confession, containing not only the
maintenance of the true doctrine, but also of the discipline professed within
the realm of Scotland. In the verification of the points offered to be proved
in the Protestation, they have these words in the 4. cap. But so it is, that
the Bishoprie is one of the greatest errors and corruptions thereof, (that is,
of the adulterous Kirk of Rome) and has no arguments of Scripture, Fathers,
Counsels, nor reason, but the selfsame, that the Papists use. and in the 5
cap. we have these words. If so be, that the setting up of Bishops will throw
down the discipline of our Kirk, or if that office has any thing to do with
these corruptions of Papistrie and Antichristian hierarchy, the King our
Sovereign his most excellent Christian Majesty, and his Highness most
ancient religious and noble estates of Parliament, if there were none other
reaeson but this one; would not for all the world fall under the danger of so
horrible a perjurie against God to set up Bishops again etc. But so it is, as
all men know, the discipline and government of the Kirk* exercised by
presbyteries and Bishops, are so far opposed one to another, that when the
one is set up, the other must down of force. There fore the subscribers and
swearers of the former Confession, if they should (as God forbid) go about to
set up Bishops and Episcopal government, they could not eshew the crime of
horrible perjurie, execrable apostasy, and most cursed reparing of Jericho.
The Reader may find more to this purpos^ in the Protestation it self, and
verification insert in the course of conformity above mentioned. This much for
Episcopacie, that it cannot consist with the Confession of Faith.

That the five Articles are likewise abjured in the Confession of Faith is
clear, For in the Confession we profess We abhore and detest all heads of
Popery, as they were then damned and confuted by the Word of God, and kirk of
Scotland his five bastard Sacraments, with all his rites and ceremonies and
false doctrine added to the ministration of the true Sacraments, all his vain
allegories, rites, signs, and traditions brought in the Kirks, without, or
against the word of God, and doctrine of this true reformed Kirk. But we have
already proved in sundry printed books, that these five articles are
traditions brought in the Kirk, without or against the word of God, and doctrine
of this true reformed Kirk, that they have been damned by our Kirk, that
confirmation or Bishoping is one of the five bastard Sacraments, and private
baptism imports the absolute necessity of baptism, that kneeling is a rite
and ceremony added to the true ministration of the Sacraments without the word
of God. And therefore for shortness we refer the Reader to these printed
treatises. For the present only this much. M. Knox within a year after he
was exyled out of England, after the death of King Edward, in his admonition,
directed to England, ranketh kneel^ng among the superstious orders, which
profane Christ's true Religion. In a letter directed from Deep, anno 1559 to
Mistress Lock^ he calls the cross in baptism and kneeling at the Lords
table. Diobolte all inventions. In the first book of discipline he and the
rest of his fellows contrivers of the book, forbid celebration of the
Communion at Easter, for the avoiding of the superstition of the time. The
observation of Christmasse, cireumcision, epiphanie they judge ought to be
utterly abolished. that the obstinate maintainers, and teachers of such
abominations as are there reckoned in the first head, of which observation of
days is one, ought not to escape the punishment of the civil Magistrate. In
the Parliamen^ holden in the year 1567, it was declared that whosoever refused
to participat of the Sacraments, as they were then publicly ministered in this
reformed Kirk were not true members of this Kirk. An act was likewise made
corcerning the Kings oath to be given at his Coronation to maintain the due
administration of the Sacraments then received, which was ratified in the
Parliaments following anno 1581 and 1582. Again, in the year 1572. it was
ordained by act o^ Parliament, that such as did not communicate and partake of
the Sacraments, as they were then truly ministered, if they continue obstinate,
shall be reputed infamous, unable to stand in judgment etc. The right
administration of the Sacraments is set down in the first book of discipline,
and the book of common order prefixed to the Psalms in me^ter, whereunto
Ministers were referred by acts of the general assemblies holden in the years
1562 and 1564. In the general assembly holden at Edinburgh, anno 1566 the
lattet confession of Helvetia was approved, but with special exception against
the same five days, which are now urged upon us. In the assembly holden anno
1575. complaints were made against Ministers and readers because they assembled
the people to prayer and preaching upon certain festival days. An article
was formed to be presented to the Regent craving, that all days heretofore
kept holy in time of Papistrie, beside the Lords day, be abolished, and a
civil punishment be inflicted upon the observers. In the assembly holden in
Aprile anno 1577 it was ordained, that the visitor with the advice of the synod
shall admonish Ministers and readers, that read, preach, or minister the
communion at Christmasse or Easter, or such superstitious times to desist under
the pain of deprivation. King James in the assembly holden anno 1590 praised
God that our Kirk was sincerer that Geneva it self, because they observed
Christmasse and Easter without warrant, which our Kirk did not. In the book of
common order before the Psalms it is said, that the Sacramenes are no^ ordaind
of God to be used in private orners, as charmers and sorcerers use to do, but
left to the Congregation, and necessarly annexed to Gods Word, and seals of
the same. In the Assembly holden at Edinburgh in October, 1581 it was ordained,
that the Sacraments be not ministered in private houses, but solemnly,
according to the good order hitherto observed, under the pain of deposition
from the function of the Ministry. It is clear then, that the five articles
are contrare to the doctrine and practice of the Kirk of Scotland, and
therefore abjured in the Confession of faith,

It follows then, that we have made two breaches upon the Confession. and
Covenant for maintaining the same, for which the LORD has threatened us with
more novations, and alteration of the whole frame of our Religion. Had we not
need then to renew our Covenant and promise to repare our breaches so far as
lies in us.

As for antiquite, and other reformed Kirkes, their judgment corcerning the
five articles, the writer of these late printed books whom you tax, either
allege their authority against the same articles, or clear their meaning, or
answer with respect. No well reformed Kirk has received kneeling or
bishoping. Some observe holy days, but would be rid of them. We may safely
have fellowship with such Churches, if we communicate not with their
corruptions.

As for the agreement betwixt the oath and Covenant about these things, with
the 21 article in the Confessien extant in the acts of Parliament, we can find
no disagreement. The first book of discipline in the head of the policy of
the Kirk, distinguishes betwixt things necessary to be observed in every
Kirk, and things variable to be ordered by every particulare Congregation.
There every particular Kirk is allowed to have a particular policy of their
own, without prejudice of the common and gene^all, as whether to conveene this
or that day of the week to the Sermon. or how many days. For the which and
many like, there can be no general order set down. That book of discipline
was penned by the same persons, who drew up the Confession. They meant never
that the five articles, or the like superstitious rites and ceremonies were
variable as appears by that which I have already alleged. M. Knox who had a
chief hand in that Confession maintained, after his first Sermon in public,
in a convention of gray and black Friars at S. Andrews, that the Kirk had no
power to devise significant ceremonies. But these are properly called
ceremonies, not politic constitutions for order and decency. And the other
Confession, which you call the negative, condemns signs brought into the Kirk
without or against the the word of God. Significant ceremonies being
condemned, the cross and the surplice or other superstitious apparel cannot
be received. You tax the royal Mandat, if you allege opposition betwixt the
old Confession and the other, which you call the negative, but we call the
general with a rejection of Popish errors as an appendicle. Before I come
this length, I perceive your reasons for not authorizing or subscribing this
Confession at this time have not been applauded unto by his Majesty, and the
Lords of secreet Counsel. What will you do now? will you stay your
subscription till his Majesty subscribe, or will you join with the
Covenanters, or will you subscribe with reservation, howsoever, if you will,
The case is altered. You were unwilling before, but now I will not for the
reasons containd in the Protestation made at the cross of Edinburgh the 22 of
September, where-unto I adhere.

To the fourth Chapter.
IN your former chapter, you seemed only to except at our interpretations. But
now you seem to offend at the matter. For you say, that in so far as the
matter of an oath is unlawful or unlawful, pl^asing or displeasing to GOD it
ought to be kept or broken, which is uncontroverted, but not to the purpose,
unless you would insinuate, that there is some bad matter in the Confession.
And so should it never have been sworn to, or subscribed from the first hour
notwithstanding of the royal mandat, or authorizing of it by the general
assembly. If you assume or apply, you should be corrected before you be
confuted, first cast out, and then answered, by such as shall be appointed.

You exhort us not to judge hardly or uncharitablie one of another, nor break
the bond of peace and Christian brotherhood for diversity of opinions among us
for rites and ceremonies. Then you would have us to suffer the people to be
withdrawn by seducers from the simplicity of the Gospel, and to admit
Episcopacie which you seem here to rank among rites and ceremonies. How can
peace stand among men, when the glory of God is not kept safe, says Bernard
epist. 126.

Quomodo stabit pax hominum coram Deo, and cum Deo, si Deo apud homines non
potest tuta esse sua gloria. FINIS.
To fill up this last sheet, I have here subjoyned some Acts and constitutions
of our Kirk, for the sitting of ruling Elders in the general Assemblyes,
Provineiall synods, and Presbyeeries, or as they are called in the book of
Policy, the Common Elderships.

IN the first book of Discipline the office and power of Elders are described,
where we have these words,

If he, that is, the Minister, be worthy of admonition, they, that is, the
Elders, must admonish him, or correction, they must correct him, and if he be
worthy of deposition, they with consent of the Kirk* and Superintendent, may
depose him, so that his crime deserve so. If they might do so with the
Superintendent, they may do as much with Ministers in a Presbytery, which is
come in the rowme of Superintendents.

In the assembly holden in December anno 1562 it was ordained. that the
Superintendent, give sufficient advertisement to the particular Kirks of the
time and place appointed for the synodall convention, that the Minister with an
Elder may repare to the place appointed. Power was granted to Superintendents
in their synodall conventions, to translate Ministers from one Kirk to another,
with consent of the most part of the Elders and Ministers.

In the assembly holden in June anno 1563 it was ordaind that every
Superintendent cause warn the Shyres, towns and parish Kirks within his
jurisdiction to send their commissioners to the general Assembly.

In the assembly holden anno 1568 in Iulie, when order was set down to be
followed in choosing Commissioners with power to vote in the general Assembly,
it was ordainde that Ministers, and Commissioners of shyres shall be chosen at
the Synodall convention of the diocie, with consent of the rest of the
Ministers and Gentlemen, that shall conveene at the said synodall convention.

In the general assembly holden in Februar 1609 we find registrated, that the
Superintendent of Angus and Merns Coomm^ssioner at that time for the
shiresdomes of Aberdeene and Bamse, had deprived the Principal. Subprincipall,
and some Regents in Aberdeene, with advice and consent of the Ministers, Elders
and Commissioners present, which is, alleged before in the first Chapter.

In the book of policy, or second book of discipline agreed upon anno 1578 we
have these conclusions.

In the end of the sixth chapter. There, that is, the Elders, principal office
is to hold assemblies with the Pastors and Doctors, who are also of their
number for establishing of good order, and execution of discipline.

In the 7 chapter. It is meet that some of the Elders be chosen out of every
particular Congregation to concur with the rest of their Brethren in the
common Assembly, that is, the Presbytery* and to take up the delations of
offenses within their own Kirks* and bring them to this assembly. This we
gather out of the practice of the primitive Kirk where Elders or colleges of
Seniors were constitute in Cities, and famous places.

The Power of election of these who bear ecclesiastical charges pertains to
this kind of assembly within their own bounds, being well erected and
constitute of many Pastors and Elders of sufficient ability.

By the like reason, their deposition also pertains to this kind of Assembly,
as of them that teach erroneous and corrupt doctrine. that be of slanderous
life, and after admonition desist not, that be given to schism or rebellion
against the Kirk, manifest blasphemy, symonie etc.

Provincial assemblyes we call lawful conventions of the Pastors, Doctors
and other Elders of a province, gathered for the common affairs of the Kirkes
thereof.

The National assembly, which is general to us, is a lawful convention of the
whole Kirkes of the realm, or nation where it is used, or gathered for the
common affairs of the Kirk and may be called the general Eldership of the
whole Kirkes within the Realm,

In the leter sent by King James to Noblemen and Gentlemen anno 1581 for
furtherance of the erection of presbyteries we have these words. It is thought
impossible to attain to any formal order likely to have continuance to the
posterity over our whole realm, while the ancient bounds of the diocies be
dissolved, where the Parishes are thick together, and small be united, and
where they be ever great, and of larger bounds be divided, and thereafter
presbyteries or Elderships constitute for a dozen of parishes or thereabouts,
some more, some fewer, as the commodity of the country lies, where the
ministry and Elders in these bounds conveening may commodiously exerce
discipline, and take order in the affairs of the Kirk, so far as shall be
appointed, before the cognition be brought to the synodall assembly.

In the assembly holden at Saint Andrews in Aprile, 1582 in answer to some,
concerning Elders we have this answer. Concerning such Elders as verse not in
the word their resort to the Presbytery shall be no farther urged strictly,
than the weightinesse and occasion upon intimation and advertisement made by
the Pastors and Doctors shall require, at which time they shall give their
concurrence, yet such as may commodiously resort are to be exhorted to be
present at all times.

The Presbytery or eldership of Edinburgh was erected upon the penult of May
1581. consisting of fifteen or sixtene Ministers of the Kirks adjacent within
four or five miles, and some Barons and Gentlemen elders out of every Kirk
for that effect. So the right of ruling Elders in presbyteries was put in
practice at the first erection and constitution of Presbyteries, and none were
constitute without them.

This form and order was a great eye-fore to M. Patrick Adamsone pretended
Bishop of Saint Andrews, as the Reader may see in his Declaration set forth
under the Kings name, but falsely in these turbulent times anno 1584 and 1585.
Where^unto an answer was made by such as were men of chief note in our Kirk,
I insert here only the answer following so far as concerns this point.

As to the eight intention, it is accursed and proceeds from the very
instinct of Satan, manifesting himself without cloak and color. For there is
damned. first the name of Presbytery* next the office bearers in the
Presbytery, and thirdly their authority and jurisdiction: The assemblyes of
Ministers and Gentlemen called by you a popular confusion* is called in the
Scriptures by Christ himself the Kirk and by the Apostle Paull, presbytery or
eldership, Elders that labor not in the word, but censuring manners, are
called rulers and governors, to which office Gentlemen, and other qualified
persons, who are not Ministers may be called, This presbytery conveened in
the name and authority of the Lord Jesus, has a spiritual power proceeding
immediately of God, and neither of Angel or man, to rule his Kirk, to reason,
de liberate and conclude in matters ecclesiastical, whose conclusions,
resolutions and deliberations, are of such sort, that what they bind or loose
on earth according to Gods word, is bound or loosed likewise in the heavens,
and whosoever contemns the authority thereof, should be esteemed among the
children of God, as an Ethnic or publican.

The author of a learned Dialogue written likewise in these times reports,
that the same usurping Prelate had approved this order by his own hand writ.
He protested himself before God afterward, when he made his recantation, that
he was commanded by the Chancelour and Secretar for the time to set forth the
Declaration and promised, if God spared his life to write in defense of the
form and order of the Presbyteries established.

In the Assembly holden in May 1586, we have these conclusions, 1. It is found
that all such as the scripture appoints governors of the Kirk, to Wit,
pastors, doctors and elders may conveene to the general assembly and vote in
ecclesiastical matters, and all others that have any suit, or other things to
propone to the assembly may be there present, to give in their suits, propone
things profitable for the Kirk, vnd hear reasoning, but shall not vote. 2.
There are four ordinary office, bearers set down to us by the scriptures, to
wit Postors Doctors, Eiders and deacons, and that the name of Bishop ought not
to be taken, as it has been in time of Papistrie, but is common to all
Pastors and Ministers.

In the assembly holden in August 1590 it was ordained that all that did then
bear, or were hereafter to bear office in the ministry subscribe the heads
of discipline set down in the book of policy, under the pain of
excommunication, specially to the heads controverted 2nd opposed by the
adversaries to our discipline, and consequently to the constitution of
presbyteries consisting of Ministers, and ruling Elders.

I wonder that any should doubt of the meaning and practice of our Kirk, seeing
they are not ignorant that Elders have place in sessions. or elderships of
particular Kirks, and in general assemblyes, the lowest and the highest
judicatories, but that that they should likewise have place in presbiteries and
provincial Synods, seeing presbyteries are made up by the particular
elderships, and provincial Synods by presbyteries. One minister may govern
like a Pope his parish without Elders, if fifteen or sixteen ministers may
govern fifteen or sixteen parishes without them.

The affairs of the Kirk, and matters of Religion are a common cause, which
Ministers ought not to engrosse to themselves.

Our Elders have not sit in prebyteries these many years, not by law annulling
or abrogating the former constitutions, but partly through their own
negligence, partly through the pride, or ill conscience of some ministers in
some part, so that is fared with us, as with the Kirk of old, of which Ambrose
complains writing on. 1 Timothy 5.

Vnde and synagoga, and postea ecclesiae seniores habuit, quorum sine consilio
nihil agebatur in ecclesia. Quod qua negligentia obsoleverit nescio, nisi forte
Doctorum desidia ant magis superbia, dum soli volunt aliquid videri. FINIS,

