A SERMON DISCVRSING THE true meaning of these words: The 1. Epistle of
Timothy, the 2. chapt. verse. the 4. Who will have all men to be saved, and to
come to the knowledge of the truth, etc.

Preached by the reverend Mr. John Forbes, Pastor to the Company of Merchant
Adventurers residing in Delph. Anno 1632.



Imprinted at Delph, Anno 1632.

A SERMON DISCVRSING THE true meaning of these words: The 1. Epistle of
Timothy, the 2. chapt. verse. the 4. Who will have all men to be saved, and to
come to the knowledge of the truth, etc.
THe reasons (beloved in the Lord) why the Apostle in the former verses will
have, us to pray unto God for all men, and in particular for all that are in
authority are carefully to be considered of us.

The first (whereof we have already heard) is taken from the great benefit,
which by our prayers to God for kings, and such as are in authority it
pleases the Lord to grant to his Church: For our prayers are an effectual
means to procure from God, that by his blessing upon the Governors and their
Government, his church may live a quiet, and a peaceable life, in all
Godliness, and honesty.

The second reason, (where of also we have heard) is from the nature of the
thing in Gods sight, before whom it is a good, and acceptable thing, to pray
for all men: and especially for Kings, and those that are in authority. And
this we have shevved you to be a special motive to move us to do any duty,
but especially to pray for others, to wit, when we know that it is a good
thing not so much in man's sight, as in Gods sight, and a thing acceptable in
Gods sight, and that even according as he is our Savior, which is a matter,
(as we have shevved you) of singular moment to be considered of us, for we
are carefully to look to this, what is acceptable in Gods sight, not simply
as we consider God in himself in his nature, power, goodness etc. but as we
consider him in reference to our selves, as he is our God, our Savior, and
Redeemer.

It follovveth now, that we speak of the third reason, (vvher upon the
exhortation of the Apostle, to this duty is grounded) and by which all to
this last reason, is made good unto us, and clearly confirmed. And it is taken
from this will of God touching the salvation of men, whose will (as says
the Apostle) is to have all men to be saved, and to come to the knowledge of
the truth. Generally hence we gather, that the vvil of God touching men,
should be the rule of our praying for them, and how largely soever Gods will
is extended to save men, so largely should our prayers be extended to God, for
their salvation: It were a vvretched thing, if we should not will the
salvation of such as God will have saved, or that we should desire them to
dye in ignorance, whom God would have to come to the knowledge of his truth,
as all our other actions, so especially our prayers, should have this vvil of
God for their foundation, for the knowledge of it, is that which must rule us
in our life, and order us in all our actions, and perticularlie in this in our
mutual praying one for another: For he that is ignorant of Gods vvil, can make
no acceptable prayer to God, seeing nothing can be acceptable to him that is
not done according to his will: We know, that the promise of Christ in the
Gospel is this, that what soever we shall ask the Father according to his
vvil, it shall be granted unto us. Thus we see God has graciously bound
himself to hear us, and grant our petitions if they be according to his vvil.

This Argument of the Apostle is enlarged by three other grounds, all
manifesting the truth of this point, to wit, that God will have all men to be
saved, and opening the true meaning of the same.

The first ground is taken from the unity of God himself, and the unity of
the mediator betvveene God, and man.

The second ground where by this is confirmed, is taken from the ransom made
by Christ, which was for all men, therefore prayer is to be made for all men.

The last ground is set down in the 7. verse. and that is this, that God has
ordained Pastors to preach this redemption to al men: Al these grounds make
this point good, that God will have all men to be saved, and this will of God
being laid down for the ground why we should pray for all men we are
carefully to examine the true meaning thereof.

This point is that, which most disturbs the peace of Gods Church this day,
for the greatest controversy is concerning the true meaning of this place. For
certainly, it is an undoubted truth, That according to the extent of Gods
will, touching the salvation of men, so is the extent of his Decree, of his
Election, and of Christ's redemption, for the lymits, and extents of Gods will,
are the limits, and extents of Gods Decree unto salvation, and the lymi^ts of
his Decree, are the lymits of his Election, and the lymits of his Election, are
the lymits of the redemption made by Christ Jesus, for all these must of
necessity be of like extent, none of them can be made either of straiter, or
larger extent, then other, where by it is manifest: that the salvation of
mankind, must be as large, as Gods will is to save mankind: Therefore by
consequence it must follow, that if these words, (God will have all men to
be saved,) be so to be understood, that every particular man should be saved,
then also Gods Decree must be that every particular man should be saved, and
if the Decree of God be such, then certainly, Christ must have dyed for
every particular man, asvvell for Cain, as for Abell: for Esau, as for Jacob:
for Judas, as for Peter, etc. And the Covenant of grace made by God in Christ,
with mankind, must include all, and every particular man, but if so be that
neither Gods Decree, nor Christ's redemption, nor the Covenant of grace be made,
with all, and every one, nor for all, and every one, Then certainly these
words, (God will have all men to be saved,) cannot be meant of every
particular man, let us come therefore to search by the light of Gods truth, the
true meaning of Gods mind in these words.

For your clearer understanding, we will first consider, the diverse sorts of
meanings, that are given of this sentence, and afterward, try which is the
trust.

Some do interpret these words, after this manner they restrain the word
(all) to such only as are really saved, as if the meaning were this, that as
many of mankind as are saved, it is Gods will to save them, and certainly it
is true, that whosoever is saved, it must be Gods will that he is saved but
allthough this meaning be tolerable, yet it is needeles, in deciding this
controversy, besides that it opens a gap to some absurdities, vvherof we are
not to speak at this time, It is an evasion for want if better light in Gods
truth to manifest Gods mind.

The second meaning of these words, is when the words (all men, about
which, all our question is) are interpreted of every particular man, without
exception secluding none.

The third meaning is when these words (all men) are not taken for every
particular man, but as the scripture oftentimes uses this word (all) for all
sorts, and kinds of men, of al nations, people, and tounges, of what state
or condition soever they be, and so the meaning will be this, that no sort,
nor estate, nor condition of mankind, no nation, nor kindred, tongue, or sex is
excluded, but that God will have men of all sorts, degrees, and qualities,
Countries, and conditions to be saved.

There is yet a fourth meaning, and interpretation of this place, which might
yield us a commodious of these words, and that arises from the consideration
of Gods will, either as we refer it to that, which God himself wills of
men, or as we refer it to that, which is Gods vvil in us, toward men, to
make this more plain: you are to consider Gods will either as we take it
for that, which is in God himself, touching the salvation of men, or as we
refer it to that which God wills to be in us, and especially in such as
preach the Gospel touching the salvation of mankind.

How these words are to be understood in the first respect, must be gathered
out of one of the former meanings, but if we consider them in the second
respect of Gods will, then the meaning will be this, That it is Gods will,
that we, and every one of us, that are Christians, and especially those, that
are dispencers of the mysteries of God, should labor both by prayer, and
preaching for the salvation of every man under the sun. And surely this
interpretation might stand without any offense because, the Apostle brings
this as a reason why we should pray for all men, to wit, eue^ because it is
Gods vvil, that we should without exception seek to save all men, and in this
respect, this sense may stand for every particular man, for it is the will of
God, that we should pray for the salvation of every man, and that we should
preach the Gospel to every man, and so this will of God is to be considered,
of that which God will have to be in our practice, but not of that which is
in his own purpose, and yet even in this sense, there is an exception
manifest in Gods own word, for it is not lavvfull to pray for any, that
commits the since against the holy Ghost, as is clear in the 1. Epis. of John
5. chap. 16. verse. So that the most commodious sense that we can give to these
words, it cannot hold for every particular man, without some manifest
exception.

These be the four interpretations of any moment, that are applied to these
words, where of this last as it might probably seem to be the Apostles
meaning, so it might satisfy every man, if the nevvnes of it as not being yet
set abroad in the world, were not a let, and hinderance to the embracing and
receaveing of it, therefore not standing upon it but leaving it to be of
weight according as it shall affect the mind of the hearer. We come to speak
of the second, and third interpretations, in which stands the whole
controversy.

To find out which of these two interpretations contain the true meaning of
these words we are carefully to vveighe, if any of them cannot stand
without notable inconvenience, and great absurdities yea blasphemies against
Gods truth, and such other properties of God, without which God is not God at
all, and which do directly contradict the nature of Gods Covenant, and truth
of Gods practice according to that which is revealed in the scriptures, for
that sense which does infer these absurdities cannot possible be Gods
meaning in these words, so that we must reject it as impious, and take that
other which excludes all the former absurdities, and fully agrees with the
truth of God else where, and iustifies God in his nature providence, power,
and truth.

Now concerning the taking these words for Gods will touching the salvation
of every particular man, do necessarily infer the former absurdities,
whereas taking them in the second sense, that is for all sorts, and kinds of
men, no inconvenience does follovv upon it, nor shall there any contradiction
be found in it, to the rest of Gods truth revealed in the Scriptures, but
shall be found soundly to agree with it in all things. To make this manifest,
we will come to the proof of this wherein that we may give the greater
satisfaction to all men, We will examine the truth of this will of God
touching the salvation of men, first as the Scriptures reveal it unto us,
before the coming of Christ in the flesh, and secondly, as it is manifested
since his coming in the flesh. Before Christ's coming in the flesh, it is most
clear, and evident, that neither of these interpretations can stand: for the
will of God before Christ, was so far from saving every particular man in
the world, that it was not his will to save every nation, or people, or
kindred, etc. seeing that it is plain in the Scriptures, that from Abraham to
Christ, salvation only did belong unto the Jews, and God did expresselie
seclude all the nations of the Gentiles from his Covenant, and hope of life,
setting up a partition wall betwixt them, and his own people the Jews,
which behoowed to be first broken down by Christ at his coming, before any
nation of the Gentiles could be made Citizens with the saints, and of the
household of God, as is manifest, by the Apost. speech in the 2. Ephesians. 12.
where he shows us, that all the Gentiles before that time, were without
Christ, and alliants from the common wealth of Israel, and strangers from the
Covenant of promise, and were without hope, and without God in the world,
who now in Christ are made near by breaking down the stop of the partition
wal, so that first by his blood shed, and the reconciliation of the Gentiles
unto God by his cross asvvell as the Jews, an entrance, and access was
made unto both Jew, and Gentile, to the Father in such sort, as the Apostle
says in the 19. ver. of the 2. to the Ephesians. We that are Gentiles, are no
more strangers, and foreigners as we were before: The same is plain by the
words of the Apostle in the 14. of the Act. the 16. where he says, that in
the times past, God suffered all the Gentiles to walk in their own vvayes.
In which words, we are carefully to mark the particle, all, when he
says he suffered all the Gentiles, whereby he witnesses playnlie, that
there was not any one nation, of the Gentiles, that was not excluded from the
Covenant before Christ, so that before Christ's coming the question is clear,
and manifest, for if all the nations of the Gentiles were excluded, and no
nation except one only of the Jews included within the Covenant of God, no
man without manifest blasphemy can say, that at that time Gods will was,
that every particular man should be saved, and this difference between, Jew,
and Gentile at that time, is justified by Christ's own speech to the Cananitish
woman, where he tried her faith, saying, that it was not good to take the
Childrens bread, and give it unto dogs, as likewise by the speech of the
Apost. to the Gal. where he says, we that are Jews by nature, and not
sinners of the Gentiles, etc. By which two places it is manifest, that the
Gentiles in respect of the Jews, were in Christ's own account, but as
dogs, and not as Children. This is yet further manifest by the Description of
the mystery of Godliness set down by the Apost. in the 3. to the Ephe. ver. 4.
5. 6. saying: When you read you may understand my knowledge in the mystery of
Christ, which in other ages was not made known to the sons of men, as it
is now revealed unto his holy Apostles, and Prophets by the spirit, that the
Gentiles should be fellovvheires, and of the same body, and pertakers of the
promise in Christ by the Gospel. Let us consider these words, that the Apost.
places the mystery of Christ, in this, that the Gentiles should be
fellovv-heires etc. A mystery indeed, which the Apostles themselves after
Christ's ascension never dreamed of, till by special revelation from Heaven,
God did make it manifest to Peter Act. the 11. verse. 18. who for his preaching
the Gospel to the Gentiles, was accused by the Jews, when he came to
Jerusalem, and upon his apology in expounding to them the matter in order as
it fell, they all held their peace, and glorified God, saying, Even (with
vvonder) then has God also to the Gentiles granted repentance unto life which
witnesses sufficiently, that the levvs did not imag^ine, that the Gentiles had
any part, or portion in salvation together with the jews. And that we may
see, that it was Gods own will, and purpose to seclude them from salvation,
till Christ's coming in the flesh. Let us mark the description of the mystery
of Gods will in his eternal purpose in himself, as it is set down by the
Apost. in the Epis. to the Ephesians. chap. 1. verse. 9. 10. In these words,
making known to us the mystery of his will, according to his good pleasure,
which he had purposed in himself, that in the dispensation of the fulness of
times he would gather together in one, all things in Christ. This fulness of
times was the very time of Christ's coming in the flesh, unto which time, as
the words do bear, he purposed not, in himself, neither was it the good
pleasure of his will to gather the Gentiles unto the number of his Saints, but
till that time, the Law of Commandments, and ceremonies did stand up, as a
partition wall to keep out the Gentiles from the grace of salvation bestovved
upon the jews, the breaking down of which wall by the death of Christ was
declared by the renting of the veil of the temple from the top to the bottom,
and therefore it is not without great, and weighty cause, that the Apostle
Paul amongst the heads, and points of the mysteries of Godliness, reckons
this for one, that Christ was preached unto the Gentiles 1. tim. 3. 16. Thus
we trust, that it is sufficiently clear to all men, that those who
maintain, that it was Gods will from the beginning, that every particular
man should be saved, do directly speak against the purpose of God as it is
revealed by himself in his truth, seeing it was not his will, that any nation
should be saved, except the jews only, before Christ's coming in the flesh.
Besides, to come more closely to the point, and examine this vvil of God
before Christ's coming in the flesh, we will lay aside the rest, of the
nations, and only speak of that nation, which was chosen of God to salvation,
namely, the Jews, to see if this opinion for every particular man's salvation,
can stand with the troath of Gods will, and purpose amongst them, and to
clear this point, First, let us consider the speech of God himself, by the
Prophet Isaiah chap. 14. ver. 24. where he says: The Lord of hosts has
sworn, saying, surely as I have thought, so shall it come to pass, and as I
have purposed, so shall it stand. By this sentence it must necessarily
follow, that if this be the sense of these words, to wit, that God will have
every man without exception to be saved, that either no man ever shall be
damned, or else God must be perjured, (which is blasphemy to think) the
reason is manifest, seeing God has svvorn, that as he has thought, it shall
come to pass, and as he has purposed so it shall stand, even as likewise he
says, in the 46. of Isaiah verse. 10. My Council shall stand, and I will do
whatsoever I will. If then it be true, that the Lord does whatsoever he
will, and that his purpose cannot fail, then it is impossible, that any one
man should ever be damned, if his will be (as they say) that every particular
man should be saved, or then if so be that ever any man be damned, God must be
perjured, seeing he has sworn, that his purpose shall stand: But if it be
true, which else where psalms. 33. verse. 10. 11. is said, to wit, that the
Council of the Lord stands for ever, and the thoughts of his heart to all
generations, and again psa. 115. ver. 3. Our God is in heaven, he does
whatsoever he will: Then it must follow, that it was never Gods vvil, that
every particular man should be saved, even amongst the jews, seeing it is
manifest, even by the Scriptures that God did not save every man amongst them,
if it were by no other evidence, yet even by that oath of God, set down in
the psa. 95. saying, wherefore I swear in my wrath, surely they shall not enter
into my rest: according to that which God speaks to Moses, Number. 14. chap. ver.
28. 29. etc. and 32. chap. ver. 10. 11. the true meaning whereof is expounded
clearelie by the Apostle to the Hebre. chap. 3. and 4. where he plainly
affirms, that they to whom the Gospel was first preached amongst them
entered not into Gods rest for vnbeleifes sake, Chap: 4. ver. 6. we might
allege likvvise for clearing this troath, the reiection of Ismaell from the
Covenant, the hatred of God against Esau, the wrath of God against Saul, the
Prophetical curse of David against his enemies, the perdition of Judas the
traitor, and more instanccs, but we conclude with two proofs for all, the
first of Jeremiah, Chap. 7. ver. 16. and chap. 11. ver. 11. 14. and chap. 14.
ver. 11. and 12. and chap. 15. ver. 1. and in the Prophet Ezekiell chap. 14.
ver. 20. where God expreslie forbids the Prophet Jeremiah to pray for that
people any more, and shows that though Moses, and Samuel did stand before
him for them, yet his affection could not be toward them, yea, that though
Noah, Daniell, and Job, were amongst them, that they should deliver neither
sons, nor daughters, but only their own souls, by their righteousness. We
can not think, that God could intend the salvation of those men, for whom he
would not suffer his Prophets to pray, how can it possible be, that he
should will the greater (that is their salvation) when he prohibits the
lesser, that is, the Prophets praying for them, Secondly, to end this
argument, let us lay before us the History, and complaint of Elijah the
Prophet, and Gods answer unto him, in the 1. kings. 19. Romans 11. where the
Prophet complains, that Ahab, and Gods enemies, (...) left none alive, that
served God, but himself alone, and God answers him, that he had reserved
seven thousand, that had not bovved their knee to Baal. Which History
according to the Apostle own interpretation, shows us, that a remnant
according to the election of grace were saved, and the rest in Gods Justice
were hardened, and proves this by the Scriptures to have been done by God
himself, by the words of the Prophet Esaie cha. 29. God has given them the
spirit of slumber, eyes, that they should not see, and ears, that they should
not heart, unto this day, and from the 69. Psalm. Let their table be made a
snare, and a net, and a stumbling block even for a recompense unto them, let
their eyes be darkened, that they sce not, and bow down their back alvvay.
Thus we trust it is plain, that howsoever God had tied salvation to the
levvs, before the coming of Christ, yet it was not his will among them to
save every particular man, as for that which may be objected, touching their
vnvvillingnes in resisting. Gods vvil, we shall answer it hereafter, only now
let us conclude this way, seeing God does whatsoever he will, and seeing
that his purpose must stand, then either God never, wills these men's
salvation, or else he must have saved them, which the scripture denies, and
certain it is according to the former grounds, that God does whatsoever he
will, and therefore, that God never willed such a thing, seeing it is manifest
he never did it: Which is manifestly confirmed by the Apostle Paul, Romans the
11. Where he shows us, that there was a remnant according to the election
of grace, and that among the Jews, the elect had obtained mercy unto
salvation, but that the rest of Israel, had not obtained, verse 5. 7. Where
also he plainly witnesses, that God had cast away the Jews, and had broken
of many branches, from the root through unbelief, so that even in that only
people, which belong to God, it is evident that it was not Gods will to save
every particular man amongst them. Now let us come to try the truth of this
matter since the coming of Christ in the flesh, at which time, the difference
betvveene Jew, and Gentile was taken away, and the grace of Salvation by
Christ's own command was to be prached by the Apostle to all nations math.
28. 19. according to that which Christ himself fore told math. 24. 14.
saying, and this Gospel of the kingdom shall be preached in the whole world,
for a testimony unto al nations. If ever in any time of the world it was Gods
will, that every particular man should be saved, it must needs be in this
time, wherein the Covenant of grace is exte^ded to al nations and all
exception of persons taken away before God, for certain it is which, the
Scripture tells us, that in Christ Jesus, there is neither levv, nor Gretian,
there is neither bond, nor free, neither male, nor female, for we are all one
in him, gal. ^ 28. and as the same Apostle says to the Coll. There is neither
Gretian, nor Jew, Circumcision, nor uncircumcision bond, nor free, but Christ
is all, and in all things: By which words it is most plain, that no kind of
nation, or people, or person, is excluded from the grace of salvation, and so
these words (that God will have al men to be saved) are taken truly, when
they are taken in that sense, even according to the testimony of the church it
self, and all the redeemed ones of God, Reu. the 5. 9. where they sing this
new song, saying, Thou art worthy to take the book, and to open the seals
thereof because thou vvast killed and has redeemed us to God by thy blood, out
of every kindred, tongue, and people, and nation, and has made us to our God,
Kings, and Priests, and vvce shall reign on the earth: Out of these words,
we have a most strong argument, to prove that salvation is universal, in
regard of nations, kindreds, or tongues, kinds, of men, but no way universal
in respect of every particular person, built upon the testimony of them
themselves who are saved, and this argument is such, as it leaves noe
exception against it, to the maintayners of that opinion, (that Gods will is,
that every particular man should be saved) for it is manifest, that they make
the redemption wrought by Christ, to have been for every particular man, and
so as universal as they make Gods will, to have measured, which is true
indeed though not in their sense, as this place plainly proves, seeing they
who are redeemed by Christ do confess, that he had redeemed them, out of
every kindred tongue, people, and nation. Now if Christ have redeemed some out
of every people, and nation, etc. then certainly he has not redeemed all of
every people, nor every particular man of every nation: and if this redemption
of Christ be not of every particular man as this place does plainly show, then
undoubtedly, it cannot be Gods will, that every particular man should be
saved, for no Christian man was ever yet so blasphemous, as to make Gods will
to save men, to be of larger extent, then Christ's redemption of men, neither
certainly can it be, both in respect, that Christ came in the world to do
the will of the Father that sent him, and this is the fathers will which
sent him, that of all which he has given him he should lose nothing John.
6. 38. 39. and also because it is God himself who has reconciled us to
himself by lesus Christ, for God was in Christ reconciling the world unto
himself, as the Apostle says, 2. Cor. 5. 18. 19. Seeing them both that Christ
the redeemer came to work redemption according to will of his father that
sent him, and seeing it was God himfelfe, who in Christ reconciled the world
unto himself, it must necessarily follow, that seeing Christ redeemed not
every one of every nation, that it was never Gods will, to reconcile to
himself in Christ every particular man of every nation, an^ so consequently
it could never be his will, to save every perticula^ man of every nation, for
as we hau^ said before, if God do vvhatsoeue^ he will, it must follovv, that
if i^ was his vvil to save every perticula^ man, that of necessity he do
this, else he were not God, seeing neither inconstancy, nor impotencie can
be fall him that is God. Besides, if this had been his will, it behooued
likvvise to have been his will, that Christ should both have saved, and
redeemed, every particular man, and yet Christ does plainly witness concerning
Judas in particular, that he was the Child of perdition, and that he was
lost, and that to this end, that the scriptures might befulfilled, John 17. 12.
which speech of Christ, himself, is carefully to be marked, for the
overthrowing of those who hold this blasphemous opinion, even from their own
strongest hold, that is from the very will of God, as it is revealed in the
scriptures, seeing Judas must perish, that the scriptures might be fulfilled,
whereof it must follow, that even according to Gods will revealed in the
scriptures, God does not will, that every man should be saved else there was
no necessity, that Judas must perish, that the scriptures might be fulfilled.

Moreover the same Christ witnesses plainly, that he laid down his life
for his sheep John. 10 15. and in that same chapter witnesses plainly
touching the Jews to whom he spoke, that they were not of his sheep,
verse. 26. whereupon it follovveth necessarily, that it was never Gods
will, that every particular man should be saved. If we compare the words of
Christ in this 10. Chapter with the words of the same Christ in the 6. chap.
ver. 39. where he says, this is the fathers will which has sent me, that
of all which he has given me, I should lose nothing, for the will of God
touching man's salvation is to be extended no further, then according to the
comissio^ given to Christ the mediator, for the saving of men, now it is
plain by Christ himself, that he was to save none, but such as the Father
had given him, but that all men were not given to Christ of the Father is
plain by the words of the same Christ: John 17. verse. 6. where he says, I
declared thy name to the men thou gave me out of the world, and again, ver.
the 9. I pray for them, I pray not for the world, but for them thouh ast given
me. Besides that, God has not given every particular man unto Christ, It is
evident by the words of Christ John, the 6. ver. 37. All that the Father has
given to me, shall come to me. But no man is so shamlesse as to deny, but that
there be many men, that never came to Christ, nor ever shall come, and so by
consequence were never given by God the father unto Christ, and if never given
by him to Christ, then it could never be his will, that Christ should save
them, seeing this was the will of the Father that sent Christ, that of all
which he had given him, he should loose nothing, and this agrees well with
Christ's own speech, (mentioned before) John the 10. Where he shows the
reason, why the Jews to whom he spoke, did not believe, saying, It was,
because they were not of his sheep, which the father had given him, whom
only he did reconcile to the Father, seeing he laid down his life for them
only, and so by consequent saved none but them only. By this it is manifest,
that it was never Gods will, to have every particular man to be saved, seeing
he has not given every particular man unto Christ, neither are all men of the
sheep of Christ, and therefore he neither did lay down his life for every
man, nor was it the will of the Father to save every man. To come yet to
demonstrate more manifestly, that this will of God, touching the salvation of
all men, is to be understood only of all sorts of men, and in no wise of
every particular man, We have 3. strong arguments laid down in this same
place by the Apos. to Tim. The first is in these words, that God will have
all men to come to the acknowledging of the truth, Which words are to be
taken in the same sense, with the former: for the Apost. ioynes them this
way, God will, that all men should be saved, and come to the acknovvledging
of the truth. VVherby it is clear, that Gods will touching the salvation of
all men, can be no larger extended, then Gods will touching the coming of all
men to the knowledge of the truth, Now that it is not Gods will, that every
particular man should come to the knowledge of the truth, is manifest by the
words of Christ himself Mat. 13. 11. where he gives the reason to his
Apostles, why he speak to the people in parables, saying, it was because, it
was not given to them to know the secrets of the kindgdome of heaven, If then
there be some, to whom it is not given by God to know the troath. It cannot
be Gods will, that every man should com to the knowledge of the truth, for
other wise certainly, he would give every man to know it, seeing he does
whatsoever he will, therefore they must speak against Gods own mind, set
down by Christ himself, and by the Apostle in this place, who does affirm,
that it is Gods will, that every particular man should be saved, seeing it is
not his will, that every particular man should come to the knowledge of the
truth, and his will touching the salvation of all men is no larger, then his
will is touching their coming to the troath.

To make it yet further manifest, that it is not Gods will, that every man
should come to the knowledge of the truth, but his elect alone the Apost.s
hevvs it in the. 11. to the Romans vvhe^e he shows us, that the elect had
obtained this, and the rest were hardened, and shows this their hardening to
be the work of God himself, out of Isaiah, saying, God has given them the
spirit of slumber, eyes, that they should not see, and ears, that they should
not hear unto this day, how then is it possible, that it can be Gods will,
that every man should com to the knowledge of the truth, If God himself
blind the eyes of men, that they see not, and harden the hearts of many, that
they understand not, for these two cannot stand together, except we make God
a direct enemy to his own will, and a worker against his own purpose,
(which is blasphemous to think, and so consequently it cannot be agreeable
to Gods truth, that God will have, that every particular man to be saved,
seeing it is not his will, that every particular man should come to the
knowledge of his troath, without which knowledge it is impossible, that any
man can be saved. The second Argument is in these words, where the Apo.
says, that Christ gave himself a ransom for all men, where the word (all)
is to be taken in the same sense, in which it is to be taken, in these that
God vvil have (all) men to be saved. Now we have shevved you before, that I.
Christ did not lay down his life for every particular man, but for his sheep
only, which the Father did give him, there being many other who were not
of his she epe, as himself does witness, and the testimony of the redeemed
ones (cited before) out of the Revel. proves this point evidently, whereas
they witness, that Christ had redeemed them by his blod, out of every tribe,
people, and nation, declaring an universality of redemption in respect of
kinds of men, but denying universality concerning every particular man.

The third Argument is set down in the 7. ver. where the Apos. lays down
the third ground, whereby he confirms the former saying to wit, that God
will have all men to be saved, which is, that he is ordained a preacher of
salvation to the Gentiles, that is not unto the Jews only who before Christ's
coming had the promises, but also to the Gentiles, who before Christ's coming
were excluded from the Covenant and promise. In these words we have first
to gather, that which the adversary takes for their advantage, that is the
universal publication of the promise, and salvation to all nations, which
notvvithstanding makes much against them, for thus far we will grant, that
as largely as the Gospel, and promise of salvation is extended by God, in the
ministry thereof: so far it is Gods will to extend likewise his salvation,
to some, though not to every one in every place, where the Gospel is
preached: But out of the Apo. words to the Heb. 4. ver. 1. 2. we gather
strong argument, against that sort of the universality of Gods will and grace,
whereby it is extended to every particular person, for the Apostle: shows us
plainly in that place, that the promise of entering into Gods rest is not left
in any place to any people, but where the gospe^ is preached, If therefore the
gospel be not preached unto al, then certainly the promise of entering into Gods
rest, is not universal, nor made to all, in that sense of universality
formerlie alleged, and if the promise be not made to all, and every one
universally, then certainly it cannot be Gods will to save all, and every
one universally. Now that the gospel is not preached to all, is plain, both
by experience, and scripture. Are there not now many nations, that never yet
heard the gospel? be there not many people in Africa, America, and other
places, who never yet heard of Christ, but lie in ignorance, and blindness
without the word of God. Besides the scriptures do show us, that when
Christ sent out his Apostles to preach the gospel, he did then command them,
not to go into the way of the Gentiles, and not enter into the Cities of the
Samiritans, matt. 10. 5. and the spirit plainly forbids Paul, and Barnabas, to
preach in certain contries of Asia, Act. cha. 1^. ver. 6. 7. If men object
against this, that God did this upon fore knowledge, that they would not
receive the Gospel, and therefore did forbid to preach unto them, this is
ansvvered out of the mouth of Christ himself. Mat. 11 ver. 21. 23. vvher he
says, Woe be to thee Corazin, vvoe be to thee Bethsaida, for if the mighty
works, which were done in you had been done in Tirus, and Sidon, they would
have repented long ago in sackcloth, and ashes. And thou Capernaum, which art
exalted unto heaven, shall be brought down to hell, for if the mighty
works, which have been done i^ thee, had been done in Sidon, it should have
remained until this day. By which speech of Christ it is evident, that God
did deny the means o^ salvation to those whom he did know would not so
have abused them, as they that had them: he did see that the Gospel, and the
works of Christ would have wrought upon the Sodomites to the preservation
from that destruction which did fall upon them, and upon them of Tirus and
Sidon, to humiliation in sackcloath, and ashes, and yet he denies these means
unto both. How can then this stand as a truth, that God only does deny the
means of salvation unto them whom he foresees vvil abuse them, these men that
maintain this opinion se not, how their vain, and blind cureositie, and
carnal wisdom makes them fall into such difficulties whereunto they are
never able to answer, besides that they overthrow by this assertion one
many points of Gods eternal truth set down in the 9. and 11. Chapters to
the Romans in both which the truth of God, does plainly witness, and prove
unto us, that Gods decree, his election, and his calling, are grounded, not
upon man's will but upon Gods, from whence comes it that even by the
publication of the Covenant, some are saved, and some are not, is it o^ their
vvil or of Gods vvil? the Apo. in the.9. of the Romans says plainly, that it is
not in him that wills, nor in him that runs, but in God that shows
mercy, for he will have mercy, on whom he will have mercy, and whom
he will he^ hardneth. It must therefore be a monstrous vntroath, to say, that
God wi^ have every particular man to be^ saved, neither can any thing, tha^ can
be said touching the rebellion of man's will against Gods vvi^^ avail to the
contrary: for God^ own will by the testimony of the Apostle: (yea of God
himself Exo. 33. 19. and not man's is the ground of Gods mercy, if therefore it
were his will, that every one should be saved, then certainly he would
shevve mercy to every one seeing he shows mercy to whom he will: Besides,
how could God be said to harden whom he will, even as his will is revealed,
and published in the gospel. If that were true, that it was his will, that
every man should be saved, how can it be possible, that toward one, and the
self same person, God should have one will to save him, and another will to
harden him, as if the fruit, and efficacy of Gods calling depended upon man's
will, and not upon Gods, how could it be possible that God could show mercy
to whom he will, or yet harden whom he will? does not I saiah, and the
Apost. does tell us, that except the Lord reserved a seed, no man should be
saved, but it should be with us, as it was with Sodom, and Gomarra: so that it
is not men, that reserve themselves, but only God who reserues a seed unto
himself. Let men out of these things Judge whether our interpretation of this
sentence be not the soundest agreeing with Gods own interpretation, of his
own mind, whereby his power will, and God head are maintained, or whether
that other sense be not to be abhorred, which makes man's will to over rule
God^ will, and man to be a fauiour, a^^ so a God to himself.

But yet to clear this point some what more, let us grant this sayin^ to be
true, that God will not sau^ us, without us, whereupon it might seem to
follovv, that although Go^ will every man to be saved, yet (...) man himself
will not embrace salvation, it is not the default of God will, but of man's
will, that he (...) not saved, for albeit, that God will that a man be
saved, yet he wills not that he be saved against his own vvil, therefore
his damnation coming by reason of his own backvvardnes, and rebellion, and
reiection of Gods offer, seems to make nothing against this point, that God
will have him saved.

Surely we cannot deny, but it is a sound truth, that God saues no man,
against man's own will, for those that come to Christ, must come willingly
unto him, neither is this the point of Controversy, but this is the question,
to wit, whence proceeds man's vvillingnes to embrace Christ, and the promise
of salvation? is it of man himself? or is it Gods gracious gift? if it be
Gods gift, then how can any man's own will hinder his salvation if God will
it, It being true which she Apost. says Phil. 2. chap. ver. 13. to wit, that
it is God that works effectually in us, both to will, and to perform, the
resistance then of a man's own will cannot hinder his salvation, if it be
Gods will that he be saved, seeing it is in Gods to make him to will, although
in himself he be never so unwilling, yea it is certain that there is not
any man, that has this power to will the things, that belong to his peace,
and salvation, till God work it in him. If therefore God will that every man
be saved, and if God have it in his hand, and power, to work in every man to
vvil that which he wills, why does not God give to every man to will so,
or if he do not work this vvil in every man, how can it be true that he
wills every man to be saved, seeing it is not from man himself but from God,
that man has this will, for man's own vnvvillingnes could not hinder Gods
vvillingnes, who has the will of man in his power to make it vvilling.
Seeing then, God vvil not save us without us, and seeing we cannot will
without him, how can he be said to will that man's salvation, in whom he
works not to will, without which God wills not to save him. Now that
God works not this will in every man, the adversaries themselves are not so
shameless, as to call it into question, seeing they contrary to the scriptures,
would make God to work it none, how then is it possible, that God wills
the salvation of every man, for if he wills not that which is the less,
and without which I cannot be saved, how can he be thought to will my
salvation which is the greater, and yet depends upon the lesser, which I
cannot have but by his vvorking. To Conclude this point, if God wills the
salvation of every man, but yet so, as not without ma^s vvillingnes, and if
every man's vvillingnes, and also vvorking of his own salvation depends upon
the same will of God, how can it be that any man in the world should be
destitut of that vvillingnes, without which he cannot be saved, or frustrate
of salvation, for if upon the same will and good pleasure of God, vvherby he
wills the salvation of a man, the gift of that man's vvilling nes, and
vvorking of his salvation does depend. It is a vvonder that any man should be
either without vvilling or vvorking for what can hinder Gods vvil, when the
vnvvillingnes of man's own will cannot do it, God having it in his vvil to
make man's will vvilling, and man not being able to will except God work it
in him, It being true which John says, that Christ gives this prerogative to
be the sons of God to those who are borne, not of blood, nor of the will
of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God: John. 1. 13.

FINIS.

