THE OVERTHROW OF THE PROTESTANTS PVLPIT-BABELS, CONVINCING their Preachers of
LYING and RAILING, to make the Church of ROME seem mystical Babell.

PARTICVLARLY confuting VV. Crashawes Sermon at the Cross, printed as the
pattern to justify the rest.

WITH a Preface to the Gentlemen of the Innes of Court, showing what use may
be made of this Treatise.

TOGETHER with a discovery of M. Crashawes spirit: and an Answer to his
Jesuits Gospel.

By I. R. Student in Divinity.

Job. 13. v. 4. Showing you to be forgers of lies, and mainteyners of false
doctrine.

Ab vno disce omnes.

Learn all the rest by one.

Imprinted Anno M.DC.XII.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND WORSHIPFUL, THE STVDENTS of the Common Law in his
Majesty's Innes of Court. THE PREFACE.
IF many seduced souls in our (in this respect) unhappy Kingdom, had no more
need to read refutations of idle Babels, then any trained up in true learning
can take delight to refute frivolous falsehoods: If as on M. Crashawes Sermon
few men of understanding can look without pitying the Preachers folly; so
likewise there were not troops of common, and ignorant people, who like weak,
and silly flies caught in the cobwebs of such slanders, are therein kept
prisoners from the bosom of that Church, out of which none can be saved: If
whom nature or education has left simple, heresy did not make proud, to be
tampering with tools that may cut their fingers, and to venture into the web
of heretical fraud, which they want strengh of wit to break through: If (I
say) such were the felicity of our Country, I might to my great comfort have
been excused from the task of this tedious labor of directing an Answer to
this Bachelours Babell, and have saved some pieces of a rich and irrecouerable
Jewel Res omnium pretiofissima te^pus, quam ne gratus quide^ potest reddere.
Senec.
to have employed them in a more gaynefull, and comfortable purchase. But
seeing the world is never so perfect; as not to have many Quid obest paruulis
tardius ingeniu^, dummodo in nido Ecclesiae tuti plumesca^t? Aug. l. 4.
Co^fess. c. 16.
simple, nor the simple always so happy, as to keep themselves securely
humble, nor the humble in this life so fully secure, as not to be subject to
the deceipts of the crafty, nor the crafty so careful of credit, or moderate
in malice, that they will forbear to utter even open falsehoods, to entangle
the ignorant, when they want stronger arguments to encounter with the learned;
the earnest entreaty of diverse friends have won me to prefer public profit
before private comfort, and neglecting the perfection of my intended studyes,
and the inclination of my own nature, to encounter with false and open
slanders, the very sound whereof cannot but be noisome to any learned ear,
though an answer be necessary to prevent the dreadful danger of eternal
perdition in the less intelligent Readers.

2. Yt is now one year and more, that a Gentleman then living in one of your
Courts, brought me this Sermon of M. Crashaw, together with his Jesuits
Ghospel, desyring I would bestow thereon an Answer, assuring me, that howsoever
the same might seem ridiculous or contemptible to men of learning, yet many
wauing Babes were carried away with Ephesians. 4. v. 14.
the blast of such slanders, and by the waves of such raging Fluctus feri
maris. Iudae 1.3.
inuectiues beaten and broken against the rock, on which Christ built his
Matt. 16. v. 18.
Church; I began then to peruse his Sermon, and note some manifest slanders,
and places of our Authors corrupted by him: yet to confess the truth, I did so
loath this war against words, and against Babels, seeming mountains and
monsters to the eye, but wynd and vanity in very truth, that I was glad of any
colorable occasion to fly from the combat. Wherefore a rumor being spread,
that by publishing his Jesuits Gospel the folly and intemperancy thereof had
offended all Protestants of Judgment, and temperate Disposition, that the
Gentlemen of the Temple for this respect, as also in regard of his marriage
which many judged no convenient quality for their Preacher, did resolve to
discharge him of his office forthwith: I began to relent, and soon after quite
gave over the intended Answer to his Sermon, hoping that without my help
together with the body, the shadows would vanish, the beams of clear truth
entering in their place. But it seems, men spoke of Master Crashaw, rather
what themselves thought he deserved, then what others intended, since neither
any public dislike was showed against his intemperate writing, nor the
sweetness of his marriage did any way mittigate the bitterness of his tongue; but
still both in print, and pulpit, according to the uttermost of his skill and
power, he imployeth his forces, to darken and obscure with a mist of slau^ders
the light of the Catholic Church.

3. Wherefore having notice thereof, and urged again by the renewed request of
some friends, I resolved to make no further delay to finish and publish my
formerly intended discovery of this Minister, specially out of grief, that so
many of my dear Countrymen should be kept from the clear water of Catholic
doctrine, and deluded with empty bug-beares, which slaunderers set upon the
banks thereof, and that the smoke of falsehood should (in the inueighled eye of
the simple) transform the very pillars of Christianity into snakes and adders
of blasphemy, causing seely souls that look not into things, to abhor the
fair, and goodly chamber of Christ his Spouse, as a den of Serpe^ts. The
treatise being finished, I did less repent my labor, hoping the same might
serve not only as a private discovery of this Preacher, abusing his credit and
small learning, to the perdition of many by fair shows of sanctity, and
greatest promises of exact truth, when he means most deceit; but also for
three other more general uses, which I intend briefly in this Preface to
declare, by which you will easily perceive the reason of the title thereof, and
together lay open unto you the motives urging me to offer the same unto you.

4. First, this Treatise may serve for a compendiary answer to a good part of
many Protestant books which ever commonly are farsed with these very slanders,
The use of this Treatise.
That we think the Pope to be God; that he can deliver souls out of hell, and
the rest, which this Mynister to make them more vendible does offer as rare
Jewels, and no triuiall things. For though I do not remember to have read in
any Protestant writers, slanders so thick, and threefold as in this Sermon,
nor lies placed in such good order and method according to the tables of the
law; yet looking into their best Authors, you shall find that they ever did,
and still do make these slanders their Triarian Legion, in which they put
their chief and last trust, and which, when the better weapons of Scriptures
or Fathers are wrested out of their hands, they choose to fly unto, rather then
yield: which may be showed by the example (to omit diverse others) of two
English writers of singular credit, in books which they write of two grauest
arguments. The one M. Doctor Jewel (to whose name I need add no other
Epithete, to make him seem peerless unto Protestants) in his book of the
Apology of the Church of England, who does not blush, into a Treatise of so
grave a subject, to insert trifles known to be false; of our thinking the Pope
to be our Lord God, allowing fornication, and such like of M. Crashawes
trumpery scattered here and there in his Especially 4. part.
book, as the penury of better weapons forced that great captain to fight
with rushes. The other is Doctor Andrews, now Bishop of Ely, In his Tortura
Torti.
who lately summoned to fight with the learned Cardinal, does often wou^d his
Latin style, worthy of better matter, with M. Crashawes wounds, urging old and
worme-eaten glosses against us, who being a man of so known learning, and ever
thought of a stayed judgment, and temperate spirit; neither we, nor the world
did expect Babels from him, nor that he would stain his learned pen with
triuiall slau^ders, seeking to crack the credit of our cause with men of mean
judgment, by the loss of his own among those of better learning. But
necessity is a forcible weapon with which were those learned Protestants driven
to fight, of who^ Doctor Field does in his Epistle dedicatory to the L. of
Canterbury.
complain (that forbearing to write themselves, laugh in their With many a
scornful look, simile at the follies of others writings.
sleeves, and sometimes more openly at others labors) would perchance be
forced to speak these very Babels, which now they laugh to behold in Doctor
Field and others, finding by experience that not want of learning, or weakness
of judgment, but the nakedness of their otherwise indefencible cause drives
these Doctors to make Babels, bulwarks of their Church.

5. Wherefore it might in a manner have been wished by us (his sin excepted)
that M. Crashaw should, as it were sweep the writings of his learned Authors,
raking all their ordure into his Sermon, as into a dunghill, or stable of such
stuff which one of far less strength then Hercules might cleanse, by
letting in the pure streams of truth the Catholic Church teaches in those
points, which cannot but clearly carry away from her doctrine the dung of
those slanders in the judgment of any indifferent Reader. Against which
slanders had we conceived (as we might justly) so great a hatred, as ever that
Caligula.
Tyrant had against Rome (who wished the heads of the people stood all upon
the same shoulders to cut the^ off at a stroke) M. Crashaw may seem very
sufficiently to have satisfied our desire, who has gathered these slanders
into heads, and laid those heads, as you shall see, very orderly together in
his own head, and Sermon, that all their chief slanders, together with his,
may be cut off, and cleared by one, and that not very long Answer.

6. But besides this first use of this Treatise, the same may also serve for an
Answer unto many Sermons that are continually made against the Church of Rome
in England, in M. Crashawes railing tune, falling and rising upon the same
notes of falsehood; That the Pope is our Lord God; that he can do more then ever
God did, and the rest. Often also singing unto their false notes the very same
ditty of this misapplyed text: We would have cured Babel etc. By which
clamorous railing, they put their ignorant Auditors into such rage, and fury
against us, that as Erasm. in spongia aduersus Hutten.
Erasmus noted long ago, they come from sermons no less fierce, and fiery,
then soldiers from the warlike speech of a Captain exhorting them to fight. I
remember I have read of the Citizens of Lucian. Quomodo scribe^da sit historia.
Abdera, that once hearing a furious Tragedy in a hot day of summer, they were
all stricken into such a fit of frenzy, that many days after they did nothing
but act the same tragedy with furious gestures in their streets. The like does
often happen in England by the Tragical declayming of Ministers against us,
specially when the persecution is hoatest, they seek to kindle the same fiery
impressions of hatred in others, wherewith themselves are enraged: the Monsters
wherewith they thus fright poor men out of their wits, against the faith of
their Ancestors, being ever commonly M. Crashawes Babels, that, We teach the
Pope to be God, that, with the Virgin Marie God has divided his Kingdom;
that, Images are better books then Scripture; that, we pray unto stocks and
stones, and the rest.

7. VVherin they do lively imitate the Diu multumque de imperitorum erroribus
latissime ac vehementissime disputabant. Aug. de vtil. cred^ c. 1.
Manichees, who seem to have exceeded all other Heretics in their slanderous
charging the Church of Christ with senseless, and prodigious doctrine, as with
teaching, that, God is envious, furious, mutable, subject to passion, cruel,
and the like, declayming bitterly against such blasphemies, citing some words
of the old Testament that might sound to that sense. And two reasons as S.
Augustine notes, moved them to this course, the very same that make our
Ministers follow the same deceiptfull course. First to affright ignorant people
from the bosom of the Cath. Church, by setting fearful bugbeares of horrible
blasphemy upon her, that not knowing whither else to go, they might in a manner
be forced to fly to the Manichean Conuenticles, like Fowlers (says this Itaque
nobis faci eba^t quod solent insidiosi aucupes, qui viscatos surculos prope
aquam defigunt, vt sitientes aues decipiant: obruunt enim, and quoquomodo
operiunt alias quae circa sunt aquas, vel inde etiam prodigiosis molitionibus
deterrent, vt in eorum dolos, non electione, sed inopia decidatur. Aug. de
vtilit. credend. c. 1.
Father) who having laid their lime-twigs by some water side, seek to stop
other waters therabout, or set some dreadful scar-crowes over them, that the
poor birds not knowing where else to find water, not out of choice, but out of
mere necessity come at last to light in their snares. Secondly, not to want
matter in their Sermons, which they might copiously dilate upon, to get with
men of small judgment the name of great Preachers, by making large and grave
inuectiues, which any man (says Quod cuiuis mediocriter erudito esset
facillimum. Ibid.
S. Augustine) though of very mean learning may easily do against such
palpable follies, as are, God his being mutable, passionate, furious etc. In
confutation of which Babels the Manichees did use to spend long sermons, with
almost as much stayed gravity, as M. Crashaw, and other Ministers do use in
their pulpits, to rail at us, for teaching the Pope to be God, the Virgin
Marie more then God, and such stuff

8. Against which manner of dealing, I will set down the saying of this
learned Father, entreating the Reader to mark the same, which may serve him
for an Antidote against, and an Answer unto all this kind of Sermons: (p) In
has, and huiusmodi nugas grauiter, copioseque inuehi soletis etc. Against these
and such like toys you make grave, and large inuectiues, which do no ways
concern us; you speak only against old wives tales, and childish Babels. In
confutation of which, the more earnest you are, the more you show your selves
to want judgment. By which clamors whosoever is moved to turn unto you, he
condemns not the doctrine of our Church, but shows himself ignorant
thereof. Wherefore if you have any thing of men left in you, if you have any care
of your selves, seek diligently in what good and pious sense these things may
be spoken. For such a faith as belieueth of God absurd, and inconvenient
things, we do more vehemently, and plentifully accuse, then you; and when by
any of our Church these things are understood as the letter sounds, their
ignorance we instruct, their pertinacity we deride. Thus S. Augustine.

9. The third use that may be made of this Answer, is yet more general, and
universal, and of greater importance, and sequel, at which I confess I have
principally aimed, to wit to show that the English Ministry cannot be a true
Church, nor among them saving truth be found, which does practice, and
patronize both in pulpit, and print most notorious lying, and furious railing.
For this to be a manifest, and sensible sign of a false Church, themselves do
grant Nos inuectio vestra non ta^git, sed aniles quasdam vel pueriles etiam
opiniones eo ineptiore quo vehementiore oratione peruellitis; qua quisquis
mouetur and ad vos tra^sit, non Ecclesiae nostrae da^nat disciplinam, sed eam
se ignorare demo^strat Quamobrem siquid humani cord geritis, si curae vobis
vosmetipsi estis, quaerite potius diligenter and pie, quo modo ista dicantur.
Quaerite miseri: nam talem fidem qua de Deo inconueniens a liquid creditur, nos
vehementius and vberius accusamus. Nam and in illis quae dicta sunt cum sic
intelliguntur, vt littera sonat, and simplicitatem corrigimus, and pertinaciam
deridemus. l. 1. de mor. Eccl. c. 10.
See the way to the true Church, of M. White in the Preface. n. 12.
which without shame they cannot deny, seeing this sin Nature does so detest,
that no Nation, though barbarous, durst ever openly allow it; a sin most
hateful and abominable Proverb. 12. v. 22.
unto God, most shameful in the Servile vitium, nec in seruo quide^
tolerabile. Plutarch.
eye of the world: in so much that the Wisema^ says: Eccl. c. 20. v. 27.
potior est fur quam assiduitas viri mendacis.
Better is familiarity with a thief, then with a liar: which sin is ever the
individual mate, and companion of heresy, as Job does signify, speaking to his
friends that were the type of heretics, as L. 11. moral. c. 15.
S. Gregory notes: I will show you to be Job. 13. v. 4.
coyners of lies, and maynteyners of false doctrine: where you see liars, and
heretics shake hands. Whom likewise the holy Ghost does couple together in
this sentence: Proverb. 14. v. 25.
Loquitur mendacia versipellis. Turne-coates (such as change the first faith
wherewith they were clothed in Baptism) do use to speak lies, and untruths.
So that this is a blemish not in face and finger, for such wounds M. Crashaw
would not stick to grant Page ^2.
in the Church of England: but such as does eat up the very heart of a Church
(to use his own phrase) which cannot be thought Christian, nor the Church of
truth, being treacherous and false, seeking to delude the world with lies.

10. But you will say, though I might prove that M. Crashaw is guilty of this
crime; yet I should be unjust to lay his lying properly on the whole Church of
England for his sake, urging the fault of one as the practice of all. To this I
answer, that had M. Crashaw published this Sermon as a private justification
of himself, his want of sincerity therein could not without some violence have
been wrested upon his Church; though truly the permitting in print of so many
and so palpable falsehoods might give some cause to suspect, that their Church
did give at least a tacit consent to such injurious dealing. But the case now
stands otherwise about this Sermon, and in such terms that the Church of
England cannot sever her public disgrace from his private shame. For whereas
Catholics have often complained of Ministers injurious dealing with them in
pulpit, to make them odious unto the people, by declayming slanders against
them, but specially of M. Crashaw in this his Sermon at the Cross, which they
thought so exorbitant, as they gave out (as he himself In his Epistle
dedicatory to the Princes Highness.
says) that he was called before authority for his immodest excess in this
kind, which you shall see by the examination thereof, they had great cause to
think: Whereas I say these complaynts were made, and this expectation had,
that some sign of public dislike would be given against such intemperate
preaching, M. Crashaw to show that Authority did not mislike, but allow his
dealing, did not condemn, but patronize it, after some months taken to think
of the matter, to view over his Sermon, and perchance to leave out some more
notorious and shameful untruths which he durst utter in pulpit though not in
print, at last makes the same public, bringing his own shame to light. But to
what end? Hear it in his own words in the Epistle dedicatory to the Princes
Highness: Not so much to clear my self (says he) as to honor the truth, and
to show, that it is no trick, nor policy of our State (as it is in Popery) to
set up men with authority to rail, and license to lie, thereby to make our
enemies odious. Thus he. And in his This dedication was the first, but his
Lordship discarded the Sermon.
Epistle to the Lord Treasurer, he adds, that he did publish his Sermon to
honor truth, but much more to justify the State: such desire does this
Minister show to be rather a Statesman then a true man. But if by the State he
understand those of his Majesty's most honorable Counsel, he needs not to
justify whom none accuse, whom their own Honor does sufficiently clear from
any suspicion of allowing such dishonorable dealing, who cannot be stained
with these Ministerial crimes, seeing they commit the charge, to see they
bring not such foul things into pulpit, unto their Bishops, and Prelates, on
whom this disgrace must lie, and from them redound unto their Church. For this
their publishing of the Sermon to be a pattern of their truth, and modesty,
and to show that our complaints against them are unjust, and without cause, was
as much as to say unto the Church of Rome, ab vno disce omnes, by this one
Minister learn all the rest; see how sincere in accusing, modest in
reprehending, solid in reproving your errors, judicious in producing,
diligent in perusing, faithful in quoting your Authors we are: finally how far
from any lying, and railing, which you falsely lay to our charge. By which also
you may see, that the credit of the Church of England lies upon M. Crashawes
head, which must needs be cracked in pieces, if in this very Sermon which they
made public to justify themselves, we find railing and lying, in very
exorbitant, or rather impudent manner.

11. As for his recrimination, that it is a trick in Popery to set up men with
authority to rail and lie, the proofs he brings are so poor, that they
will rather serve to discover his fraud and falsehood, and make his impudency
more apparent, compared with the sincerity of our proceeding. See his Epistle
to the Earl of Salisbury.
For whereas we charge him with many hundred of manifest and inexcusable
slau^ders, uttered in this one Sermon, he that has spent the whole course of
his studies to peruse our Records, could bring but three examples, and those
neither to the purpose, nor true. Nay therein he does show his own false
dealing, as will appear by the examination of them, as they are set down in
his Epistle Dedicatory to the Princes Highness. A Book (says he) was printed
in the English College at Rome, wherein it is affirmed, that we take
Catholics, and draw upon their legs boots full of hot boiling liquour, and
upon their feet hot burning shoes: and do put them into Bears skins, and cast
them to the dogs to be pulled in pieces. All this, and many such other set down
in pictures. But first it is false that any such book was printed in the
English College, in which since the first erectio^ thereof never any book was
printed. Some things indeed are painted upon the walls of their Church, which
book perchance the Bachelour means: so that instead of Preachers set up in
pulpit, he accuses Painters hired to make pictures upon walls, which is great
folly, seeing all grant unto them Pictoribus atque Poetis quidlibet audendi
se^per fuit aequa potestas. Horat.
license to devise and faigne without charge of falsehood. And if a Catholic
painter to express how Priests in England are traduced as Traitors; how
disguised with the ugly terms of enemies of the State, they are made hateful,
did paint the^ in the form of a man in a Bears skin, no less meek and
innocent within, then dreadful and horrible without; if to represent the fury
and violence of Purseuants in hunting after, seeking out, and abusing these
men, he did express the^ under the shape of bloudhounds, or mastiues: truly I
see no reason why this may not be as well excused, as their ordinary painting
the Pope in the shape of ugly Monsters, and John Fox his filling his lying Acts
and Monuments with such Pageants, and ridiculous devises, to fright fools,
whereof he was Father. Secondly I say, that these things are not our devises or
inventions, but true stories, that at Louth in Lincolneshire a Catholic was
put into a bears skin and torn in pieces by dogs in King Henry the 8. his
days, whether by public authority or popular fury it is not certain; which
answer was made long since to Sir See the warn-word to Sir F.H. watchword 2.
encount. c. 2. page 6.
Frauncis Hastings, and not yet refuted. As touching boots of boiling liquour,
a venerable Bishop of Ireland had boots anointed with oil put on his legs,
and set to the fire, was put to cruel torture. So that they accuse us of
speaking fables, when we do but rehearse their furyes, and belying us to
feygne what their cruelty forced us to feel.

12. The second instance or charge is more vain, and false then the first.
Feuardant a famous friar (says he) wrote in latin seven years ago, that we
revile, and reject that prayer to the holy Trinity, Sancta Trinitas vnus Deus,
miserere nobis: what will not he say, that dare say this? Thus he. But indeed
the Bachelour does abuse that famous, and learned Friar, who does only say,
that the error against the invocation of the Blessed Trinity, was Feuardant.
in 1. Petri. c. 1. fol. 140. edit. Paris. 1600.
restored by Caluinists in France, Flanders, and England, who cavil at, and
reject the former prayer. Where you see he does not charge with that error all
heretics, or Protestants in those Countries, but Caluinists only; nor all
Caluinists neither, but some, to wit such, as are of the purer strain, that
mislike all words in prayer that are not found in Scripture, and follow Calvin
exactly in all points, who does wish buried in oblivion the name of Trinity,
and such like, as Feuardant. vbi supra page 36.
Feuardant proves. Wherefore I would demand of M. Crashaw, when he says,
Feuardant does write, that we reject the prayer etc. whom does he mean by that
(we?) We State Protestants, or We Puritans? for I think his conscience is not
so stiff unto one, but it may extend to the other. If Protestants, Feuardant
does not charge them. If Puritans, the Bachelour does vainly seek to justify
them by the book of Common Prayer which they are known to hate and detest. So
that this trick of setting up liars, comes to fall upon his own head.

13. In the third charge of falsehood, which is against Gretzerus his
narration, concerning Father Garnet and Oven his man, he does neither cite the
words, nor quote the place, nor name the book, and at most it is but an
Historical untruth, whereunto men are subject, as John Fox was in his Calendar
of Martyrs, who reports of some that were John Marbecke the singer of
windesore and diverse others. Acts and mon. 115.
burnt into ashes under Queen Mary, which lived and drunk merrily in tauernes
many a fair day after Queen Elizabeth her coming to the Crown. But our
Controversy is about wilful, and malicious falsehood, which the Author could
not but know to be such when he wrote or spoke it, whereof we accuse M. Crashaw
and his Church. Neither have they cause to wonder, though strangers do not
give great credit unto their public Acts, and Records against Priests and
Jesuits, against whom the State professes emnity, which may give cause to
fear, and suspect partial Professae inimicitiae suspitione^ habent mendacij
Hieron.
dealing, specially when the persons condemned are well known unto strangers,
and their learning and sanctity highly esteemed. But this Minister that does so
declayme against the contradictors of their public Records concerning the
Powder Treason, does he bear respect unto them himself, when they restrain
his tongue from railing against the Pope? No truly: which you may guess by
this one example: even in this very Sermon page 43.
speaking of a certain form of prayer for the conversion of the Kingdoms of
England and Scotland to the Catholic faith set out by Pope Clement the Eight
in the year 1603. as even he does confess, upon news of the late Queens
mortal sickness, before his Maties coming to the Crown: speaking I say of
this Letany, and the Authors thereof, he says: when these men had conceived and
hatched at Rome the Powder Treason, then to make us secure, and believe they
loved us, they framed prayers for us. Thus he. What respect does this Minister
bear unto their public Records, by which it appears, that, that execrable
Treason was conceived and hatched in England, and when, where, and by whom?
Neither was any the least suspicion of that bloody intendment cast upon the
former Pope, which slander the best in England knew he did little deserve. And
is contradicting publik Records reprehensible in a stranger, and not punishable
in a subject? Or is it lawful against the Pope, and not in the behalf of
Priests? This bold uttering of shameful untruths against so grave and
venerable men, and even Princes, does make our Country infamous with
strangers, that some stick not to say, that our Island, if Ministers pens may
have liberty still, will in time dispossess Crete of her Non hoc, quamuis sit
me^dax Creta, neque potest. Ovid.
Syrname: might it please the Lords of his Majesty's Counsel, to call this
Minister to account, and urge him to prove what he does so peremptorily
affirm, that the Powder Treason was conceived and hatched at Rome, in the year
of our Lord 1603. or before, by the Authors of that Letany, whereof Pope Clement
was chief, it were a thing not unworthy of their knowledge. And if the Bachelour
cannot prove what he has written, let him be punished as he does deserve, for
putting in print such open untruths, to the infamy of the State that may seem
to permit the^, specially this Sermon being also translated See the Frankford
mart of the 1610.
into Latin. This example of equity would move strangers, and foreign Princes
to bear more reverence unto their public Records, the neglect of which cannot
be justly misliked in strangers, whiles it is permitted in Subjects.

13. Thus I have showed how vain, and false the Bachelours instances are to
prove it a trick in popery to set up men to rail and lie against Protestants,
who has not brought so much as one Preacher that used such lying in pulpit,
much less a Sermon of sole slau^ders, as the ensuing discourse does clearly
demonstrate his to be, beginning at the very first sentence of his second Part,
which first sentence, to wit, that Bellarmine does grant the Church of Rome to
be mystical Babylon, is so notorious false, and so contradicted by Bellarmine,
almost in every word of his writing, that I much wonder how the man could so
far forget himself as to think it, having thought to preach it, ha^ing
preached print it, and some years since the printing being past, never yet
reclayme it; I must think it was Gods special providence, that such an
emine^t falsehood should be placed in the forehead or first sentence of his
inuectiue, by which the judicious Readers might perceive, that fury and passion
against the Church of Rome, so blinds the Minister, that he does understand
neither what he reads in others, nor what he says himself. And from the
same providence of God, that takes the wise in their wisdom, and turns
their po^icy into folly, we may think proceeds the blindness of their
Bishops, and Ministry, that have chosen or permitted this Sermon of M. Crashaw
to be printed for their justification, and to stop our complaints that they
rail and belly us in pulpit. For if this Sermon be more intemperate, and
railing then any other they use to make, their want of judgment is admirable to
let the same pass to the print for a pattern. But if the same be more modest,
and sober then many which he and his fellows use to make in this kind (as
perchance it is) truly their dealing must needs be most detestable, and
hateful; whereof this Sermon is the fairest and best, which is nothing else,
but a long cob-web of foul and fond slanders wouen of no other matter, then
the venyme of the preachers bowels, howsoever he pretend to gather it out of
the sayings, and sentences of our Authors.

15. For though he protest in his Preface to the Reader upon his conscience, to
have forged no new Author, to have falsyfied none, to have corrupted none, to
have brought no quotation of any Author of ours, which he has not diligently
perused aforehand, and the whole scope of the place, stopping against himself
the starting hole, to which In his preamble to the Encounter page 100. 104.
M. Morton, and other Ministers fly for defense, when they are charged with
witting falsification of our Authors, that they received the same upon the
credit of John Stock, or by the suggestion of R. C. yet is there scarce any
quotation of any of our Authors cited in this Sermon, which is not very
notoriously corrupted, either by putting in words of his own, or leaving out
words of theirs, or joining together the words that are divided in the
Authors, into the same sentence, or by perverting the scope and drift of the
place; or finally which is his ordinary and common trick, by false translating
their sentences into English, wresting them upon the rack of his large
conscience, till they reach to the length of his false slander, many times
forcing them by torture to say in English what they detest in Latin. Which
manner of proceeding in him that perused diligently the places, cannot be
excused from wilful falsehood, and wicked desire to deceive his Auditors and
Readers, in the most important affayre of knowing the true Church, whereon their
eternal salvation does depend. Of which treacherous dealing this Sermon does
affoard so plentiful examples, that I say again, that few places are by him
cyted (if any) that have not some notorious mark of falsehood printed upon
them: and scarce is there any sentence from the first page of his second part,
where he begins with full mouth his railing Inuectiue, to the last thereof
(above a hundred in number) which is not either notoriously false, or extremely
foolish. Which dealing though it may seem incredible in him, after the former
protestation of truth often reiterated in his Sermon, and this censure, bitter
and harsh to them that have chosen him to be the Pattern and Patron of their
sincerity, and modesty: yet I desire not to be believed, but upon evident
proof thereof, which follows in this Treatise, where Protestants may learn
that falsehood can never be defended with truth, as crafty Ministers that have
made Machiauel a witness of their Catalogus testium veritatis l. 19. col.
1916. edit. ann. 1608. ex officina Iacobi Stoeret Chouet.
Gospel, have long since learned that Machiauelian Principle of the
treacherous Theban: Children are deceived with Apples, and men with Oaths.

16. Which protestations of truth, and shows of Godliness have been so
strong to deceive, that not only flies, and seely people, but also some other
(in their own conceit) neither flies nor small fools, have been caught in
this cobweb. Nay even that Sir Edward Hobby.
Knight whose pen is more famous then his sword, and whose wit, were it
answerable to his name, or his learning so high as his own co^ceipt thereof,
might be well thought a soaring bird, does commend this Sermon In his letter to
T.H. page 54. and 55.
specially to prove that we do degenerate from the doctrine of ancient Fathers
in twenty particulers, insulting over us, that we have not hitherto made
answer unto them. But if it may please him to peruse this Treatise, he will
perchance both be ashamed of his boast and his fluttering in a web of so weak
slanders, and never trust his trencher-schoolmaisters, or Ministers herafter,
that cast flies, and follyes upon his trencher, wherewith he has stuffed his
unlearned Letter, as he may see an example or two, which we have examined in In
the first Part chap. 4.
this Treatise.

17. Now the reason that has moved me to dedicate this Treatise unto You
(HONORABLE COVNTREYMEN) you may easily imagine, to wit, a careful respect of
your salvation, and of your honor, both which this Minister, who still styleth
himself Preacher in one of your Innes of Court, does bring into eminent
danger: your salvation, by preaching false and execrable slanders; your
honor, by publishing in print many ridiculous follyes. The care of your
salvation did move me to present this cou^ter-poyson specially unto them, into
whose breasts the Spyder may be thought to have more ple^tifully infused his
venyme; to offer You this fan of truth to cleanse your Temples, which more then
any other place have been filled with these cobwebs, where the deceyuer has
hid himself these many years in a fair show of feygned Godliness, to
entangle his credulous Auditors, in wicked and damnable hatred of that faith,
which our Forefathers did most gloriously profess. Did you well understand,
and seriously consider, what horrible hatred against Catholic Religion he does
breath out in his Sermon, and seek to inspire into your hearts; I cannot
think, but that your Wisdom, Conscience, and Christianity is such, as you
would detest it.

18. For though we had ever just cause to suspect secret Atheism, and small
Christianity in many Ministers, that they do hate Catholics more the^
Atheists, that they desire rather the overthrow of all Religion, then the
bringing in of the Roman: yet none before Your Preacher (that I know of) durst
make such open profession thereof, who does, and dares give us many clear
signs of this his holy hatred. What shall we think was the reason that making
laws for Virginia, in his new yeares-gift unto In the latter end of that
Sermon.
her, against them he most hated, or would seem to hate, names first Papists,
then Atheists, and lastly Brownists? And of Papists he says, that the Pope for
Popery, be not so much as heard of in Virginia: but for Atheists he will let
them be named. Nay the Virginian Church shall be honored by having their names
in her first Law. And good reason, seeing the first men sent, and intended as
her Apostles, were for the most part Atheists, and profane fellows, as
himself does partly confess. But you see this wise Lawmakers out of his
hatred unto Papists, will have them first excluded from the Commonwealth of
his own head and heart before Atheists, though he will not vouchsafe to name
them, as Solon out of extreme hatred of Parricides left them out in his
Athenian laws. But will you hear him yet more clearly profess together at
once his little love unto God, and huge hatred against the Pope in this very
Sermon? Having found a worme-eaten saying of an old Gloss left out in all
later Editions as he cannot deny, which he thought did sound of blasphemy, he
does openly confess, that page 73.
he will not conceal the same, but discharge his duty to the truth, though he
may give vantage to the Atheists, and Libertines. The truth is, he does
discharge his duty not to God, but to the Devil, not to truth, but falsehood,
by falsifying the meaning of the Glosser, as I have proved in that place. But
suppose it had been a true error, was that blasphemy of such importance
(think you) to be known, that Atheism must be set forward and advanced,
rather then that error of the Gloss concealed? God thrown down, rather then
the Pope spared? Can any religion be in him that will join with the Atheist
against God, rather then (I do not say become a Papist, or speak a good word
for the Pope, for he will perchance rather be a Devil then do it) but so much
as forbear speaking a thing that may seem to disgrace the Pope, the uttering
of which did not import the worth of a rush? I am content any Christian, or any
man that does feelingly believe there is a God, be judge in this case. For that
your Christianity and Conscience does detest such hatred of any religion
whatsoever, I cannot without doing you wrong mistrust.

19. Do you desire yet another, and a more clear argument of your preachers
Atheism, that secretly harbors in his heart? You may find one very notorious
in his page 26.
Jesuits Gospel, which joined with the former by co^paring the two different
shows of zeal together, will make his impiety apparent through the veyle of
hypocrisy, though he double the same with never so many fouldes, and fair
shows of zeal against the Pope. You have heard how dutiful the man is to the
truth, how scrupulous to conceal the same, though by utterance thereof he may
give advantage to the Atheist to deny God. But what if a seeming zeal of Gods
honor may give him a colorable occasion (in his fond conceit) to conceal
the truth of the dignity of Gods Mother; will he think it a sin not to
discharge his duty to the truth? Will he think it reason to condemn them,
that in show of zeal to Gods honor shall speak untruth, and giving passage
to their passions, break the Mother of God in pieces with lies, and slanders?
Mark his doctrine about this matter, and then admire the scrupulous conscience
of the man. Whereas Catholics object unto Protestants, that diverse principal
writers of their sect have spoken irreuerently, and blasphemously of Gods
blessed Mother, your preacher not denying the fact, but justifying the same as
done in laudable zeal, shapeth us this answer, if any shape can be in such a
monster. If any of our religion (says he) has given any words of her that may
give the least blemish to her blessed state, it was not done in any the least
contempt of her, but in the zeal they bare to the honor of their Savior,
whom they held dishonored by the unequal comparing of her with him. For what
will not a Christian man's zeal cause him to do Not to slander any man, nor to
blasphem any Saint though hypocryticall zeal will give advantage to Atheists
against God.
when he sees his God dishonored? Who would have thought that Moses would
have cast so carelessly out of his hands so precious a Jewel, as were the two
tables written with the finger of God? And yet when he heard the name of the
Lord blasphemed, he forgot himself, and them, and as though he remembered none
but God, he threw them away, and brake them in pieces. If Moses zeal makes
his hastines excusable, no reason to condemn them whose zeal gave passage to
their passions, and caused them for the honor of their Creator, to forget the
privilege of a creature. Thus he? In which words few Readers I think can be
so simple or blind, not to espy a wolf whose teeth water with desire to tear
in pieces the immaculate mother of the lamb of God, though he would faigne
cover himself, and do it in a sheeps skin of zeal, which will not serve his
turn; the example of Moses the meekest of men, being too short and little by
much, to hyde the least particle of such monstrous fury, as is giving passage
to passions against Gods Mother, specially so full of blaphemy, and falsehood as
theirs are.

20. And first to discover his faygned zeal, mark (as I touched before) how
it is hot or cold as he pleases, sometimes dutiful to truth against Gods
honor; somtymes zealous of Gods honor against truth, as the taking upon him a
show of either of these zeales may best serve his turn to give, under pretense
of piety, a passage to his passions against the Pope. Sometimes his zeal to
Gods honor is so calm, that he is content God be even denied, not caring
though his discourse may give advantage thereunto. At other times so hot in the
spirit, and zealous of Gods honor, that the least sound of a blasphemy (though
but in a poem) will put him into a trance, where forgetting the true
privilege of a creature, to honor the Creator, he will think it no sin to
speak vildely and irreuerently of his Mother, uttering slanders that may give
blemishes to her blessed state. Is any man so blind that does not see this
zeal to be cou^terfayt, true neither toward truth, nor God, which he can make
hot and cold, sweet and sower, careful and careless of the same thing as he
pleases? Can any thing be in that heart sincere, from which both hatred, and
neglect of blasphemy, both reverence and contempt of truth, both zeal and
carelessness of Gods honor does flow? Secondly, here you may discover the
impiety of Ministers, and the true cause why they so curiously search into our
writings, to find some speeches concerning the Blessed Virgin that may seem
blasphemy, which when they have found, wrapping their woluish intentio^s in a
sheeps skin of zeal against it, they straight fall into a trance, forgetting
themselves, and giving passage to their passions, against her whom they hate
the more, because the Church of God does highly honor her.

21. In this zeal we cannot deny, but John Calvin the Moses of their new Law,
did forget himself and the Virgin (how he remembered God her Son, let the
Reader judge) when he wrote, that in the birth of Christ she was so broken and
weakened, that the forty days before her Purification, were not sufficient
for her to recover her forces, but God did yet spare her, donec ex Calvin
Harmon. in cap. 2. Matthew. v. 3.
puerperio conualesceret, that she might gather up her strength lost in the
labor of childbirth. In this zeal do diverse Protestants give passage to
their passions, accusing her to have committed as great sins as Eve Ce^tur.
l. 1. ce^t. 1.
the Mother of mischief unto all mankind, making her the very type of
Heretics, and Infidels, carnal Sarcerius in Eua^gel. de festo annunciat. apud
Canisium. l. 4. de Deipar. c. 7.
and profane men. In which passion a Lutheran preaching upon her answer to
the Angel, How can this be done, called her Zuinglian, and Georg. Muller. apud
Hospin. 2. p. fol. 390.
Caluinist, whom they hate no less (if not more) then Insatanized,
supersatanized, persatanized. Luther. apud Tigur. in tract. 3. co^t. supre^.
confess. Lutheri.
Devils. But no man more like Moses in forgetting himself, and breaking in
pieces the tables of the Law, then our English Minister In his book of
Christian exercise p. 669.
M. Buney, who dares to write, that when that innocent, and sorrowful LADY
stood at the foot of the Cross, she brake four commandments of God at one
clap, the first, the fifth, the sixth, the ninth, by this blasphemous slander
breaking into pieces both the tables of the Law in her Virginal heart, where
Christian antiquity did ever believe they were De Sa^cta Maria Virgin nullam
habere volo, cum de peccatis agitur, mentione^, quae gratia^ habuit ad
vincendu^ omni ex part peccatum. Aug. de not. and great. c. 36.
inuiolably kept. In this pretended zeal M. Crashaw practicing himself, what
he does patronize in others, thinking (or making a show to think) that we
compare her breasts and milk with the wounds and blood of Christ, does
likewise forget himself, saying, that no extraordinary In his Jesuits Gospel
page 44.
blessedness does belong to the womb of the Virgin, none to her breasts in
this regard only, that they did breed, and feed the Son of God, that she
whom we do so exalt, is no more then another page 91.
holy woman, but a believing page 36.
Jew. And giving further passage to his passions, he does not only beat her
sacred womb and breasts into dust and worms, by scoffing at her assumption
into heaven page 95.
but also carelessely casts them out of his heart into a lower place then
worms and magots, by a foul comparison of them and her milk, with other page
92
women's; not excepting the most impurest Strumpet. What Seneca L. 3. de ira. c.
14.
said of the arrows which a barbarous Cambyses.
Tyrant did fasten in the heart of a child, making the same his mark, praised
by the flattering Praexaspes.
Father of the child that stood by, we may say of these blasphemies, that do so
deeply penetrate into the heart, and honor of Christ's Mother, justified by M.
Crashaw, that they are sceleratius laudata tela, quam missa, not so barbarously
discharged, as commended, that the tongue is more blasphemous that does praise
such passions, then the pen that wrote them.

22. And as for Moses his example of breaking the tables of the law, the
Bachelour does wrong that great Prophet, by accusing him to have been hasty,
careless, forgetful in that fact which he did advisedly and piously, not
dishonoring the tables, but honoring them rather, thinking them to be over
worthy Jewels to be delivered to drunken people, as S. Propheta sanctissimus
indignum existimauit, vinole^tu^ populum a Deo legem accipere. Ser. 1. de
ieiunio ante medium.
Basile says; as Catholics honor the Images of Christ which they put into
the fire, rather then permit them to fall into heretics hands that will
abuse them. But had Moses (pretending zeal) fell into a rage against to
Tables, calling them the law of sin and the Devil, whose Slave heretics in
their passions make the Virgin in whose heart God with his own finger wrote his
law; had Moses in a feigned trance reviled Abraham, or Isaac, or any deceased
Saint; had he falsely slaundered the meanest woman living, as Ministers do the
most blessed of women, and the most glorious of all Saints; I think no
Christian would have dared to speak a word in defense of that zeal, as I do
not know that any man pretending the name of a Christian before this Bachelour,
did ever justify against Gods mother confessed blasphemy, that may blemish her
blessed state. And verily I do somewhat wonder in what a slumber Protestant
Bishops were, when they did permit such a defense of passions pass to the
print, full not only of blasphemy against the Virgin, but also of discredit
against their own writers, giving such a censure of them, which if it be true,
the man that shall bear respect to their writings may justly be thought worse
then mad. For how can any well in his wits believe such books whose authors
even by their best friends are confessed to have written, forgetting
themselves, giving passage to their passions without exact care of truth? How
can we think that doctrine deserves credit which they did deliver, not
knowing what they said, thinking of one thing, and speaking of another,
remembering none but God, when they rail on his Mother: carelessely casting
from their pen sentences that might break and beat her honor into dust? Let
M. Crashaw answer me this argument if he can. If the men of his religion wrote
about the Virgin remembering themselves, and without passion, why does he
slander them that they gave passage to their passions in such wrytings? If
they did indeed write in a passion, forgetting themselves, how can any man of
judgment believe their doctrine in this point, or in any other, when they speak
against the supposed blasphemies of our Church? seeing of men so zealous, we
may justly think, that their zeal does still make them forgetful of truth,
moving them to give passage to their passions against the Pope, whom they will
seem to believe, that we compare with Christ, against whom the zeal of their
passion is no less fervent, then against the Bl. Virgin. So that you clearly
see the suite of Moses his zeal in breaking the tables of the Law does not
fit, nor can hyde the monster of Ministers fury against the Mother of God.
Neither has it, to cover their impiety, any more proportion then the skin of
the least lamb, to hyde the mightyest wolf. By which it is apparent that not
only excess of love, but of hatred also does bereave men of their judgment,
which is the cause that hypocrisy could not keep M. Crashawes huge hatred
against the Pope, greater then his love to God, or the best thing under God so
within the compass of show of piety, but it has broken out into such open
tokens of secret Atheism, that the discreet Reader may justly wonder to
behold them in his writings, that does not know Atheism to be in truth the
very spirit of the new Gospel, moving men to hate Papatus reijcitur, and
Christo nomina no^ da^tur, iuuentus fere nil Dei habet. Gaspar Hedio Ep. ad
Mela^ct.
Popery, but not embrace christianity, lea^ing them without love or feeling of
God.

23. From this hatred does proceed the bloody drift of his Sermon: The scope
whereof (says he) is to discover that ^hese would but deceive us, who speak or
write, that Popery (...) now well reformed in manners, and refined in doctrine:
and therefore they, and we by a reasonable mediation might well be ^econcyled.
You see this Minister is all for war, he will ^ot hear of peace, no mediation,
no reconcilement, ^^ough reasonable, shall be thought or spoken of a^ongst us,
but fight we must one against the other ^ith irreconciliable, and mortal
hatred: In his epist. dedicatory to the Prince.
burning with ^^^e, and devouring each others flesh, and dashing heads against
the stones. In all which Metaphors he does utter ^^e intent, and final scope
of his Sermon, which is so ^^oudy, and so unchristian, that I cannot think
charity ^^so dead in any among You, that they do not even ab^orre the same, as
proceeding from the canckered ma^^e of a venomous spyder. These men know well
and ^^ele the weakness of their cause which they mantayne, because they have no
other way to live, but by keeping ^enefices (first appointed unto Catholic
Priests) for ^^emselues, their wives, and children, should a reaso^able
mediation, or toleration betwixt them and us be ^^ought of, such as Hugonots
enjoy in France, under a ^atholike Prince, that we might have any tolerable
li^erty to speak for our selves, and discover their frauds and slanders,
their guilty conscience does make them ^elieue, and excess of fear somtymes,
that in such a ^^se they would be forced to shut up their Church ^oores, and be
soon forsaken of all. Nay they fear ^^e discovery of their gross lying,
might perchance stir ^^o the people, that were before deluded by them, to take
some violent reueng upon them. This is their fear, which to prevent, they
buzze slanders into peoples heads, that they may not think of any peace,
mediation or reconcilement, but still pursue us with sword and fire to incite
them. Whereunto the Bachelour devised in his chamber, preached at the Cross,
published in print, finally presented to the Princes Highness this Sermon, of
the most odious slanders that wit of man could possibly invent, seeking by
hook and crook to fasten them upon the Church of Rome.

24. Now to understand how far he does endanger your eternal salvation by
this dealing, I do wish you would seriously ponder, what De vtilitate credendi
c. 6. and 7.
S. Augustine teaches: That it is an offense and sin very damnable, not only
in preachers to utter, but also in the auditors to believe against the Church (
that bears away the name of Catholic, by the consent of the world, and,
has the fame and opinion of great learning, and sanctity with humane kind)
horrible and heinous blasphemies, wicked and senseles doctrines, upon the
credit, and clamors of her known enemies. And so hard of belief in this point
ought Christians to be, in S. Augustine his judgment, that they should scarce
believe their own eyes, though they should see some words that may seem to
yield a blasphemous sound, but read again, and again the place to understand
the true meaning thereof. And if thou can not excuse those words from
blasphemy nor give them a good sense by thy own learning Ibid. cap. 7.
seek (says he) some learned, and godly man that may instruct thee. Cannot
such a man be found with ease? Seek him with labor. Is he wanting in thy own
Country? What better reason can thou have to travail? Can thou meet with
no such man in the Continent? Sail beyond the seas, beyond the seas, if thou
can not find any near the sea, pass further into the country, and even into
those parts where the things were done their books speak of. This diligence
does S. Augustine require to be used before we fasten upon the whole Catholic
Church any imputation of false, and blasphemous doctrine. Whereupon he accuses
himself, and his friend Honoratus for having believed such slanders against
the Church upon the Manichees report, not having first used such diligence to
find out the truth. What Quid tale fecimus Honorate? and tamen religionem
fortasse sanctissima^ (adhuc enim quasi dubitandu^ sit loquor) cuius opinio
totum terrarum orbem occupauit, miserrimi pueri pronostro arbitrio iudicioque
damnauimus. de vtilit. credend. c. 7.
like thing have we done friend Honoratus? And yet (wretched young men) have we
presumed upon our judgment and fancy to condemn a religion perchance most holy
(for yet I speak as though the matter were doubtful) whose fame has filled
the world. And more earnestly in another place: We De vtil. cred. c. 6.
witty, and learned young men forsooth (says he) and deep searchers into truth,
not having so much as once turned over their books, not having sought any to
declare them unto us, non aliquantum nostra tarditate accusata, non vel
mediocri cord ipsis co^cesso, never fearing or mistrusting the weakness of our
wit, nor granting so much as mean judgment, and common sense unto those men
that have permitted such books to be read over the world for so many ages:
laying aside (I say) all these respects, we have resolved to believe nothing
what those men teach, moved thereunto by the clamours of their enemies, who
with false promises of clear truth, have brought us to believe many thousands
of their own fables. Thus S. Augustine.

25. Who seems unto me lively to describe the miserable estate of many
thousands now in England, that rashly condemn so glorious a Church, as the
Roman (whose fame has filled the world) of most horrible blasphemies,
believing them upon the word and clamours of her professed enemies, such as
Ministers are known to be, especially M. Crashaw, who fears not to say as
you have heard, that he will not spare the Pope, though page 74.
thereby he may give vantage to the Atheist, resolving to pluck down the Sea of
Rome, though God, and all godliness fall with it: upon whose words they have
believed the Roman Church to teach; that the Pope is God; that, he can deliver
souls out of Hell; that, one may appeal from God to the Virgin Mary; that, we
do pray unto, and call upon a wodden Cross; that, those which receive the
blessed Sacrament, must have a wife, or else keep a whore in her place, and the
like paradoxes and senseless doctrines, which even children know to be hated
by us. Now, what diligence have his credulous Auditors used to find out the
truth before they yielded their assent unto these slanders? What seas have
they passed? What Countries have they travailed? What long search have they
made after learned teachers, to declare some speeches and sayings that may
seem more harsh? How many that never so much as read the sentences they cavil
at in our Authors? And if they have done none of these things, how can they be
excusable with God in their confident condemning so famous a Chistianity, upon
so slight examination of matters?

26. The second reason of my presenting this Treatise unto you, was a care of
your honor, which the Bachelour does much abuse, by publishing his gross
folly and ignorance, under the name of the Preacher of your Temple, who does so
far surpass any mean or mediocrity therein, printing absurdities so void of
common sense, and so intolerable to any learned ear, that your long
forbeara^ce to take notice thereof, harboring him in one of your Courts, does
make many wonder, and think they may justly apply unto you the words of S. 2.
Cor. 11. v. 19.
Paul: Libenter suffertis insipientes, cum sitis ipsi sapientes: you gladly
suffer fools, being your selves wise, I will not lay that title on M. Crashaw,
though his ignorance may seem to deserve it, except by his lavish bestowing
the same on learned men, it do from the diamond wall of their excellent wisdom
reflect on himself, whereof I am content to make you Judges.

27. First, as for the learned Catholic Writers of this age, Bellarmine,
Valentia, Vasquez, and many others, he does rate, and revile them at his
pleasure, tearming them, Patrons of page 88.
damnable Idolatry, loud p. 115.
liars, and the like reproachful terms without any respect. He ^osseth and
turns them up and down, as himself thinks best, making now Bellarmine
chief, now Valentia, now Vasquez: and somtymes putting Chrysostomus a
Cistercian before them all, using them as counters which stand somtymes for
ten, somtymes for twenty, somtymes for a thousand, sometimes for nothing at all,
as it pleases the caster of the account. Secondly, all the learned Deuines
successively since the days of Aquinas, and namely that Angelical Doctor, he
does charge to have taught, that a stock or stone representing Christ, is to
be worshipped as God; and a wodden Cross to be In his 8. wound.
prayed unto; that they brought wodden arguments for their Idolatry; were blind
in their understandings; and dru^ken with the whore of Babylons spiritual
abominations. Thirdly, Pope Adrian the sixth, who before his advancement to S.
Peter's Chair, was a learned Doctor, and Reader in Louaine, Master unto
Charles the fifth of famous memory, and Governor of the Kingdoms of Spain in
his absence, this Pope, I say, the Wiseman of your Temple terms page 163.
fool in plain terms. Finally the noble nation of Italians he does not
blush to affirm that they are either page 111.
Atheists, or fools (some privy Protestants excepted) which privy men what
they are, Atheists, or Protestants, or fools, or all three, who can tell but
himself, who has a nose to smell them into England from their Italian privy
Churches. But if Italians whose works of piety show they are not Athiests,
whose learned books do witness they are not fools, see this shameful reproach
in print (as they may, this Sermon being turned into latin) they will perchance
attribute such speeches without salt or wit, to the clownishnes of our
Country, and grossenes of the northern climate, and apply unto M. Crashaw the
verse with some allusion to his name, Horatius.
Bootem Crasso iurares aere natum.

Now if it be the property of a fool (as the holy In via stultus ambulans cum
ipse insipiens sit, omnes stultos aestimat. Eccl. 10.^.3.
Ghost says it is) to judge rashly, that others are fools; you will easily
see the stones of reproach cast up at others, fall fool on his own head.

28. But no where does this Minister show greater want of judgment, then in his
Jesuits Gospel, which in truth is such a piece of work, as I do much
marvel, that such an owl (to use his own phrase) was let fly abroad in the
days of light, and in the fairest day of summer, though that book was likely
to be written (as it was indeed) under the hoatest influence of mid-sommer
moon. I do not think any are living in your Courts which do not blow away
such light stuff with contempt; yet will I speak a word or two thereof that no
seely fly or fool, may be entangled therein, and that you plainly may see the
notorious folly of your Preacher, which is such, as the sweet, and divine muse
of the grave, learned, and venerable Father that wrote that excellent and
mellifluous poem may seem to have wrought with the Minister, as some sound of
music does with the Tigres tympanoru^ sonitu aguntur in rabiem Plutarch.
Tiger, wherewith enraged, her fury wanting other matter to work upon, teareth
out her bowels, as the Bachelour with raging and railing does his brains,
which I will make plain by three, or four examples of such folly, as are long
in him, lasting from the first beginning, to the end of his Gospel, though I
shall dispatch them in few words.

29. The first is to gather a Gospel out of a Poem, and that not written
historically, or doctrinally, but in patheticall verse, full of metaphors
Metonomi's, Apostroph's, Prosopoper's, and other as well Rhetorical figures, as
poetical flowers, which to take in a proper and rigorous sense is folly, to
urge them as points, and articles of faith is such a solemn foolery that it
may seem the next degree unto madness it self, which was to present the figures
and flowers of the Poem to be condemned in the in the end of his Jesuits
Gospel.
Parliament, as heresies, and Catholics in that respect to be pronounced
heretics. Truly I think midsommer moon had never the like influence in any
Minister or madman, Bachelour, or Bedlame before. And yet does he urge these
points of our doctrine, as most authentical, and substantial things, much
more credible, and certain, as he says, then the knowledge they have of
Jesuits and their doctrine and practices, from Jesuits Gospel page 18.
the report of their merchants, or intelligence of their Ambassadors, or from
the writing of their own men, which is the truest point in his whole Jesuits
Ghospel, though Jesuits need not faith to believe it: they see and feel it.
For the relations which their Merchants, and Ambassadors give, the stories
their men write of them are such, as no patheticall exaggerations, no poetical
figures, fables or fictions, can be more false, as many late books can
witness, specially a late Pamphlet dedicated to the Princes Highness, called
the Devil The Devils pilgrimage to the Jesuits Colleges. printed anno 1611.
his pilgrimage, where this lackey or footman of the Devil tells many false
stories, naming persons that were never heard of, speaking of actions that
never any dreamed of, as (to omit foul matters) that on Quam multis intrandi
(in Ecclesiam) aditum obseraba^t rumores maledicorum, qui nescio quid aliud nos
in altar Dei ponere iactitabant. Aug. ep. 48. ad Vincent.
the Altar of our Lady at Sichem a sheep was sacrificed, and a long poetical
narration of the cause of the Jesuits expulsion from Venice, abusing the
knowledge of the whole Christian world; and that in their College straight
upon their banishment was found such a sum of money, as all Merchants having
taken whatsoever they would challenge upon their own words (which we may
imagine was no small quantity) the remnant was five hundred millions, besides
plate and vestures: and yet he says he tells not these things upon
hearsay, but what he saw with his eyes. Now what Poet could have told a more
lusty lie? So that this part of his Gospel is very true and credible, that
their reports and rumors, and printed relations about Jesuits, are more false,
incredible, and fuller of exaggerations and fictions, then any poem.

30. Now if you desire to see how wittily, and ha^dsomely the Ghospeller does
gather his Gospel out of the Poem, I will present you a fair pattern, by
which you may guess the rest. In that poem the Author in in his meditatio^s
does imagine a familiar dialogue betwixt the Virgin and Christ, and says unto
Christ: Say to thy Mother, see my brothers thirst,
Mother, your milk would ease him at the first.


Which speech is imagined to show the great familiarity betwixt Christ, and his
blessed Mother, that she has a special interest in the joys and comforts
(metaphorically termed milk) that flow into the soul by devout contemplation
of her blessed Breasts, which comforts are not granted but to whom she does
singularly favor, nor given without her consent; without which the Son of
God would not be borne in her womb. Now what doctrine does this Bachelour
gather out of this poetical imagination think you? Marry, that Popery does
make Christ a mediator to his Mother: which again he deuideth into diverse
branches, opposite to the Gospel of Christ, grounded upon the first
mistaking, unto the fifth and sixth generation, Ies. Gosp. page 87.
in this sort.

Christ says of himself as man. Romish doctrine makes him say. He that will,
may see another like Gospel, that we teach, that Christ this present year a
sucking child at Hall in Brabant, opposed in like manner unto the Gospel of
Christ. page 64.


My Father is greater then I. My Mother in some respects is greater then I.
Christ says of himself as God. Romish doctrine makes him say. I and my Father
are one. I and my Mother are one. Christ says. Romish doctrine makes him say.
Come to me all that are weary, and I will ease you. Come to me, and I will send
you to my Mother for ease. The Scripture says. They make him say. No man
comes to the Father, but by me. No man comes to my Mother, but by me. The
Scripture says. They make him say. Whatsoever you ask my Father in my name,
he will give it you. Whatsoever you ask my Mother in my name, she will give it
you.

All this Ghospel does he gather only from the former verses without any other
ground, which I have here set down, both for the recreation of some
Catholics that may peruse this Treatise, that they may see both how malice
against truth puts their Adversaries out of their wits, and with what empty
shows many seduced souls are frighted from the Catholic Church; and that
some of you may see how grossly this Bachelour does abuse them, who cannot I
think but see, and grieve that their Preacher should publish such follyes,
vanities, or rather baberyes in print.

31. This then is the first mistaking or folly, wherein he runs on to the
very end of his Gospel, making no difference betwixt an Evangelist, and a
Poet, a Gospel, and poem, rigid truth and figurative speech, articles of
faith, a page 37. ad 60.
and poetical fancyes. And the second is no less notorious the^ this, to wit,
to put no difference betwixt contemplation, and the object thereof, meditation
and the matter, the thought and the thing we think of, betwixt the breasts and
milk of the Virgin, and devout considerations upon them. Because Scribanius
compares his meditations upon the breasts of the Virgin, with his meditations
upon the wounds of Christ; the Minister does infer, that he does equal her
breasts to his wounds, the milk of the Mother with the blood of the Son,
which is gross mistaking, and misconstruing of things. Often may
contemplations be equally full of comfort or profit, though there be great
difference in their objects. What greater distance then betwixt heaven and
hell, the joys of the one, and the pains of the other? yet many times may
one, through Gods special grace, find as profitable, yea sometimes as
comfortable meditations upon hell, as upon heaven. When we say that hell makes
men avoid sin, we do not understand that hell has a certain power to
infuse grace into a man's soul, by which he may avoid sin, but only that it
is an object which may (Gods grace concurring) awake such a good purpose in a
man. The like is when we say, heaven does make men serve God with great
comfort, we do not understand, that heaven has any virtue or quality to
infuse grace, but only to be an object or motive of joyful going on in Gods
service. So when it is said, that the breasts or milk of the Virgin do comfort
the soul, heal the diseases thereof, appease anger, envy, pride, and other
raging sins, the sense is, that her breasts, and the mystery of her blessed
milk is an object of such devotion and piety, as devout contemplation on them
may bring forth in a soul these and many other more admirable effects.
Moreover, when one does meditate on the Virgins breasts, as she is Gods Mother,
the object is equal to the object we think of in the wounds and blood of
Christ; because in the breasts of the Virgin as she is Gods Mother, we must
needs behold, and contemplate Christ in her virginal arms, and sucking her
blessed breasts, who though not in bigness of body, yet in Majesty, power,
wisdom, sanctity, both as God and man, is equal to himself bleeding on the
Cross. Now which object is more sweet, tender, and able to styr up devotion in
a soul, Christ sucking in the arms of his mother, or bleeding on the arms of
the Cross is a doubt, which did perplexe S. Augustine long ago, that he brake
out into these words. In medio positus quo me vertam nestio: hinc pascor (...)
vulnere, hinc lactor ab vbere; placed betwixt these two pledges of mercy, I
know not which way to turn my self: on the one side I am fed with blood from
the wounds, on the other, with milk from the breasts. This is the doubt which
that learned Jesuit, whom this Bachelour terms, Anointed with the oil of
mischief above all his fellows, does excellently express in Latin verse,
which begins: Haereo, lac inter meditans, interque cruorem;
Meditating betwixt the milk and blood, I am perplexed.


32. By which first verse you see, that he does compare his thoughts and
meditations on the one, with his thoughts and meditations on the other,
doubting by which of the two, greater devotion did accrue to his soul. That he
says he will lay his left Rem scio prensabo, si fas erit, vbera dextra: laeua
prensabo vulnera, si dabitur.
hand on the wounds, and on the breasts his right: by this metaphore he does
show, his purpose is to meditate on the Virgins milk, or Mystery of Christ's
Childhood in the time of prosperity, signified by the right hand, for which
time it is fittest to weane us from the milk of vain pleasures, and that he
will think on Christ's wounds, and passion when he is pressed with adversity,
which the left hand does express: and for which sorrowful time of crosses,
the Cross, and bleeding wounds of Christ, are considerations of highest
comfort. This is the pious meaning of that metaphorical speech, which this
Bachelour does expound at his pleasure, crying like a calfe at the bug-beare of
his own brain, out of mere ignorance, not able to discern the right hand
from the left in a mystical sense. No less pious is the Lac Matris miscere
volo cum sanguine Nati: Non possum antidoto nobiliore frui.
metaphore of mingling the milk, and the blood together into one compound;
which is nothing else but to compare those two mysteries together and mingle
them in our thoughts, conferring his payning in the arms of the Cross, with
his playing in the arms of his Mother; his shedding blood in the one, with his
sucking milk in the other, with the like sweet differences betwixt them. Which
compound, or comparatiue consideration of these two mysteries may justly be
thought the sweetest meditation the soul can enjoy upon earth. Behold what
true, pious, and sweet conceits the metaphors have, which this Bachelour
draws to most blasphemous senses, raging against his own fancyes, as against
the Jesuits faith, like furious Ajax, that scourged an heard of his own swyne,
for the Army of Grecian Princes.

33. And in this folly does he go page 60.
forward, raging at shadows, till he come to that dystich of the poem: Sweet
child in mothers arms that playing rests: Paruule maternis medius qui ludis in
vlnis: Qui tua iam comples vbera iam vacuas.

Now sucks as child, now fills as God her breasts.


Where this learned and devout Religious man does begin to set down in verse,
a meditation on Christ's childhood, much used by Jesuits, as does appear by
their books, which is called by them applicatio sensuum, an applying of the
internal senses of the soul, to the mysteryes of Christ's life. By which, when
they meditate on Christ's childhood, they do imagine themselves to be in
Bethleem, or Nazareth, and there behold with the eyes of their mind, that
venerable, and amiable child in his Virgin mothers arms, to hear with their
ears the words that pass betwixt them, to taste, smell, and feel internally
the things that are objects of these senses, as far as they may serve to awake
devotion, and stir up a lively apprehension of the mystery in their hearts; in
the mean time speaking with the Bl. Child, or Virgin mother, framing unto them
mental and imaginary discourses, and petitions according as the holy Ghost the
teacher and guide of such high, and extaticall contemplations shall This (I
dare say) is a strange language to M. Crashaw.
direct. This manner of contemplation you shall find most frequently practiced
by ancient Fathers, and learnedly declared by Instruct. de modo meditand.
Riccius, and Part. 2. tract. 7. of mental prayer, in the Introduction.
Puentez, two Fathers of this Order, in their Treatises of contemplation, and
mental prayer. And such imaginations, conceits, and discourses are neither
false nor vain: not false, because as the Logicians teach (and it is the first
lesson in Logic, which this Bachelour of divinity does not yet understand)
that there is neither falsity nor untruth in our thoughts, or imaginations,
when we stay in the first operation of understanding, which is to apprehend a
thing without judging that it is so, as we apprehend: as when we apprehend (as
S. Augustine. l. 7. Confess. c. 5.
Augustine did) God as an infinite light, or sea of glory, without bound, in
which the world like a sponge floateth, though God be not indeed as we
apprehend; yet are not such apprehensions erroneous or false, because we only
apprehend him, as such an infinite material light, not judging him to be so:
nay, we judge the contrary, yet we must so apprehend him, because our thoughts
can reach no other higher conceit of him. When we apprehend, and imagine our
selves in prayer to be before the throne of God, to be kneeling in heaven among
the blessed Angels, as lib. 2. de oratione.
S. Chrysostom, and other Fathers exhort, this apprehension is not false,
because we do not judge, and think that indeed we are in heaven, but so frame
our imaginations, thoughts, affections, prayers, and inward speachs unto God,
as if we were in heaven. And thus may we make our selves present in Bethleem,
or Nazareth, unto the mystery of Christ's sacred Childhood, or in Mount-Caluary
unto the mystery of his Cross, behoulding him with the eyes of our mind, as
bleeding and dying for us, which thoughts are not vain, but causes of piety,
devotion, and tender affection unto Christ, and his holy life, and therefore of
singular profit, which any that will make trial thereof, shall undoubtedly
feel.

34. Hence does appear the falsehood, and impiety of the Bachelours new
doctrine, not taught by any Christian (that I know of) before, to wit, that we
must not now imagine Christ as sucking his mothers breasts, nor speak unto
him, as to a child, nor as dying upon the Cross, nor conceive him as a mortal
man; to which purpose he cites S. Paul, saying: We know not Christ now
according to the flesh, that is, says he, not as a mere, and mortal, but as
glorified man: this doctrine I say is the bane of piety and devotion, and a
perpetual banishment of contemplation of the mysteryes of Christ's life out of
men's hearts. For how can they lively apprehend love, and embrace Christ as dying
upon the Cross for their cause, if they may not conceive, or apprehend him as
a mortal man. How can they in contemplation wash his wounds with their
tears, or bath themselves in his bleeding wounds? How can they enter as doves
into the holes of that Rock, if they may not so much as apprehend death or
mortality in him? S. Paul's meaning is, that we must not believe nor judge, nor
think that Christ is now mortal in very truth, and subject to misery as once
he was, as S. Chrysostom expounds; but he does not deny but we may conceive
Christ and speak, and pray unto him, as to a child, or as crucified, or as
represented in any other mystery of his life, imagining things past so lively,
as if we saw the^ present with the eyes of our mind; though the more litterall
sense of the Apostles words, Now we know not Christ according to the flesh, be,
that he had not now a carnal, and fleshly conceit of the Messiah and his
Kingdom, as he had once with other Jews before he was converted; so he says,
that now we know none according to the flesh, that is, we bear not carnal
affection unto any, wishing them carnal and temporal blessings. For though we
once (says he) knew Christ according to the flesh, that is, expected his
carnal, and temporal Kingdom; now we know him not in that manner, nor
consequently do we love carnally any, whom we love in him, and for him. This
now is the third folly of this Bachelour, wherein he spends the rest of his
Gospel, making no distinction betwixt apprehending and judging of a thing,
betwixt imagining and believing. We do apprehend Christ in our thoughts, as a
child, we mentally see him, kiss, embrace him, speak unto him: yet do we not
judge, that he is a child, or a sucking babe this present year at Hall in
Brabant, as this Wise Man obiecteth, but that he was once a child. Which
mystery that we may know, love, and admire the better, we set it before the
eyes of our mind, not as a thing past, but present, and behave our selves in
our imaginations, thoughts, and affections, as we would do indeed, were he
truly, and really present before us. This is the manner of meditation, most
pious, devout, and profitable, which to Protestant Ministers seems (I dare
say) a new Gospel, though it has ever been practiced by all spiritual men:
but no wonder at their ignorance heerin, seeing the sensual or carnal man
conceaueth not the things of the spirit of God.

35. A fourth example of folly, is his fury against Jesuits, because this Poet,
in his imaginary contemplation and application of the internal senses unto the
mystery of Christ's childhood, does fear to approach unto the sacred, and
venerable breasts of the Virgin, confessing himself unworthy of such an honor
and favor, in regard of his grievous sins: wherefore he does in his
contemplation and thoughts, rather run to be cleansed by Christ's blood,
begging one precious drop for that end, which he does express in a most divine
sweet and admirable verse. Here the Bachelour keeps a great styr, and rages
for many leaves From the page 66. of his Gospel, to the 77.
together, that the Jesuits think the Virgins milk to be more pure, and
precious then Christ's blood, to which they dare approach, though not to her
breasts. Where he is so void of judgment, as he would have a sound, and solid
reason which in rigor of Divinity may subsist of a poetical conceit, which
may be raised of small ground, or fancy, as all men know. And the ground of
this conceit, is, not because the milk of the Virgin is more pure and precious
then Christ's blood, but because the manner of approaching unto it, may seem to
carry a show of pride and presumption. For a man to run to Christ's blood which
was shed to cleanse sinners, is a token that he does acknowledge himself a
sinner, and a needy supplyant: but to approach the Virgins breasts, which were
not filled with milk, but only to nurse the Son of God, and comfort the
specially devoted to Christ's blessed childhood, might seem to savor of pride
and arrogance. This may be declared by an example. Which is of more worth, a
thousand pounds out of the Kings Exchequer, or an ordinary dish of meat set on
the table for the Kings refection? Doubtless, the thousand pounds: yet is it a
greater honor to sit at table with the King, and eat with him in the same
dish, then to have a thousand pounds out of the Exchequer; and many that dare
ask the second, will not presume of the first. The like is in this poetical
imagination. Christ's blood is more precious then his mothers milk, yet in
conte^plation to sit, as it were, at the same table with Christ, and to be fed
with the same Virginal milk, miraculously prepared for him, does carry a
greater show of honor, then to be bathed in his blood, and washed with his
wounds, which sinners are admitted unto. And this is a sufficient ground to
build a pious poetical conceit, not unbeseeming a Christian Poet, as any man
of understanding will grant; and admyre the Bachelours madness, who spends
many leaves in railing against Jesuits, for this only respect, calling them, a
generation of Vipers, bred of an old and sinful world, who as they have Christ
most in their mouth, so they have him less in their heart; and, that they have
herin more dishonored the blood of Christ, then ever it was by any Sect, or
Profession whatsoever, Turk or Heretic, Jew or Atheist, Devil or Man, since
the world began. Thus he declaymeth against Jesuits, who do daily convert unto
the desire to be saved by Christ's blood, many of all the sects by him named
besides Devils, whom they leave to confer with Luther and his learned
Scholars. But these inuectiues (as S. Augustine says of the like) are by so
much the more sottish, by how much they are more earnest, and prove, that one
only point Jesuits must necessarily believe of their long Gospel, penned by
M. Crashaw, to wit, that the writer thereof, when he wrote it, was not well in
his wits.

36. Which does further appear, in that he does object in his fury, even the
elegancies of the Latin language, which he does not well understand, as
blasphemy to be condemned in Parliament. For example, the Jesuit in this Poem
says to Christ: Ergo redemptore monstrate iure vocari; Nobilior reliquis si
tibi sanguis inest.
A Savior show thy self to soul oppressed,
If thy blood be more noble then the rest.


This Minister will needs accuse the Jesuits of doubting whether Christ's blood
be more noble then any other, because the Jesuit makes an (if) thereof which
implies doubt. But would it please you to send your preacher to some Grammar
school of Jesuits, he should be taught that (si, if) is not ever a doubting
particle but sometimes most asseueratiue, specially in obsecrations, in which
that particle used of something which is certain, does with great force
affirm, making the speech more elegant, and the obsecration more earnest. To
give him an example out of a poet, Dido does thus beseech Aeneas, Virgil. 4.
Aeneid.
Si been quid de te merui, fuit aut tibi quicqua^ dulce meum miserere.

Did Dido doubt whether she had bestowed great good turns on Aeneas? she knew
them well, and could tell them also: -- Eiectum littore egentem
Excepi, and regni demens in part locaui.
And yet she makes an (if) of what she made no doubt, saying: Si been quid de
te merui, with an elegant and complete speech, putting him in mind of what he
knew and was apparent, and she did much desire he should remember. And this
elegancy is used in this verse most sweetly, representing unto Christ the
dignity of his precious blood above all other, and obtesting him by the same,
to blot out therewith the multitude of his sins.

37. Pardon me (learned and judicious Countrymen) that I trouble your ears
with such trifles, where if I have cause to say with S. Paul, 2. Cor. 12. v.
11. Factus sum insipiens, sedvos me coegistis.
I am become a fool, you will remember your Preacher has forced me thereunto,
by printing these follyes, to deceive seely people, who might out of the former
ignorant, and malicious cavil, have thought that we doubt of the inestimable
value of Christ's most precious blood. And truly seeing you are not altogether
out of fault, who suffer fools, though your selves be wise, you may be content
to bear part of the penance, to read a refutation of the follyes printed by
your own Preacher, with which I will now weary you no longer in this place, if
it may please you to take notice of his last folly, upon the last verses of
this Poem; where the Poet co^playning of the great dryness of his own
meditations on the mysteryes of Christ's passion, and chidhood, whereas clothes
were wet with the milk of the one, and blood of the other, concludes with
this devout dystich.

page 98.
I am more then clouts, yet these more rich then silk
wet with Sons blood, wet were with Mothers milk.
Here this sucker of venom out of flowers, first frames a long enditement of
pride against the Jesuit, wondering, that he dare come before the Lord his God
in his prayer, making himself better then these clothes, specially hearing the
Prophet cry before: O Lord, all our righteousness is like a menstruous clout.
Psalm. 72. v. 23.
Thus he. Where we may likewise wonder, how this Bachelour in the sight of God
dare make himself wiser then that Ass Christ rode on, specially hearing the
Prophet cry before him, I am become like a iument, or Ass before thee: and
being no wiser in the sight of God, how dare he thus babble, if not rather bray
in the ears of men that can understand his solemn foolery, to make it a sin
for a man, to think, and say in the sight of God, that he is more precious,
and dear unto him then any clout, even the best that ever was: which though
this ridiculous Merchant say, that he does prize above gold, and therefore much
more then Jesuits souls: Matthew. 4.13.46.
yet that heavenly Merchant does make another estimate of such Jewels, giving
all that he had to buy one.

38. And if you examine the other part of his cauil at the Jesuit, for envying
the clouts that were wet with that milk and blood, you will find he does show
himselft to be a braying creature indeed, not only in the sight of God, but
even in the judgment of every reasonable man. If (says he) the Jesuit mean
the material, and real blood and milk, that were in the bodies of Christ and
his Mother, then is he more then mad to envy the clouts, for they did touch
them, and he cannot. Thus he. And is not this a fit discourse (think you) to
discover a mad man? What if he cannot touch those sacred bodies, that Virginal
milk, and precious blood? May he not therefore without madness, wish that he
had been in the time when he might have touched the^, envying the felicity of
the clouts, that were so happy, and more happy in this respect, then he now can
be? May he not grieve and compain, specially in a patheticall poem, that he
is deprived of the possibility of such a comfort, therein declaring his devotion
unto these sweet pledges of mercy? But the Poets complaint is not in this
respect, but has an higher and sweeter conceit, grieuing that he is not so
happy in his kind, as those cloutes were in theirs. They were corporally wet,
and moystened with the blood and milk of the Son and Mother, the greatest
honor and felicity such creatures could have, whereas his soul, his
understanding, his meditations, as he complayneth are not wet with a fresh and
lively remembrance of that milk, and blood, nor his thoughts and affections
drowned in these two main seas of jove's, nor he absorpt by contemplation of
those two sweet mysteryes, from the love, and care of all other inferior
things. This is the complaint, which whether it be pious or no, let any man
judge, and of the vanity of such cauills.

39. But it is worth the noting, that though your Bachelours drift was to beat
in the mortar of malice, with the pestell of his pistilent wit, every flower of
this flagrant poem, to get out venomous juice of some blasphemy; yet has he
omitted some, at which he might have cauilled with far more show of reason: for
example, at this verse: Parce Deus, magno si te clamore fatigem.
Pardon me Lord, if thee my cries do tire.


Where he might have objected pride unto the Jesuit, as to one thinking himself
such a stout prayer, as he can even tire God; and blasphemy in teaching that
God may be tired: and hence have deduced the Popish practice of praying unto
Saints, which they do (so might he cavil) to give some respite unto God that
he may breath. Also when he says: Lanceaque erubuit sanguine tincta suo.
The lance did blush imbrued in thy blood.


Seeing no creature can blush which is not endued with reason. By this Jesuits
doctrine he might infer, in his fashion, that the lance was a reasonable
creature, man, or woman, rather a woman, because the latin is the feminine
gender, perchance mother to the famous Knight Sir Lancelot Du-lake; but
doubtless a Saint, seeing she was washed with Christ's blood, the virtue whereof
made her blush for her sins. These deductions (as I am content to refer to
the Readers judgment) are no more injurious against truth, and have more wit
and show of reason in them, then the cloutes of the cauills, wherewith your
Bachelour botcheth up his Gospel. And yet should any man object these things
in good earnest, as things of moment and substance, that man's wits might be
thought more wodden then the very wood of the lance, howsoever his malice may
be more sharp then the point: to which point of malice the Ministers may seem
arrived, who are more sharp set, and bear a greater tooth against Catholic
devotion and piety, then Atheism, and profaneness; as your Bachelour did
openly profess, and they all show it in works. For so many wanton and
lascivious verses come daily forth, and such works of darkness are harbored
even in Preachers bosoms and breasts: but this pious poem full of so many
sweet, and devout conceits both toward Christ and his Mother, which malice
only can misconster, and draw to blasphemous senses, you see, how these birds
(forsooth) of the light, cry, and cackle, and keep a stir at it, as if it
were an owl, among whom your Preacher is leader. Nay he only plays the fool
in print for all the rest, who are (he says) many millions more.

40. Had a lascivious Muse set out a patheticall Pamphlet, showing his
affection to the breasts of some woman, this Tigre who only rages at sacred
music; would not have stormed thereat, for he does show good affection to such
objects. And that he is better acquainted with other women's breasts, the^ the
Virgins, does sufficiently appear, in that he dares avouch that it cannot be
proved either to reason, or faith, that the Virgins milk excels other
women's, in any either corporal, or spiritual operation whatsoever; raging
against this learned Father for saying, that her breasts are diuitiora, more
rich, and full of divine and heavenly comfort, have more virtue to styr up
faith, love of God, and pious thoughts in the devout contemplant, then those of
any other. Which base conceit of the breasts of Gods mother may be the cause
that he think^ it no sin, for a man full of sin, without any care or
respect, to approach and touch them by imagination: he dares stand to it, it
is no evil: and no marvel, seeing her breasts in his co^ceipt are no better,
and so no more to be honored and respected, then those of other women, with
which to play either imaginarily or indeed, it may seem he thinks no great
evil, learning this devotion of his Father Luther, who writes in this sort of
his co^templations of this kind: Loci commun. Martini Lutheri, p. 4.
Mihi quidem (says he) saepe magnae voluptati, and admirationi est, quod video
corpus muliebre totum ad id factum, vt foue at infantes. Quam decore etiam
paruae puellae gestant in sinu infantes! Ipsae matres quam aptis gestibus
ludant, quoties placandus est infans vagiens, aut in cunis ponendus. These were
Luthers devout conte^plations upon women's breasts, laps, arms, and bodies: his
words I will not turn into English, but such as understand Latin will not
wonder, that such meditations brought him in the end to marry a Nun; nor that
M. Chrashaw and the rest of his Scholars find not much comfort, feel no great
virtue in meditation on breasts of the Virgin, more pure then the heavens, who
full of gross, and carnal imaginations dare approach to her sacred closet,
more rudely then they would to their own Wives chamber, thinking it no evil
to defile with their swynish imaginations, the most pure, and sacred mysteries
of our faith.

41. I will here set down an example of their meditations in this kind, not
written in verse, but in prose, and in an exposition upon the Ghospel, by a
Ghospeller Ioa^n. Agricola apud Canisium. l. 3. de Maria Virg. c. 12.
of great name and credit, who expounding the Angelical Embassage to the Bl.
Virgin, does thus gravely meditate on the matter: Ingressus Annot. in cap. 1.
Luc.
cubiculum ^uellae Gabriel (says he) adolescentis forma, amatorium quiddam and
nuptiale orditur, virginem, vt apparet, pellici^urus ad concubitum: Gabriel
entering the maids chamber in the form of a young man, begins a nuptial and
ama^ory speech etc. my pen blusheth to put the rest into English. And is not
this (think you) a fit meditation for Luthers Gospel, which makes the
Gospel of Christ begin with a nuptial song, enticing a Virgin to marry, or
to do worse. And yet this contemplant will not have his Readers pass over the
matter slightly, but insist upon it, and apply their internal senses unto ^t:
Meditetur apud animum suum qui volet pia curiositate, quid sit videre comptulum
adolescentulum solum cum puella clauso cubilis ostio, dulciter alloquentem
virginem, quam se ambire nihil obscure and gestu and oratione demonstrat. Let
him that will meditate with pious curiosity in his mind, what it is to see a
trym young man with a young maid a^one in a chamber, the door shut, speaking her
fair, to whom both by gesture, and speech he does clearly show himself to be
a woer. Do you perceive the pious curiosity of these Ghospellers, that will not
rest with their thoughts, till they know the Quid sit, the very essence and
quiddity of the locking up of a try (...) young woer, with a fair young virgin
together alone in a chamber? These owls, they do not harbor in the barn of
their brains, nor keep in some corner of their chamber, but let them fly
abroad in print, in these days (as they term) of light. Nay they pass among
them without wonder, as sweet and devout conceypts. By which this marrying
Mynistry, that cannot live chaste, turn the pure virgin water of divine
Scripture into the wanton wine of lascivious fancyes, to keep the wedding feast
of their woing Gospel.

42. They that thus turn the Gospel of Christ into a wanton Comedy, what
marvel though they change a Jesuits poem into a Gospel of their foul
fancyes, as gross and carnal as women's breasts, the objects of Lutheran
devotion, can make them? What wonder though the diamond of a devout
co^templation set in golden verse, be stained by such Cast not Jewels unto
swine, least they tread the^ under feet, and rising against you, rend you in
pieces, Matthew. 7. v. 6.
swyne, who never yet could raise their thoughts out of mud? what marvel that
having defiled the Jewel, they tear in pieces those that cast it before them,
with all manner of foul and despicable reproaches? as this Minister terms
Jesuits, anointed with the oil of mischeef about all their fellows; that,
they bynd their Nouices prentises unto Beelzebub, and the like, not having any
leaf or almost line not adorned with some such rare Jewel of contumelious
terms, though the most used by him, is Vipers, which was a title Luther did
leave, together with his love, in his last See Luthers last will in lib. de
coena. Ego Lutherus alteru^ iam pedem habens in sepulchro etc.
will unto the Caluinian brood, whose nature he does so describe by the
metaphore of Vipers, that I am content to make you Judges whether he may not
seem to describe the Preacher at the Temple. The Apud Theodos. Fabritium in
locis co^mu^. Mart. Lutheri p. 4. Diabolus. and ibid. p. 5.
nature (says Luther) of these vipers (the Caluinists) is such, as they cavil
deceiptfully at words proceeding from a pious, and ingenuous heart, and turn
them altogether to another, and to a quite contrary sense, then they were
meant. In which art they are admirable Doctors, surpassing in this point the
skill and wit of all the Rhetoricians in the world: for they are governed by a
malignant spirit, which does possess, and betwitch their wits, that enraged
with Satanicall virulency against pious, and godly men, they cannot but
maliciously interpret their words, and writings. Wherein they are for all the
world like spiders that suck poison out of fair, and fragrant flowers, the
venime not being in the flowers, but in themselves. Thus far Luther. In which
words he does so ^iuely describe M. Crashaw, that whosoever shall read ^his
Jesuits Gospel, will confess that Luther did know him, and the nature of a
Caluinist, as if he had spit him and them out of his own mouth, from whence
indeed this late swarm of Spyders, and Vipers did originally proceed.

43. The folly and falsehood of your Preacher, being thus proved already in this
Epistle, but more largely in this Treatise, to the discredit of that Church
that durst set him up in Pulpit, and out in Print, I might speak unto you in
his own words, and what he says against the Jesuits unto the Catholics of
England, Jesuits Ghosp. p. 72.
apply against him unto you. O my beloved Countrymen, be not seduced by such
impostors, let not such Vipers eat out your hearts, but discover the hypocrites,
and send them home to hell unmasked, where they were hatched: for they that
dare thus dally with God, no marvel though they be bold with your souls,
consciences, your children, and your estates, and all that belongs to you. I
might (I say) present against M. Crashaw this Bill indyted by himself, turning
the railing terms, and cruel request upon the Author. But for sending him to
hell, I have such horror of that place, that I cannot intertaine such an
uncharitable wish: nay I would willingly undertake any labor, and undergo any
danger to save him from it. Neither would he wish the Jesuits unto that place,
did he as often think thereof, and as deeply, as they do, which makes them so
ready to venture their lives to save men from that lake of unquenchable fire. I
fear he will go thither too soon, though no man send him. The day, when
perchance he shall least dream of such a dreadful cast, his Lord and ours
shall appear, and cast him, that trod under foot those of his family, unto
fire where with hypocrites he shall burn for ever. I wish he may live many a
year in this world to do penance for this heinous slaundering the Church and
Spouse of Christ, and recant his falsehoods according to his promise; though
having often found him false of his word, we can give no credit to his profers.

44. But for the other part, that you be not seduced by such Impostours, nor
permit such Vipers to eat up your hearts, nor Spyders to build in your
Temples; my request herein against him, is so reasonable after manifest proof,
and conviction of so heinous a crime, that the strongest reasons both of
honor, and conscience, do bind you unto it. You may remember that a late
worthy The Earl of Salisbury Lord high Treasurer of England.
Peer of the Realm, for Wisdom, and Counsel renowned in most Countries of
the world, did refuse to patronize his Sermon: you know the Parliament House
commanded the Epistle Dedicatory of his Jesuits Gospel unto them, should be
suppressed, who by their Grave, and Honorable rejecting his works, gave you
to understand, what you in honor ought to do with the Author, though the
danger of salvation you incur by his means, be far greater. For as you see
by this Treatise, that the first part of a sentence of S. Apud propha^os and
extra Ecclesiam positos esse aliud no^ potest, nisi men's praua, and fallax
lingua, odia venenata, and sacrilega mendacia, quibus qui credit, cum ijs
reperiatur necesse est, cum dies iudicij venerit. Cyp. l. 1. ep. 3.
Cyprian is true in M. Crashaw, to wit, that among them that are profane, and
out of the Church, nothing is to be expected, but a depraved mind, a
deceiptfull tongue, cankred malice, and sacrilegious lying: so likewise you may
fear, one day will prove the truth of the second part of his speech, which is
very dreadful, to wit, that, whosoever gives credit unto such slanders,
shall share with the slaunderers in their sentence of damnation at Christ's
coming to judge the world. You know that not only the Authors, and Actors of
sin, ^ut also such as consent thereunto, deserve punishment: and a consent to
M. Crashawes slanders they may be thought to give, who, though perchance they
do not believe them, yet they grace the slaunderers Sermons with their
presence. And to Your charge, the ^osse of so many souls for which Christ gave
his life, will be laid, a strict account exacted, for making your Court the
place, where such seely flies, and fools are caught by your example, as with a
stale, drawing others into the snare. Which thing being of such moment, I will
refer to your more serious considerations, wishing your resolution may be
such, as you may find comfort thereof one Dies vna in atrijs Domini super
millia. Psalm. 85. v. 11.
day, which shall be worth a thousand.

45. Wherefore now, without further Preface, I will hoise up sail, with the
gale of your favor, and enter upon his Sermon, which may be fitly compared to
a stormy sea. For what are so many raging inuectiues against the Church of
Rome, but so many gusts of wind, to drown in disgrace the Ship of Peter? What
are his devised wounds, but raging waves that batter her? What are his peevish,
and malicious slanders, but shelfes and shallows wherein men do stick more
stiffely, because uttered without proof, they cannot be clearly refuted? What
are the sentences of our Authors corrupted by him (yet covered with great
protestations of sincere dealing) but so many rocks, the more dangerous
because hidden, upon which whosoever runs a rash and credulous course,
without suspecting falsehood, incurreth shipwreck, and is drowned in damnable
error? What are the ugly blasphemies which he lays to our charge, bu^
horrible monsters? What the brags of his Churches salues, but Sirens songs?
What finally his fond arguments, and unlearned discourses, but foame and froath
of this sea? Such waves against the Roman Church have never wanted in any age,
who by battering her, have broken themselves; yet will not the latter learn of
the former, nor fear their ends whose courses they follow, but with a new
rage of fury ru^ to their ruin. This Church, as she is a ship to convey her
passengers unto heaven, flying by the sayle^ of Sacraments, and filled with a
gale of the holy Ghost, which she has a promise never to want: so is she
(...) rock against her enemies, that swell like waves against her; whose end,
though they rage for a time, wi^^ prove foame, and froath, into which others
before them no less proud and swelling are vanished.

46. To quiet and pacify these waves we have small hope: they are, as S. Paul
says, Tit. 5.10.
condemned by their own judgment: like Dathan, and Abyron they descend into
hell alive, that is, suam perditionem sentientes, as Saint Epist. 48. ad
Vincent.
Augustine expounds, feeling themselves to perish, and yet will not reclayme
themselves; such is the hatred that hell has inspired into their hearts, though
many times they continue in their wicked courses out of shame, searing if they
should leave off, that men will say to them: Vtique hoc time^t ne dicatur eis:
Quare nos decepistis? Quare: tanta mala and falsa dixistis? Eterubescant
humanae infirmitati, and non erubescu^t inuictissimae veritati.

August. ser. 22. de verbis Apostoli.


Why then did you deceive us so long? Why did you seduce us? Why did you tell
us so many false things? Regarding more the weakness of men, then the
inuinciblenes of truth? But for these that are but deceived, who not out of
pride swell, but are tossed in the rage of others, whom Saint Paul terms,
paruulos fluctuantes, wauing young ones: for these, I say, I have sent out the
Pinnace of this Treatise, into which if they please to enter, and read, and
peruse the same, I make no doubt, but they will see the folly, and falsehood of
the slanders, which toss and drive them against the Roman faith, and the
wicked fraud and malice of them that utter such untruths, and be moved to
enter into the Arc of the CATHOLIC CHVRCH, singing with Saint l. 6. Co^fess.
c. 11. Nos falsis rumoribus terrebamur intrare, quos falsos esse nesciremus
nisi intraremus. So S. Augustine makes Catholics rejoice, coming from
Donatists to the Church, Epist. 48. ad Vincent.
Augustine, having discovered the Manichees falsehood; Non docet Catholica quod
putabamus, and vani accusabamus: The CATHOLIC CHVRCH does not teach, as we did
imagine, and were made believe, and full of vanity did accuse her of. Into
which Ship of salvation, if this little Treatise may serve to convey any out of
the raging waves of Heresy, I shall think my time well spent in the buylding
thereof: this being the only comfort of my labor, that I desire in this life.

AND so I commend the same to YOUR reading, wishing YOU may make that use
thereof, which God in his infinite goodness has ordained.

Yours in all Christian duty, I. R.

THE OVERTHROW OF THE PVLPIT-BABELS of English Ministers. THE FIRST PART.
THE FIRST CHAPTER, Showing M. Crashawes, and other Ministers extreme folly, in
their ordinary applying the words of his text (We would have cured Babell
etc.) to the progeny of Martin Luther, against the Church of Rome.
MASTER Crashaw for the ground whereon like Nemrod Genesis 10.10.
he seeks to buyld the Babel-Tower of his blasphemous Sermon against the
Heaven of Gods Church, chooses the words of Jeremy 51.11. as he cites, We
would have cured Babell, but she would not be healed. Let us forsake ^er, and
go every one into his own Country: for her judgment is come up into heaven,
and lifted up to the clouds. Where it is worth the marking, that
(notwithstanding the great exactnes promised In his preface to the reader
by him in quoting authors) at the first dash, he neither quoteth right the
verse, nor words of his text. For the verse is not as he says the 11. (though
the number of passions fitteth well a passionate Pamphlet) but the ninth, which
number sacred to the Muses, by him fatuously, or fatally rejected, does seem
to presage, that none of those learned nine shall have part in his Sermon,
which may be thought rather the brood of the birds that are most hated of
them, -- Nemorum conuicia picae
caecaque garrulitas, studiumque immane loquendi.
The pyes which woods with railing charms do batter,
A prattling blind, and vast desire to chatter.


The words also of his text in our translation are; We have cured Babel, but
she is not healed: according to the Protestant English, she could not be
healed, so that, she would not be healed, as M. Crashaw cites the text, is
neither in our, nor the^ Bible. Which gross error I see not how he can
excuse, unless by the variety of translations (which are in their Church so
many, and so different) this Proteus can wynd himself out of this knot.

2. Having cited the words, and verse of his text neither of them truly, he
falls to examyne in whose person the words are spoken, rejecting the two
best expositions, and choosing the worse, out of desire to get a Babble to play
with against the Church of Rome, and a mystical text for his miserable Sermon.
First he does not like Carthusian^^ his opinion, that the words of his text be
spoken in the person of Angels, and mark his reason. For thus does he open
his learned lips, and very gravely begin his Sermon. This is not spoken (says
he) in person of the angels that were set over Babylon, for angels have no
charge of curing men's souls: they mourn for men's sins, and Luc. 15.7.10.
rejoice at their conversion; they Psalm. 34.7.
guard their bodies, and Luc. 16.22.
carry their souls to heaven: but the curing, and converting of the soul has
God delegated to his Prophets, being men like out selves, that so he might make
man to love man, seeing he has made man a sauer of men. Thus he.

3. Now is not this very learnedly spoken? Or can one almost imagine more
gross, and senseles doctrine then to give Angels charge of men's bodies, not
the cure, and care of souls? Is not the office of Angels opposite to that of
Devils, which is to wound, and pervert not so much the body, as the soul? If
Devils suggest wicked thoughts that may wound the soul, have not good angels
greater care to suggest wholesome and heavenly cogitations that may heal? Can
he name any Divine, ancient or of late days, Cleme^s Alexand. strom. 5.
Angelis curatione^ nostri, and visitatione^ tribuit.
Catholic or Calvin. l. 2. Instit. c. 14.. 7.
Protestant that ever intertayned this carnal imagination, touching the office
of angels, before himself, who sets it on the forehead of his Sermon, and
printes it on the posts of his door to show the wisdom of the owner of the
house? If instructions, prayers, affections be salues to heal, who can better
apply them to the soul, then angels? Who can instruct better then they that
cannot only speak to the ear, but also styr our Cassia^. collat. 7. c. 9. D.
Thom. 1. p. q. 111. a. 3.
inward fancies to apprehend, and conceive wholesome counsel, and therefore are
termed by the Fathers Orig. homil. 8. in Genesis
Tutors, Basil. l. 3. contra Eunom.
Teachers, and Idem ib. Ambr. in c. 2. Luc.
Pastors of souls? Whose prayers are more efficacious then those of Angels
who Matt. 18.16.
see the face of the Father in heaven? What creatures have more power then
Angels to correct, and afflict, and so heal the obstinate by such playsters?
Where were M. Cra ^hawes wits, to begin his craking Sermon with such a notable
folly? And truly his exposition of this speech of the Prophet, God has given
his Angels charge of thee, drawing it to the custody and charge of body only,
may seem to savor of Epicurisme, as though a man had no soul, or were rather
a body then a soul, a lump of flesh, then a spirit, or that by man, the
carnal part rather then the spiritual were to be understood? What more absurd
and senseless, then that God would set the Peers and Princes of his Kingdom
to keep the dunghill of this corruptible carcass, and not rather the jewel or
pearl (bought at the rate of the most precious blood) hidden in it? And yet
seeing the Bachelour has made this wise division of the Parish, betwixt the
Angel and the Prophet or Minister, committing their bodies to the Angel, their
souls to the Minister, it were much to be wished this division were kept, and
as Angels seldom meddle with souls committed unto Ministers charge, so these
Ministers and Prophets would not somtymes mittere falcem in alienam messem, and
meddle with the bodies of some of their parish, that are in the custody of
Angels.

A ridiculous reason why Angels have not charg of souls.
4. Now what is his drift in this doctrine, by which he puts Angels out of
their office? That man (says he) may love man: which may rather seem spoken
in merryment or in jest, then a grave Theological reason. For why I pray you,
may not men love Ministers, and Angels both? Or why should they love Ministers
the less, if they love Angels? Or why should the soul of any have her
thoughts, and affections so employed on any Minister, though he be her Husband,
that she may not spare some love for blessed spirits! Nay were it not good for
many that they loved Angels more, and Ministers less, and that they spent
that time co^uersing with Angels in their chamber, that now they wast drinking
with Ministers in tauernes? In my judgment if these Prophets (for so they love
to be termed) did labor to make these, they deal with, devout to Saints and
Angels, without so much care to be loved themselves, they would be more
honored, and respected of all good men and women. And thus much of the folly
couched together in the first sentence of his Sermon, by which (if S. Bona
domus in ipso vestibulo debet agnosci, primo praetendat ingressu nihil intus
latere tenebrarum. Amb. lib. 2. de Virginit.
Ambrose his rule be good, that a fair house is known by the entry) one may
guess what a goodly Babell we are like to find of this Sermon, the gate whereof
is so rare a piece of doctrine, that the like was never perchance before seen
in any the fondest Author.

5. The second exposition which he reiects, is of his venerable Master the
warlike Minister in Annot super co^plan. in Ierem.
Zuinglius, whose judgment, though otherwise of great respect, the Bachelour in
this point makes no account of, because it wresteth out of his hands the text,
or rather beats the Babell about their heads, that will apply it against the
Church of Rome. For Zuinglius says, the words are spoken by hypocritical, and
feygned friends, who make a great boast of their little love: which exposition
being true in the judgment of so grave a Ghospeller, we may wonder this
Bachelour durst take this text into his mouth, uttering such brags of his
Churches charity, as cannot be spoken but in only hypocritical sense, as shall
afterward be proved. The argument also upon which he contemns Zuinglius his
judgment, is very weak, because (says he) this reason (her judgment is come
to heaven) is too divine to proceed from a profane heart; as though hypocrites
did use to speak from the heart, or did not use to take into their mouths the
holiest things, Vae desidera^tibus diem Domini: vt quid eam vobis? Amos 5.18.
most of all seeming to desire the day of judgment; whom the Prophet does for
that cause reprehend: Migremus hinc. Joseph. l. de bell. Iud. c. 12.
VVoe unto you that desire the day of our Lord: what has it for you?

6. As for his own exposition, that the words are spoken of the true Church,
showing her love to Babel, and their longing desire to have done good to their
souls, I do not see how he can make it stand with the text. For how could the
people of Israel threaten Babel to forsake her, where they were kept captyue?
This is as good as if a prisoner should threaten his Keeper to forsake the
jail. Besides these words Let us go every one into his own Country, do
insinuate, that the speakers were of different Countries, and upon the
destruction of Babel they resolved to go every one into his own: whereas the
people of Israel were all of the same Country as is known. Wherefore the
opinion of Carthusianus is more probable then his, that the words were spoken
by Angels, who having charge of different Countries, yet all had special care
of Babylon the head of the Assyrian Empire, to which those Countries were
subject. Which blessed spirits use to forsake Countries when God is minded to
destroy them: and you may find the like speech of Angels in Migremus hinc.
Joseph. l. de bell. Iud. c. 12.
Josephus the Jew, of forsaking the Temple and City of Jerusalem, before the
destruction thereof.

7. He notes also that these words of his text may be understood in a double
sense, literal and mystical, literally of the Israelites and Babylon of the
old Testament; mystically of the Israelites, and Babylon of the new: which he
sets out with many words as a great mystery of learning (and in truth it is the
best and deepest point of doctrine in all his Sermon) though very vulgarly
known to every mean scholar. In declaration whereof he says learnedly: that
it is worthily condemned by the Church, as injurious to Gods word, to destroy
the litterall, and historical sense of the old Testament: which saying has
the clear face of truth, but he draggeth after it the serpentine train of a
venomous slander, as some old (says he) and many late writers, that be
Papists have done. A notable slander.
A slander so false, that it can be true in no litterall, nor mystical sense,
there being neither letter in our late Authors, that may seem to sound of this
error, nor any mystery or mist in his words, that may hyde their shame from
the eye of the learned Reader, who having perused the works of our late
writers Pererius, Serarius, Pineda, Iansenius, Genebrard, Villapandus, Ribera
and others upon the old testament, cannot be ignorant of their exactnes to
search, and find out the litterall sense thereof. But the Bachelour is so full
of spite against Papists, that he could not live, were he kept long from
spitting out his venom at them, Quod si non aliqua nocuisses, mortuus esses.

8. But that he does himself use to destroy the litterall sense of the old
Testament, to build his new and mystical Babell, is apparent by this one
example in this very Sermon. For to build upon the text in hand this lesson,
that a Country is forthwith destroyed of God, when it is forsaken of the good
men of God (he means Brownists) says: that the Babylonians cared not for the
Israelites company; but as soon as they were gone, destruction came upon Babel:
which is spoken not only without book, but also against the book of God,
which whosoever has read over, though but once in his life, cannot but know,
that the Babylonians did not desire to be ryd of the Israelites, page 35.
but kept them, rather against their will: neither did Israel forsake Babylon,
and return every one to his own Country, till after the destruction thereof,
to wit, under King 2. Paralip. c. 36.20.
Cyrus who overthrew that City: so clearly does he destroy the litterall, and
historical sense of Scripture, to buyld not a new, but an old morality
thereupon, stolen from some old Sermonary Summist. Such ignorance in another man
were pitiful; in a Bachelour of Divinity it is shameful; in a contemner of
Catholic Deuines both of this persent, and so many ages past, and whole
nations, as fools, hateful; in this Sermon, where he does sharply censure
our Authors for this very point of ignorance, intolerable want of judgment.

9. But to leave the old, and litterall Babells of the first part of his
Sermon, and to come to the second, where he plays with mystical Babel, which
he will needs have thought the Church of Rome, challenging to himself, and his
fellows the title of the Church of the new Testament or mystical Israel,
without any proof, though the matter be so doubtful, that a Doct. King upon
Jonas 32. lecture. page 442. in fine.
principal man both in Name and authority among them, does say, that, they are
so far from being true Israelites, that they are indeed fully Atheists. And yet
upon this ground, as though there were no doubt thereof, does this
Babell-builder by line and level draw the proportion of his Sermon, which
shall be four square, and consist in the declaration of four points. First that
they would have cured the Church of Rome. Secondly, that she is found
incurable. Thirdly, that Christendom must forsake her. Finally that being
forsaken of the good men of God, she shall be forthwith destroyed. The two
first (says he) are already past, the third is a doing, and the fourth sure to
be fulfilled in Gods good time. This is the sum of his Sermon, in which he
does censure things past, prattle of things present, and prophesy of things
to come; uttering in the one slanders out of malice; in the other the fancyes
of his idle head; in the third the dreams and wishes of his uncharitable heart.
Against whom I shall endeavor to show four points, that his reasons to prove
the Church of Rome Babylon, are follyes; his salues for our wounds ridiculous
brags; his twenty wounds, twenty horrible slanders; finally their revolt from
the Church of Rome, not Christian, but heretical; not lawful, but damnable.
By which answer I make no doubt the Reader will see the vanity of these
dreaming Prophets, and by their vanity touching things past, and present,
easily conceive their falsily and folly about things to come: which is so
clearly laid open in this Treatise, as I am in hope that Ministers will be
ashamed hereafter, to take this text into their mouths against Rome, when they
shall see this Babble beaten about the Bachelours ears. Let us come to the
proof of these things; and first whether the Church of Rome be mystical
Babylon, and the Protestant Co^panyes sprung from Luthers revolt, the Church of
the new Testament. This shall be examined in this Chapter.

10. To prove the Church of Rome to be mystical Babylon, M. Crashaw has
diverse arguments, which may for methods sake be reduced unto three different
kinds, either unto impudent lying, or ignorant babbling, or impotent railing. If
any say, this is harsh, and bitter, I answer in his own words, page 45.
unto the like objection made in our behalf, but it is true, and therefore not
to be concealed. Let him blame them tha^ put such arguments into his head, not
them that discover their vanity: and, as for me that affirm it, I crave not to
be believed, but rather to be reproved, if the evidence of the fact do not
prove, what I have said.

11. And to begin with his arguments of the first kind in the beginning of his
second part, having said in few words, that he is to speak of mystical
Babylon, which i^ partly temporal, to wit, the Kingdom of Antichrist, and
partly permanent, which is the Kingdom of sin, he begins with thi^ sentence,
as notoriously false, as the first of the other wa^ notoriously foolish: and if
the forhead of that part was o^ lead, this is of brass. That the Kingdom of
Antichrist (says he) namely the Church of Rome is mystical Babylon, I will
not stand to pro^^ seeing it is granted by de Ro^. Pontif. l. 3. c. ^^..
Secundo dici potest.
Bellarmine, compelled thereunto by the clear authorityes of Fathers. Thus he.
Weigh his words, and you will perceive the vastnes of this untruth. Had he
said, that Bellarmine did grant the City of Rome is mystical Babylon, though
it had been false (for Bellarmine says expressly, that the City of Roma
Ethnica, non Roma Christiana.
Rome was mystical Babylon in S. John time, but now it is not, but has
Scriptam fro^te blasphemia^ Christi confessio^e delesti. Hier. l. 2. aduers.
Iouin.
blotted out the names of blasphemy written in her forehead, by the confession
of Christ:) yet such a mistaking of times, and confounding of states mainly
divided by so many ages, might have been thought a tolerable fault in this
Minister. Had he said that the Kingdom of Antichrist is to be mystical
Babylon, taking Antichrist as Catholics do for the Kingdom of one man, that
for three years and a half in the end of the world, shall cruelly persecute
Gods Church; though Bellarmine even in this sense does expressly teach the l.
de Romans Po^t. c. 13.. secundus locus. Quomodo Roma erit seeds Antichristi, fi
illo ipso tempore debet euerti and comburi?
contrary: yet I would not have much merueyled at the Bachelours ignorance
thereof, nor at his ^ould uttering what he knew not. But taking the Kingdom of
Antichrist as he does (with whom the Pope, and Antichrist are synonima's, and
signify one person) to wit, for the Christianity, subject to the Roman Bishop,
and that ^o man might mistake his meaning, namely the Church of Rome, that
Bellarmine does grant the same to be mystical Babylon, is such an untruth, as
I cannot but wonder how any man that ever heard the name of this learned
Cardinal, could either print or preach, or so much as think it; seeing no man
is more famous in the world for his wrytings to the contrary. But necessity is
a forcible weapon. Bellarmine (says he) was forced thereunto by the clear
authority of some Fathers. The Fathers ^re Tertullian, and S. Hierome. Let us
see what these Fathers force Bellarmine unto: perchance it is to admyre the
impude^^y of the Bachelour. For thus he writes in that place quo^ed by him: Et
sane mirabilis est impudentia haereticorum etc. And truly (says Bellarmine)
wonderful is the impudency of Heretics, who to prove the Church of Rome to be
the whore of Babylon, use the ^estimony of Tertullian and Hierome: for at that
time, Heathenish Rome being opposite to Rome Christian, which of those two, I
pray you, ^id those Fathers term the whore of Babylon? If Heathenish Rome,
why do they abuse their testimonies against the Church of Rome? If Christian
Rome, then even at that time the Roman Church had lost ^er purity, and even
then Antichrist raygned, which themselves deny.

12. Thus Bellarmine. And have not these Fathers compelled Bellarmine to
confess much for the Bachelours cause, and credit? If Aristotle's saying be
true, that liars gain by their trade, not to Vt vera loquentibus non credatur.
Laert. l. 3. de Plat. philos. c. 1.
be believed when they speak true, we may justly think that it was Gods
special providence, this horrible and huge untruth should stand in the door of
this railing in^ectiue, like foule-mouthed Cerberus in the gate of hell, to
fright from the reading thereof, any that has either love of truth, care of
concience, or fear of God. For can we imagine an untruth more shameless, and
impudent? I think, hardly. And yet can I bring forth one that shall by many
odds surpass M. Crashaw in this place, and utter a more vast lie about this
very matter of Romes being mystical Babylon. Who is he think you? Even M.
Crashaw himself, who strives in his Jesuits Gospel to overcome himself, as
in all other good qualityes, so likewise in lying; where not particulerly of
Bellarmine, but generally of Jesuits he has these very words: They well know
(says he) all the world either clearly condemns, or at least justly suspects
the Pope, or Popish state, to be th^^ spiritual Babylon, so fearfully
accursed, and condemned in the Revelation* Thus he. Now if any Mathematician
would measure the length, and breadth of this lie, surely he shall find the
same not much less then the world. For first a great part of the world are
Heathens, Turks, and Jews, who in thi^ point think neither one way nor
another. In the Christian world, Catholics the far greater part of the
Christian world.
of so many Nations in the Indies conuerte^ unto Christ, never any that we can
hear of has yet dreamed of this folly. In Europe who does not know and see
the greatest part is Catholic, and adhereth to the Roman Bishop? Italy,
Spain, France, Flaunders, Poland (and some few Countries infected with heresy,
yet have many Catholics among them) all which do constantly profess, and
maintain the contrary, that the Church of Rome i^ the true Church of Christ.
Finally among the small handful of Protestants, many are found that do reject
constantly this foolish paradoxe, that the Pope is Antichrist. So that I say,
measuring this lie exactly, you shall find the same i^ bigness not much short of
the world. Nay take it as it is by him uttered, and it wants I dare warrant
you, not one all or inch of the world. For howsoever some few in the world may
either condemn, or suspect the Church of Rome to be Babylon, yet that Jesuits
do know, they do it clearly, and not in darkness, and ignorance, justly, and
not out of malice and perverseness, and that they have this knowledge and conceit
of the whole world, is as vastly falfe as the world is wide: neither can he
name any Country of whom the Jesuits have such knowledge, nor any Jesuit that
does intertayne such a thought. So that you see clearly I had reason to term
his first kind of argument, deduced from our confession, impudent lying: which
howsoever it may make some impression in poor ignorant souls to abhor and
detest us, as though we did both know and confess the Church of Rome to be the
Whore of Babylon, and still adhere unto her: yet very few I think can be
either so simple as not to perceive this unconscionable proceeding, or so
consciensles, as not to detest it. Brightman M. Crashaws So he terms
Brownists p. 33.
brother ^elleth us a revelation out of the Revelations, that in Apocalypsi
Apocalypseos.
the man that shall discover Antichrist, is to be an obscure, and contemptible
fellow: which if it be true, I see not why M. Crashaw may not be the man. For
if baseness can make one ^^t such an office, and the basest sin that is not
pardonable in a slave, can make one base, I might prefer M. Crashaw ^or that
office before any other I know of their Church, ex^ept he can show some other
that can, and will tell more ^ase, and vile untruths then these are. And thus
much for his first kind of arguments.

13. Let us come to the second, to wit, his ignorant ^abling, and consider his
argument to prove the Church of Rome Babylon, deduced from the text of the
Reuelatio^s, which ^e says is notable, and does ineuitably conclude. For the
^ext says, that mystical Babylon Revel. 17.9.
is the City, seated on the seven hills, that she is Ibid. v. 18.
the City that raygneth over the Kingdoms of the earth, which notes can agree
to no other Church or City besides the Roman. If you say that Rome anciently
stood on seven hills, but now is shrunk into the plain of Campo-Martio, M.
Crashaw has a reply at his tongues end. Though this be true (says he) yet
diverse Churches, and places stand on those hills, in which the Pope (whom
paying us aforehand, he calls Antichrist) does exercise his authority, namely
in the Lateran Church, and Palace. Thus does the Minister babble, and discourse
in good earnest, seeking to prove that Constantine the first and most Christian
Emperor, and other noble, and pious Romans in the purest times of
Christianity, had small foresight of things, who thinking to make Rome seem
gloriously Christian, by setting up Crosses, buylding many Churches unto
Christ, raising diverse monuments and stately tombs for the relics of Martyrs
on the top of the seven hills, affoarded an argument unto M. Crashaw to prove
her to be mystical Babylon, and the Strumpet of Antichrist; which in truth is
the only argument that causes him to lay these reproaches upon her. Mark this.
For if Rome should to morrow cast down the Crosses, beat down the Churches
of Christ that stand on her hills, flyng the Relics of Martyrs, and other
dear pledges of Saints into Tybur, I dare say, in M. Crashawes judgment she
should be the whore of Babylon no longer, but straight be styled a glorious
Church of Christ; so clear a thing it is, that the glory of Christ and his
blessed Saints shyning on the top of her mountains inrageth the man against
her; which monuments of Christ's glory, especially the Lateran Church makes his
eyes water for sorrow, and his lips open into complaints, that in the Lateran
Church have by held by several Popes some three and thirty Provincial or
National Counsels, and five General; all, or the most part of them, to
establish Antichrists throne, Vsque adeo enim contra vetusta^ pulchritudinem
Sarae non inuenit quid nouitia deformitas mentiatur, vt tot Episcoporum,
gloriosoru^ Catholicoru^ consensum de blasphemia criminetur. Aug. l. 3. cont.
Iulia^. c. 17.
that is, confirm the Primacy of the Roman Bishop, which must needs be the
Seat of Antichrist, if any man be so mad, as to believe the bare word of a
Bachelour, before so many Counsels, some General, some National, which he
does confess to stand against him, of which some were held in the time of the
confessed purity of the Roman Church, some not long after the very time of the
Apostles. Lo how learnedly this Minister discourses. Does he no^ ineuitably
conclude? Yea doubtless his own folly, and want of judgment, to allege against
himself, so many Councels, so many Senats of learned Prelates and Doctors,
not of one Kingdom, but of the whole Christian world, that lived successively
almost in all ages since Christ, and then think to blow them away with this
weak puff of pride, they all, or most of them did establish the Kingdom of
Antichrist.

14. Concerning the two Canons of the Lateran Counsel under Innocent the
third, the first about Transubstantiation, the second of the Popes Authority to
depose heretical Princes, which he terms the most heinous, and horrible
that ever were before, he does notably discover his own skirts therein, his
want of learning in the one, and want of judgment in the other. For
Transubstantiation was no new point of doctrine defined by that Council, but
believed universally of the Church many hundred years before, as Bellar. l. 3.
de Euchar. c. 20.
Bellarmine clearly shows, and Protestants themselves grant, as you may see
proved at large in the learned Treatise of the Protestants Prot. Apol. tra. 1.
fol. 3. subd. 2.
Apology for the Roman Church. And when other evidences failed, the words of
Doctor Iesuitis. 2. p. 627.
Humphrey might suffice to put the matter out of doubt, who does affirm that
Augustine our Apostle (who was many hundred In the year 599.
years before that Lateran In the year 1215.
Council) brought Transubstantiation into England. For without question
neither did he bring other doctrine then that he had learned in Rome, nor Rome
then teach different doctrine from the rest of the world.

As for the second, to wit, the Bachelours lack of wit, in saying and urging,
that the Popes authority to depose heretical Princes, was defined in the
foresaid Council, I will not discuss, whether it were so, or not: this I am
sure, that therein very rashly he goes against the stream of his own
Doctors, and against his Majesty also, who took his pen in hand to prove that
the Oath of Allegiance against this power of the Pope does overthrow no point
of doctrine, as yet defined by the Roman Church, and namely by this Apol. pro
Iuramento fidelitatis page 52.
Lateran Council. And in truth what man of judgment defending Princes immunity
from this power, could say otherwise? For though the Pope had not such
authority from Christ, yet this very act of the Council, whereat were present
the chief Two Patriarks and the Legates of the other two. 412. Bishops.
Pastors both of the Latin and Greek Church, the Legates of the Grecia^ and
Roman.
Emperors, and of Of France, England, Hungary, Jerusalem, Cyprus, Aragonia,
Sicilie etc. vide Bin. tom. 3. Council. p. 2. page 1466.
all Christian Princes, might have sufficed to bestow this temporal authority
on him, seeing temporal authority may be given by the consent of the whole
Christian world (as all grant) Christian Princes yielding their free assent
thereunto, and allowing the Canon, and decree of the Council. What an ouerture
against the pretended immunity of Princes, were such a Canon of the Council,
which this Bachelour does so constantly avouch to have been made therein, out of
want of judgment, giving them just cause of offense, whom he most desires to
please, deserving the reward, that, that witless beast had, that fawned
unmannerly on his master.

Jesuits Gospel p. 78. 79.
15. Another argument in this babbling kind to prove the Church of Rome,
Babylon, he has in his Jesuits Gospel, deduced from the number of the beast,
or of the name of Antichrist, which is 666. which he will prove to be included
in the title which the Pope does most glory in. He brings two examples, or
two such titles, whereof the first is, Dux Cleri, which title neither
Catholics use to give to the Pope (and the Bachelour does ridiculously, or
maliciously English it, Vain babbling about the number of the beast.
universal Bishop, or Pastor of Pastors, as all that understand latin do see,
for it only signifies the captain or chief of the Clergy, which is no
Antichristian title) neither do I think the Lord of Canterbury would be angry
at such a title, nor the Bachelour dare deny to be his due, though the name of
Antichrist, and number of the beast must needs go with it, as he says.

The second title is, Generalis Dei Vicarius in terris, Gods general Vicar on
earth: which name he will have include the number of the beast, and to be the
mark of Antichrist, wherein he does offer more wrong to Kings, and temporal
Princes then unto the Pope. For the Pope is not ordinarily styled by us, Gods
Vicar, but, Christ's Vicar, as all know: neither can the Minister find this
title of Gods General Vicar given the Pope by any Catholic: neither can it
be an Antichristian title, which does sound of subjection unto God, which
Antichrist shall refuse, extolling himself above all that is called God. But to
our answer: that the Pope is called Christ's Vicar, not Gods, the Bachelour
does reply, Jesuits Gospel p. 80.
uttering another horrible untruth, that the Pope holds himself Christ's Vicar,
even as Christ is God: and full little would he thank him, that holds him to
be Christ's Vicar only as he is a man. Thus does this fellow babble he knows
not what: for all Catholics hold the Pope to be Christ's Vicar, and to have his
office as he was man, not as he was God: and even those whom Protestants think
the Pope has most reason to be behoulding unto for the defense of his power,
do most clearly teach it. Who more famous in this kind, then Cardinal Lib. 5.
de Romans Pont. cap. 4.. Sed. iam.
Bellarmine? let him speak for the rest.

Dicimus igitur Papam habere illud officium etc. We say then the Pope has
that office that Christ had, as he lived upon earth as a man. For we do not
give unto the Pope those offices which Christ has as he is God, or as he is a
glorious, and immortal man, but these only which he had as a mortal man etc.
Add also, that the Pope has not all power that Christ had as mortal man: for
he, because he was God and man, had a certain power which they call of
excellency, How the Pope is Christ's Vicar.
by which he was superior unto both Christians and Infidells, but to the Pope
he committed his sheep only, that is, his faithful. Moreover Christ could
institute Sacraments, and do miracles by his own authority, which the Pope
cannot. Also he could absolve from sin out of the Sacraments (that is,
without giving any Sacrament, by his absolute power) which the Pope cannot. So
that to the Pope he did only impart that power that could agree with a mere
mortal man, and was necessary for the government of the Church. Thus
Bellarmine. By which you see, how notoriously the Bachelour does belly, and
slander our doctrine, that we make the Pope Christ's Vicar, even as he was God.

16. And that he may the better see the vanity of this babbling argument deduced
from titles co^tayning the number of the beast; let us beat this babble about
his own ears, or (which will as much grieve him) his Father Luthers, proving
him to be Antichrist and the number of the name of the beast inuolued in those
names he did most glory in. For what title or name more proper unto Luther,
then the immortal enemy of popish pardons, against which he began to preach,
and dyed in a deadly hatred of them, leaving the same hereditary to his cursed
stock, whereof this Bachelour does boast. page 103.
Now to proclayme Luthers shame to all the world the number of the beast is in
this name, without adding, altering, or any strayning, as he shall find that
will reckon: Indulgentiae Pontificiae hostis aeternus. 1.500.5.50. 1.
1.1.100.1. 1. 5. The total. 666.

Moreover in what did Luther glory more, then in the title of the Preacher of
justification by faith only; which point (...) doctrine, he dares brag, that
he did singularly Tom. 4. praefat. in Ion. Illud iustificationis and
remissionis peccatoru^ etc. quod est Christianae doctrinae ita tractaui, vt
gloriari cu^ Paulo etc.
illustrate which as it is a Seminary of sinful life, preparing in truth the
way to Antichrist more then any other; so likewise cannot he have the title of
Preacher thereof, but he must als^ have the number of the Beast engraven in his
forhead, so that he that runs, may read it: Praeco Iustitiae solius fidei.
100. 1. 5. 1. 1. 50.1.5. 1.500.1. The total, 666. And this may suffice for
answer of the Bachelours babbling arguments.

17. Now remains the third kind, which is railing, his laying sins to our
charge without any proof. I^ his Jesuits Gospel he says: page 78.
what is spiritual Babylon, b^^ the Kingdom of sin and Satan, of impiety,
Idolatry blasphemy, profaneness, and where is that, as in Popery? (...) where
to be found so fully, as in the bowels of the Popish state? Thus he declaymeth
in a vatinian vein, without any word or syllable of proof. But to his
questions. I answer, that if Babylon be the Kingdom of sin, and Satan the
same is no where found so fully as in the Protestant Church, even as themselves
confess, whose Professors Jacob. Andr. conc. 4. in c. ^1. Luc.
blaspheme the name of Christ, more lewdly then the very Turks, (...) one of
ten that fall from us to them, which by the liberty of their doctrine does not
become profane fellows, Vix decimus quisque eorum qui Euangelio nome^
dederunt, fidei puritatem ad extrenum retinent. A magistris licentiae delusi
prophanescunt. Calvin. in 2. Petr. 2.
whose Ministers that make the f^rest show of singular zeal, if you search
into their bowels, you shall sinful of deceitptfulnes and Praeclarum quidem
zelum simulant: si tamen intus excutias, reperies plenos esse perfidia etc.
Calvin. prael. in Dan. c. 11. v. 34.
fraud, whom the seven headed Devil (as Septiceps Diabolus inuasit, and
deteriores effecit, quam in Papatu^ Praef. in postillam Ecclesiast.
Luther says) does possess, and make them worse, more cruel, coueteous,
lascivious, impious then they were in Popery. Thus their own Fathers speak of
their children. Now, be they no^ cruel, who like Nero will search into, and
rip up the Roman Church, which they cannot deny to be their mother, (...) find
Babylon in her belly, having the kingdom of sin and Satan, and of the
seven headed beast, or monster, as ^hey confess in their own bowels?

18. Another example of his railing is in this Sermon, against the Rhemists
distinction, that heathenish Rome was ^abylon, not Christian Rome which now is.
To which he ^hapeth us a short answer. page 41. 42
I answer briefly (says he) if heathenish Rome be Babylon in regard of her
sinfulnes, and persecution of the ^aints, then this Rome is Babylon also,
seeing in her sinful abominations, and cruel persecutions, she is nothing
inferior to old heathenish Rome, (...) may be easily proved, and showed at
large, if this time and place requi^ed it, as has been already showed by
diverse learned writers, and in ^ood part confessed by many of their own. Thus
he takes us up short, ^eeking to prove by railing what by reason he cannot
euince, ^ot cyting so much as one author, either of ours, or his own to
confirm this enormous, and incredible asseueration.

I know he might have cited one like himself whom ^erchance he meant, Gabriel
Powell, the son of David, and ^he Golias that with a proud challenge defieth
the army of ^he living God, who has written a long railing Treatise of that
argument, in the forhead of which book, he pla^eth this uncircumcised
blasphemy: I Tam certo Romanum Pontifice^ esse magnum illu^ Antichristu^ quam
Deum esse in Caelis. Powel. p. 2.
believe the Pope to be Antichrist, as certainly as there is a God: a fair
mark for the sling of David to aim at, with stones taken from the clear
book of holy Scripture, as some Catholics have done, and his Premonitory
epistle page 51. an obscure point. A conjecture. page 106.
Majesty also, who teaching this to be at the most but a conjecture, hit this
Golias on the forhead, laying him groueling on the ground, as an Atheist
without any God. And that he is ^o in very deed, it may appear by this Powel.
l. 1. de Antichrist. c. 34. n. 24.
example, that having taught it to be a dream, and a fable, that the time of
Antichrists persecution shall be Diuturnitatis circu^stantiam infallibiliter
includit.
short, which seems the express words of Christ, saying: Those days shall be
made short for the Matt. 24.22.
elect, and were not those days shortened, no flesh should be saved, which he
lib. 1. c. 4. n. 20.
confesses that Christ spoke of Antichrists persecution: yet does he not show,
nor endeavor to show how they may be true in his doctrine, leaving the^ to be
thought an old wives tale, or a So does he call the doctrine of Catholics,
that Antichrist shall reign but 3. years and a half, though the same be
taught by most ancient Fathers and expressed in Scripture, both by years
months and days.
monks dream. And is not this plain Atheism in a Professor of
Christianity, thus grossly to abuse Christ, whom he does no more believe (I
dare say) to be God, then the Pope to be Antichrist; believing both a like,
upon a fancy, which may change with the moon, and unto the Turcisme.
moon? Such authors as these bearing so little respect unto Christ, M. Crashaw
might have brought, which dare affirm whatsoever they can imagine odious
against us, thinking proofs needles, as himself does in this place, to prove
the Church of Rome to be Babylon, though this be the foundation of his Sermon,
which is like to be sound and sure, having a heap of slanders stoutly
pronounced without any proof, for the ground thereof.

19. But to show yet more the vanity of his reasons: Why should any mislike the
Lateran Sea, because it stands on the highest of the Roman mountains, called
Caelius, as it were a Caelo? or the Church of Rome, because seated on the
seven Imperial hills? Whereas if you consult with Scriptures they seem to
point and direct us unto such a Church. Christ says that his Church is as a
city on the top of a mountain which should never be Matthew. 5.15.
hidden: in the light whereof the Prophet Esaias. 60.3.
foretold, that Kings, and Princes, and Nations should walk, as it were
describing the Church of Rome, to whose authority the greatest Nations, and
Monarchs of the world have submitted themselves, in which Christ placed the
faith of Peter, as a light, with a promise that the same should never Luc.
22.32.
sail, to confirm his brethren, and direct them the right way to heaven;
which directive light, though in other Seas, yet never in his unto this day
failed, by defining or commanding any thing to be believed of Gods Church that
was an error. The Prophets cap. 2. v. 2.
Esaias, and cap. 4. v. 1.
Micheas also moved both by the same spirit of God, in the very same words
describe the Church of Christ placed on the top of mountains, having the
Nations, and Kingdoms of the earth subject to it. In the latter days the
mountain of the house of our Lord (that is the Church of Christ) shall be
exalted, and placed on the top of mountains, and Nations shall flow unto it,
and many people shall come saying; Let us ascend unto the mountain of our
Lord, and unto the house of our God. These marks the Prophets assign of the
Church of Christ, which M. Crashaw shooting wide of his mark, would have to be
the marks of the Sea of Antichrist, and upon this ruinous foundation without
further proof begins to build, and turn the words of his text against the
Church of Rome, We would have cured Babel.

20. Which he does particulerly apply as spoken of he great charity of English
Protestants toward Catholics here, whom these godly Israelites being forsooth
banished their country, led captyue, kept in prison, who mourn upon he banks
of Babylon, The Bachelours ridiculous application of his text
sighing out Geneua psalms by the Thames side, who having hung their harpes,
and lutes, and instruments of mirth on willow bows, can neither sing, nor
^augh, nor banquet, nor dance, nor be merry: these, he ^aith, seek to heal
the Babylonians, that is, Catholics, which ^n England rule the stern of the
state, live in mirth, joy and ^oyllity, and do wonderfully afflict and
prosecute the righteous souls of these good Israelites, that they are even
weary of their lives: this I say, is the ridiculous application of his text,
which being most absurd without any proof of congruity therein, he makes the
foundation of his long, and bitter inuectiue against us.

21. You see he does omit to prove, which is the hardest, most controuersed,
and important point in his text, Whether Protestants be mystical Israel.
that his Church is mystical Israel that can heal the wounds of the Roman,
and by which she must be healed, if she be wounded. For if she commit her self
to every sect that cries they will cure her, instead of healing her wounds,
she shall rend her self into more pieces, then are countries in Europe, the
different sects sprung from the root of Luthers revolt, being more then ever
were the divided tongues at Babell. She must become a Lutheran in VVittemberge,
a Zwinglian at Zurich, a Presbyterian at Geneua, a Parlamentarian in England,
an Anabaptist in Holland, an Arian in Poland, a Trinitarian in Transiluania, to
omit diverse other lesser, and petty sects, which cry as stoutly as their Syres,
we would cure Babel, who if they get her into their care, will never cease to
mynce her into more parts and sects, till her religion, and piety vanish into
Tobacco smoke, or she prove an Atheist in the end. Now what is the
seauen-headed monster, if this their multitude of Sects be not it? What shall
we do to be ryd of this crying crew, of this barking Babel, and tumult of
tongues? What counsel would M. Crashaw and his fellows give us Perchance he
will bid us follow S. John's advise, Try 1. Joan. c. 4.
spirit^ whether they be of God: and S. Paul's: examine all 1. These. c. 5. v. 21.
and choose what i^ good. This the Church of In the Council of Trent.
Rome has done she has tried their spirits, and finds them to be spirits of
error, pride, and contention, which cannot be of God. She has examined what
new faith they bring, and finds whatsoever is differe^^ from hers, is
opposite either to Scripture, or the practice of the Primitive Church, or the
doctrine of ancient Fathers, or the received custom of many ages in Gods
Church.

22. You will say, she has not examined the matter well but how can she amend
it? Or what greater care or dilige^^^ could she use? She gathered together all
her Bishops, and the most learned Physicians she had, she fasted, prayed, and
shed many tears: and to prevent complaints, and cauills that your physic was
slightly rejected, she caused her learned Doctors to examine The Council of
Trent continued 27. years from the year 1545. to 1563
many years together, conferring with the holy Ghost, that receipt: You
cannot deny but the Friar, Author of your revolt, did learn by one (excep^ you
can assure us of more) nights See Luther de missa angulari tom. 7. Wittenberg.
fol. 443.
conference with the Devil. Moreover she made her Physicians meet upon the
borders of those Countries, where you did most cry (out of charity you say)
that you would heal her, presuming you would perform in deed, what you had
promised in words She invited you by loving letters, and earnest entreaties,
promising, if you brought any thing worth the hearing, to intertaine you with
honor, if otherwise, yet to dismiss you without See the safe conduct granted
unto Protestants by the Counsel: omnibus charitatis officiis Sancta synodus vt
inuitat, ita complectetur. sess. 13.15.18.
harm. Could any proceeding be more Christian, or less obstinate, or more
reasonable then this? Can you with any truth say, you would have cured her, but
she would not be cured? Seeing she invited you to confer with her learned
Physicians, wherein she was wounded, and y^^ refused to come. You pretend danger
that you durst not venture: You had the Emperors, the Popes, the Council
warrant. What greater security could she grant, or you desire? You say we
teach that faith given unto heretics may be broken by them that gave it.
Heerin you mistake, or else wilfully misconster our doctrine, as you may see
proved in this Treatise afterward. That the Fathers of the Counsel of
Constance brake their word to John Husse, is a cavil: they gave him not their
word, whose safe conduct he scorned, trusting ^o the Emperors Warrant.
Wherefore it is apparent, these are but idle fears of a slothful man, that
says, a Lion is in the Prou. 22. n. 15.
way, or else excuses of your cowardice, who knowing the weakness of your cause,
durst not appear before that assembly of the learned of our Church. But
suppose that your fear had been just, that you had reason to suspect the
Counsel would break their word: yet was there so little charity in your
Church, that not one would ve^ture his life to heal us, or at least, to make
the world see the Council was trea^herous, and our Church incurable? Do you
remember what you say to the Brownists, that for fear of persecution fly from
you, that had they true love, page 31.
and charity they would care for no danger, that might befall their body, so
they might heal your souls, and gain them to God? Thus you speak of
charity, and ^each Brownists their duty: and yet among so many cryers of your
Church, that they would cure the Church of Rome, when she made offer to hear
their counsel, not one durst openly show his face; nor to save our souls,
venture his body into an imaginary danger. Why then do you brag of your great
charity, and longing desires to heal us? Why do you make great boasts of
little love?

23. And yet to stop your mouths, and take away all cause of complaint, if any
reason may content you, yet the Church of Rome dares proceed further, and make
you a more reasonable offer. You know Jesuit. Ghosp. 43. It requires the
oueruiewing eye of the whole College of Physicians.
that triacle is not permitted so be made in any City without a council, or
general meeting of the learned Physicians, and Apothecaries, it being a
compound that has diverse ingredients taken from Vipers, and venomous serpents;
to sever which healthful drugs from the midst of poison, requires great
skill, and is dangerous to be done without good advise. The doctrine that now
can heal Christendom, is a compound of the truth of Christian doctrine,
divided into so many dangerous and viperous sects, discerning the good from
bad, the truth from falsehood, antiquity from nouelty, Christia^ity from heresy:
there being no sect so bad, that has not some good; nor so false, but has
some truth, which you see and confess cannot be made but in a general
Council. The Church of Rome has gathered a Council, has made triacle, where
truth is declared, heresy condemned, falsehood rejected. You like it not, you
cry out against it. Let not our contentions be endless, let us not still rot
and rankle in deadly wounds of discord: you that are branches of Luthers
revolt, An offer made unto all Protestants that descend of Luther.
that cry against the Church of Rome, meet your selves in a general Council,
join together your heads in one truth, who have been a long while tied
together by the tails in error; let us have a form of faith, triacle of
truth by your making. Can you desire a more reasonable offer? Some triacle we
must have to heal the disease of discord for matters of faith, by which
Christendom is brought into extreme danger. Either approve ours, or appoint
better of your own by common consent (for without common consent it must not
be made.) If you will not do the one, nor can the other, who are incurable? Who
have just cause to complain, you or we, let the world judge.

A pleasant story declaring Protestants vanity that brag of healing our Church,
and can not agree upon the physic.
24. I remember I have heard a pleasant story, which may serve to show the
vanity of these complayners, of a certain town which did use to make great
complaynts for want of rain, not forbearing sometimes to touch Gods
providence, as wanting in the care of their affairs. Whereupon a wise, and
prudent man to show them their folly, made them a promise to rain them as much
rain as they would, so that meeting in the market place they would agree upon
the time, and the quantity thereof. Glad of the promise the people met, and
began to consult about the matter, but there were almost as many different
opinions as men: some would have rain in more quantity, some in less, some
one week, some another; then about the day of the week, had there been more
days then seven, that only difference would have had more heads then Hydra.
Concerning the hour, the variety was greater, some would have it in the night,
others in the day; some in the morning, others in the evening; some would have
one good shewer, others rain often, though not much at a time; and every man
stood so stiffly in his conceit, that from consulting they fell to quarelling,
and from quarelling were ready to come to blows, and to water the market place
with blood, instead of getting water from heaven. Protestants will never agree
about the physic that must heal the Church of Rome.
The man that had made the promise standing by, laughed at their folly, and
cried unto them, agree, and I will rain. Does not this story show how
impertinent the cryers of Luthers crew are, that from all parts of Europe in
different tongues cry, they would cure the Church of Rome, every one offering
her his own physic, and condemning his fellows as poison? If the Roman
Church should agree to be healed by them, would they ever meet together and
agree in one doctrine to heal her? No, never so long as Babel shall be Babel,
never till Hydra cease to have many heads, and return again to the unity of
the Roman Church.

25. First they confess Sir Edwin Sands in his relation etc. fol. S. 2. on
the B. side.
they have no ordinary means on their part, to assemble a General Council,
though that be the only means remaining ever to assuage their contentions: and
as for extraordinary, and miraculous means, themselves grant miracles are now
out of date: by which you may guess in what a woeful and desperate case their
Church is, who so brag of curing wounds. But suppose by some extraordinary
great chance, their Bishops, and Presbyters, and other Prelates of their
revolted Co^gregations, brought from the northern corners of Europe by the
hair of their head (as Abacuc was) should meet in a Council, would they agree
upon one physic to heal themselves and us? would they heal ancient wounds,
and not rather make new, and wider? I am content their own Bishop, Doctor
Bilson, inferior in learning and experience in matters of their Church unto
few, prophesy of the event of such a Synod, rather then my self, which he
does, saying: That Si linguae eoru^ similiter se habea^t ac calami, pluribus
certe opus erit pacis custodibus ad pugnas praeueniendas, quam librarijs ad
decreta eorum perscribenda. Bilson de perpetua Ecclesiae Christi gubernat, c.
16. in fine libri.
in such a case except their hearts do better agree, then their pens, there
would be more need of officers to part their frayes, then of Notaryes to write
their acts. And would not the Babel and confusion of their Church (think you)
be well healed in such a tumult? Would the blemishes of their faces, and want
of fingers (which M. Crashaw will not much stick to grant in his Church) be
notably taken away in that skirmish, in which those Bishops that should defend
their heads from new wounds might be well thought wise serpents? What might
the Church of Rome expect, were she present at such a fray? How would they cut
of her fingers, and toes, her arms and legs, to make meat of them; for which
feast the Bachelour says In his Epistle dedicatory to the Princes Highness.
that he and his fellows have longed a great while, and now at least hope
shortly to be glutted therewith, to make her desolate, and eat her flesh
(without salt or sugar, and even raw) and then, burn her with fire. Are not
these men notable Surgeons think you? Can any thing be either more ridiculous
then their braggs, or more unjust then their complaynts?

26. Wherefore seeing they will needs apply this text against the Church of
Rome, that she is Babylon, that they are her healers, that she would not be
healed, that therefore they must forsake her, will, or nill they, they must go
forward in their misapplyed text, Genesis 11. v. 9.
every one into his own Country (as the buylders of Babel, their tongues
being divided, were dispersed upon the face of the earth) some one way, some
another into different Sects, for number, more then the Countries of Europe,
and more opposite then the four corners of the world, where every Babylonian
may curse the Pope in his own language, every Heretic damn him in their own
Sect, every cock crow at him on his own dunghill, every Minister rail at him
in his own pulpit, every good fellow drink to his damnation in the tavern
near unto the Church, if not rather within it: but meet together all in one
general Counsel, make an end of their disorders, agree upon the same salve or
form of faith in all points, this they will never do, so long as the four
coasts of the world shall be opposite one to the other, nor ever so long as,
Protestants
Frigida pugnabunt with Puritans.
calidis Anabaptists
humentia with Aria^s.
siccis,
Soft Lutherans
Mollia cum with Rigid.
duris Sacrame^taries which deny the Real presence
sine pondere with Realists that put it
habentia pondus.
Hot things with cold, moisture with drought shall fight;
Soft things with hard, and heavy things with light.


Let S. Augustine Aug. de vtilit. credend. c. 14. Vos aute^ and tam pauci, and
tam turbulenti, and tam noui, nemini dubium est, quam nihil dignum authoritate
praeferatis. August. ibid.
conclude this Chapter, and what he said to the boasting Manichees, let us say
to M. Crashaw, and craking Ministers, Redite in latebras vestras, return into
your holes, in which you lurked, like dorme-mice, so many ages before Luther.
Seek not to impair the credit of that Church, that mayntained the name and
credit of Christianity before you were known. The Church of him, who bringing
a sovereign medicine to heal the most corrupted manners, by miracles won
authority, by authority gained credit, by credit gathered a multitude, by
multitudes got antiquity, by antiquity strenghtned the religion, which neither
the fond vanity of heretics by their fraudulent devises, nor the ancient
error of the Heathens by violent fury shall ever be able to overthrow: but You
for number so few, for age such vpstarts, and for spirit so turbulent, and
divided one against the other, every man may see, that you carry neither
credit, nor authority with you.

THE SECOND CHAPTER, LAYING OPEN The vain and ridiculous braggs of the
Bachelour, of four salues very charitably applied by the Protestant Church, to
heal the wounds of the Roman.
THE Bachelour having laid no better foundation of his Sermon then you have
heard, having brought no reasons at all to prove himself and his fellows to be
mystical Israel, and such reason to prove the Church of Rome to be Babylon, as
he might with more credit have been sile^t: The Bachelours 4. salues or
plasters.
yet does he go forward in his fancy, and begins to build the first square
of his Babel, which is in the praise of his Churches charity, and of the
excellent balmes, and salues by her applied to the wounds of Rome, to wit,
these four, page 45.
Instructions, Prayers, Examples, Laws; by which (he says) the heavens have
seen, and the world will witness with them they have sought to heal Babylon:
nay, such excellent salues these are, and have been applied by them with such
admirable dexterity and skill, that (in his conceit) seeing we are not cured,
he must needs pronounce us incurable. This he preaches very stoutly, and
proves so doughtily, that, I dare say, the judicious Reader will be moved to
laugh at, if not rather to pity the misery, and beggary of his Church, whose
Preachers for want of better subject of her praise, are forced to fly to
triuiall stuff, which every heretical Sect in the world does brag of, and may
with as good reason, as any this her Procter does, or can allege in her
behalf, as will appear by this short examination of them.

2. The first means then to heal our wounds which he braggeth of, is his
Churches Instruction of us, page 4^.
informing them (says he) in the truth, and discovering their errors both by
holy Scripture, and the ancient Fathers of the best and purest times. Jewel, A
Valiant. Vaunt.
Fu^ke, Whitaker, Reynolds, Perkins, and many others who now sleep in Christ,
have lest behind them such testimonies of this truth, as shall live while the
world lasts, and never can be confuted, as appears, in that they have not
dared to answer most of their books to this day. Thus he craketh: giving us
for our salve a plaster of big brags without any proof. For that some of
their books have not been answered to this day, the judicious Reader will
easily perceive the cause to be, that by authority they have wrong the press
out of our hands, not permitting us so much as a corner, where such weapons
may be cast: and keep so carefully the ports, that no book can pass, except
it be almost invisible: which though they know the world sees; Great vanity of
English Ministers.
yet these ioylly Champions for want of greater proofs of their prowess,
blush not to brag of, even in pulpit. But might it please his Excellent Majesty
to permit this booke-warre about Religion indifferently on both sides, so
nothing be written that (otherwise) may offend the State, that we might bear
weapons as openly as they; you should soon see the learned of our side, make
M. Crashaw, and such Crakers that dare them now they have nothing in their
hands, pull their horns into their shells. In other Countries we do not hear
Protestants brag so much of their unanswerable books: in which kind of
battle they have been so beaten, that now they seem rather to trust, as
they think, unto stronger weapons.

3. But indeed, M. Crashaw, have we been such dastards in England, as you
seem to make us? Have we been so beaten with your books, that one may justly
think we dare not meet you with such weapons in the field? Nay such has been
the strength of our invincible cause, that not withstanding the great advantage
you have had to write at your will: yet very few of your books that might seem
to need answer, but have returned unto you with a full answer, and many in the
height of their pride have received such blows, that their pen beaten out of
their hand, they were glad to run to take a Jewels vain challeng who having
dared catholics to answer him, the answer was no sooner come out but he got
the same to be forbidden by Proclamation.
Proclamation for their defense: unto which shamfull shift M. Jewel, whom you
make leader of your learned army, is known to have been driven by Doctor
Harding. And with far greater reason might we brag of our Hardings, Sanders,
Allens, Bristowes, Reynolds, Parsons, and others, who have left behind them
many excellent Monuments of our invincible cause, some of which remain
unanswered even unto this day. So that things duly considered, this
book-victory you so much brag of, may seem very doubtful on your side, even
in the judgment of any indifferent Protestant, though Authority having bound
our hands, have given you free leave a long time to beat us with your books at
your pleasure, and afterward sing your own triumphs (as you do now) in
pulpit, prophesying (though you seem neither Prophet, nor son of a Prophet)
that your writers works shall live whiles the world lasts: which I must
confess seems scarce credible unto me, having read in Stories, that many
greater lakes of water (to which S. Augustine Non nos terrea^t isti torre^tes,
multae haereses iam emortuae su^t, cucurreru^t, in riuis suis decurrerunt,
siccati sunt riui, nec eorum iam memoria reperitur. In Psalm. 56. page 44.
compares heretics) falling from proud hills, have for a time ouerrun weak,
and ignorant people in more violent manner, yet have dried away within few
years, the corn of Catholic doctrine growing where that inundation had
reigned.

4. But you must expect from this Bachelour no better proofs of what he says,
then big words: and if the former be not big enough, he opens his mouth yet
wyder into the praise of his later writers. If I may give (says he) my
judgment (and who can hold a man of his judgment from speaking?) of these
days, the skirts of the Romish Whore were never better discovered, her
grossest absurdities, and soulest impieties never so clearly displayed, as they
have been by Deuines of this present age. Thus he. This also you see is but a
foolish flourish in a foul phrase, that might better become her mouth, whose
skirts he does long to discover, then a Preacher at the Cross. For what
Heretic or Sectary in the world (might he give his judgment, as this wiseman
does) would not vaunt of the writings of his Church, and prefer their books
before all other, as wonderful salues to cure wounds? But if his Doctors be
such great Surgeons, and so full of charity as he pretends; first I ask, why
none of them durst appear in the Council of Trent, to confer with our
Surgeons, to which they were so invited, that not only charity, but even shame
might have moved them thereunto? Secondly why do none of these learned troops
so full of charity go to Rome to instruct the Pope, and Cardinals, and other
Prelates, and Doctors of our Church, which were an enterprise worthy of their
excellent charity, and learning, specially seeing diverse Catholic Priests come
to venture their lives and liberty in England, to heal their wounds and
souls, provoking them to dispute even in their own Universities? Thirdly if
his Deuines be so great Champions, as he makes them; why durst they never
yield to a public Disputation with us for forty years, and above, in the
days of the late Queen? Whereas Catholics did not fear to grant the^ diverse
such public disputations Fox gives testimony hereof in his Acts and
Momuments: one in Paul's Church for six days. p. 905 at Oxford. 931. Again at
Oxford, page 1411.
within the five years of Queen Maryes Reign.

5. Finally I demand their Surgeons, and salues being so excellent, what is
the cause the body of their Church is, and ever has been full of wounds, or
rather rent, and torn in many pieces; whereas the Catholic Church which they
accuse as mortally wounded, is united in peace, and unity of doctrine, having
sovereign salues of instruction to heal any wound of discord or error that
may grow in her body? whereof Sir Edwyn Sands known to be zealous against us,
writes in this sort, relating what he found experimentally in his trauayles.
His relation etc. fol S. 2. on the B. side.
The papist (says he) has the Pope, as a common Father, aduiser, and
conducter to reconcile their iarres, to decide their dissentions, to draw their
religion by consent of Counsels into unity: whereas on the contrary side,
Protestants are severed, or rather scattered troops, each drawing adverse way,
without any means to pacify their quarrels: Mark this speech M. Crashaw.
no Patriarch, one, or more, to have a common Superintendency, or care of their
Churches, for correspondency or unity; no ordinary way to assemble a general
Council, the only hope remaining ever to assuage their contentions. Thus this
Protestant writes of the remediless wounds and dissentions of their Church,
and of the peace and unity of ours; and that which is chiefest, of the balm,
or salve, or means to keep and conserve the same amongst us, which
Protestants want, and ever will want; and the wounds of their discord like to
rot, and rancle more and more for want thereof. Which consideration should make
every Christian detest the salve and balm of Books which M. Crashaw does
present to cure us; the scope, and drift of which writings is, that forsaking
the authority of Gods Church and general Counsels for many ages, we reform
and refine our selves by Scripture understood as we think best, or as such
writers shall make us conceive, which is the very sourge of discord, and endless
debate. Wherefore with more reason might we proclayme our salues, which even
our enemies are forced to admire, and say with the Prophet: Hier. 3. v. 22.
Is there not balm in Galaad? Is there not a Physician there? Why then is not
the wound of my people recovered? What more sovereign balm to heal discord,
and dissension then the doctrine taught and decreed by General Counsels? What
Physician more excellent, or more to be desired of Christians, then a common
Father, aduiser, and directer to decide their differences, to compound their
iarres, to keep them being dispersed over the world in the unity of the same
faith? How great the wounds of the Protestants discords are.
Why then do so many Protestant Countries remain unhealed? Why do they still
rancle in dissension and discord betwixt themselves? Why do they not repair
unto Galaad, where they may be healed, where they confess such a Physician,
and sovereign salues to be found, and out of which they have no hope to find
them in any other?

6. M. Crashaw will perchance say, that these wounds are not deadly; they are
not in the head, or heart; nor such as may endanger life, though they do
somewhat blemish her beauty: as one (says he) may have a heart sound, and
strong, and yet have (...) blemish in the face, or want of a finger. But if we
look into the practices, and writings, which in their Churches an immortal
and implacable hatred betwixt them for matter of religion, has brought forth,
you shall find that in their practices they do not only blemish faces, but also
seek to ^tab each other into the heart; and in their writings not only with
sharp penknifes of short Treatises, cut off toes, or fingers, but also with big
books beat out each others brains; ^lamning themselves as Heretics unto hell
mutually, not cursing, as we may charitably expound, but prophesiyng ^ather
what will be their several ends: and I fear though in other things they be
false, yet in this they will prove but too true Prophets. Which war betwixt
them does appear both by the Catalogue of their books which they have written
one against another, set down by Histo. Sacram. part. 2
Hospinian a Protestant, and Iodocus Coccius in his Thesaurus etc. Tom. 2.
Prot. Apo. in the end.
others; as also by the yearly Marts of Franckford, in which, store of such
books wherewith they wound each other mortally, never want: disagreeing in
points most essential (and not in slight matters only) as about Scriptures,
whether the Epistles of James, of Jude, the second of Peter, the second and
third of John, the Epistle to the Hebrews, the Apocalypse be authentical or
no: which not some few, but whole Churches, and the chiefest Luther, Illyricus,
Chem nitius. and others. See Chem. enchirid. p. 63. and exam. Co^c. Trid. part.
1 p. 55.
pillars of Protestancy deny: about Christ's Incarnation, about the blessed
Trinity, and such like See Edkandus his enchiridion of Contro. between
Protestant Churches.
points, in which, errors and heresies must needs pass to the heart of any
Religion.

7. As for their practices, read the second part of Hospinians Sacrame^tary
Story, which I have of late perused with great admiration to see how their
Churches do wound and tear each other in pieces for religion; who to poor
people that know not these things, dare avouch their iarres to be tryfles.
There you may behold how they banish each other by public Hospin. p. 2. Sacr.
Histor. fol. 127. p. 2. fol. 227. fol. 389.
Proclamation, prohibiting the sale, and reading of each others 383.
books, cast each other into Hospin. 393.
prison, not permitting common hospitality to those of the adverse part passing
by their Hospin. fol. 399. Co^rad. Schlusselb. in his Catal. Haeret. l. 13.
page 828.
Towns; rise in arms, and fight one against another for Hospin fol. 395.
Osia^d. epit. centur. 16. p. 735.
Religion: finally mangling the very dead Hospin fol 395.
corses of the contrary faction, not granting Hosp. ibid.
sepulture, as unto Christians, in their Churches. Now, M. Crashaw, are these
wounds in the heel, and not in the heart? in the finger, and not in the head?
Are these sister-Churches, that do thus not only byte and scratch (which might
be pardoned unto their weak sex, and would perchance hurt but face and
finger) but also cruelly cut each other in pieces for Religion, damning each
other to hell in words, and sending themselves thither mutually with their
swords? Are not these deadly wounds, and even those wounds, whereof all heresies
in former times have ever bled unto the death? If you know not this point of
spiritual surgery, your Father Luther can teach you it, who says, that Neque
n^vlli vmquam haeretici, vi aut astu victi su^t, sed mutua dissentio^e etc.
Tom. 3. VVitte^berg. in ps. 106 in fine.
Heretics never at any time have been overcome by force or subtilty, but by
mutual dissension: neither does Christ fight with them otherwise, then with a
spirit of gyddines, and disagreement. Thus Luther. Now, M. Crashaw either heal
this deadly and desperate wou^d in your Church, if you be able, or else if you
be wise, never brag of your Surgeons, and salues hereafter.

8. But let us see whether there be any virtue in the second salve, or means
to h^ale us, which M. Crashaw and his Church, as he says, has laid to our
wounds. This is their devout Prayers for our conversion, whereof the Minister
braggeth in very good earnest, page 43 45.
though most ridiculously, as you shall see, saying: that they have the
testimony of a good conscience, that they pray for us daily, yea continually,
publicly and privately every where over the world all of their Church, that
use to pray for themselves.) Which last parenthesis warily put in by him, I
fear will deprive us of a great deal of good prayers; that exception reaching
far, and wide in their Church, not only to the swearers, swaggerers, and
swas-bucklers thereof, but also unto their purest Preachers, and good men of
God. For (to omit others) of Iacobus Andreas a man of great credit in their
Church, as much honored, and famous in Germany, as ever was Calvin or Beza in
Geneua, Chancellor of the University of Hospin. p. 2. Histor. Sacra^. fol
198.
Tubinga, of whose zeal against the Pope they give this testimony, that
Osi^nd. in Epitom. Histor. ce^t. 16. p. 1044.
concionibus suis grauiter in Antichristum Romanu^ est inuectus, multas
Ecclesias pie reformauit. In his sermons he did bitterly inueigh against the
Roman Antichrist, and piously reform many Churches. Of this great Preacher of
the Gospel, and reformer of Churches, a Nicolas Seluecer.
Protestant that lived very much with him, does affirm, that he could never
see, nor hear, nor by any probable conjecture gather, quod vel cubitum iturus,
^el de lecto surrecturus, autorationem Dominicam recitauerit, aut vllam Dei
mentionem secerit: Hospinian. p. 2. Histor. Sacram. fol. 389.
that going to bed, or rising from thence, he did ever so much as say the Lords
prayer, or had any remembrance at all of God. What may we think of the
reformed Churches, whose Reformer was so devout? How piously did he teach them
to pray for the Pope, that was so slack and slothful to pray for himself?
And yet did he preach against the Roman Antichrist as zealously as M. Crashaw,
spoke of godlynes no less hypocritically, reformed Churches more successively
then ever he is like to do: which example may give us just cause to doubt,
whether such earnest declaymers against the Pope, and busy searchers into
wounds, ever pray for themselves or no. So that this continual praying for us
by Protestants, every where over the world, seems a very incredible paradoxe,
and I do think most Protestants that should practice the same, were it true,
do somewhat wonder to see it in print.

9. The Bachelour goes forward to set out the pomp of his praying Church,
with more magnificent words. This our diligence (says he) so shamed them
(Catholics) for their negligence in the same, page 41.
that four years ago they published at Rome a form of Letany, and public
prayer, for the perverting of the Realms of England and Scotland to Popery.
Thus he. But if you ask me what valiant exployts, I ever heard the Protestant
Church to have performed by praying, that may justly make the Church of Rome so
much ashamed; or upon what show, or color of truth the Bachelour speaks such
strange things in so confident manner, I plainly confess, I know not, but
must leave you to Oedipus for an answer; neither can I imagine upon what
ground he may justly think, that we take Ministers to be such men of devotion,
who have settled a contrary conceit of them, in which we are daily more and
more confirmed, that they do more trouble the world with See the Conference at
Hampton court.
prating, then the heavens with praying. We know the doctrine of their
primitive Church taught by their Protapla^^ Luther Luther. Concione in Dom. 4.
Adue^tus per Buceru^ latin redditam an. 1525. Etiamsi interim nihil nisi vinum
Creticum biberet, and ambularet super rosas, neque verbo quide oraret.
is, that he that has the true knowledge of himself, shall be saved, though he
drink nothing but malmesy, and lie continually in a bed of roses, and say not
so much as one prayer: which is excellent divinity I confess to make men take
many sweet nappes of contemplation in soft beds, and to pray fervently in a
tavern, till they be deprived of their senses by devotion to a cup of malmesy.

10. And yet I would not doubt but their prayers might be heard to Rome from
England, were M. Crashaws Church such as he describes it in his
New-yeares-gift to Virginia, where to animate and encourage them that were to
undertake that journey, he says, that so many millions of souls would daily
pray, and send up a strong cry for their prosperous voyage, that he nothing
doubted of the success, but what old holy Ambrose said of young Augustine, for
whom his mother so weeped: A son of such tears cannot perish, he durst apply
unto Virginia, for which the Protestant Church prayed, that, Populus tanta^^
precum perire non potest, the people that has so many a good prayer could not
possibly perish. For in truth a Church consisting of so many millions that they
might not be numbered, was like to have such sighs and tears as Poets faygne
the God Saturnus to have, Virgi Ser. p. 72.
whose sighs are storms of wynd, and tears seas of water. So that the
Virginian voyagers tossed with a storm of sighs, raised by their own Church,
came to be drowned in that sea of tears, in which Virginia should have been
christened. Was not this stoutly prayed think you? Was it not an heroical
act of prayer? Had not M. Crashaw reason to say with the Poet -- habeat iam
Roma pudorem: Iuuenal.
let Rome be ashamed, that she cannot sigh out such storms? But rather let
England blush to set out in print such ridiculous braggs.

11. But if these things do not yet convince, M. Crashaw brings a third
argument of his Churches charity in praying for us, which he terms very
obseruable, to wit, that whereas the Pope on Maundy-Thursday curses
Protestants in Rome, page 6. 7.
they like meek lambs the next Friday morning pray for him, and his sect in
all Churches and Chappells of this Kingdom, by prayer of their public
liturgy, appointed of old, and continued by authority: which is (says he) a
testimony against them, that we are a Church of blessing, a blessed Church; and
the Father of blessings bless it more and more, and all that seek the peace
of it. Amen. Thus he. But having perused the public Liturgy of his blessed
Church, I find no such blessed prayers, where either Pope or Papist is named,
or may be justly thought to be meant. I find indeed a prayer where Pagans,
Jews, Turks, Catholics have no cause to think the^ prayed for in the
English Liturgy.
and Heretics are put together: but that they comprehend us under any of
these four sects, we have no cause to think, except they further by public
authority declare. For in good sadness M. Crashaw tell us, if we should think
that you pray for us under the name of Pagans, or Jews, or Turks, charging
you to give us those uncharitable terms in your public Liturgy, would not
you think we do you wrong? You will say, we are comprehended under the name of
Heretics: first, that is not the ordinary style you give us, and in your
writings you charge us equally with all, or rather with Paganism more then any
other. Moreover that public authority does not comprehend us under the title
of heretics, even in your own judgment, I will convince out of your own
writings. See the Conclusion of his Jesuits Gospel.
For do you not in your Jesuits Gospel entreat the Parliament to declare by
their public authority, that we are heretics? And to incite them thereunto,
did not you write that long witless inuectiue? What needed that labor,
especially in the heat of midsommer moon, had we been declared heretics by
public authority in your Church, in your public Liturgy long before, and as
such prayed for publicly every year in all your Churches, and Chappells of
the Kingdom?

12. M. Crashawes love to the Church of Rome.
So that it is clear we are not put in your prayers by public authority, but
by your private courtesy: to which, if we will stand to beseated, in which of
these four damned sects you please, we are like to be well placed, whose
charity toward us can find reasons to rank us in any sect, though never so
damnable, not caring what you write, so you may make us seem wicked. To make
us seem Pagans, you do not stick to say, we worship Idols, we direct prayers
not to Christ, but to a wodden page 89.
Cross. To make us seem Jews, you say, that Antichrist (who shall be admitted
as Messiah) is the Bishop of Rome: neither would you blush to say for such a
purpose, that which some of your Doctors Powel l. 1. de Antichristo. c. 1.
have written, that Rome was the great City which Christ was crucified in,
though even children do know the same to be false. To make us seem Heretics,
you say we have separated our selves from p. 166.
Christ, though you can tell neither where, nor when, nor from what Church of
Christ we ever parted, whereof we were once members. Finally what dare not you
say of us, that durst write of Jesuits, who are known to honor singularly the
name of Jesus, and to have carried the sound thereof to the furthest confines of
the world, that they have more disgraced his blood, then ever it was by Jew or
Heretic, Jesuits Ghos. page 76.
Turk or Atheist, Devil or man, since the world began. Thus you rail in some
rithme, without any reason; and yet forsooth notwithstanding these great tokens
of your little love, you would have us remit the matter to your charity, to
define under what title either of Pagans, Jews, Turks, Heretics, Men, or
Devils, you do use to pray for us in your Church.

13. But one thing moves me much, that M. Crashaw says, that this prayer is
made in all Churches of this Kingdom, insinuating that out of England that
prayer is not made in their more reformed Churches, which makes me more then
suspect the prayer came originally from Rome, especially seeing he adds, that
it was appointed of old. Old M. Crashaw? Look well to it, that it be not some
prayer taken out of an old Missall, some skirt of the Romish Whore, which you
have sworn to discover. Will you see, that I hit the nail on the head, or
rather the Minister on the noddle, who so much brags of a prayer, Missal. Ro^.
in officio feriae sextae hebdomadae Sanctae.
or rather a little particle of a prayer taken from that very Church which he
reuileth, as wanting the charity showed in it. Look into our Missalls, both in
the old and new, you shall find three prayers (besides many others) appointed
for good Friday, one for Pagans, another for Jews, a third for Heretics:
which Babylonian Book such godly Israelites as M. Crashaw coming to reform
their devotion to a flesh dynner on Good friday, making the^ think the Roman
morning-prayers over long, put Pagans, Jews, Turks, and Heretics into one
prayer, not so long as the shortest of our three, in which the Church imitating
the charity of her dearest Spouse that day on the Cross, prays for her
greatest enemies. A small particle of which devotion found by M. Crashaw in his
English Liturgy, did so ravish the man in the love of his Church, that lifted
up to the third heaven, he bestows (as you have heard) blessing, and
blessing, and blessing upon her, with an Amen in the end. O M. Crashaw, that
you had grace to consider how blessed indeed you might be, did you receive all
the robes, and ornaments of the Roman Churches piety and devotion, seeing one
only little skirt or particle thereof left by great chance in your reformed
Church, makes you so proud, that you spread it abroad like her peacocks tail,
full of blessings, not looking down to her deformed feet, fugitive from that
very Church from whose larger example of loving her enemies, and praying for
them, this poor piece of your piety is cut off, to adorn (if not rather
patch) with a short show of devotion, your Communion-Booke.

14. Now about the Catholic Church, praying for the conversion of Heretics,
though she seek to make her charity in this point more known to God then the
world, to heaven then earth, unto Saints and Angels then mortal men, yet
there want not arguments thereof, which even our enemies may see if they please
to open their eyes. For in Iubilyes, and plenary Indulgences, which are
universally granted to all, and very frequent with us (as themselves complain)
is not ever one condition required of Catholics to gain them, that they pray
for the conversion of Heretics? page 109. and 112.
The like is of the grains the Pope graunteh (two copyes of which grau^ts the
Bachelour has inserted into his Sermon, unmindful of what here he bableth)
where praying for Heretics is expressly required by the Pope to gain the
pardon of his graynes, using that doctrine to their good, which they most
malign, not sucking silver out of men's purses, by granting pardons, as the
Bachelour lies; but seeking to save such wretched souls, as his is, that
rail on him, if the prayers of all Christendom may prevail to that effect.
And as for our private devotions for the conversion of heretics, especially
our dear Country, our prayers, sacrifices, disciplynes, hair clothes, and
others pennances, with secret sighs, and tears in the ears of God, having
more cause then these counterfeit Israelites to weep upon the banks of
Babylon for the desolation of Syon, that is, of a most flourishing Church, that
was once in our Country, now turned into a Congregation of carnal Ministers;
of these, I say, and such like things we will not boast, as the Bachelour does
of his Churches poor devotion; the Father that sees in secret will doubtless
reward them, and hear in the end the prayers of the poor, the sighs of the
humble, the groans of the fettered, restoring again at the time his infinite
Wisdom has appointed, the buildings which these deformers of Christendom,
rather then reformers have cast down in few years, but would never be able to
repair again in many ages.

15. The third manner of salues or means to heal us, that these Surgeons do
brag of in their Church are their good examples, page 43.
professing (to use his own words) and practicing their own religion daily
in our sight: where first we are not sure of M. Crashaw, whether he for his
part profess his own religion, and not rather the Kings religion in our
sight, liking best of another religion in his heart. For he is thought of some
that know him well, to prefer the Lemon-lake before Lambeth, which he was
wont with his Puritan brethren to to term Limbo-lake, when that voice
(Crashaw, Crashaw, g^^ to Geneua) did ring strongly in his ears. And that the
same affection does still reign in his heart, howsoever he seeks to dissemble
it in this Sermon, desirous (as he says) to justify the state, much more then
to honor truth, does sufficiently appear, both by his bitter inuectiues
against them that persecute the good men of God, bannish, and force them to fly
the country, and also by his earnest coniuring his brethren the Brownists,
notwithstanding persecution, not to depart from England, but still continue,
The Bachelours exhortation unto Brownists
and labor to heal by their preaching, and draw more and more from
Protestancy to their sect. If (says he) they be healed already, why do they
not more seriously labor the healing of others? They cannot but know there be
many in our Church curable enough, if they could show the^ to need their
healing. Why then do they not stay among us to heal, and help us? He is no
good physician, that flies and forsakes his Patient. In this manner M. Crashaw
coniureth them not to forsake their Patient, the Church of England, which may
be well termed M. Crashawes Patient, seeing she could endure him so long time
together, crying in pulpit till he was hoarse, plaistering, or rather
pestering her ears with such intolerable fooleryes, as have been discovered,
and as is this, to entreat sectaryes condemned by her to continue still in the
country, and labor more seriously to draw men, from her unto their sect.

16. Now as for the good examples, and practices of his Gospel done in our
sight, we know Luther. Peter Martyr. Bucer.
their profession has drawn many professed Nuns out of their Cloisters to
marry, a thing punishable with death by the most ancient Christian Vide
Zozomen. Histor. l. 6. c. 3. Cod. i. 1. de Episc. and Cler.

Si quis, non dica^ rapere, sed attentare tantum iungendi causa matrimonij
sacratissimas Virgins ausus suerit, capitali poena feriatur.


laws: but of any that by their persuasion have left the world, forsaken the
house of their parents, professed themselves Virgins to Christ, living chaste in
body and mind, as was the practice of Apostolical times, we can not name so
much as one. We are sure also that many Churches, Monasteryes, and holy places
have been overthrown and laid wast by their practice: whereas not any
Monastery has been by them built; few places (if any) made sacred unto
Christ, and a rare bird is that Church or Hospital, or College in
Christendom, that may call a Protestant her founder. As for Cathedral
Churches, the first Protestant that shall appear in the world, may be thought
will be the most stately, and sumptuous that ever was, seeing the foundations
thereof have been above these fourscore years a laying, in half which time
that famous Six and forty years. Joan. 2. v. 20.
Temple of Solomon was built.

17. And will M. Crashaw be content that we enter into any of their Churches to
see them practice their own religion in our sight, even where their Gospel
is most purely preached? even whither Andreas Musculus a pryme Protestant does
inuit us? Si quis videre volet inge^te^ turba^ nebulonum, hominum
turbulentorum, fallaciu^ impostorum, foeneratorum, ciuitate^ aliqua^ adeat, in
qua Euangeliu^ pure praedicatur, cateruatim tales ibi reperiet etc. Conc. 1.
Adue^tus.
If any man (says he) be desirous to see a great rabble of knaves, of persons
turbulent, deceiptfull coosoners, usurers, let him go to any city where the
Gospel is purely preached, and he shall find them there by multitudes. For it
is as manifest as day light, that there were never among the Ethnicks, Turks,
and Infidels more unbridled and unruly persons, with whom all virtue and
honesty is quite extinct, th^^ are among the Professors of the Gospel. Thus
he. Now have we not seen a goodly spectacle of godly Professors of their own
religion in our sight? Are not we past cure, that are not healed with such good
examples? Is it not an holy religion, which by such examples is made known to
the world? That the whole world (says Con. 4. ad cap. 21. Lucae. Vt totus
mu^dus agnoscat eos no^ esse Papistas, nec bonis operibus quicquam fidere,
illorum operum nullum penitus exercent etc.
Iacobus Andreas a great man among them) may know that they are not Papists,
nor place any confidence in good works, they do not any good works at all.
Instead of fasting, they spend the day and night in feasting and quaffing. In
lieu of being bountiful toward the poor, they devour, and flea them with
extortions: they turn their praying into swearing, and blaspheming of Gods
name, that even Turks do not more impiously blaspheme Christ. Is not this
holy professing their own religion in our sight? And is not that an holy
religion, that is known and discerned from Popery by such marks?

18. You will say we wander far from home. Look into the Church of England,
you shall there see many profess their own religion in your sight. Well,
though I could willingly be absent from such a spectacle, yet seeing M. Crashaw
does importune us thereunto, with sorrow of heart we will cast our eyes upon his
Church, in which we may clearly behold, how far our dear Country has
degenerated from her ancient piety and Religion. For who would not weep to
behold England in that woeful form, and damnable state as M. Richard Ieffery,
having gathered her true Pourtraicture in his trauells to that end, made a
public spectacle of her in his sermon at the Cross, some 3. years before M.
Crashaw came to that honor. M. Richard Ieffrey in his Sermon preached at the
Cross the 7. of October, anno 1604. p. 31.
I may freely speak (says he) what I have plainly seen in the course of some
travails, and observation of some courses; that in Flanders was never more
drunkenness, in Italy never more wantonness, in Jury more hypocrisy, in Turk
more impiety, in Tartary more iniquity, then is practiced generally in England,
particulerly in London. All this is to be seen etc. And were not these things
worth the ^eeing M. Crashaw, were we disposed to jest at your folly, that brag
of your profession of religion, and not rather to weep at the woeful spectacle
of our now deformed Country, that once for her religion, and sanctity was so
renow^ed? For does not this Preacher come near the place, where you so purely
preach the Gospel? And that by these good deeds, and holy life you profess
your own now English religion in our sight, these being the effects of the
rifenes of your ghospelling there? If you doubt, Doctor King, now your Bishop
of London, will put the matter out of question, who upon Jonas writes in this
sort: King upon Jonas. page 442. Lecture 32.
So far is it off (says he) that we are become (by the Protestant reformation)
true Israelites with Nathanael, or but almost Christians with Agrippa, that we
are proved fully Atheists. And that which Tully reports amongst his wonders
in nature, that in one Country drougth causes dirt, and rain stirs up
dust, may be truly applied unto us, that abundance of grace has brought ^orth
in us abundance of sin: and as some took occasion by the law to wax more
sinful; so iniquity had never been so ryfe amongst us, but through the rifenes
of the Gospel. Thus he. Is not this a very gracious Gospel that does bring
forth abundance of sin? And do you wonder, that we hinder, as far as we have
forces, that the same may not be rife in Catholic Countries? Are you offended,
that we will not lay these plasters of your Ghospells examples to our wounds?
Truly you have no cause.

19. And here we might make an end of the Protestants good examples to heal
us, but M. Crashaw will needs also apply to our wounds, the salve of Q.
Elizabeth's good example, and professing her own Religion in our fight. Worthy
(says he) of eternal memory, whose constant zeal to the truth was such,
About Q. Elizabeth her constant professing her religion in our sight.
as that all her days, they could not by their brags, and treasons, and curses
cause her once to fear them. Thus does the Minister fiddle in the praise of
this Princess, touching that string loudest, which of all other least sounds
of her honor. For as I will not deny, but that she had many Princely
qualityes, both of mind and body, that made her worthy to have been Defendresse
of a better Gospel: so likewise he could not possibly have named any
Christian Queen of our Country, to whom the note of mutability in matters of
Religion might more justly adhere. See the Answer to Sir Edward Cooks Reports
c. 15. page 363.
For (to omit other proofs) who does not know, that whilst her sister ruled,
she did not profess herself a Protestant, but confess her self to a Priest,
and heard Mass in show devoutly, commonly two a (f) day, more then perchance
she heard all her lifetime after, which does argue either little zeal in so
long dissembling, or small constancy in so soon changing.

20. But seeing this Queen is now gathered unto her Father (I cannot say
Fathers, seeing not one of her noble Ancestors besides him were of her faith,
nor he but in part) I will say no more: only to her I dare oppose two Catholic
Queens of the same age, much more worthy of eternal memory for their constant
zeal to the truth: two Maryes (who chose indeed the best part) the one of
England, the other of Scotland. The first was constantly zealous to her
religion, not only in the days of her reign, when Puritans neither by their
brags, nor treasons, nor bloody books from Geneua, especially those of that
Minister, whose deeds made him unworthy of his Goodman.
name, could cause her once to fear the^ but before also in the days of her
brother, when Protestant ruled, and ouerswayed all, ventured her Princely life
many times by the constant practice, and profession of her Religion in their
sight.

21. The second no less zealous then the former, stood most constantly in the
truth, even unto the death, washing her Princely robes in the blood of the
lamb: where Protestant Bishops, and Ministers fearing to be sent again, as in
the days of the former Mary, into Jury, to sing songs of Sion, and not be
permitted to chaunt Geneua Psalms on English land, had this Catholic
Princess come to the Crown, inciting the Queen in Court, the people in
pulpit, with bloody slanders against her, made a lamentable proof, what a The
executioners name.
Bull against an anointed Princess they can indite, when they fear, though
but a far off, that in time they may come to touch their freehold: such a
Bull as all their clamours can ^euer prove to have ever come from Rome. Of the
bloudines ^f which fact, and constancy worthy of eternal memory ^f the
Princess, that the Reader may more detest the one, and admire the other, I
will here set down a few verses of that subject, taken out of an excellent
Poem, to requite, by ^he way, the liberality of M. Crashaw, who bestows some
^able verses upon the Lateran Sea.

Ecce Caledonij commissa piacula Regni,
Infandumque nefas: en Regia colla securis
Et Q. Dowager of France and Q. of Scotland.
geminum diadema ferit, quo nulla vetustas
Funere maius habet, seris nec proseret annis
Posteritas, magnique necem mirabitur instar
Prodigij, Regina, tuam: sed gloria mayor
Quo tibiculpa minor, tantoque celebrius orb
Nomen erit, quanto fidei constantia mayor.
Dum iugulum petit intrepidum scelarata securis,
Quae tibi men's tum (lictor) erat, cum verbere crudo
Colla secas, quae nec Nolite tangere Christos meos. Psalm. 104.15.
manibus contingere fas est?
Si Marium post Teutonicos morsipsa triumphos
Pauit, and attonito percussor constitit ore:
Tu Mariam vita priuas, nec torpuit ictus
Maiestate sacri capitis? ferrumue repressit
Dextra? nec Augustos acies defecit in artus?
Heu quantus Regina iacet ter maxima truncus,
Quae Mother to our dread Sovereign-
matres, regumque nurus supereminet omnes.
And this may suffice to lay open to the eye of every man the ^ntolerable
vanity of this bragger of his Churches examples and professing religion in our
sight.

22. The fourth salve of wholesome laws.
Now remains that I add a word or two of the ^ourth sort of means or
salues, that M. Crashaw says their Church has applied to our soars, by which
were we not ^ncurable, we might be healed; to wit, wholesome laws: which
(says he) we have devised, and enacted against their errors, superstitions,
impietyes, seditious courses, sometimes in justice executing them, sometimes in
great mercy suspending them. page 44.
I cannot deny but ^hese have been strong salues, which flesh and blood could
never so long time have endured, persisting constantly in the faith without
special assistance from heaven; salues that have drawn not only goods and
lands, but also much noble blood from diverse Catholics, who heirs more unto
the virtue of their Ancestors, then unto their livings, have chosen rather to
part with the best blood from their Noble Progenitors they received, then from
their faith and religion, and the hope of eternal salvation, and blissful
enjoying their desired company everlastingly in glory. Some o^ them I confess
may perchance have been executed in justice, that is, permitted to hang till
they were just half dead, Suspensio^ in mercy.
no more, nor less, as the law requires: yet other have been executed short
of justice, cut down, and bu^cherly vnbowelled, being full alive: though I
willingly grant that many also have been suspended with great mercy, as a
fellow cried out at Oxford at the execution of a Priest* Let him hang till he
be dead, for the Queen is mercifull^ But how may these laws be thought salues
to heal ou^ wounds? First M. Crashaw grants, that they were de^^sed and
enacted by themselves, an evident sign, that they Religion also for which
these laws are made, was devised and enacted by themselves, otherwise
Christian Princes, and Bishop in former ages would have made laws for it, had
they by^ of it. So that the very salve does strongly savor, and their laws
clearly sound the nouelty of the religion, that the^ would force us to embrace,
as Ancient.

23. Moreover that the penal laws in the late Queen time were executed upon
us any ways for conscience sake the grauest and greatest of their side do
constantly deny though the evidence of the truth wrung a confession of the
contrary from In his Jesuits Gospel he says, Priests and Jesuits in
England dye for the Primary of the Roman Bishop, some excepted that died for
treason. page 79.
M. Crashaw, which may seem a wonde^ in so great a Statist, who did publish
his Sermon to justify the State, much more then honor truth. How can their
penal lawe^ heal the wounds of our conscience, unto which they do^ not apply
them as plasters, not punishing us (they say) for conscience sake? Can the
Master justly wonder if the Scholar amend not his fault, when he will not
tell him why he is beaten? Catholics are charged with fines, cast into prisons,
put unto shameful deaths for their errors, superstitions, impieties, as M.
Crashaw says: yet they must not say, nor so much as think, that Religion is
the cause. This manner of ^uring us, or proceeding against us may justly
strengthen, and confirm us in our Religion, seeing the majesty thereof ^o be
such, that even those that do mortally hate it, would ^ot be thought
persecutors of it. The very instinct of nature ^et down in the law of Nations
does teach, that it is cruelty ^o force any from the faith and belief of their
ancestors, wherein they have continued time out of mind: even Jews and Turks
cannot be drawn to be Christians by rigor of ^enall C. Maiores extr. de
Baptismo and eius effectu. Et in C. Sicut Iudaei. Item extr. de Iudaeis, and
Saracenis. D. Th. 22. q. 10. a. 8. ad 2. Val. tom. 3 d. 1. q. 10. punct. 6.
laws, nor their young children christened against both the parents will, as
Deuines teach. How then may Ministers seek to compel Catholics from their
Religion, ^n which their Ancestors successively for many ages did both
gloriously live, and religiously dye, especially ours being a Religion which
the more learned Protestants do confess to be truly Christian, and sufficient
See Protestants Apology. tra. 2. sect. 6. subd. 1.
to salvation.

24. Were we Idolaters (which in Ministers mouths is our ordinay reproach) or
Heretics (with which title they please sometimes to disgrace us) what need
they devise new laws, seeing laws have been enacted long since by God against
the one, by the Church against the other? What is the reason they proceed not
against us by these laws? The cause is, that when they call us Idolaters and
Heretics, their conscience does secretly check their tongue, that these crimes
are more stoutly pronounced by them, then indeed practiced by us; rather
uttered by way of reproach, then of truth. Neither can judicious Princes, who
measure others worthiness by their own, be easily persuaded, that their noble
Ancestors, whose valor and wisdom the admire, were indeed drowned in such
brutish Idolatry, and more then Cymerian darkness. For in truth should they
proceed against us as Idolaters, and stone us to death, their hearts might seem
harder then the very stones, which they should force to fly at us; pursuing the
faith of so many Kings, Queens, Princes, and famous Worthyes, whose persons
also they neither would, nor (without exception of persons) could spare, being
guilty with us of the same faith, were not these blessed and everliving stones
now eternally placed in the glorious Palace of Gods Kindgdome, which the
stones of malice can neither overthrow, nor reach unto; who have left behind
them so many Monuments of their Christianity, and piety, which yet stand, and
may stand to the worlds end, except Ministers destroying them, employ the
stones to beat out of the world that faith and Religion that built them; which
should they do, the very stones, if men were silent, would cry unto heaven for
vengeance against them.

25. And for burning us as Heretics, such fire would give a clear light, to
make the shame of their new Gospel apparent to all Christians, should they
(which this their fury supposed we might expect at their hands) make the fire
of all Christian books, which even themselves do confess to teach the same
doctrine, for which Catholics should burn. For into such a flame, not only so
many thousand of books of the learned Deuines of this present age should
enter, but also the rest of all learned Christian Authors for these thousand
Protestants have written (says M. Fulke) that the Pope has blinded the world
these many hundred years some say a 1000. some 1200. some 900. Fulke in his
treatise against Stapleton and Martial page 25.
years, without any question: and all the rest of all ancient Fathers, some
for one point, some for another would by the Protestant Censure be cast on the
same heap to serve for fuel: from which their private spirits interpreting
Scripture as they please, would never be able to keep either the blessed
Apostles, or Christ himself, who has given his word never to part from the
mouth, and doctrine of his Church in any age to the Matt. 28. v. 20.
worlds end. A fire made of so sacred fuel would yield rather flames of
divine love to comfort the heart, then corporal flames to consume the body;
neither might that fire be thought so much to turn the sacred members of the
Martyr into ashes, as embalming his holy Relics with the myrh of immortal
memory, commend them as pledges of Christian co^stancy to the custody of future
ages. Such a deathbed how comfortable might it be to a Martyr, where the
flagrant sent of holy Scriptures, by which Fathers prove their doctrine, and as
with flowers adorn their writings, might make him with the glorious S. Laurence
Deacon in the midst of flames seem to lie upon roses; where their sweet,
and divine eloquence declaring the joys of heaven, and miseryes of this life,
would yield a more pleasing gale of ^ynd to cool his burning heat, then that
which bedewed ^e Babylonian furnace: where finally the rarest spices of all
manner of learning, containing within them the fiery per^me of Christian piety,
laid on a heap, and set on fire, ^ight make them never envy the odoriferous
deathbed of ^^e Arabian byrd. And should they stay their fury against ^^ese
books, not to make our death more glorious, and ^^eir cruelty more barbarous
in the eye of the world: yet ^^e books themselves full of spirit and zeal of
their Au^^ors would be ready to leap into such a fire, and to dye ^ith them,
in whose hearts they kindled the fire of that vi^orious faith. From which kept
by force, they would ^^mayne as so many fiery tongues to torment the conscienes
of them, that set such a glorious faith on fire: together ^ith which, had all
Christian books that teach it been ^urnt, no ancient writer for Christianity
had been left. So ^^at, Catholic Religion is indeed so glorious, and so full
of Majesty, even in the eyes of her enemies, that they devise, ^^d enact new
laws to proceed against her, disgraced with ^gly terms of treason, or
sedition against the State, trem^ling to behold her stand at the bar in her
native beauty, and Princely robes: which laws are the good, and Godly ^eanes
or salues to heal us, which M. Crashaw does so much ^ag of.

26. Now let us look into the laws, wherewith the Catholic Church has
sought to heal, The cause why Protestants are punished by Catholics
and reform ^rotestants, whose proceeding therein will appear to have ^eene
both just, and merciful, and efficacious to work that effect, if you consider
either the cause for which, or ^he laws by which they were punished, or the
manner of ^he execution of them. The cause of their punishment has ^uer been
their leaving the Church, whereof they were ^hildren, their forsaking the
faith, whereof they were pro^essours, their reuolting from the army whereof
they ^ere soldiers; their rebelling against the Kingdom wher^f they were
subjects, a thing punishable by the law of all Nations, as by the law of all
Co^mon-wealths does appear, and among Christians, the very brand of heresy
set on he^ forhead to make her known thereby, even by Gods own^ word, they went
out from us, 1. Joan. 2. v. 19. 2. Iud. v. 19.
these are they which segregate themselves: and that Protestants have thus
revolted the world ca^ witness, and Calvin Discessionem a toto mundo facere
coacti sumus. ep. 141. page 273.
confesses. Now how great, and inexcusable this sin is, and justly
punishable by Christian laws you may gather by the notable doctrine of S.
Augustine worthy to be known of all, and written in letters of gold: T^^
Obscurius dixeru^t Prophetae de Christo quam de Ecclesia; puto propterea quod
videbant in spiritu co^tra Ecclesia^ homines facturos esse particulas and de
Christo no^ tantam litem habituros: ideo illud vnde maiores lites futurae
era^^, planius praedictu^ est, apertius prophetatum est. in Psalm. ^0. conc. 2.
Prophets (says he) spoke more obscurely of Christ, then of the Church the
reason was, because they foresaw in spirit, that men would take part^ and
sactions against the Church, making more strife about the Church then about
Christ: therefore of that, concerning which the contenti^^ were to be greatest,
also the predictions are clearest, to the iudgme^^ and greater condemnation of
them, who saw her, and fled from her. Th^^ S. Augustine.

27. Neither were these Christian Laws lately devised and enacted by us against
Protestants, but by Christian Kings against reuolters from the Church of Rome,
long before Protestants were either borne, or named, or thought of, as (...)
known: yea some laws which these Ministers, and Ma^tyrs transgressed, and for
which they were punished, did d^serue death by the most ancient Imperial laws
made ne^ unto Constantine his time, and yet extant in the Code to the eternal
shame; as that of entysing and marrying Nuns o^ of Cloisters, wherewith Luther
made the Prologue unto the Comedy of his new Gospel; in which after him many
(...) lapsed Monks, and Friars did not shame to appear on the stage in the
eye of the world.

28. In execution of which laws we have not sough^ by the false imputation of
Treasons, and conspiracyes against our Country, to make them odious unto the
people, (...) which slanderous cup they have forced us to drink in dee^
measure, to hide the more popular, and plausible cause (...) suffering for
conscience and Religion from men's sight; b^^ have made them, and the world
understand, that the cau^^ of their punishment, was their forsaking the faith
of the^^ Ancestors, their proud opposing of their private fancies i^ the
interpretation of Scripture, against the judgment of the whole Church,
authority of Counsels, consent of Fathers; ^ying before their eyes the
ugliness of such pride, with for^ble reasons, as might have healed them, had
they not been ^curably arrogant. Whereupon we may justly conclude, ^at the
Church of Rome has reason to complain against ^^e Protestant, We have cured
Babel, but she is not healed, that ^e may seem to have made a bargain with
death, and a plot with ^ll.

THE THIRD CHAPTER. VVHERIN is discovered M. Crashaws impious stage-playing in
Pulpit, bringing in a Babylonian to speak like a Catholic; seeking to
disgrace thereby ancient Christianity, and the glorious marks of the true
Church, taught by the ancient Fathers.
MASTER Crashaw having spent all the best salues in his box, or Church, upon
the soars, and wounds of the Roman, being past faith, and hope ever to cure
her, he wastes also his charity upon her, in rating, and reuiling her as
incurable, laying horrible errors, and blasphemies to her charge, wherein he
bestows the rest of his Sermon, The great labors of Protestant Ministers to
heal us.
which he begins with a great groan: Now, alas (says he) see the effect of
our labor! all is lost. And is it not (think you) great pity, that these
good men of God should loose so many labors to convert us; so many weeks
fasted in bread and water; so many days, and nights spent in continual
prayer; so many rough hayrclothes worn next unto their tender skin; so many
disciplynes done even unto blood? Might it not make a tough heart break for
sorrow to see such Bachelours take so many, good, and godly pains, going long
iourneys, from Shire to Shire, from Town to Town, from house to house, to get
to Virginia, that is, a fair and rich Virgin to wife, and all in vain? That
their learned Ministers should go in great companyes, with manifest danger to
be burnt, unto Rome, to discover the skirtes of the Whore, in a dream of the
night, lying in their soft beds with their wives under their arms instead of
Bibles, and all to no purpose? Now alas (says he) see the effect of our
labors! all is lost: for she is Babylon, and therefore cannot be healed. Some
will say, this is harsh and bitter, but I say it is true, and therefore not to
be concealed. Thus M. Crashaw.

2. Now to make us seem incurable, A peevish practice of the Bachelour to
deceive ignorant people.
and like in religion to the ancient Babylonians, he brings in his first part
a Babylonian speaking like a Catholic, and rejecting the counsel of the
Israelits, which though it will seem fond to the learned; yet it is malicious
and peeuishly penned to deceive the ignorant, making him allege the same
arguments for his Idolatry, which we and the Fathers make notes, and marks of
the true Church; seeking this occasion to open a vent to his secret malice
against the ancient Church of Christ, covertly (his face being hidden under a
Babylonian mask) deriding the Majesty and glory thereof, thinking his impiety
would not be perceived; like unto that sottish bird, that having put her head
into an hole, thinks her whole body unseen, which we will set down, and
briefly refute.

3. The Israelites (says he) did what they could to cure Babel, page 17 18. 19.
but the Babylonians had their answer as ready as now have the Papists. Think
you (you silly Israelites) that you are able to teach Babylon a better religion
then it has? Is not hers of so many, and so many years continuance? Was it
not the religion our forefathers lived and dyed in? And is it not general and
universal over the world, and yours but in a corner? And is not ours visible,
and does is not prosper, and flourish? Is not your visible Temple now defaced,
your public daily sacrifice ceased, and your succession cut of? And if you
have anything left, is it not invisible, and in secret corners? And what can
you alleadg for your religion? That you have many learned men. A fond discourse
of a Babylonian penned by the Bachelour to disgrace the ancient Church of
Christ.
Alas, poor men, for one learned Rabbin that you have, have not we twenty? Are
not the Chaldeans the famoust learned men of the world, renowned for their high
wisdom, their skill in Astrology, interpretation of dreams, and other the
most secret, and supernatural sciences of the world? And do you think it
possible, that so many learned Doctors can be deceived? Nay all the world be
in an error, and only you, that hold a particular faction, and a singular new
found Religion by your selves, have the truth amongst you? You will say you
have a succession from Noah: have not we so to? etc. Look into the world at
this day, and see if any Nation of all that came from all the Sons of Noah be
(...) your religion? All that came from Cham are of ours; all that came (...)
Iaphet are of ours; and all that came from Shem, but only your sel^^ etc. And
during the time that you have had your Kings, and Priests, show one Nation by
you converted, or one that came and joined with you all th^^ time etc.
Wherefore never tell us of healing us; beale your selves, see^^ fools, for you
have need; as for us, we are well, we are far better th^^ Israel can make us.

4. Thus M. Crashaw, who speaking so bitterly against Players in the end of his
Sermon, page 170.
turns the Pulpit into a stage, and brings in a Babylonian to play the
Vize: which part ended, page 20.
he steppeth in himself to play the Epilogue with all his Ministerial gravity
in these words. Thus did Babeled away the good counsel the Israelites gave
them, and pleased themselves in the like carnal arguments, and fleshly
conceits, as Papists in their Popery. The profaneness and impie^y of the
former discourse.
Which Epilogue (if you consider the same well) has dare say, more
profaneness, impiety, and blasphemy conched together in few words, then those
Players whom he does pursue, ever scattered abroad in the longest Plays. For
whereas other Protestants use commonly to deny (with what probability I will not
discuss at this time) the Church of Rome to be that Christianity, that
converted, and ouerran the world, that Church which has lineall succession of
Bishops, from Christ and his Apostles, confirmed by the uniform consent of
ancient Fathers, the same that ou^ Christian Ancestors, famous for sanctity,
did profess, which are the true marks of the Church we allege: the
Bachelour seeming to make no bones to grant us all, faith they are but carnal
arguments, fleshly, and Babylonian conceits, The Bachelour puts no
difference betwixt Christianity and Idolatry.
not sticking to compare Christianity by the conversion of Nations unto Christ,
gloriously spread over the world which we challenge, with the Babylonian deluge
of Idolatry ouerwhelming the face of the earth: the never interrupted
succession of Bishops, from the most Bl. Prince of the Apostles wherein we
glory, with the Babylonians carnal Pedigree from cursed Cham: the authority of
ancient Fathers, and Doctors of the Church, defining Controversies in general
Counsels which we allege, with the soothsaying, and divining of Chaldean
Astrologers, and their learned interpretation of dreams: finally the piety and
religion of our most Christian Ancestors, which moves us to embrace, or
rather to continue in their faith, with the cruel and bloody tyranny of
Nemrod, and other idolatrous Babylonian Monarchs. Can there be more profane
impiety, or greater blasphemy then this, to cast (as he does) the glorious
Jewels of Christian Religion to be trodden under, and defiled by Pagans feet?
If he were so moved against the Players for bringing two hypocrites on the
stage, under the names of Nicolas S. Anntlings, page 71.
and Simon S. Mary Oueryes, two Churches in London which he and his fellow
Puritans much haunt, such open hypocrisy the mean time haunting them, as it
comes to be perceived even of Players: if this child of Babylon, as he
terms it, did so offend him, that like Phinees full of zeal, he passes the
sword of his censure through it, exclayming; Oh what times are we cast into,
that such a wickedness should pass unpunished! what cause of just anger have
all Christians against him, that in the person of Babylonian Idolaters durst
represent in the Pulpit, as on a stage, our famous Christian Ancestors, that
lived before Luthers time? Have they not just reason to complain, and
exclaim, Oh what times are we cast into, that such a wickedness should pass
unpunished, Nay such a profane play be put in print, as the pattern of a
modest Sermon?

5. No less blasphemously in this discourse does this Pulpit Stage -- player
abuse the ancient Fathers, making this Babylonian dispute against Israelites,
in the same manner (which he calls carnal) as they did against old heretics,
and we against these of our age. The very first sentence wherewith he
begins, Can you silly Israelites teach Babylon a better religion then it
has? Is not hers of so many years, and so many years continuance? Was it
not the religion our forefathers lived, and dyed in? This sentence, I say, is
taken almost word by word out of S. Hierome, who by this argument (carnal in
Crassus his conceit) casts of the bringers in of new doctrine against the
Church of Rome. Quisquis assertor es nouoru^ dogmatum, quaeso te vt parcas
Romany auribus etc. Our post 400. a^nos docere nos niteris quod ante
nesciuimus etc? epist. ad Pa^machium and Oceanum.
Whosoever thou be (says he) that do bring new doctrine, we beseech thee
pardon our Romish ears, and the faith praised by the Apostles mouth. After
four hundred years will thou teach us that which we knew not before? Until
this day the world has been Christian, without this your doctrine etc. S.
Hilary discourses also against heretics in the same Babylonian manner: Tarde
mihi hos pijssimos Doctores aetas nunc huius saeculi protulit, sero hos habuit
fides mea quam tu eruduisti Magistros. l. 6. de Trinit. ante medium.
Lord (says he, speaking with Christ) this last age has brought forth over
late these godly men to be my teachers, they came not soon enough to be
masters of my faith, which thou had before instructed; I did believe in
thee, when they had not yet preached. That great Father of Gods Church surnamed
the Divine, famous for sanctity and learning Gregory Nazianzen does likewise
rely his conscience upon the religion his ancestors lived and dyed in. Si
triginta his annis fides originem habuit, cum quadringenti anni fere ab eo
tempore fluxerint, quo Christus palam conspectus est; inane tanto tempore fuit
Euangelium etc. Epist. 2. ad Cheli^on.
If within thirty years (says he) true faith began, four hundred years being
almost expired since Christ first appeared, in vain has the Gospel been so
long time preached, in vain has the world believed, in vain have Martyrs
shed their blood, in vain have so many, and so great Prelates governed
Churches. Had not this Babylonian (think you) read these sayings of the
Fathers at least cited in some Catholic book, who could apply to his
Idolatry their arguments for Christianity, almost in their words, only
changing Rome into Babylon?

6. The words also which follow in the same speech: Is not our Religion
general, and universal over the world, and yours only in a corner? And is not
ours visible? do show that this Babylonian by some chance or other, has had
a smack at S. Augustine, who shakes of heretics with the same manner of
argument. Sivestra est Ecclesia Catholica, oste^dite illam per vniuersam terram
ramos suos copia vbertatis exte^dere: hinc enim and Graeco vocabulo Catholica
nominatur. l. 3. co^tra Gaud. Donat. c. 1.
If (says he) yours be the Catholic Church, show that the does extend her
boughs over the whole earth by copious increase, whence she is called
Catholic, by a greek word, signifiyng Universal. And having brought the
words of Christ, saying, that his Gospel should be preached to all nations;
Quaecumque co^gregatio cuiuslibet haeresis in angulis fedet, co^cubi na est,
non matrona. l. 4. de Sym bolo c. 10.
Hear you heretics, (says he) the Church of Christ does possess the whole,
which her spouse left her in dowry. What company of heretics soever sits
in a corner, is a Concubyne, and not the Matrone, that is, the strumpet of the
Devil, and not the Church of Christ. And again. Numquid digito oste^dimus
Ecclesia^ fratres mei? nonne aperta est? tract. 1. in epist. Joan.
Do we not (says he) point the Church with our finger? and is she not
visible? What Quid dicam nisi caecos, qui tam magnum montem non vident? Qui
contra lucernam in candelabro sitam oculos claudunt? tract. 2. in ep. Joan.
shall I say more, but that they are blind, that see not so great a mountain?
Who against the candle set on the candlestick shut their eyes? And lib. contra
epist. Parmenian. c. 5.
will not behold the Church declared in Scripture, which placed on a mountain,
cannot be hidden? Thus S. Augustine. What think you of him, M. Crashaw? Does
he not seem unto you to speak a Babylonian language? Did he take his
arguments from your Babylonian, or rather your Babylonian out of him? Could any
Papist have made the Church more palpable (or as you say carnal) then he does?
Does he not ferrit your lurking Church out of her dark holes, where she would
feign lie, and sleep, without being seen, the long night of so many ages
betwixt Christ and Luther? Does he not force her to come out and stand on the
top of a mountain, in the eye of the world in all ages since Christ, that one
might have pointed unto her with his finger, if she mean to be thought the
true Church, and not the concubine of Satan, that kept him secret company in
corners, whilst Christ's true Spouse was converting the world unto him?

7. And what means this Bachelour (think you) to adorn the Babylonians
speech with the flowers of the Fathers doctrine, and put their learned
sentences which he had read in some Catholic writer, into his Idolatrous
mouth? The reason is, that he would imitate backward the prudent fact of that
Emperor, who hearing a man of infamous life bring forth a grave, The
Bachelours drift in making his Babylonian speak like the ancient Fathers.
and worthy sentence, commanded another of more gravity and honor, to
pronounce the same after him, to give credit, and estimation unto it.
Contrariwise M. Crashaw perceiving by the perusal of our Authors, the doctrine
of ancient Fathers, requiring Universality, visibility, Succession, Antiquity,
Conversion of Nations, as infallible marks of the true Church, by which
doctrine his Church is beaten into dust, and ashes: he bids a Babylonian step
into pulpit, and pronounce at the Cross their sentences as his own, in
defense of his Idolatry, to discredit their doctrine with ignorant people, to
whom it might seem to relish, and savor of Idolatry, receiving the same
streyned through an impure Babylonian tongue. This is the true cause that he
played the Babylonian so long in pulpit, that he permitted the Babylonian in
print to fill up with his babbling so many pages of his Babell. Is not this
vizard now taken away? Be not the skirts of his impious design discovered? Do
not you see his iugling, how cunningly, without being perceived of the less
intelligent, he would conueigh true Christianity into Idolatry, the Church of
Rome into Babylon, the uniform doctrine of ancient Fathers, into carnal
conceits? Can any play be more profane and impious then this?

8. And in truth the Babylonian, to speak as Catholic and ancient Fathers
do, does so strain, and constrain hi^ tongue to speak impertinently, that
it is clear he would never have conceived such follyes, had not his head been
filled with M. Crashawes brains; nor durst ever have uttered such falsehoods,
had not he lent him his face instead of a vizard, that he could not blush.
Conversion of Nations fondly challe^ged by the Babylonian.
For what Babylonian durst have said without a mask to an Israelite: Show one
Nation by you converted, or that came, and joined with you, during all that
time you had your Kings, and Priests, seeing it was well known, that in other
Nations there were diverse Proselites, and worshippers of one God, that agreed
in Religion with the Jews? And who could better know, and witness then
Babylonians, the Israelites power to convert Kings, and Nations, by whom their
King Nabachodonosor had been lately converted, and had commanded by public
Edict all Nations under heaven to adore their God? And what would M. Crashaw by
this Babylonian circu^locution against the Israelites of their not converting
Countries? He would, forsooth, comfort his good Mother and Church in her so
great barrenness, not having been able since the time of her Kings and
Priests, to convert one Country, or City, or Town of Infidells unto Christ.
The Virginity of the Protestant Church.
He would flatter her, and make her believe, she is a Virgin, and like to the
Virgin-daughter of Israel, that was barren, and without children in the same
manner, which (were all he wishes true) is, God wot, but cold comfort. For as
thereby he may happily prove his Church to be a Synagogue of Jews, confined to
one corner of the world; so does he clearly remove from her the title of the
Church of Christ, whose singular privilege above the Synagogue is, to dilate
herself over the world, by converting Princes and Nations unto Christ, which
care his good Church leaves unto Longinquas istas peregrinationes locustis
illis ementientibus nomen Jesus relinquamus. Beza apud Sarau. de diuer s. grad.
p. 309.
Locusts, as they term the reverend Fathers of that Order, that in this later
age have principally labored in the successful conversion of many Heathenish
Nations unto Christ.

9. What also may we think of that speech of the Babylonian to the Israelites,
Is not your visible Temple now defaced? Have you any thing left, that is not
invisible, and in secret corners? For was Salomons Temple such a mote in the
sun, that the Jew might have thought it invisible, had not the fond
Babylonian ^ioyned the Epithete of visible with it? Did not many Israelites in
Babylon profess their Religion openly in the streets? Were they not known
over all Babylon, not to worship their Gods? What means the Bachelour to make
this Babylon speak of visible, The Protestants invisible Church.
without rithme, and the Israelites to run into invisible corners without any
reason? The mystery is this, that ^he would have you understand, that there was
a Babylonicall captivity in former ages under the Bishop of Rome, in which
time, though no Protestants appeared, but only Catholics in the world, yet
would he insinuate that some Professors of his Gospel might lie invisible in
secret corners from Constantine, in whose days the night of superstition was
(as they say) M. Napier upon the Revelations. page 168.
Universally spread over the world, unto the morning of Luthers sunshine, the
clear beams of whose day drew these lurkers to light. By which you may see
the extreme misery, and beggary of their Church, that would think it a great
favor, and take it very kindly at our hands, if we would grant her for so
many ages since Christ, page 111.
so much as one corner, or some more secret, though less sweet place (such as
M. Crashawes priuy-Protestants of Italy live in) where she might be thought to
have lurked invisible, whilst the true Church (as it had been foretold long
Isay 49. v. 20. c. 54. v. 23.
before) gathered into her Tents, and Tabernacles, dilated over the world, the
Nations of the earth: she would be glad, I say, of a little hole under ground,
where she might admit some secret Professors, wherewith the eye of her more
then omnipotent faith, that can make things to have been that never were, she
might contemplate in a dream her invisible Kings and Queens, as M. Barlow In
his defense of the Articles. page 35.
terms them. And in very truth so liberal dare we be with M. Crashaw, that
can he prove clearly, and apparently, that either King or Queen visible or
invisible, any man, or so much as a woman, did believe all the points of the
now Protestant faith, or did practice Religion as now they do in England,
though never so secretly, though but in a mouse hole (though such a woman might
seem to have little interest in the visible works of piety done by Catholics
in the time she durst not show her face: An offer to M. Crashaw.
) yet will we be content (upon evident proof that there was ever such a woman)
to yield all the Churches we have in Christendom unto him, as her lawfully
begotted issue without further proof of his legitimation. Is not this a fair
offer? If M. Crashaw will not, or dare not accept of this offer, or cannot
perform it; who does not see, that the Church of Christ (if theirs be his
Church) has been more obscure, and contemptible for many ages together, then
ever was the Church of the Jews, when she was most oppressed, and at her
lowest ebb, which was in Babylon, where she was not so beaten down, but still
had some that were known, and could be proved to worship the true God, and not
Idols? To such impious shifts must they needs be driven, that will defend the
being of a Church that never was seen, which only does boast of her exployts,
Quae sine test gerit quorum nox conscia sola est.

10. Like to the former is the other Babylonian brag of a continuance of so
many, and so many years, like unto that which we challenge. For it is known
that the Babylonians were not constant continuers in the same Religion, who did
use to change their Gods with their Kings, and some times oftener: wherein
Protestants of all other be most like unto them. For since the beginning of
their Gospel within less then an hundred years, England only can affoard
three or four notable examples of their changing their religion with the Sea
the second part of the three Conuersio^s
Prince. And in other Countries also the climate of their Gospel is so
subject to the influence of the nutable planet, that (as one of their own
brethren, an Andraeas Duditius who^ Beza terms his brother, Viru^
Clarissimu^ and Ornatissimum. Beza in ep. Theol. ep. 1. ad Andr. Duditium.
where he repeateth Duditius his complaint of Protestant mutability: Menstruam
fidem habe^t omni doctrinae ve^to agitati etc. p. 3.
emi^e^t man co^playneth with great sorrow of heart unto Beza) they ^oyne
monthly faiths; they are carried about with every wynd of doctrine, ^ow to
this part, now to that: whose religion (says he) what it is to ^ay you may
perchance know, but what it will be to morrow, neither you, ^or they can
certainly tell. Now, is it a Babylonian argument to prove a religion to be
true, because it has continued one and the same in many ages? Are not all
errors subject to change? What more comfortable motive to remain in a Church,
then the example of such ancestors, who though our Adversaries, out of pride
dare affirm they erred, yet for shame the grauest of them dare not say they be
damned? Yet out of the principles of their doctrine the same does follow;
whereupon some that are more zealous in their sect, then considerate in their
speech, do not blush to Gabriel Powel l. 2. de Antichristo c. 36.
teach it. And what Church can be more hateful to a Christian then that which
can give him no hope to go to heaven, but by such principles, as must needs
cast most famous, and glorious Saints of Christ's Church, without number, into
hell? A doctrine so barbarous among Christians, that as O rem lachrymis dignam!
S. Gregory Nazianzen says, it were to be washed away from the face of the
earth with a flood of tears.

having among themselves the like dismemberd Universality, the like variable
continuance, the like agreement against one, and the same truth, and disagrement
in their several errors, as the Babylonians had. And that I may not seem
without proof to accuse heretics of being Idolaters, I shall confirm the
same, and conclude with these words of Multi Haeretici cum Paganis alios and
alios Deos finxerunt sibi, and eos si non in Templis, quod peius est, in suo
cord posuerunt. Magnum opus est haec idola frangere, and locum Deo viuenti,
and non recenti mundare. Videntur dissentire, sed in terrenis cogitationibus
consentiunt sibi. Opinio diuersa est, vanitas vna est. August. in Psalm. 80.
S. Augustine. Heretics (says he) have like Pagans faygned, and devised to
themselves diverse Gods, which they place, if not in Temples, yet, that which is
worse, in their hearts, being themselves temples of fond fancyes, and
ridiculous Idols. It is a great piece of work to break those Idols of nouelty
in their hearts, and prepare a place for the true God, ancient, and not recent,
everliving, and never changing. They all being of different minds, fancy to
themselves other, and other Gods, and as it were die the Christian faith with
diversity of errors, wherein they seem to dissent, but in earthly cogitations
they do conspire. Their doctrine is different, their vanity the same. Thus S.
Augustine.

THE FOVRTH CHAPTER. DISCOVERING The Bachelours proud heretical contempt of
General Counsels: and how notoriously he does falsify diverse Canons taken out
of the Counsels of Constance, and of Trent.
THE Bachelour having commended his own salues, and condemned us as incurable
for not being healed by them, now seeks to discredit the means to cure
wounds, to suppress errors, to reform abuses, used by the Catholic Church,
specially that which Christ did Matt. 18. v. 17. He that hears not the
Church, let him be to thee as an heathen.
appoint the Apostles Act. 15.
and the Church since in all ages to practice, to wit, the definition of
Counsels. You heard before of See the 4. To me of Councels page 40.
38. Counsels, partly National, partly General, some very ancient, which the
Bachelour blew away with one puff, saying they did establish the Kingdom of
Antichrist, without bringing any proof: such strong breath these men have to
blow the supposed Antichrist out of his throne, that is, the Church of Christ,
and true Christianity out of the world. For how can Christian Religion stand,
if such blowers be permitted? If the voice of so many Counsels, to which
Christ did promise the holy Ghost, and his Matthew. 18. v. 20 and c. 28. v. vlt.
assistance, may be condemned as the voice of the Devil, by a lightheaded
Bachelor, that could think the voice of a boy out of a Chimney, or some corner
of his chamber, crying (Crashaw, Crashaw, go to Geneua) was the voice of an
Angel^

2. But the Minister not to stick in the number of 38. which number does
signify weakness and infirmity, as S. Tract. 17 in Joan. Numeru^ quendam
languoris.
Augustine notes, and to make the perfect number of forty falls to
contemn, and cavil at two other general Counsels, that of Constance, and
the last of Trent, accusing the^ that they were so far of from healing old
wounds, as the^ did contrariwise establish diverse impious errors, never
before decreed in the world: where he comes forth with triuiall cauills,
about Communion in one kind; breaking oaths made to Heretics; the Canon of
Scripture; and the^ authentical translation. To which cauills Catholics have
answered many hundred times, though they will take n^ notice thereof, showing
themselves therein true Bachelours of Babel, that will not be healed; though our
Bachelour has devised some new tricks of falsehood, as you shall see. And
because here he begins to cite and produce our Authors, I desire the Reader
to call to mind his promise s^ strongly made in his Preface, to deal
faithfully, and cite the t^^^ words of our Authors, and allege them according
to their true meaning having himself perused aforehand the whole scope of the
place. The Bachelours promise of fidelity in quotation of Authors.
which how he has performed, you shall now begin to perceive, and how true my
accusation against him is, that scarce one Author does he allege, whom he
does not also one way o^ other very notoriously corrupt, to give their words a
harsh sound, and wrest them from their plain meaning; which must needs be a
sign of great want of conscience.

3. Concerning Communion in one kind, he does repeat the same accusation again
in his tweluth wound, where I have showed, that he does notably falsefy the
words of the Council, to fasten a blasphemy on the Canon, and corrupt the
story and text of the holy Ghost, to make it seem they defined against Christ.
To which place I remit the Reader not to weary him with a needless repetion of
the same things, and will come to his second cavil against this Council. In
which he does charge the Fathers thereof to have defined, as good Deuinity, that
oaths and covenants made to heretics are of no force, and bynd not the
makers, and to have decreed, page 48.
that though the Emperor or King give a safe conduct to one accused of
heresy, to come to a Council or disputati^n etc. and though he bind, and
confirm that safe conduct with any ^and whatsoever; and though he would not
have come, but upon the assurance of the safe conduct: yet, hoc non obstante,
this notwithstanding, ^e may be taken and proceeded against, and burned as an
heretic, without my prejudice to the Catholic faith. Thus he makes that
Council ^efine, but with such false translating the words of the Ca^on, and
concealing particles thereof which are of most moment, that you will wonder, if
you think the man has any conscience, where the same was. He says the
Council defines, that the Oath may be broken by the maker, and ^he Heretic
burned, without prejudice of the Catholic faith. But no such definition is in
the Council, but only this: Council. Constant. sessione 19.
Ex eo ^aluo conductu nullum fidei Catholicae, vel iurisdictioni Ecclesiasticae
prae^udicium generari, vel impedimentum praestari posse, vel debere etc. that
^s, that such a safe conduct neither can, nor ought to put any hinderance, let,
or impediment to the Catholic faith, ^r Church, or to Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction (of the Counsel) ^ut they may, that notwithstanding, proceed etc.
Where you see the Council does not say, that Oaths may be broken by the makers
without prejudice of Catholic faith, as this Minister makes the Canon roar;
The true definition of the Council.
but only that Oaths and promises made by inferiors do not restrain the
power of ^uperiours, nor the safe conduct of the Emperor oblige a general
Council, nor the Covenants of temporal Princes ^ynd the Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction of them that are independent of them.

4. This is one corruption, notorious as you see, turning the sense and sound
of the Canon quite another way. The second is his concealing the judge or
person that may proceed against such heretics, leaving the Reader to think,
that even the makers of such oaths, temporal Princes, having intrapped
heretics by such oaths, may break the same, and proceed against them. But
the words are, h^c non obstante, liceat Iudici competenti and Ecclesiastico
etc. Notwithstanding this safe conduct, it is lawful for an Ecclesiastical,
and competent Judge, to wit, one authorized by the Council to proceed against
heretics, that scorning the Counsels safe conduct, shall come upon the
warrant of a temporal Prince. The third is the concealing the last words of
the Canon, wherein the Council does define, or rather suppose, as a thing most
certain, that temporal Princes that give their word unto heretics are bound
to keep it, a^ far as they are able, decreeing in these words: Sic Council.
vbi supra.
p^mittentem, cum fecerit quod in ipso, ex hoc iam in aliquo non rem^sisse
obligatum. That the makers of such oaths having done what in them lies to
keep the same, Princes and others that make oaths unto heretics are bound to
keep the^.
do not remain further obliged. Who does not see, that the Council does
suppose that Princes are bound to keep oaths made unto heretics, as far as
it lies in their power, or as they may by law, and justice, and without
wronging others, or restrayning the authority of them that are not their
subjects which is to keep oaths made unto heretics, as far as the same may
be kept unto any other; which oaths can never bynd either beyond power, or
against justice.

5. Thus treacherously does this Minister deal with the Council about keeping
faith: and no less perfidiously does he falsely misreport the doctrine of
Bishop Simanch^ whom he makes speak in this sort: page 49.
By the authority of the Decree, A most notorious slander.
it is now a rule in our Church that faith made to an heretickely a private
man, is not to be kept; no, nor if it be made by a Magistrate (...) is proved
by the practice of the Council of Constance. Mark (says the Bachelour) how
they are healed; before it was true in public persons, now it is true in
private men also; before it might be broken without any fault, but now it may
not be kept. Thus does this fellow insult over us. But look into Simancha, and
you shall find him teach in express terms as may be, the contrary to that
which here the Minister does enforce him to speak. He has two conclusions
about this matter, the first concerning public persons in these words:
Iacobus Simancha in institut. Cathol. c. 46. n. 52. Si fides haereticis data
esset a Principe, vel publica potestate, exact seruanda esset; si modo quod
addixisset, non sit de illo genere rerum quas lex aut inspirata aut naturalis
vetat praestare. Non enim videtur esse vetitum eorum quae ad naturae and
gentium ius attinet habere cum haeretico commercium.
Si fides haereticis data esset a Principe, exact seruanda esset etc. If the
Prince or public Magistrate give his word unto heretics, the same is to be
kept exactly, except the promises be of such things, as the ^aw of God, or
nature does forbid: for it is not unlawful to have traffic with heretics
in such things as pertain to the law of Nations, and nature. This is Simancha
his doctrine. How could he speak more plainly to convince the Bachelour of
false dealing? What can be more contrary, then faith given unto heretics by
the magistrate is not to be kept, which the Bachelour does make Simancha say,
and, ^t is exactly to be kept, which are his very words? The second ^onclusion
of Simancha is about private persons specially, which is set down in this
sort: Fides haereticis data, etiam iura^ento firmata, contra publicum bonum,
contra salutem animarum, contra ^^a diuina and humana, nullo modo seruanda est.
Faith given unto heretics, when it is against the Common wealth, against ^he
salvation of souls, against the laws either of God or ^an, is not to be kept.
In a bad promise, says In malis promissis rescinde fide^ inquit Isidorus: and
iuramentum esse non debet vinculum iniquitatis Simancha vbi supra*
Isidorus, ^reake thy word, neither can any oath bynd a man unto ^inne. Thus
far Simancha. Where you see the Bachelour ^oth conceal the limitation of
Simancha his doctrine, that ^athes are not to be kept, when the promise is a
sin, but when the ^hinges are lawful, then it is to be kept by the
Magistrate ^xactly, and by private men, as far as they are able to keep the
same, without transgressing the law either of Nature, or Christ, or Man, to
whom they are subject. How this may be excused from wilful lying, and
malicious corrupting the doctrine of Authors, to make them odious, I see not,
if he did peruse this place, as he does protest. And thus much of the Council
of Constance.

6. Let us come to the Council of Trent, whom he does yet more egregiously
abuse and falsify, not only changing some words of their Canon, and perverting
the meaning thereof, as he did with Constance, but indyting a new Canon for them
in his own words, and those horrible and exorbitant, setting them a part from
his own, in a different letter, very conspicuously, as the words, and decree
of the Council, which is this: The Apocriphall books of Tobiah, Judith, and
the rest shall be held and received of as Authentical, and Canonical authority,
as any parts of holy Scripture, whose authority was ever sacred. This he says
was never till then decreed, not in the darkest times of Popery, The light of
the Protestant Gospel to see things that are not.
when ignorance, and superstition was without all control; which I do
willingly yield unto: neither had a Canon in such absurd, and exorbitant terms
been eu^^ indyted, but in the days of the sunshine of this new Gho^pell, when
impudency, and impiety is without all control. For this Canon, he refers us
to the fourth session of the Council; but truly if from the first line to the
last of that Counsel, in the fairest day of his sun-shining Ghospel, when his
eyes are best, he shall be able to show me or any other, a Canon, where the
Council does confess books to be Apocriphal, and yet define them to be of as
Authentical and Canonical authority, as those whose authority was ever sacred,
a^ you see he does make the tenor of their Canon to be, and not only Tobias,
and Judith, but the rest of Apocriphall books without limitation, which are
very many, to be Canonical^ If, I say, he can show me such a Canon, I will
confess the same was made in dark times of Popery. But if this roaring sound
and the horrible crack of this Ordenance be feigned, and counterfaited by
himself, to fright poor ignorant people, I am much deceived in my conceit,
of the conscience and honor of most Protestants, if they do not highly detest
such unconscionable, and shameful dealing.

7. Now as for the Cano^ of holy Scriptures which the Council of Conc. Trid.
sess. 4.
Trent does profess to hold, in which the books of Tobias, Judith, Hester,
the book VVisdome, and Ecclesiasticus, the first and second of Machabees, which
Protestants following the Jews do reject, which were ever sacred in truth,
though some mistakers thought otherwise of them, the truth thereof may appear
by this, that M. Crashaw is not able to speak one true word against it, but
lays together such a multitude of palpable falsehoods, that more for number,
or greater for quality, or for their impudency less excusable, were scarce
before ever uttered by any, within the compass of so few lines. First (says
he) this was never decreed till then, not in the darkest times of Popery: which
he speaks by Stultus vt luna mutatur. Eccles. 27. v. 12. page 50.
moone-light, as may appear by his contradicting himself therein, in the same
page not many lines after, granting that the third Council of Carthage
Council. Carthag. 3. c. 47.
did admit into the Cano^ the same books; which Council was kept within the
first four hundred In the year of our Lord 397.
years, or in the beginning of the fifth age, and consequently that those books
were held Canonical, within the lightsome times of Christianity, when Religion
did most flourish. Secondly he says, that never any Popish General Council
was so presumptuous before this of Trent, that ever durst add more books to
the sacred Canon, then we received from the Church of the old Testament: which
is most inconsiderately spoken, and apparently false, except he mean to reject
as Apocriphall the four Ghospells, and all the rest of the Apostolical
Scriptures of the new Testament, which were not received from the Church of the
old Testament, as all know. Thirdly he says, it is little material, whether
the General Council of Florence did admit these books into the Canon or no,
seeing it was but a small time before Trent, scarce an Above an 100. years
between these 2. Counsels. Florence in the year 1438. Trent began in the year
1545.
100. years: by which you see what small account this Bachelour makes of
General Cou^cells, not fearing to meet in the field all the learned men of the
Latin, and Greek Church, who were gathered together in that general Council
of Florence, thinking himself perchance to be the Sampson of Protestants, able
to put to silence a thousand of such Doctors with the iaw-bone of an ass.

8. Fourthly, It is clear, says he, that never general Counsel made these
books Canonical before Trent. This S. Hierome does convince to be false,
saying of the book of Judith: Hiero^. praefat. in Judith. Hunc librum Nicena
Synodus in numero sa^ctarum Scripturarum legitur computasse.
The Hebrews placed this book among the Apocriphall writings, the authority
of which is not sufficient (in their opinion) to establish any doctrine of
faith: but seeing we read that the Council of Nice has accounted this book
among the Canonical, I have yielded etc. What say you to this Council M.
Crashaw? Was it popish? Was it made in dark times? Was it presumptuous? Or may
not you rather seem puppish and presumptuous that talk in the dark you know
not what? Fifthly he says, that we are not able to bring one Father that held
these books to be Canonical within the first four hundred years after
Christ. Look into Bellarmine Tom 1. co^trouers. 1. de verbo Dei l. 1. c. 10.
11. 12. 13. 14. 15.
and Coccius Tom. 1. l. 6. art. 4. 9. 12. 13. 17. 18.
whom he cites, and you shall clearly find he cares not what he says. For
they both bring diverse Fathers that lived within the four first ages after
Christ for all, and every one of those six books: in so much, that of the
book of VVisdome which both Protestants, and Jews reject, Eusebius Lib. 4.
Histor. c. 22.
writes, that Aegysippus, and Irenaeus, and omnis antiquorum chorus, all the
company of ancient Fathers do affirm Solomon to be the author thereof, of the
authority of whose books never ancient Father did doubt. And the same might be
proved of the other five, as you shall hear by that which shall be proved
against his next impudent assertion; where like that frantic Athenian who
vaunted in the streets that all the ships in the haven were his, not being
owner of so much as one, dares say, that he is able to prove that all the
Fathers for four hundred years did reject them, not citing in text or margin
so much as one: a sign, that he is a great prouer against us in pulpit, where
without control he may lie as he lift.

9. And seeing he is so skillful in the ancient Fathers, we will set him a
task against the next time he print. Let him prove that S. Augustine, who
lived and was converted unto Christ within the first four hundred in the year
385.
years, did not admit these books, who not only does number then in the Canon
of Scripture in his private l. 2. de doctrina Christiana c. 8.
writings, but also subscribed to the Council of Carthage, where all those
books are admitted into the sacred Canon, as has been said. Let him prove that
l. 1. de partibus diuinae legis.
Julius Africanus, or S. Ambrose did reject the book of Tobie, which he terms
lib. de Tob. 1.
Propheticu^ librum, a Prophetical book of Scripture. That S. Cyprian did
reject the same book, who citing it, says Sermon. de eleemos. initio.
Loquitur in Scripture Spiritus sanctus, the holy Ghost speaks in the
Scriptures. That S. Athanasius, or the Council of Nice did reject the book of
Hieron. prafat. in Judith.
Judith. That the same S. Cyprian did S. Cyril l. 2. in Julian vltra medium,
calls the book of Wisdom divine Scripture, Melito epist. ad Onefimum puts
it in the Canon: The General Counsel of Sardica uses the testimony thereof as
Scripture against the Arians, as Theodoret does mention l. 1. Histor. c. 7. let
M. Crashaw prove they did reject them.
reject the book of VVisdome, which he calls De habit. virg.
diuinam Scripturam, divine Scripture, and makes Solomon the Sermon. de mortalit.
Author thereof. Let him prove that S. Augustine did reject the book of
Machabees, which he says not Libros Machabaeorum non Iudaei sed Ecclesia pro
Canonicis habet. lib. 18. de ciuit. c. 36.
the Jews, but the Church of Christ does hold for Canonical.

10. And here by occasion of S. Augustine, and the book of the Machabees, I
must give M. Crashaw warning, that in proof of his assertion he bring not such
testimonies as are the three Sir Edward Hobby alleges out of S. Augustine,
to prove he rejected the Machabees, ignorantly, and impudently corrupted, not
by Sir Edward himself (I cannot think so dishonourably of men of his calling)
but by his trencher-School-maister, or some mercinary Sir Edward Hobbyes
letter. p. 23.
Lecturer, perchance even by M. Crashaw himself, who is great in the book of
this credulous page 55.
Knight, whom they make fly hoodwinke to catch flies; which hood if I pull from
his eyes that he may see how they His own phrase. page 92.
abuse him, I hope he will take it in good part. The first is out of the book
De mirabilibus sacrae Scripturae l. 2. c. 34.
which he cites (by their direction) as S. Augustines, which all learned men
by uniform consent discard from that number, as a book of no accoumpt, which
censure was made of this book many hundred years by S. Thomas 3. p. q. 45. a.
3. ad. 2.
before Sir Edward was borne, or his Church either, whose antiquity he does say
truly the Ladies are not able to In his epistle to the Collapsed Ladies.
conceive, though they may easily conceive her nouelty, seeing some Ladies ^ay
yet live that are elder then his Church, and many are yet not very old, whose
parents were some years before Luther her first Father. But as for that
pretended book of S. Augustine, he that has perused the same, and can think
it to be worthy either of the wit, or learning, or to savor of the style of
that learned Father, he has, I dare say, more ^kill of trenchers, then of
Authors, specially seeing the Author himself in the fourth Chapter of his
second book, does say in express terms, that he wrote the said book in the
year of our Lord 627. In the third year of the 12. Cyclus which he makes
begin 624.
almost 200. years after that S. Augustine Ann. Dom. 480. Prosper. in Chronico.
was dead. And was not Sir Edward think you here bobbed by the Bachelour, or
some Lecturer?

11. But more grossly by many ods do they abuse him in the two other
authorityes, which do not only bewray gross ignorance (which is pardonable in
a Knight, Sir Edw. Hobb. let. page 60.
when it is not joined with arrogance) but also great impudency, and want of
conscience, framing sentences for S. Augustine, which he neuet wrote, nor so
much as dreamed of. The first is, Machabaeorum Scriptura recepta est ab
Ecclesia non inutiliter, (...) sobrie legatur, vel audiatur, maxim propter
istos martyrs: sed ob ha^ causam in Canone morum, non fidei censeri posset.
Thus they make S. Augustine speak; showing, says the Knight, that the^ must
great sobriety be used in the hearing and reading o^ these books, and that
they are in the Canon of manners, and not of faith. Now let us see how
intolerably his His phrase of some of his Ministers.
Pedantes deceive him. S. Augustines words are these: Scripturan quae
appellatur Machabaeorum non habent Iudaei sicut Legem, Prophetas, and Psalmos
etc. sed recepta est ab Ecclesia non inutiliter si sobrie legatu^ vel audiatur,
maxim propter istos Martyrs Machabaeos etc. The Jews do not admit the Book
of Machabees, S. Augustines true words showing the Machabees to be Canonical.
lib. 2. cap. 23. contra Gaud. Ep. or in the better editions, lib. 1. cap. 31.
as they do the Law, the Prophets and Psalms etc. Yet it is profitably
received of the Church, if it be read or heard with sobriety, specially in
regard of those Machabees Martyrs etc. This is that which S. Augustine says of
this matter. By which it is clear first, that in S. Augustines judgment, the
Christian Church does admit the Books of the Machabees as Canonical, in tha^
sense that the Jews did refuse them, to wit, even as the Law, Prophets, and
Psalms are Canonical, whose authority was ever sacred. Secondly that this
whole sentence ( sed ob hanc causa in Canone morum, non fidei censeri posset:
that therefore they may be admitted into the Canon of ma^ners, but not of faith)
which contains the substance of the matter, is wholly added by Sir Edw.
Chaplain, or School-maister. Will Sir Edward suffer himself to be thus bobbed,
and his credit blown up? Will he not set such a frown on them, as may make
them vanish out of his sight for ever? Can any stain to his p. 24.
Knighthood be greater, then to be thought so notorious a falsyfier of so great
and learned a Father, even in print? Neither can one gather, because S.
Augustine says, that the book is good, if it ^e read soberly, that therefore it
is not Canonical. For what Book of Scripture may not hurt rather then profit,
if the same be read without humility in a dronken fit of a wanton wit? What
Story or Miracle in the holy Bible will not some men deride when they bibble,
or take tobacco, or when they ^ead the Scripture as Sir Edward does seem to
do Lypsius his Book of our Ladies miracles, by the fire side, when men roast
crabs ^o drive a man out of a melancholy page 102.
fit?

12. No less shamefully do they make the poor weak ^nueihgled Knight,
corrupt another place of S. Augustine to the same purpose. This it is: De
ciuitate lib. 1. cap. 20.
In sanctis canonicis libris, nusqua^ ^obis diuinitus praeceptum permissumue
reperiri potest, vt. vel ipsius adipis^endae immortalitatis, vel vllius
carendi, cauendique mali causa, nobis ipsis necem inferamus,
vt Ra^is seipsum occidens laudatur. This place they gave the Knight, ^ut told
him not where it was to be found in S. Augustine, ^eauing us to seek it in the
wide world of his writings: neither have the Latin words any sense, as any that
does understand that language must needs perceive, though in the ^nargent I
have both noted the place, and added the words ^f S. Augustine that were
wanting, to make up the sense, which ^yr Edward does thus turn into English:
In the holy Canonical ^^oks, there is no divine precept or permissio^ to be
found, that we may either ^aine immortality, or to escape any peril, make away
with our selves All this is added to S. Augustine. page 61.
(...) Razis did, and is therefore commended in the Machabees. Thus Sir Edward
Englisheth the words, and then demands, Where (...) now the collusion?
Truly Sir, in the Minister that suggested unto you this corrupted piece of S.
Augustine, adding to the text, (...) Razis seipsum occidens laudatur, as Razis
did kill himself, and is ^herfore commended in the Machabees: which words S.
Au^ustine has not, and were put in, to discredit the Book of ^he Machabees,
in which to the less wary, or sober Reader, Razias (for that is his name, not
Razis as your suggester does ^^yle him) may seem to be praised for that fact
of making away himself. But did S. Augustine read that Book with so little
sobriety, that he fell into this dronken conceit of your hu^^ourizing
discourser? Far was it from S. Augustines gravity, page 24,
who ^aith the contrary in express terms in that very place against Gaudentius
you cyted, where the Circum^elliam who killed themselves in their defense, did
object, that sanctarum Scripturarum authoritate laudatus est Razias: Razias is
praised by the authority of divine Scripture. Does S. Augustine say he is
praised in the Machabees, but that book is not Canonical? No. He denies,
that he was praised for killing himself. Quomodo laudatus? (says he) quia fuit
amator ciuitatis. 2. Machab. 14.
How is he praised? because he was a lover of the City or Common wealth; and
so goes forward, speaking of other causes why Razias was praised: and having
set down the bloody, and undaunted manner of his death, concludes in these
words. This Hanc eius morte^ mirabiliorem quam prudentiorem, que^admodum facta
esset narrauit, non quasi facienda esset, scriptura laudauit. Aug. loc. cit.
death of Razias more admirable the^ allowable, having more show of valor then
true wisdom, the Scripture does set down in what manner it was done, not
praise as a thing that should have been done. Thus S. Augustine. Who does not
see that Sir Edwards Readers of books, and rosters of crabs by the fire side
do slander S. Augustine, as though he had been as drunken and dizzy-brayned a
Reader of the Machabees as themselves? Can any corruptions be more gross then
these? I could wish Sir Edward for his credits sake, to lay the matter of his
Pamphlet on the Minister that was the true Father thereof, only challenging to
himself the style and phrase, which may well beseem a Knight, and is too rich
and goulden to choth the foul brat of a Ministers brain.

13. But to return to M. Crashaw, if he keep thi^ Caveat, that he put not
whole sentences into the Fathers o^ the first four hundred years, he will
never be able to prove that they all did discard from the Canon the former
books, as he does brag he can do, nor that any ancient Father, even those
that are most accused thereof, Origin apud. Eseb. l. 6. Hist. c. 19.
Epiphanius ^e ponderbus and mensuris.
and Hierome praefat. in lib. Reg.
did superstitiously tie themselves or the Church to the Canon of the Hebrews.
Let him prove that Origin, and S. Hierome do not admit the two last Chpaters
of Daniel, concerning Susanna, and the Dragon, which both Protestants, and
Jews reject; in defense of which Chapters Origin wrote an Epistle to Julius
Afric^^ Orig. epist. ad Iulianu^ Africanum. and homil. 1. in Leuit.
; and S. Hierom being charged by Ruffinus to reject them, because his words in
his Preface upon Daniel to the less wary Reader may seem to carry such a
sense, does answer: Qui hoc criminatur stultum se sycophantam probat. Non enim
quid ipse sentire^ sed quid ipsi aduersus nos dicere soleant, explicaui.
I did not set down what my self thought, but what the Hebrews ^re accustomed
to say against us. Further calling Ruffinus, stultum ^cophantam, a foolish
Sycopha^t, for mistaking, and charging ^im therein with the hebrews opinion:
which title, did S. Hierome live, he would (as with great reason he might) lay
upon M. Morton, who still Apol. Cathol. p. 2. l. 1. c. 3.
challenges S. Hierome to be ^f his side, and to reject these two Chapters,
notwithstanding his earnest disclayming from that error. Finally let ^im prove
that S. Epiphanius with the Hebrew, and Prote^^ant Canon does reject the book
of VVisdome, and of Eccle^iasticus, both which he numbreth among the Divine
Scri^tures Haeres. 76.
and makes Solomon author of the de mensuris and ponder. initio. Epiphanius
in that place leaves these books out of the Canon of the Hebrews, but he does
not speak according to his own opinion.
first. Let M. Crashaw, I say, prove these things the next time he ap^eares
either in print or pulpit, and not only beat the air, and wound the ears of
the learned with foolish brags, and ^alpable falsehoods. Which he will never be
able to prove, much less can he prove that any ancient Father or true
Chri^^ian since the time of Christ in any age was so Iewishly ad^icted to the
hebrew Canon, as Protestants now are, that ^hey were resolved in defense
thereof to stand out against Canons of general Counsels of the Christian
Church, ^eing S. Hierome (of all the Fathers thought to be most affected to the
hebrew) upon the first sound of the Ordenance of the Nicen Council for the
book of Judith, yielded thereunto, which was the humble resolution of the rest,
far from ^he pride of our Bachelour, and his fellows, who would ^ondemne such
a Council of the ancient Church as presumptuous, and such a Canon as a high
disgrace to holy Scripture; resolving rather to dye desperately by the curses
proceeding from the mouth of such a Canon or Ordena^ce, then yield to obey them.

14. Now remains his cavil against another Canon taken likewise from the
same Council of Trent. For (says ^he) a Romish Council will never meet for
one evil, therefore secondly they decree; That in all disputations, sermons,
lectures, and to all other purposes, that latin Translation, called the vulgar,
shall be held the authentical text, and that no man presume under any pretext to
refuse Co^cii. Trident. sess. 4.
it.

Thus he, where I may note, that this Bachelour lightly never permits any
Author pass his hands with one simple corruption of his saying, but still
printeth upon it a double mark of falsehood at least, as now he peruerteth this
Canon, both by omission of some words that might have made the same more
plausible, and adding some of his own to draw it to an harder sound. First he
omitteth the description which the Council makes of this translation, calling
it, Longo tot saeculorum vsu in Ecclesia ipsa probata.
the translation approved in the Church, by the long use of m^^ ages: which
description with men of judgment may be su^ficient to move them to allow of
that decree, as very conformable both to reason, wisdom, and piety, and
therefore was left out by the Bachelour, to leave the Canon as bare as might be,
and in the worst sound he could. But much more perfidious, and full of wilful
malice is his adding to the Canon, that this translation must be used for all
purposes, which is neither the text, nor sense thereof. For the Canon does not
forbid, but that we may have recourse unto the Originalls for four purposes as
Bellarmine notes. 1. To correct the faults that may be in the Latin print. 2.
To know which is the truest Lecture, when the Latin copyes vary. 3. To know the
true sense of a place when the Latin is ambiguous. 4. To know the force, power,
and emphasis of the words that so we may better understand the Scripture: so
that (a^^ purposes) was added to the text by the Bachelour of purpose to
deceive his Reader, and slander our doctrine, which may seem wonderful, that
no place can escape him without such palpable corruption thereof, after such
promises of exact dealing, the credit of the English Ministry lying upon his
head.

15. Now you will wonder if you read his Comment upon this Canon, page 51. A
multitude of untruths.
with what a multitude of false, and foolish untruths he charge the same.
First, says he, here is a strange decree; the stream shall be of more virtue
then the fountain, the translation of more authority then the original; which
is a strange untruth, there being no word of fountain, or original, or of
being more or less virtue in the Canon, but only the translation to be true,
and the water from the fountain clear. Cannot a translation be true, except
it be of more authority then the original? Cannot water from the fountain be
clear, unless it be more clear, and of more virtue then the fountain? Who
is so void of judgment, that does not see the vanity of this sottish slander?
Secondly many learned Papists (says he) are ashamed of this, if they durst
utter it, A fond slander.
and Bellarmine and Coccius do bewray it by their slight handling of the
matter. But first, how comes he to know the shame of our secret thoughts,
which we neither do, nor dare utter? Have Ministers more insight into our hearts
to see our secret blushing, then they will grant to Saints, and Angels to
know our inward praying? Barl. Sermon 1602. in the Preface.
If we have made him acquainted with our shame in secret confession, why does
he proclaim it at the Cross, and sound it out with a peale of Canon, as M.
Barlow did the confession of the unfortunate Earl? And how may Bellarmine and
Coccius be said to handle this matter slightly? Does not Bellarmine spend many
long Chapter 14. of his 2. book de verbo Dei.
Chapters in it? Does not he prove the authority of the vulgar translation by
many c. 10.
reasons: by the authority of the Church, that used the same for so many ages;
by the authority of Fathers, that highly commend the translation of S. Hierome,
Coccius also l. 6. tom. 1. art. 3.
whose the greatest part of the vulgar is, which was so exact according to the
Hebrew fountain, that S. Augustine Cuius literatum laborem Haebraei fatentur
esse veracem. l. 18. de Ciu. dei. c. 43.
says, the very Hebrews were forced to confess that translation to be true?
Does not Bellarmine particulerly answer the objections which c. 13.
Calvin, and c. 12.
Kemnitius, and others c. 11. and 14.
bring to prove the vulgar translation corrupt? May this be termed slight
handling of a question? Does this Babbler know, or care what he says?

16. Thirdly Bellarmine and Coccius (says he) are wiser then to venture their
credits upon so false a matter, and therefore do wholly leave it upon the
credit of that Conuenticle. Are not these things news to men that have read
Bellarmine, and Coccius? Dare they not defend what the Council taught in that
Canon? Durst not Bellarmine venture his credit upon it? Is he not most earnest
in defense of that Canon? He does not magnify the translation above the
original, neither does the Council, as has been said; but that our
translation Negari non potest, quin sint fo^tes antepone^di riuulis versionu^,
quando co^stat fontes non esse turbatos: nunc autem fontes multis in locis
turbidos fluere ostendimus. c. 21.
is more incorrupt then the originalls, which now we have, and by which our new
Masters would correct the ancient text, Bellarmine does constantly avouch cap.
2.
; which he does convince even out of the confession of Calvin himself. Neither
have we cause to be ashamed of this Translation, which even the Adversaries and
enemies of the Council writing one against another Translation, do highly
commend as most sincere, and authentical; so potent is truth, and true that
Proverb, when thieves fall out, true men come by their right. For of this
edition Beza says, that the Interpreter seeme^^ to have translated with
marvelous sincerity, and religion, Vetus Interpres videtur summa fide Libros
Sacros interpretatus. Annot. in c. 1. Lucae. v. 1.
which for the most part (says he) I do follow, and prefer before all in
praefat. nou^ Testame^ti ann. 1556.
other. With whom Molinaeus consents, preferring our Translation before all
others, namely before the Translation of Erasmu^, Bucer, Bullinger, Brentius,
the Tigurine, and even that of John Calvin: in so much that Pellicanus a
learned Protestant is forced to confess, that the vulgar Interpreter was a
most pious, and learned Father, truly endued with a prophetical Conradus
Pellicanus Praefat. in Psalter. ann. 1534.
spirit: and even our English Adversaries in the end, are content to yield,
that for the antiquity thereof, the vulgar be preferred before al other latin
D. Dove in his persuasion to English Recusants. page 16.
books. Who does not see the vanity of M. Crashaw, that brings our uniform
receiving of the same authentical text as a shame and wound of our Church
which in the judgment of best and most judicious Authors is a glory, and
ornament thereof? But let us hear the Bachelour go forward in his falsehood.

17. Fourthly, these two bills about the Canon of Scriptures and authentical
translation, were carried (says he) in the beginning of the Council, In cap.
17. Luc. and in nou. Testam. part. 30.
when there were scarce sixty in the house; for the Pope durst not for one of
his crowns, have put these two bills concerning the Canon of Scriptures and
authority of the vulgar translation, especially the latter, to the full house.
Thus the bell ringeth what the fool thinks, without any proof. For first
the Pope did use his best endeavor and all possible diligence, that all
Bishops might be present at the beginning of the Council, as does appear by
the Bull of Indiction, and Convocation thereof vide Bullam indictionis.
where ^hey are charged In vi iurisiurandi, and virtute sanctae obedie^tiae etc.
under Censures sub paenis iure and consuetudine etc. See the last session of
the Counsel.
to be present at ^he beginning. Secondly the Canons and Decrees of the
Council were not absolutely made before the end thereof, when subscribed by
the hands of all the Bishops, they were presented to the Roman to be confirmed
by him; so that all and every Decree, and Canon of the Council was ^ssented
unto, and subscribed by all that had voices in the Council, which were above
three hundred, as the Bache^our confesses. Neither were these matters handled
first out ^f fear, that they would not pass in a full Council, which are is
to be committed to the holy Ghost, but because the ^ourse and order of doctrine
did require those things should ^e first decided. For as in every science,
first agreement is to ^e made of the principles from which conclusions are
deri^ed: so likewise in Counsels the first treaty ought to be con^erning the
word of God, and the authentical text thereof, when controversy is about the
same, the word of God con^eyning the principles from which general Counsels
are ^o deduce their definitions and Canons: so that the Bache^our charge this
Canon with the black powder of the ^alse and folish imaginations of his own
brain.

18. Finally not to weary you with the tedious rehear^all of all his
intolerable falsehoods, he concludes with this notorious untruth, that since
the Council of Trent, page 52.
some Catholic Authors have dared even to resist this Decree, who though they
were tolerated (says he) whilst they lived, yet being dead their books are
either purged, that is altered, or else reproved. And in his mar^gent he names
Arias Montanus, Sixtus Senensis, and Oleaster to be the men. This is so strange
an untruth, that to any learned man that has perused these Authors, he may
seem to speak in a dream. For who does not know that is learned, that these
Authors both in their life, and since they death are highly esteemed in our
Church, as may appear by in bibliotheca sancta.
Posseuinus his censure of them, which the Bachelour says ought to be
accoumpted the censure of our p. 67.
Church. And did these Authors stand out against this Canon of the Council
even unto death? Nay did they not highly esteem, praise, and commend this
decree? Let Sixtus Senensis who stands in the midst speak for the other two,
which he does in the eight book of his Bibliotheca sancta in the refutation of
the thirteenth heresy, which rejects the authority of the vulgar Translation,
where he does confute the Protestant Paradoxe of still reforming the
translations unto the originalls, which were (says he) to raise an eternal
tumult, and discord in the Church, and never make an end of translating a new
the Scriptures, nor of correcting, altering and censuring former translations.
Vide Sixtu^ Senens. l. 8. Biblioth. sanct. haeres. 13. page 1051. Edit. Venet.
Proinde (says he) h^^ animaduertens Sacrosancta Tridentina Synodus, recte
etc. VVherfo^^ the holy Council of Trent perceiving this (to wit the necessity
of one^ translation in Gods Church) has upon good reason ordained, that of all
Latin Editions which are extant, only the old, and vulgar be authentical etc.
which Decree was made with great cause, not only because th^^ Edition has been
approved in the Church, by the continuance of so many years, but also for that
not any of the more recent translations, is either more certain, or more
secure, or more exact, or more faithful them this.

19. Thus writes this Author, and in that place proves largely, not having
any syllable that may sound of the least dislike of this Canon, but does
learnedly, gravely, an^ sharply condemn Protestants for resisting the same.
No^ what shall we say of M. Crashaw that brings him in, following a contrary
course, and standing out even unto death against the doctrine of this Canon,
and curses of the Council? What trick or policy is it in this Minister, to
utter such gross falsehoods, and in his fellows to allow them to be printed,
to justify the State? Verily I know not what their policy may be heerin,
except they mean to amaze us with their impudency, and put us out of heart ever
to conquer their malice, by showing them the truth; or that ever their mouths
will close up from railing at us, for want of matter; seeing they can create
the same of nothing, and find whatsoever they fancy against us, even in those
Authors where the contrary is both plainly, and earnestly taught: their policy,
I say, may be, to think to discourage us from answering their slau^ders, and
discovering their false tricks, seeing that therein we do but wash bricks, or
Black-Moores that will not be white. But let them know that they deceive
themselves, we being resolved to follow S. Vtamur igitur haereticis, non vt
eoru^ approbemus errores, sed Catholica^ fidem aduersus eorum insidias
asserentes vigila^tiores simus; etia^ si eos ad salute^ reuocare no^ possumus.
Aug. de vera relig. c. 8.
Augustines counsel, to make use of Heretics: Not (says he) to approve their
errors, but that by defending the Catholic doctrine against their deceipts,
we may be more vigilant and wary our selves, though we shall not be able to
reclayme them from their damnable ^ourse. And yet we cannot but expect that
this dung of M. Crashawes falsehood, that he has laid upon the soil of our
Country, consumed by the force of truth, will make many the more apt, and
disposed to bring forth the corn of Catholic faith, which we seek by these
labors to sow in their souls. For as S. Haec est vere dementia, no^ cogitare,
nec se^tire, quod mendacia no^ diu fallant; nocte^ ta^ diu esse, donec
illucescat dies, clarificato aute^ die, and so^e oborto, luci tenebras and
caliginem cedere l. 1. ep. 3. ad Cornel.
Cyprian says, it is mere madness in Heretics not to think or consider,
that lies do not long ^yme deceive; that night does continue no longer then
till ^he break of day, and that the day being clear, and the ^unne risen, the
darkness does yield unto the light.

20. And thus much of the Protestant salues which the Bachelour has with no
more vehemence then vanity praised, and of his cauills and slanders against
Counsels, the salues to heal the wounds of error and discord, which the
Church of God in all ages has used, which not only ^aith, but even natural
reason, not only the word of God, ^ut also common sense must needs move any
discreet man, that seriously, and really desires to be saved, to prefer before
the new conceits of any humourizing Paracelsian that does brag of his knowledge
in spiritual physic, and ^nderstanding of Scripture above Fathers, and
Counsels of former ages.

The end of the first Part.
THE SECOND PART of this TREATISE.
THE FIRST CHAPTER. CONCERNING the Errors and Blasphemies, termed by him
Wounds, which the Bachelour does falsely, and slanderously impute unto the
Roman Church.
Now we enter into the confession of M. Crashawes Babells; we come to cleanse
the Augaean stable of his Sermon, M. Crashawes drift in his 20. wounds.
divided into twenty different rooms of slanders, the drift of which
discourse is to make some principal points of Catholic doctrine which
heretics ever have most hated (as are the Primacy of the Roman Bishop, the
Intercession of the Blessed Virgin, the Authority of Gods Church to decide
doubts about Scriptures, the use of holy Images, directing prayers before them
unto Christ, and such like Pillars of Christian piety) seem horrible
blasphemies, accusing us to teach, what in truth we detest, and to hold what
we abhor; to wit, that the Pope is God; the Virgin Mary above God; the Popes
Decretalls of more credit then Scriptures; that Images are to be prayed unto,
and worshipped as God. And not to seem to rail altogether without reason, to
make some little show of proof, he cites the most harsh, and inconvenient
sayings, that have escaped the pen of any Catholic writer; in search whereof,
he has spent, as he does confess the In his Epistle to the Lord Treasurer
course of his studyes, which he urges not as the inconvenient, or
inconsiderate speeches of pri^^ Authors, but as generally received doctrines of
our Church. These are the wounds he charge the Roman Church withal; these
the grave and substantial proofs of so grievous, and horrible slanders; this
his sincere, and upright dealing, endeavoring to make the errors of some few,
seem articles of our faith, opinions of private men, definitions of the whole
Church; which course men of judgment that understand of these matters, must
needs perceive to be no less absurd then unjust, A iugling trick of Ministers.
and that therein Ministers play with their Auditors the trick of some Iuglers,
who with the smoke of certain herbs, make therafters of fair and goodly
rooms wherein they burn them, seem snakes, and adders, by this means
frighting fools and children, from the same: which false and slanderous
smoke, changing pious doctrines in^^ seeming blasphemies does M. Crashaw raise
within the fairest and goodliest Rome of the Catholic Church, by setting fire
with his railing tongue to the sayings of some Catholic Authors, making a
smoke of blasphemy vampe from them, wherewith the doctrines of the whole
Church, may seem to ignorant people ugly Monsters.

2. And though in such variety of gardens as are the learned books of our
Authors, M. Crash. vanity in the search of the wounds.
among such store of their sweet herbs, and fragrant flowers, it might seem
no wonder, though some twenty weeds of erroneous sayings be found, which taken
in rigor of speech, may seem blasphemous yet to make the purity of our
doctrine, and the falsehood of railing Preachers, whereof the Bachelour is
Procter, more apparent, by this Answer it shall be clearly showed, that learned
Catholics have used such diligence, to weed their own writings, and that such
has been the care of the Church to purge their works, which they did submit to
her Censure, that the Bachelour to justify his railing Church, has been able
to allege no one saying of any Catholic Author that does not contain pious,
and justifiable doctrine. Neither can he make the sweet herbs and flowers of
their doctrine, take the fire of his railing Rhetorike, to yield the smoke of
false slanders, without drying them up, and bereauing them of their natural
juice and sense; which also commonly he cannot do, without wringing and
wresting, bruzing and breaking, mangling and corrupting their words, as shall
appear by this full and particular Answer unto every one by him alleged:
wherein if I be longer, and more earnest, then such palpable slanders uttered
upon no better proofs, may seem to require; let the Reader remember and
consider for his comfort and ours, that in this Sermon we confute, and he
reads in this Answer a refutatio^ of all the rest of the like railing
inuectiues, that are daily preached, though not printed against us; which how
false for matter, foul for language they are, may appear by the monstrous
deformity of this that durst come to light, as the publicly allowed justifying
pattern of the rest. Which if we convince of horrible falsehood (as we shall of
such as all men of conscience must needs abhor) we may justly apply to the
English Ministry, the saying of Christ: If Si Iume^ quod in te, tenebrae sunt;
ipsae tenebrae qua^tae erunt? Matt. 6.23.
thy light be darkness, how dark is thy darkness it self? That is, if such
Sermons as they dare bring to light are full of gross, and foul lies, what
store of such dark and foul stuff may be supposed to be in such Sermons, as
themselves for very shame suppress in darkness?

The first of the twenty slanders: That we teach, the Pope is God.
3. THE Pope as he is most hated in the Bachelours heart; so he comes first to
his mouth, when he is in railing mood, with whom he begins the list of his
twenty slanders, page 53. 57.
accusing us to teach, that he is God, and our Lord God; and that we do
equalize him (to use his own word) to the true God. Which accusation being
most heinous, yet he brings for proof thereof only this seely argument
against us, that the Pope is called God, and Lord God, not only in private
Authors, but also in his own Canon law. Where first, though the antecedent
were true, that the Pope is called God, yet the inference that therefore he is
God, equal to the true God, is full of ignorance, and blasphemy against all
holy Scripture, which does often honor men with the name of God. For who has
not heard that famous place of the prophet, I Psalm. 81.6.
said, ye are Gods, and children of the highest all, where, those to whom the
word of God was revealed, are called Gods, as Joan. 10.35.
Christ does declare? Who does not know that often in the Scripture, Judges are
called Gods? Exodus 21.6.
ad Deos vtriusque causa perueniet; their cause shall be brought before the Gods?
Dijs Exodus 22.9. and 8.
non detrahes; thou shall not detract from the Gods? Does not the Scripture
also term Moses Exodus 7.1.
Deum Pharaonis, the God of Pharao? Does it not salute Solomon by the same
title, if we believe Calvin upon this verse of the Psalm. 44.7.
Psalmist, Thy seat, o God, is for ever, and ever, where Calvin says not
Christ, but Solomon is termed God? Having this warrant of Scripture, what
great matter is it, though the Pope by some Catholic Author be termed God? Is
not the Bachelours vanity wonderful, that after such promises of great proofs
of no triuiall things, nor trisles, begins with this Babel argument?

4. Secondly he has not been able to bring in this place any one Catholic
Author, where the Pope is so much as termed God, though he have (as he does
confess) spared no cost to get, no labor to peruse Records, where he thought
such blasphemous sentences might be found: nay there is not any by him brought,
whom he has not notoriously corrupted and slaundered, as you shall see. They
are only these three. First, the Glossers (says he) call the Pope their Lord
God, page 53.
and the Pope is content to take it to himself: where he coupleth together two
loud untruths. The first that the Glossers, A double slander about a gloss.
which signifyes a number, call the Pope their Lord God, giving his Reader to
understand, that many Glossers do use that phrase, or rather, that it is the
ordinary style they give to the Pope; which to be false may appear by this,
that never Protestant before this Bachelour durst charge with this slander
more Glossers then one, and for one only time using this speech, Dominum Deum
nostrum Papam, Extrauag. Joan. 22. tit. 14. c. 4.
though him also without cause, this being indeed not his phrase, but an
error, and oversight in the print in some later editions; which is proved by
many ancient copyes, in which Deum is wanting, and this title found Dominum
nostrum Papam, our Lord the Pope; which is no more absurd, then Dominus noster
Rex, our Lord the King, the usual style of subjects to their Prince. Moreover
the original manuscript of Zinzelinus the Author of that Gloss is yet extant
in the Vatican Library, where this insolent title is not found, as any that
goes into those parts, and is desirous to satisfy himself, may see in the
original it self upon certain days of the week when the said Library is
open. By which you may guess what doughty arguments Protestants have against
the Roman Church among which this error of the print is their champion or
Achilles, which our Bachelour puts in the forefront of the battle, and
without which no Protestant dares appear in the field; that even Doctor in his
Tortura Torti.
Andrews comes flourishing against Bellarmine with this Babble. But seeing now
the world does know, or may easily know this to be a mere error of the print
in some copyes only; Ministers must seek some better ground of their clamorous
inuectiues and railing Sermons, lest urging still this known slander, their
auditory drive them out of pulpit (as they have good cause to do) for seeking
to fright them from the faith of their ancestors with such false, and foolish
Babells.

5. But the second untruth, that Popes take this title of Lord God upon
themselves, is yet more gross, and intolerable, without any show or color of
truth, the whole world knowing the modest style the Pope uses, and takes to
himself, or Seruus seruorum Dei, the Servant of the servants of God: and has
been greatly offended, as I can affirm upon certain knowledge, with the
overseers of the Print, that permitted out of negligence that fault to escape;
which Babell is the chiefest engine, by which these skillful Architects of
falsehood seek to raise the Church of Rome as high as the Tower of Babell, and
the Pope unto the Throne of Antichrist.

6. But to me it seems strange, and wonderful, that these men that have
raised a tumult against this error of the print, with such loud cries, as
might seem able to shake both heaven and earth, should fall themselves, to
bestow the sacred name of God upon mortal men, having scarce wiped their
mouths worse then the strumpet that wypeth her mouth before thee, saying, what
evil have I done? Prou. 30. v. 20.
after their railing at us. For who does not know, how lauishly they did load
upon the late Queen the style of See Cambdens Britannia.
Goddess, whom a Prime man Ascha^ in epist. fol. 255.
and one of the first Preachers of their Gospel in England calls great Tuis
Dea magna Brita^nia.
Goddess, the only salvation of tu sola salus, tu sola colu^na.
England, praying unto her to grant them things that cannot be granted but by
God only, imperium placidu^ mundumque benignum.
peace, plenty, and that which Ministers most desire, laeta laetaque temporibus
nosiris da tempora Diua.
tempora, times of joy and mirth? And no less vain, and foolish, was a late A
Pamphlet called, An ad^^nitio^ to France. printed in the year 1610.
writer against us, who terms the Noble men that live in Court happy, by
seeing face to face the Divinity of the King. What would not M. Crashaw give
for a book of ours, where he might find such a piece of doctrine, that the
Cardinals of Rome are blessed, because they see face to face the Divinity of
the Pope? What Gospel would he gather out of such a sentence, that Rome is
heaven, the Cardinals Angels, the Pope God? What part of the Popes face would
he leave unstained with some railing reproach which malice would make him spit
out? Who^, should a Catholic imitate, taking occasion by the former flattering
phrase, to rail on the Court, Nobles, and Person of his Majesty, we our selves
would confess him worthy of punishment, which such railing companions, as this
Bachelour, should not want, did love of modesty bear greater sway with their
Lord Bishops, then hatred of the Pope, and desire to make our doctrine odious
to ignorant people.

7. The second place he brings to build this slander upon us, is out of the
text of the Popes Canon Law, page 54. Decretum Gratiani d. 96. c. Satis
euidenter.
where the Pope himself (says he) frames this argument, writing to the
Emperor against them that would call his Holiness to account. It is certain
that the Emperor Constantine called the Pope God, but it is clear that God may
not be judged of men. Ergo, the Pope may not be judged by any man. Thus he
makes the Pope dispute, and then adds this applause to this argument: Thus
the Pope that canonizeth so many men, and women Saints, here takes pains to
canonize himself a God. This is the chief ground whereon he builds his
Babel, upon the sand of a text corrupted notoriously four manner of ways.

8. First, he changes the scope of the place against his own conscience (if
he perused the same, as he protests to have done.) For the scope of that
place is not against them that would call his Holiness (the Pope) to account,
as he boldly avouches; but against them that had deposed Ignatius Patriarch of
Constantinople, That chapter of the Decree is taken ex epist. Nicolai. 1. ad
Michaelem Imperatorem.
as appears by the words which straight follow upon the former argument: His
itaque manifest repertis, apparet comministrum nostrum Ignatium, per
Imperialem ta^tum sententiam nullo modo potuisse prorsus expelli. These things
being manifest, it is apparent, that our fellow-minister or Bishop Ignatius
could no ways be deposed by only Imperial sentence.

9. Secondly, he translateth the words of the text corruptedly, making
Pontificem, which signifies any Bishop to stand for the Pope only, so making
the Pope dispute impertinently, and from the mark and matter in hand. This then
is the true argument of the Pope: Satis euidenter ostenditur asaeculari
potestate, nec solui, nec ligari Pontificem posse, quem constat a pio Principe
Constantino Deum appellatum, cum nec posse Deum ab hominil ^^iudicari
manifestum sit: That is, It is evident, that a Bishop cannot be released, or
bound by secular power, whom Constantine the pious Emperor called God, it
being manifest that God cannot be judged by men. These are the Popes words. Now
where is our Lord God the Pope in this very text of the Canon law? How does the
Pope canonize himself a God in these words, where he is not so much as named?
Where if he do cannonize any particular Bishop for God, it is not himself,
but the Patriarch of Constantinople, who has ever commonly been an emulous,
and an enemy of his Sea.

10. The third falsification is in the change of the Conclusion which he makes
to be this, Ergo, the Pope may not be judged of any man: the conclusion indeed
being, a Bishop cannot be judged by secular power, which is very different. For
Bishops may be judged, and deposed by Ecclesiastical power, and general
Counsels, who are men, yea Pope also themselves, namely in case of heresy may
be deposed, as his own Canon law Decret. did. 40. c. 6. si Papa.
does prescribe: so that this is another, and a remarkable fraudulent trick of
this Bachelour.

11. The fourth falsification is in the reason which he makes the Pope yield,
that a Bishop may not be judged by secular authority, Impudent dealing.
to wit, because he is God, auouching, that this is good Catholic Divinity
which stands still, not in one word altered in the Popes law; That the Pope
is God, and therefore may not be judged of men: and that the Pope makes this
argument in the Canon law, God may not be judged by men, but I am God, and
therefore may not be judged by man. All which are manifest untruths, both in
the Conclusion, and the reason thereof. For the conclusion is not that the Pope,
or Bishop may not be judged of men, but not by secular men, or Princes: and the
reason given by the Pope is, not because Bishops are termed Gods, which reason
would prove that Bishops might not be judged by their Archbishops, nor
Archbishops by their Patriarch, because they are in the place of God. The Popes
argument then is, because Constantine the first Christian Prince, who had as
much, or rather more power and authority then any other succeding temporal
Christian Prince can justly challeng, did call Bishops Gods, that is did
acknowledge them to be his Superiors in the place of God, to rule, and direct
him in matters of his soul, and that therefore he had no authority to judge
them, but was to be judged by them, as Ruffinus Potestatem dedit vobis Deus de
nobis quoque iudica^di; vos autem non potestis ab hominibus iudicari, quia a
Deo nobis dati estis Dij, and conueniens non est vt homo iudicet Deos l 1.
Histor. c. 2.
writes of him; which doctrine all ancient Fathers teach, namely S. Hierome
upon the first verse of the 81. psalm, God stood in the Synagogue of Gods, and
in the midest judges the Gods. Here the holy Ghost (says Psalm. 81. v. 1. Deos
appellat praesides Ecclesiaru^, quos Deus deoru^ non per alios, sed per
semetipsu^ dijudicat. Hieron. in psalm. 81. Adoardus Gualanaus Episcopus
Caesenas de morali and civilly facultate l. 14. c. 3.
S. Hierome) calls Bishops and Prelates of Churches Gods, whom the God of
Gods does judge, not by others, but immediately by himself. Thus you see the
Bachelour has made four gross corruptions in this only little piece of the
Canon law, changing the scope of the place, the words of the text, the
conclusion of the argument, and reason thereof.

12. But let us examine, if he have used greater fidelity in the third Author
whom he makes an auoucher of the Popes Godhead, to wit, Bishop Gualandus. What
do we say to this doctrine, of which he makes Gualandus Author; From the Pope,
as from the head, there do flow into the whole body of the Church, that is,
into the whole Christian world, spirits, or spiritual life, yielding the
feeling and fruit of heavenly graces, and effectual motions to eternal
happynes? I answer that this sentence though it may have some true sense, to
wit, that jurisdiction comes from the Pope, without which Priests cannot
administer the Sacraments, which infuse grace; yet properly, and in rigor of
speech the same is false and condemned both by l. r. de Romans pont. c. 9.. At
inquiunt. Solus Christus est caput principale and perpetuu^ totius Ecclesiae:
nec Ecclesia est corpus Petrivel Papae, sed Christi etc.. Praeterea, Christus
in corpore Ecclesiae omnia in omnibus operatur, per oculum videt, per doctorem
docet etc. quod in nullum hominem co^uenit,
Bellarmine, and the translators of the Rhemes Testament in express terms,
who in their annotation upon the 22. verse of the first chapter of the epistle
to the Ephesians, where it is said, christ was made head over all the Church,
teach; that Christ is the head of the Church, and the only head, from whom
does issue life, motion, spirit, grace unto the mystical body of the Church,
and the members of the same, as from the head to the natural body, in which
sort not any Pope, nor Prelate, nor man can be head but Christ, nor the Church
be body to any, but to Christ. Thus the Rhemists write. Neither does Gualandus
teach the contrary, whose words are not, a Papa tamquam a capite, as the
Bachelour does cite them, from the Pope as from the head, but, a quo tamquam a
capite, from whom as from the head, not meaning the Pope, but Christ, as
appears by his words that go immediately before, which are these. That the
Pope out of modesty calls himself Servant of the Servants of God, cum tamen
eius Vicarius sit, and omnium primus minister; being the Vicar, and supreme
Minister of him, a quo tamquam a capite, from whom as from the head,
spiritual life, and heavenly grace flows into the body of the Church. Thus
Gualandus makes not the Pope the supreme fountain and head, from which grace
flows, but an head under Christ, to rule the Church by examples, and good
laws, as he there declares.

13. Now the Bachelours cavil, and railing at the last words of Gualandus his
sentence, that the Pope is honored and adored, tamquam quidam Deus, as a
certain God upon earth, deserves not an answer. For he does not call the
Pope God but only tamquam Deum, like unto God, whose office, and person he does
represent, which other Princes also do, from whom their power is derived, and
therefore are be to worshipped and adored, Adorare does signify in latin no more
then to honor: and Kings and Princes are in the phrase of Scripture to be
adored, as Judith did Holofernes, Bersabe King David, to omit other examples.
not with divine worship, but with inferior honor, as representing Gods
person, as his substitutes, and certain Gods upon earth. By which you see,
that the Bachelour has not been able to bring one Catholic Author, that so
much as calls the Pope God; but to make their sentences sound to his purpose,
has slaundered, falsified, and corrupted all the Authors by him cyted, and
instead of wounding the Roman Church, made deep and deadly wounds in his own
conscience, and in the Church of England her credit, which as by this Pattern
appears, does maintain such gross, and palpable lying.

14. Now upon this fundamental falsehood he builds diverse other Babels, and
impudent slanders. First he makes this proclamation; show me the Pope, or
name that Writer, Doctor, Inquisitour, Bishop, or any other, who by
commandment, or authority, or but with approbation of the Pope, have
confuted, or so much as reproved this blasphemy, to wit, that the Pope is our
Lord God, and equal with the true God. Many heaps of untruths.
This is his challenge; then which a more shamlesse could scarcely be made even
by impudency it self, preaching at the Cross in a Ministers weed. For scarce
is there any Catholic Author, that has of late written against Hetikes, that
has not detested this blasphemy, and censured Protestants as impudent
slaunderers for charging the same to be a point of our Cath. See Bellar. lib.
3. de Romans Pontif. c. 19. and 20.
doctrine. Secondly he says, that we hold the Pope to be above a Council,
above Scripture it self, above Kings, and the reason is, because he is God,
which are vast untruths. That the Pope is above a Council, some Catholics
deny: that he is above holy Scripture we all detest, teaching that he is bound
to believe the doctrine, and to obey the precepts thereof. And though he be
above Kings, as spiritual jurisdiction exceeds temporal, yet the reason
thereof which we assign, is not because the Pope is God, and God the King of
Kings, which the Bachelour brings as ours, but because the soul exceeds
the body, heaven surpasses earth, and therefore the Pastor of the soul, and
the director unto heaven is a more high, and excellent office, then that of
earthly, and temporal power: so that in this his saying there is not one true
word. And no less false, and impudent is the next, that we hold that the Pope
should take appeals from all the world, wear a triple crown, be carried on
men's shoulders, give his foot to be kissed, dispose of Kings, and Kingdoms at
his pleasure: because he that is God, may do more then all these. For the Pope
as all know that have seen Rome, uses to go on foot, or in Litter, or in
Coach, neither does he give his foot to be kissed, though sometimes he permit
the same to them that desire to offer that sign of reverence unto Christ,
whose Vicar he is; neither does he challenge the authority of taking appeals,
in worldly and temporal affairs, but in Ecclesiastical only, much less from
all the world, whereof a great part is not Christian; least of all do Catholics
teach, that he can dispose of Kings and Kingdoms at his pleasure. But that
which surpasses beyond measure the bounds of modesty, and truth, is that we
derive these doctrines from the Popes Godhead: what truth, modesty, or shame
can be in this fellow, that uses such exorbitant lying, and railing? What
discretion of the English Ministry to make him the pattern of their modest
Preachers? Finally to make good what I said, that you should find no sentence
in him, which is not either notoriously false, or witless, he concludes with
this sottish argument, that we worship not the true God, because our God admits
another Lord God (to wit the Pope) and so is not God alone: where I wish the
Bachelour to examine his conscience, and search the corners of his invisible
Church, and tell us what Gods he and other Ministers do worship in private,
whether it be Jupiter, or Mars, or Cupid, seeing their God (whosoever he be)
will not be alone, nor suffer his worshippers to live single, but admit the
company of Lady Goddesses, as Q. Elizabeth was termed.

The second wound and slander, That the Pope can do more then God has done.
His second wound or head of slanders.
14. IN the second wound the Bachlour mounteth a point higher, charging the
Church of Rome to teach tha^ the Pope can do more then God has done, which is
indeed a note above a lie, that no marvel though he fell hoarce strayning his
voice to reach such high points of falsehood. l. 4. reuelat. c. 13.
This blasphemy he seeks to build upon the book of the Revelations of S.
Brigit, where (says he) it is dogmatically delivered as a matter without
question, Four untruths in few lines, the four corner stones of his Babel.
that Pope Gregory by his prayers lifted up the heathen Emperor Traian out of
hell. In which few words are contained four notorious untruths, the four
corner stones on which the Babel of this feygned blasphemy is set. First it is
false that there is affirmed, that Gregory did deliver Traian out of hell,
there being no mention at all Infidelem Caesarem eleuauit ad altiorem gradum,
he lifted Constance, yet it is ridiculous thence to infer, that all matters
contained in a book set out by authority, are points of Catholic faith, as
any man of judgment does know, and the Bachelour does affirm, that our
learnedest authors bonus Gregorius, Pope Gregory, for holy Gregory which in
truth were a small fault by itself, did he not say the same as a foundation of
four huge, Four huge untruths raised by the Bachelour, only on the word
cogged into S. Brigits sentence, the four walls of his Babel.
and horrible untruths, as the four walls on the top of which he reareth up
the blaspemy which reaches above God. For by putting in the word Pope, which
is not in S. Brigit, he infers first, that Gregory was Pope when he wrought
the supposed miracle of raising from death and delivering Traian from hell,
which though he do very constantly affirm, and suppose as avouched by the
authors of that story, yet I think it is more then he can prove, these authors
seeming rather to affirm, that Gregory did that miracle (if ever he did it)
before he was Pope. The second falsehood which he infers from the intruded
title of Pope, is, that Gregory did the said miracle as Pope, delivering Traian
out of hell, by his papal prerogative and power, contrary to the authors of
that story who affirm that he did it by his prayers and by his tears, Bonus
Gregorius oratione sua infidelem Caesarem eleuauit ad altiorem gradum. Holy
Gregory (says the book he cites) by his prayers lifted up Traian to a higher
degree.

15. The third falsehood, is, A fond discourse.
that the Pope (in this respect because the miracle was done by a Pope) does
defend this book of S. Brigits and the story of Traian against many learned
men, to wit Melchior Canus, Blasius Vegas, and the two Cardinals Bellarmine,
and Baronius, who reject the same as a fable. And how does he prove the Pope
mayntayneth the story against these learned men? Hear I pray you this learned
Procter of the English Church discourse, and then judge of his wisdom. Because
(says he) he suffered a Spanish Dominican friar to defend it, and not in word,
but in writing, not privately, but openly, not in a corner of the world, but to
come to Rome within these few years, and there even to write, and publish
under his nose, and by his authority an Apology of this blasphemous fable,
endeavoring to prove it by many arguments that Gregory delivered Traian out of
hell. Thus he. Now, is not this wife stuff? Is there either rythme or reason
in this discourse? If the Pope did approve this story by suffering the Spanish
Dominican friar to defend it, does he not also reprove the same, by suffering
Canus l. 11. de loc. c. 2.
a Dominican friar to refute and deryde it? by suffering in cap. 6. Apocal,
comment. 3. sect. 3.
Vegas a Spanish Jesuit very lately also to reject, and confute the Apology of
that Spanish Friar? What says he of the two Italian Cardinals, Bellarmine
Bellar. l. 2. de purg. c. 8.
and lib. 8. Annal. ann. Dom. 604. n. 31. and sequ.
Baronius? Do not they impugn the said story? Do not they confute by name
the Apology of the said Friar? and not in word, but writing, not privately, but
openly, not in a corner of the world, but in Rome, within these few years,
since that Dominican Friar; and even Bellar. to Sixtus, Quintus, Baron. to
Clement the 8.
to write, and publish by the Popes authority in their learned works,
dedicated unto the Pope, a confutation of this incredible fable, indeauouring
to prove by many arguments, that Gregory did not deliver Traian out of hell, or
any other place? How imperinently does this Bachlour dispu^ who to show this
small judgment, as also memory, so necessary a property in a Professor of the
lying Art, he cyteth Posseuinus, giving his censure upon the Apology of the
Dominican Friar: Posseuinus in verbo Alpho^sus Ciacon.
Hanc Apologiam vti and Historiam validis refutat argumentis Bellarminus. This
Apology for the story of Traian, as also the story i^ self, Bellarmine
refuteth with strong arguments? This is Posseuins ce^sure, whose censure three
or four pages after the Bacehlour says, no man that knows the present state
of our religion can deny, but that it is the censure of our Church, and ought
so to be reputed. Is ^t is true? Then Sir, how do you charge our Church with
allowing the story of Traian, which by the censure of Posseuine (which you that
know so well the state of our Church, must needs account her censure) is so
strongly refuted, and worthily rejected as a fable? Do you see how malice
blinds you? Into what pits of folly you plunge yourselfe?

page 58. in ^ine.
16. The fourth falsehood, more impudent then the former is, about the cause
that moves the Pope to defend this story against so many learned men, which
is, says he, because the same does magnify him, The story of Traian though it
were true does not magnify the Popes power.
and his Papal power and prerogative, signifying that Popes do challenge
power, and prerogative to raise men from death, and deliver souls out of hell,
as coming to them by succession from S. Gregory. What intolerable insolency is
this? What Pope can he name that ever challenged, or Catholic ever attributed
such power unto him? Neither does this story (were it true) magnify the power
and prerogative of the Pope, more then the power of any other holy man,
miracles being effects of prayer not of power, of sanctity not of authority,
deeds of some Popes, not as they were Popes, but as they were Saints in great
favor with God: if other men be as holy as Popes, their prayers as devout,
their devotion as fervent, they may work miracles as well as Popes. Thus you
see what a cunning Architect this Bachelour is, who by thrusting the two words
hell, and Pope, into the sentence of S. Brigit, where neither of them were,
has built an hell of devilish lies and slanders, upon the Pope and whole
Church.

17. You have seen the foundation of this Babell in four corruptions
committed in the quotation of few words; Two foolish arguments or infere^ces.
you have beheld also the walls thereof, four notorious untruths, raised upon
the former corruptions. Now it remains you view, if your sight can reach so
high (for the Babell reaches above God) the top thereof, which he sets up in
very excellent mood and figure by two arguments, seeking to prove, that the
Pope by our doctrine does exceed Christ in charity, and God in power. page 59.
The first he proves in this sort, Christ says, I pray not for the world: the
Pope says, but I do, Ergo, the popes pity and charity is more then Christ's.
Alas, alas, is Rome the holy Church that sees not these blasphemies? Is she
the living Church that feels not these wounds? Thus he. And verily I much
wonder, how England being a Church of men endued with reason, does not see such
open follies as these, or seeing them, does permit them to be printed to
justify herself thereby. For what form or fashion, rithme or reason is there
in this argument? Or what Pope can he name that used this arrogant speech,
Christ prayed not for the world, but I do, which he would seem to make an
ordinary vaunt of Popes? Or how may the Pope be said to have prayed for the
world, and not rather for hell, when he prayed for Traian that was damned to
hell, if he ever prayed for him? And in truth I could not but smile to read in
the margent the exposition the Bachelour brings to show his skill in
Scripture, of his saying of Christ, I pray not for the world Joan. 17. v. 9.
that is (says he) for the wicked and damned, giving such a sense to Christ's
prayer, which his heavenly Father would never have understood, without the help
of this Prophets spirit, then which a more ridiculous, and fond exposition I
do not remember to have read in any babeling Minister, neither cohering with
it self, nor with the text, nor with his purpose. Not with it self, for if by
wicked, and damned, he understand wicked men that yet live in this world, how
can they be said to be damned? If those that are dead, and damned to hell, what
need was there to ioyn wicked with damned, as though there were some damned
that were not wicked? It agrees not with the text, for if by the wicked he
mean such as yet survive in the world, it is false, that Christ's charity never
prayed for them, who on the Cross prayed for his Crucifyers. If he mean the
wicked that are sentenced to eternal fire, how can they be termed the world,
that are in hell and out of the world? Finally this exposition makes not for
his purpose, for if by damned he understand those that are irreuocably judged
to hell, the Pope never prayed for such, seeing Traian, whose fable is the
cause of this storm, was not condemned, but his sentence suspended upon the
foresight of S. Gregoryes prayer, as the mantayners thereof say: but if by the
damned he mean such as dyed in wicked, and damnable state, he does speak
without book, so peremptorily auouching that Christ never prayed for such. For
how does he know that the son of the widow whom Christ raised, dyed Luc. 7.
not in a damnable state? How dare he affirm the same so constantly of diverse
others, whom without doubt Christ raised from death to life, though the
particular stories Joan. vlt. v. vlt. Quot mortuos visibiliter Dominus
suscitauerit quis nouit? non enim scripta sunt omnia quae fecit: multi sunt
ergo sine dubio alij suscitati. Aug. ser. 44. de verbis Domini
be not written. And is it not most certain the Apostles restored diverse from
death to life that were infidells, delivering the^ from hell, and damnation
miraculously by their prayers? The like also we read in the authentical
histories of diverse Saints, namely of the Virgin S. Agnes, who (as S. Ambrose
writes) restored the son of the Prefect of Rome unto life by her prayers,
and consequently from hell, unto which by the ordinary course of Gods justice
he should have been damned. So that it is certain that Christ and his Saints
have prayed for wicked men, and some that dyed in damnable state, and saved
them from hell by their prayers. And the sense of Christ's words, I pray not
for the world, is, that at that time, and in that prayer he prayed not for the
world, nor for men that loved the world; yet at other times he prayed for them,
namely on the Cross, when he prayed for the Jews that crucified him, of whom
he had said unto his disciples, the world shall rejoice, and you be Joan. 16.
v. 20.
sad. Thus ignorantly does this Minister babble about Scripture, impiously
restrayning Christ's charity from the world, slanderously extending the Popes
charity unto hell, to build this Babel for fools to gaze on, of the Popes
pity, and charity above Christ's.

18. Let us consider the other steeple of his Babel, where by your doctrine he
places the Popes power above Gods, proving that he has done more then God, by
a syllogism in this mood and figure: The true God never delivered a damned
soul out of hell, but the Pope has delivered a soul out of hell: therefore he
has done that which God never did. This argument he says he does offer us to
think on: which if he or any other Protestant Bachelour for him can save out
of the hell of damned arguments, I will confess they can do more in hell then
the Pope. For whereas an argument, as Logitians say, must have only tres
terminos, this argument has five at the least, and therefore is more then a
brutish creature. God is one, the Pope another, to deliver a damned soul out of
hell a third, to deliver a soul out of hell a fourth, to do that which God
never did a fifth, which is in the conclusion, though it were not in the
premises, in which he uses two different mediums, to deliver a soul, and to
deliver a damned soul out of hell, affirming the one of God, the other of the
Pope: by which fond and ridiculous manner of arguing any man may conclude any
thing. For example, one might prove M. Crashaw has done more then God in this
sort. The true God did never deliver a damned soul from sin, but M. Crashaw
(at least in his own conceit) has delivered a soul from sin An Apothecaries
Prentice that fell into despair by hearing his sermons, because he understood
not the Apocalypse, and thereupon became mad, whom I suppose M. Crashaw being so
great a surgeon cured, teaching him to discover the skirts of the whore.
, Ergo, he has done that which God never did, or for ought is revealed, ever
will do. If he say that to deliver a soul from sin, and to deliver a damned
soul from sin are two different things, he cannot but see the vanity of his
Babel he offered us to think on, seeing to deliver a soul from hell, and a
damned soul from hell, are also very different things; never God by his power,
nor holy man by his prayers, did deliver a damned soul out of hell, though
they have delivered by their prayers the souls of wicked men that dyed in
damnable state from hell, before they were damned thither, to which they should
have been damned, according to the ordinary course of Gods justice, had he not
upon the foresight of those Saints prayers suspended their sentences for
hours, days, or weeks, according as the time was longer or shorter betwixt
their death, and their restoring to life: and so God upon the foresight of S.
Gregory's prayers, held back his irreuocable sentence upon Traian for many
hundred years, as the belieuers of this Story say, though, as I said, the best
of our Authors reject the same, as a fable. Wherefore here again I remit the
matter to the judgment of the judicious Reader, whether M. Crashaw have uttered
one true word, or wise sentence in all this wound.

The third slander; That we teach to appeal from God to the Virgin Mary.
19. FROM the Pope, the Bachelour passes to the Virgin Mary, from Christ's
Vicar the supreme power under him upon earth, to his Blessed Mother the
Sovereign Lady of Saints Oecolampadius infra.
under him in heaven, showing himself to be one of the damned crew S. Jude
speaks of, who contemn power, blaspheme Iud v. 8.
majesty, and hate them most that are nearest unto Christ, and most honored,
and exalted of The Beast shall open his mouth against the Tabernacle of God
Apoc. c. 13. v. 6.
God. This slander concerning the Blessed Virgin, has two parts. First that
we teach, that one may appeal unto her, even from God himself, when we are
agrieued by him. Secondly, that God has divided his Kingdom with her, giving
away his mercy, and reserving still justice to himself. This accusation he
does largely and earnestly with great words, page 60. 61 62. 63. 64.
and exclamations urge against us, where I desire the Reader to be attent unto
the proof he brings, how substantial the same is, of an imputation so
heinous: which if it be not one of the most impudent corruptions that ever came
in print, I am content that he think that the Church of England does not
license her Preachers, and Ministers to lie, and rail at us in pulpit. The
only proof he stands upon, is the saying of an Italian Friar, by name
Bernardinus de Busto, who lived 120. years ago, as eloquent (he says) in his
time, as ever was Panigarola in these later. Page 66. both in the margent and
text.
And one sentence tending to the former blasphemy found in him only, he does
make the generally received doctrine of Popery, by the law (he says) of
Accessaries, because the book was dedicated unto Pope Alexander the sixth, and
so this doctrine of the Friar allowed as current Catholic Divinity by him.
This is his vain, and ridiculous proof, which serves to prove clearly that
these Bachelours of Babell, want solid matter against us, that are forced to
object such far-fetcht Babels. For first though the book were dedicated to the
Pope, yet does it not follow, that the Pope did ever peruse the same, or any
part thereof, either before, or after the printing. How many books come forth,
which the Patrons to whom they are dedicated, did never read, or know of,
before they appeared with their names? How could this Pope be accessarie to the
doctrine of the book, which he never read, as it is very probable he did not,
being full of other business, and this book of Bernardinus very long? Must
their Patron be accounted Author, or approuer of the blasphemies, lies, and
slanders, wherewith Ministers stuff their books? May the Princes Highness be
taynted with the Bachelours impudent tricks, because his Sermon was dedicated
unto him? God forbid. Secondly, suppose that Pope Alexander had known, and
neglected to condemn this sentence of the Friar, must it therefore needs be the
approved doctrine of all Catholics? Among whom are many thousands, I dare
say, that never so much as heard the name of this Friar till now; many more
thousands that never saw the book, and some few that may perchance have seen
the book, yet never stumbled on this sentence, for which the Bachelour has
been seeking the whole course of his studyes, as he says, sparing neither
cost, nor labor, to get toys to bestow gratis on the Pope. This is the vanity
of the accusation and the wrong he does Catholics, though the former doctrine
he does rail so eagerly at, were to be found in Bernardinus his books.

20. But now we are to examyne how truly this Friar is accused of this strange
Paradoxicall doctrine; where the perfidious dealing of this Minister is such;
as I make no doubt but the conscionable Reader, though otherwise Protestant,
will be even amazed at his want of conscience, and at the lack of wisdom in
the Church of England to print this Sermon to justify themselves, from the
imputatio^s of lying, and railing. The impiety (says he) of this blasphemy is
so execrable, and incredible, that I will set down the words of the book it
self, Bernardi^us de Busto in Mariali. p. 3. ser. 5. page 96. edit. Lugdun.
ann. 1517.
as it was dedicated to the Pope; which he does in the margent thus, in latin:
Licet ad Mariam appellare a diabolo, a Tyranno, imo a Deo, si quis a Dei
iustitia grauarise sentiat. Thus in English in the text, A man may appeal to
the Virgin Mary, not only from a Tyrant, and from the Devil, but even from God
himself, namely when he feels himself grieved or oppressed by Gods justice.
Now having made Bernardinus speak in this sort, he begins to thunder against
us: what is this we hear? Do there lie appeals from God, and from God to a
creature? is Gods justice such as a man may justly be grieved at? We may say
with the Prophet, o heavens be astonished at this, and let all Christian hearts
tremble to hear such blasphemies. Thus he. Can any clamours be louder then
these, wherewith he would shake the very heavens? What if they be raised upon a
false quest? What if the blasphemy he rayleth at, be his own words added to
Bernardinus his sentence? if this be true, have not Protestants cause to
tremble to see themselves guided by men without conscience or shame, who so
desire to disgrace the Pope, that catch at a shadow that may seem to make
against him, nothing so wicked that they will not do, nothing so sacred that
they will spare, no not though they may give advantage unto Atheists to deny
God? page 73.
The true sentence and words of Bernardinus in that place are these:
Confidenter quisque appellet ad ipsam, sieve grauetur a diabolo, Bernardinus
loco citato.
sieve a Tyranno, sieve a proprio corpore, sieve a diuina iustitia. That is; Let
any man confidently appeal unto her, whether he be vexed or oppressed by the
Devil, or by some tyrant, or by his own body, or by the divine justice.
Compare this sentence with that which the Bachelour cited, and you shall find
him to have made three very gross, and inexcusable corruptions of this place.

21. The first is by omission, leaving out a proprio corpore, putting the body
out of the number of those, from whom Bernardinus says we may appeal to the
Virgin Mary, because that makes the metaphore manifest, that Bernardinus did
not mean of proper, and iuridicall appealing, but only of praying unto and
inuocating the Mother of God in any temptation, misery, or distress. For what
man so mad as to think of a proper appeal from his own body? Bernardinus in
that place tells, how S. Mary of Egypt being grievously tempted by the
suggestions of carnal lust, fled unto this Empress, and appealed, overcame
her body, and kept chastity. Where you see plainly, he means no other thing
by appealing, then invocation of the Blessed Virgin, when either the Devil
does seek to deceive, or the world pursue, or our body molest us, or the
rigor of the divine justice drive us into despair, which is the doctrine of
all ancient Fathers See Coccius. Tom. 1. Thesauri. c. 3. art. 4. l. 5. art. 4,
and 6.
and the counsel of S. Bernardus ser. 2. super Missus est.
Bernard, in all distresses, doubts, temptations, dangers, specially when thou
feel thy self sinking into the depth of despair, Respice stellam, voca
Mariam, look upon the star, call upon Mary.

22. Secondly, he gives a wicked, and a blasphemous sense to these words, Si
quis graueter a diuina iustitia, accusing Bernardinus to teach, that one may be
justly agrieued by the justice of God, that the judgment of God may be unjust,
and his proceedings erroneous, and that therefore there needs a Chauncery, or
Higher Court, to mitigate the one, and rectify the other: page 65.
which are intolerable slau^ders, and wicked blasphemies, that were far from
Bernardinus his meaning. For grauari a diuina iustitia, cannot signify to be
wronged by the divine justice, for it were not justice, did it offer wrong unto
any, but to be oppressed, or weighed down into despair, by comparing the
multitude of our sins with the rigor of Gods justice, which might cast us into
the pit of hell, without doing us wrong Neither should such a sentence be
unjust, or such proce^^ing unequal, but agreeable to our deserts. This
proceeding with us by justice, according to our deserts, though just, yet is it
most terrible and dreadful, at which the Saints of God did tremble, and from
which they did ever appease; namely the Prophet David: Lord, Judge me not thy
Psalm. 6. and 37. v. 1.
sury: but have pity on me, according to thy great Psalm. 50. v. 1.
mercy. The weight of which ^^t anger Semper quasi tumentes super me fluctus,
timui Dominu^, and po^dus eius sustinere no^ potui. Job. c. 31. v. 23.
Job does confess, he was not able to endure, seeming to be overwhelmed
therewith, as with a sea of waves, wishing to be rather for a time in hell, then
to appear before that terrible bench, so heartily did he appeal from the
rigor of Gods justice, to the sweetness of his mercy: which Chauncery of mercy,
the highest Court of the divine providence, is required, not to rectify what is
wrong, but to mitigate what might be justly severe in his judgment. Wherefore
the Bachelours account of this Court as needless, thinking men may be saved by
that of justice only, seems to savor of extreme pride, seeing S. Augustine
says, Vae etiam vitae laudabili, si absque misericordia iudicetur: woe even to
a man of holy and laudable life, if the same be judged without mercy. Neither
do I think our Bachelour ignorant of this truth, but his immoderate desire to
wrest the Metaphors of our Author to blasphemous senses, further then the
words will endure, does so blind him, that he speaks manifest blasphemy, not
knowing what he says.

23. The third and chiefest corruption of this place, is, by addition, putting
these formal words into Bernardinus his sentence, imo and a Deo, one may
appeal even from God himself: Psalm. 138. v. 7.
which Bernardinus has not, but only that one may appeal unto, that is,
invoke the Bl. Virgin, when the terror of Gods justice does affright him.
For who does not see a main difference between appealing from God, and
appealing from the justice of God. From God one can never appeal. (b) For
whither shall one fly from him? but from the justice of God we may appeal to
his mercy; which is not to appeal from God, but to the highest perfection in
Psalm. 144. v. 7. Vide S. Thom. 2.2. q. 30. art. 4.
God. Now this is that which Bernardinus teaches, that when we be tempted by
despair, we may confidently have recourse by prayer, which he metaphorically
calls appealing, unto the B. Virgin, to pacify Gods wrath, not staying our
appeal, or prayer finally in her, but by her seeking access to Gods mercy.
This he declares by the example of the Jews, who did pacify the anger of
Assuerus, by the means of Hester c. 5. v. 6.
Hester; appealing unto her, not from the King, but from his anger, to his
clemency by her intercession, who was so gracious in his eyes, that he could
deny nothing she would request, though half of his Kingdom. page 67.
So that this appealing even from God himself, is neither the words, nor
meaning of this Author, but is a blasphemy formally, and in terms, put into
his sentence by the Bachelour, to take thence an occasion to rail, and
thunder, and shake the very heavens Oh heavens be astonished at this. p. 61.
against us, as you see he did in the former inuectiue. Now let the Reader
judge, what truth, or honesty, or conscience, we may imagine in this pattern
of Ministerial sincerity, that has so notoriously, and so many ways
corrupted this place, both in Latin and English, substantially changing the
Authors doctrine? Which is the more intolerable, and execrable in this place,
where besides his general promise of sincere quoting our Authors, he does
specially protest, to cite the very words out of the book it self; further
protesting, that the same very words and doctrine, stand unreproved,
uncontrolled, unaltered in the new Brixian, and Colonian editions of this
Author, pawning therein his credit to the honorable Assembly, promising to show
the books both new and old: which he protests plainly against his own
conscience, and knowledge: for in all Editions, new, and old, in the Brixian
and Colonian both, these words, imo and a Deo (yea even from God himself) are
not to be found in Bernardinus: and therein I pawn my credit to the Reader,
having diligently perused both Let any that will be satisfied, look into the
books The Brixian was printed, anno 1589. The Colonian anno 1607.
Editions. Can there be more impudent lying, and outfacing of truth then this,
in which he had the greatest obligations, that either Court of conscience, or
credit can lay on a man to be sincere? What colorable excuse of wilful
casting away their own souls can his Auditors have, that will believe him in
any thing, after this notorious trial of his falsehood?

24. The other speech of Bernardinus that God has divided his Kingdom with
the Virgin Mary, that the Throne or Court of his mercy is hers, is a metaphore
to express a truth, to wit, that she is in great favor with God above all
Saints, and Angels: which metaphore is common and very vulgar in all languages
who use to term the fauorits of Princes that are extraordinarily great and
potent half-Kings, and that the King, his Kingdom, his treasure, his Exchequer
is theirs, and at their command. Neither do^^ this metaphore swerve from the
phrase which holy Scripture uses to declare the glory of Saints, as saying
that God does give, and dispose of his Kingdom to them Luc. 23. v. 9.
, that he does place them in his own throne Apoc. 3. v. 21.
, give his own scepter into their hands to rule the world Apoc. 2. v. 27.
, nay that God himself does obey their word Ios. 10. v. 14. Obediente Deo voci
hominis.
, and will Volu^tatem timentium se faciet. Psalm. 144. v. 12.
that in heaven, they sit at a banquet, God serving them in person Faciet illos
discu^bere, transiens ministrabit illis. Luc. 12. v. 37.
, wherein his liberality does far exceed the greatest, men may expect of the
most bountiful temporal Monarch, who will never give above half of his
Kingdom at the most. Which therefore being the Nonplus vltra of Princely, and
humane liberality, the offer or gift thereof does serve to signify the
special, and supreme degree of friendship and favor any can arrive unto with
a Prince. And according to this metaphore does Bernardinus say, that God has
divided his Kingdom with the B. Virgin, that she is half Queen with Christ,
that she has the Court of mercy at her will, meaning, that her favor, and
friendship with Christ is such, and her intercession so potent, that she may
free from dangers, deliver out of miseryes, bestow favors and graces on whom
she pleases, not, that by right and justice men may appeal unto her, as to
one in authority above God (which is the Bachelours slander) but as to one
that by favor and friendship does both over rule the Court of Justice,
stopping such processes against us, as out sins do deserve, and rule the
Court of mercy, being able by her intercession to obtain for us in that Court
whatsoever we do either need, or can resonably desire.

25. This is the high conceit which ever the true Church has had of Gods
Mother, being honors, and dignityes necessarily inuolued in that sacred, and
venerable title. Decet enim (says S. Damascen. orat. 1. de Not. Deiparae. and
orat. 2. de Assu^ptione.
Damascen) matrem ea quae filij sunt possidere, and ab omnibus adorari. It is
reason the mother should possess the things of the son, and be adored of
all. This is the cause that all the most learned, holy, Anno 370.
and ancient Doctors of Gods Church are so vehement, and plentiful in
extolling the dignity of this Virgin, thinking no words titles or praises that
man's tongue can utter, or wit in^ent, sufficient to express the same. Let S.
Ephrem a most ancient Father of the same age with S. Basil, speak for the
^est, who terms the Virgin Orat. de laudibus Dei matris Virgo, Dei para,
Regina omniu^, nulla comparatione omnibus superis exercitibus gloriosior, spes
Patru^, gloria Prophetarum, Apostolorum praeconium, honor Martyru^, Sanctoru^
laetitia, omnium dux, Virginum corona ob fulgorem inaccessa etc.
Mother of God, gracious Lady, and Queen of all, more bright, and high,
without any comparison then all the quyres in heaven, the hope of Patriarchs,
the Glory of Prophets, the ^^ise of Apostles, the honor of Martyrs, the crown
of Virgins, for bright^^^ in accessable: the solace of the world, the
redemption of captives, the ^omfort of the afflicted, the peace, life,
salvation of mankind, the common ^ropitiatory of heaven and earth etc. with
many more no less glorious titles. Nothing inferior in devotion to the Mother
of God, nor less highly conceyted of her power and mercy, was the learned
Father that the Grecian Church has yielded, Gregory Nazianzen, writing of her
in this sort: -- O puella gratiae
Aequanda nullis, matter and virgo, supra
Omnes decora virgins, and maxima
Quae vincis omnes ordines caelestium
Regina, Domina, generis humani bonum;
Amica semper esto tu mortalibus,
Maximaque quouis in loco mihi salus.
Virgin with whom none may compare in grace
Virgin and mother both, above all bright.
Thou unto whom the Angels do give place,
of all mankind Queen, Lady, chiefest light.
Be thou to mortal wights a friend for ever
And unto me chief safety wheresoever.


26. The like sayings, full of titles and praises of this Blessed Queen, and
Mother of God, might be produced from the rest of the Fathers, which not to be
tedious in so clear a matter Vide Coccium tom. 1. l. 3. per totum, praesertim
c. 5.
I omit. These may suffice to make a Christian read with horror the Bachelours
profane scoffing at the Virgins title of Queen of Heaven, she that has got
(says he) half of Gods Kingdom, may well and worthily he held the Queen of
heaven. A scoff not only impious, but also void of wit, without any grain of
salt. For though the Virgin should part stakes with God, in that gross manner
the Bachelours muddy brains can imagine; how does it follow, that the best and
greatest part, heaven rather then earth, should fall to be share? And what
greater profaneness and impiety, then to scoff at that title, which any man
that is not besides his se^ses, must needs see to be necessarily employed in the
title of Gods Mother, as S. Athanasius says; seeing he that was born of her,
is King, Lord, and God, the Mother that bare him is properly and truly called
Lady, and Queen, and Mother of Quandoquide^ ipse Kex est, and Dominus, and
Deus, ea propter and Matter, and Regina, and Domina, and Deipara vere ce^setur.
Athanas. in Euang. de SS. nostra Deipara.
God? With whom another ancient, and learned Patriarch does consent, she that
was from eternity ordained to be the Temple of the eternal, is by good right
saluted Queen of Dei domicilliu^ diuinu^que se^piternae naturae te^plum, haec
vniuersorum Regina merito salutatur. Anatolius in Cantico de Mariae natiuitate.
all. And S. Damascene in a sentence, no less sweet then short, Regina
Damascen. lib. 4. de fide cap. 15.
ommum effecta est, cum matter Creatoris extitit: She became Queen of all
creatures, when she was made mother of the Creator. Which title the very light
of Nature does so show to be enclosed in the dignity of Gods Mother, that even
some Protestants deny not this title unto her, namely Supra omnes Regina
omnium, Aduocata generis humani, quae Regina appellatur misericordiae. In sermon.
de laudando Deo in Maria.
Oecolampadius, who calls her the Advocate of mankind, and Queen of mercy,
above all Saints, and Angels, Queen of them all, in quam minus been affici,
reprobatae mentis certum iudicium existimem, toward whom not to be very well
affected, I account as a clear token of a reprobate. Thus writes this famous,
and ancient Protestant, both giving the Blessed Virgin the two titles which
this Minister does cruelly pursue of Queen of mercy, and Queen of heaven, and
also laying as you see the title of reprobate upon M. Crashaw, who shows
himself worthy thereof, for that in all this long discourse about her, he does
never vouchsafe to allow her the ordinary style of Blessed.

27. And further to show that his hatred against the Mother of Wisdom, has
left him not so much as the least mite of learning, he carpeth at a speech of
Tursellinus in her praise, with such ignorance of Latin, as were shameful even
in a Grammar boy. For whereas Tursellinus Matre^ quippe suam omnipotens deus
diuinae potestatis socia^ (quatenus licuit) asciuit. epist. dedic. Hist.
Lauretanae.
says, that God has made his Mother fellow, and partaker with him of his
divine power, and majesty, with this limitation, quantum licuit, the ignorant
Bachelour does English that clause, as far as it is lawful, accusing
Tursellinus in a long marginall note thereupon, of horrible impiety, as teaching
either that which is good not to be lawful, or that which is not good to be
possible to God. All which is grounded in ignorance of the signification of
this Latin word licuit, which does signify not the lawfulnes only, but also the
possibility of a thing This he may find in Calepine, licet, modo significat
idem quod fas est, modo ide^ quod possibile est. He may find it also in Coopers
Dictionary.
and must accordingly be Englished, as in this place, that God has made his
mother partaker of his power, and majesty, quantum licuit, as far as it was
possible, or a creature might be capable of, insinuating the Principle received
in Catholic Divinity, grounded on Scripture Luc. 1. v. 49. He that is mighty
has done great things to me.
, that the measure of the grace, and perfection bestowed on the Blessed Virgin,
is the power of God, and the capacity of a creature: agreeable to which S.
Anselme says, that the purity of Gods Mother was requisitely such, as greater
under God cannot be Ansel. de concept. virg. c. 18.
imagined. And to me it seems a wonder, that this Bachelour should mislike
those titles in the Virgin only, which the Scripture allows every Saint, to
be 2. Petr. 1. v. 4.
diuinae consortes naturae, partakers and consorts of the divine nature, and
consequently of power and majesty, which is inseparable from that nature to be
Romans 8. v. 17.
heredes Dei, and coheredes Christi, the heirs of God, and fellow-heires with
Christ. And in what are Saints fellows with Christ, but in his Fathers
Kingdom? Or in what does that consist, but in honor, glory, power and
majesty? In the division of which blisfull inheritance, the greatest portion by
all titles, and rights, is due to the Mother, howsoever the Bachelour wonder at
it, saying, that God has divided his Kingdom with a Creature, even with a
woman, and rage against it o ye heavens, be astonished at this! Where he
calls her woman by contempt, not finding any thing in so glorious a creature
that might seem contemptible but her sex, he casts that in her teeth, which
God by being her son made sacred, and venerable to the very Angels. The same
love to the Virgin makes him utter this notorious untruth, page 64.
that in our Ladies Psalter we turn the Psalms from Dominus to Domina, from
God to our Lady. For that Psalter compiled by S. Bonauenture, does not turn
the Psalms of David unto the B. Virgin, but makes a new Psalter of Psalms,
and Hymns in her praise, following therein the phrase, and imitating the
style, and taking often the very words, which he does so temper with his own
that they may suite with all, and not exceed the dignity of the Virgin. But the
Bachelour is so distempered with malice, and want of affection toward Gods
mother, that to him every thing seems to sound of blasphemy, that tastes of
her honor: a manifest sign of a reprobate, as you heard Oecolampadius avouch,
to which reprobate sense we must leave him, beseeching the mother of Mercy, and
Wisdom, that by her powerful intercession he may be reclaymed, whereof I
should have greater hope, would he appeal from the Devil the Father of
falsehood, to her the Mother of God and truth.

THE SECOND CHAPTER. OF His slanders, concerning Scriptures.
THE Bachelour having discharged his duty to the Pope, done his devotions to
the B. Virgin, by railing on the one, blaspheming the other, lying against
both; passes unto holy Scriptures, making great show of respect and reverence
toward them, with as much truth as former Heretics have done, who by
counterfayte devotion to Scripture raised lamentable tumults in the Church.
Nothing was more rife in the Arians mouths, the^ this brag, that they were
Scripturarum discipuli, Maximinus Arian. oro and opto scripturarum esse
discipulus. August. l. 1. contra Maxim. initio.
Scholars in the book of God. By this pretense of Scripture (says
Tertullian) heretics seduce the weak, they make the meaner stagger, they
weary and tire the learned in praescript. c. 15.
, knowing that by this kind of weapons only, aut nulla, aut parum certa
victoria ibid. c. 19.
they cannot be convinced, or not so evidently, but they may by some
fantastical shift ibid. c. 16.
euade. This is the cause that nothing comes out of their mouth which they
do not adorn with some words of Scripture Vince^t. Lyrin. aduersus haeres.
c. 35.
privately, publicly, in their speeches, in their books, abroad, at home, at
table, in the streets, the words of Scripture do so flow from their mouth to
make men believe that they have the spring thereof in their hearts, as Vincentius
Lyrinensis co^plaineth, clothing their woluish senses with the soft woll of
Gods sacred Act. 36.
word. And because Catholics refuse to stand to Scripture only, as No^ ad
Scripturas prouoca^dum. Tertull. praescrip. c. 16.
Heretics declare the same, appealing from the^ to the Churches Vt diuinum
canonem secundu^ vniuersalis Ecclesiae traditio^es interprete^tur. Vincent. vbi
supra. c. 38.
judgment, from Scripture interpreted by the fancy of private men, to the same,
declared by the spirit of truth, which shall never forsake the true Joan. 25.
v. 26.
Church* which practice though in truth it be an honor, and not a contempt of
Scripture; yet it is a wonder to see what an vproare in all ages Heretics have
made herupon, accusing Catholics as denyers of Gods word, followers of the
tradition of Aria^s, apud Aug. cont. Maxim. l. 1. initio.
men; in which vein M. Crashaw bestows fou^^ his twenty wounds, treading the
steps of his damned predecessors Nestoria^s, apud Vincent. aduers. haeres. c.
42.
, which though they be very triuiall cauills, and old Babells, wherewith every
Minister commonly when he comes to the Cross, plays the fool in pulpit,
answered by us many hundred times; yet out of ambitious vanity to be thought
the first discouerer of the whores skirtes, he dares say, that they are rare
things which have not been often touched by many, whereat the learned will
laugh, when they shall hear them; though I confess he has added some few
falsehoods more impious, new follyes more ridiculous then ever any perchance
did before him; specially in the two latter of these four, that even Turks
will abhor his profaneness in the one, and children laugh at his ignorance in
the other, which I dare promise the Reader this Answer shall make apparent, to
be spoken in rigide truth, without any exaggeration at all.

An answer to the fourth wound or slander; That the Popes Decretalls are made
equal to holy Scriptures.
2. THE first of these four, and his fourth wound, he sets down in these
words: In the Decree the Pope shameth not to affirm, that his Decretall
Epistles are numbered among the Canonical Decretum d. 19. c. 6.
Scriptures. This all know to be an old worm eaten carp, which has been so
often brought to the table, and discovered to be a mere cavil, that I wonder
men do not loath the very sight thereof; yet the Bachelour to make the same more
pleasant, adds the sauce of a new lie, that this is the saying of a Pope. The
Pope (says he) shameth not to affirm. But first I demand of him the Popes
name, was it Pope Ioane, or Pope Gyn, or Pope Geffrey? Gratian Vide Posseuin.
in Apparatu sacro.
the Author of the Decretum (a book so called) was never Pope, except he were
created in the Co^claue of the Bachelours idle brain. Has he not cause to be
ashamed at his folly, or fraud, not to distinguish betwixt sentences of private
Gratia^ and his Decretum is accused often of ignorance and errors by
Catholics, namly by Bellarmine l. 4. de Romans Pont. c. 10. lib. 2. de Council. c.
12. l. 1. de sacr. matr. c. 5.
Authors, and Definitions, and Decrees of Popes: and this is one new trick of
falsehood. Secondly he charge upon the Canon Law, that doctrine which even in
that place the new reformed book of Gratian denies in express terms,
putting a maine difference betwixt divine Canonical Scriptures, and Popes
Decretall Epistles, declaring that the saying of S. Augustine, cyted out of a
corrupt copy of that Fathers works Bellar. l. 2. de Council. c. 12.
by Gratian, that might seem to magnify the Canonical Epistles of Popes, was
not referred to the Decretalls, but to the Canonical, and holy Quae quide^
sententia B. Augustini no^ ad decretales Romanorum Pontificu^, sed ad Canonicas
sacras Scripturas refere^da est. Decr. did. 19. c. 6. In canonicis.
Scripture. Which note the Bachelour does acknowledge, and no marvel (says
he) though they confess it: For the name of Decretall Epistles of the Popes,
was to get, and to bear many a fair year after his days: where his
ignorance of Histories might be showed by many Decretal See their Epistles tom.
1. Council.
Epistles of Popes, as of Anacletus, Alexand. Victor, Anicetus, Marcellus, and
others, that lived many a fair year before S. Augustine. The Decretall
Epistles of S. Leo Pope, Protestants themselves do not doubt of, who lived in S
Augustines time, and was made Pope not long after his S. Augustine died 430. S.
Leo chosen Pope 440.
death. Likewise the Decretall Epistles of Innocentius the first, are no less
certain and undoubtedly his, who lived in S. Augustines time, and dyed some
years before Innocentius anno 417.
him, as all that have any acquaintance with antiquity do know. So that this
cavil is either foul ignorance, or a fair lie. But that which is most to our
purpose, the Bachelour cannot deny, but that a distinction betwixt the
authority of divine Scriptures, and Popes Decretalls, is expressly taught even
in this place, whence he would enforce the contrary doctrine, which is not
ignorance only, but impudency also.

2. Thirdly he does pervert the plain and clear meaning of Gratian in that
place, which I will show out of that very distinction, the more largely to stop
the mouth of this Minister and his Mates, who still come forth with this
trishtrash, and triuiall slander. For I demand of him, seeing his Conscience
speaks that he has perused the whole scope of this place, whether he does
not know that Canonical Scriptures, or writings do not there signify holy,
and divine Scriptures, but Codicem Canonum, the Book of Canons or Decrees of
General Counsels, to which (and not unto divine Scriptures) Gratian intends
to prove in that distinction, that the Popes Decretalls are equal, as
appears both in the beginning, ending, and body thereof. The beginning is, De
See the beginning of the 19. distinction 1. part. Decreti.
Epistolis Decretalibus quaeritur, an vim authoritatis obtineant, cum incorpore
Canonum non inueniantur. The question is, whether the Decretall Epistles be of
authority, seeing they are not found in the body or book of Canons. This is
the question, which Gratian handles in that distinction, and makes answer in
the words cited by the Bachelour, that the Decretall Epistles are reckoned
among Canonical writings, concluding in the end with these words: Titulus cap.
6.
Decretales itaque Epistolae Canonibus Conciliorum pari iure exequantur. The
Decretall Epistles have right to be equalled to the Canons of Counsels in fine
distinctio^is 19.
. It is then plain, that a distinction is made by Gratian betwixt Canonical
writings, and holy Canonical Scriptures; and that the Popes Decretalls are
said to be of equal authority with the first not with the second. Which is yet
more plainly set down in the body of the distinction in the words of Nicolaus
Pope about this matter, bringing many arguments, that the Decretall Epistles of
Popes, that are not in the Book of the Canons of Counsels, are to be reckoned
Canonical, and of authority to bynd. If cap. Si Romanorum.
(says he) the Decretall Epistles of ancient Roman Bishops were not to be
admitted, because they are not inserted into the Codex Canonum, the Code of the
Canons; then neither the constitutions of holy Gregory, nor of any other Pope
are to be received, because they are not written in the book of Canons. Itaque
nihil refert (says he) vtrum fint omnia necne Decretalia Sedis Apostolicae
co^stituta, inter Canones Conciliorum immista, cum omnia in vno corpore
compaginari non possint. That is; It imports not though all the Decretall
Epistles of the Apostolical Sea be not joined with the Counsels, seeing that
all could not be compacted into one corpse, or book. Thus writes the Pope,
cited by Gratian. By which it is evident, and by the whole scope of that
distinction, that Canonical writings signify in that place the Code of Canons,
and not holy and divine Scripture. What shall we think then of the conscience
of this Bachelour, which speaks that he has diligently perused the whole
scope of this place, and yet so notoriously falsifyeth the meaning thereof?

The fifth slander; That the Popes Decretals are of more authority, then
divine Scriptures.
^. THE second Babel about holy Scriptures, and his fifth wound, is, that we
not only equal, but also prefer the Popes Decretalls, before the holy
Scripture: for this ambitious Bachelour will needs proceed to higher degrees of
slander, not ceasing to clymbe till out of hatred to the Pope, he become
graduate in Atheism, and a plain Atheist, as you shall hear in his next
wound. This Babel ^he seeks to raise upon the words of S. Boniface our
Countreyman, famous for sanctity, and learning, who converted a great part of
the Germayne Nation unto the Christian faith See Baron. tom. 9. ann. 722. 723.
724. and seq.
, and was therefore called the Apostle of Germany, where he endured a glorious
martyrdom for that cause Vide Baron. an. 755.
. This blessed Saint and Martyr says: That Decret. d. 40. in appendice ad cap.
6.
all men do so much reverence and respect the Primacy of the Apostolical Roman
Sea, that they seek some part of the disciplyne of holy Canons No^nullam
Sa^ctorum Canonum disciplinam: which the Bachlour tra^slateth much of the
discipline of holy Canons, putting in to the text much of his own.
and of the ancient Institutions of Christian Religion, rather from the mouth
of the Bishops thereof, then either from holy Scriptures, or the Traditions of
Ancestors: and that therefore if the Bishop of Rome be zealous of Gods glory,
careful in his office, irreprehensible in his life, he is able by his
doctrine, and example to draw great multitudes of all sorts of professions unto
to Christ, to the great increase of his reward. But if on the contrary side, he
be careless of his own salvation, and negligent in the Pastor ship of others,
he may be cause of the damnation of very many, drawing them by his example and
ill life into hell: cum primo mancipio Gehenna multi plagis vapulaturus: where
for the bad performance of his office he shall be punished with many stripes,
and scourged for ever with the chief slave or Devil of hell. This is the
doctrine of that decree, and of that blessed Bishop. What can any Protestant
reprehend, or mislike herein? Is not the Pope plainly, and dreadfully warned of
his duty, and danger even in his own Canon law? How does his Canon law exalt
him above God, which tells him of his Lord and God, and that h^^ so far from
being God, that if he look not to himself, and his office, he may become
equal to the Devil, and fall into the depth of hell? Does not this
sufficiently declare how impudent, and without shame Ministers are, that charge
us, and the Canon law, of equalizing the Pope to God, and setting him in Gods
Throne?

4. But lo (says the Bachelour) what doctrine is here* The discipline, nay
rather the religion it self of Christianity is sought for, rather at the mouth
of the Pope, then at God mouth in holy Scriptures. Thus he wrangleth at words;
but can any man be so simple, as not to see the vanity of this cauill^ For it
is clear that in the former words of S. Boniface is registered a matter of
fact not of doctrine, a History not a Decree, a Relation not a Definition:
there is taught, not wh^^ reverence, and respect men ought to bear to the
Bishop of Rome, but what in their present disposition, and preparation of mind
men did bear; and how that might be used to their eternal good, giving them
exhortations, and monitions, and examples of good life. If a Protestant of
England should write, that the people do more fear the King the^ God that they
be readyer to obey his laws, then what they are taught to be the law of God,
that therefore if the King make good, and pious laws tending to their eternal
salvation, giving them likewise a commendable example of a Christian life, he
may draw great multitudes unto God, and be cause of salvation unto many, to the
great increase of his glory and reward; might one thence infer, that
Protestants of England teach, that men ought to fear the King above God, and
say, behold the doctrine of the Church of England, the King is feared above
God, his law obeyed more then the law of Christ? Were it not great babery not
to distinguish an historical narration of a matter of fact, from a doctrinall
definition of a point of faith? Nay this doctrine that Christian religion does
rather depend of the Pope, then of God, which our Bachelour does charge upon S.
Boniface, was so far from his mind, that he does teach the contrary expressly
in the very Canon before cyted, that Christianity does depend on the Pope post
Deum, after God, secundo In eadem appendice ad ca. 6. did. 40.
post Deum loco, in the second place after God. Thus you see, you find no
so^ide, and substantial objection in all the Bachelours wounds, but the higher
he climbeth, want of judgment, and conscience does more and more show it self,
as shall yet more clearly be demonstrated in the sixth wound.

The sixth wound; In discovery whereof the Bachelour gives advantage unto
Atheism.
^. THIS Babell-builder not content to have made the Popes Decretalls with the
wings of his own inventions fly above Scripture, by a new devise, he breaths
such spirit and vigor into them, as you shall see them pitched a ^oft by an
Atheistical slander, many millions of miles above God. In which conceit and
impious cavil he takes such pleasure, and delight, that he says, the
blasphemy shall ^ut, and this Babell up, though thereby God himself be thrown
out of his Throne. This Atheism (says he) and ^^mpiety is such, as if it had
but crept into some secret Pamphlet, I ^ould never have brought it into light:
but being registered in the Gloss of their law, a book of so great authority,
and so common in the hands of all the learned, I cannot but discharge my duty
to the truth, though it his love vantage to the Atheist, and Libertine. Thus he
professes his love to God, and to the Pope, resolving to make them fall both
together, if he cannot overthrow one without the other. By which you may see
the progress in perfection their Gospel has made, whose Peosy in the
beginning was rather The rebels of Holland at their first rising against their
Prince, set up a banner with the Turkish arms and this poesy, Plutost Tures,
que Papa^x.
Turks then Papists, but now they mount higher by the wings of M. Crashawes
charity, ready to be rather Atheists then Papists. Then they were ready, rather
the^ receive the Pope, to deny The Pope is a more dangerous enemy of Christ
then the Turk. Horn, in his book of the Q. Supremacy against Felton.
Christ: now they will help away with God also, rather then have the Pope to be
his Vicar. And has not this Minister think you, a very tender conscience, who
out of duty to the truth, cannot hold his peace, though such words vampe from
his mouth, as may give advantage against the most sovereign of all truths, the
very sun of all verityes, that there is a God? But seeing (as he says) he
cannot be silent, let us with horror hear hi^ discharge his duty to the
Devil, wresting, and wringing the words of a Gloss to a blasphemous sense,
which may comfort Atheists, as he does confess.

6. These are the words on which this Babel is built, to wit, a Gloss upon a
chapter of the Decretalls containing a verse taken out the ^6. of Salomons
Proverbs. Observe (says the Gloss) that these words are not the words of the
Pope, but of Solomon: but because that text of Solomon is here canonized by the
Pope, therefore it is of credit, and implies necessity of being believed; or
it binds as strongly, as if it had been pronounced, or uttered by the Pope,
because we make all those things as good as our own, upon which we bestow or
impart our authority. Having cited these words, this hypocrite falls to his
prayers, craving mercy of God a have nothing to do with this unchristian
blasphemy and wicked work of darkness; Lutherans did use to say, they would
rather fight for the Turk unchristened then for a Turk Christened, meaning the
Christian Emperor. Erasm. in Epist. ad frat. inferioris Germ.
yet few lines after he says, he cannot let it alone, but must needs meddle
with it, even though he give Atheists thereby occasion to deny that high, and
holy God, whom he will seem to crave mercy of. But did he indeed believe, that
there is a God, who hears prayers, and sees hearts, he durst never have
presented unto him his heart, fuller of hatred to the Pope, then of love to him,
from which proceed three fraudulent tricks here used by him to raise this
Babel that gives advantage unto Atheists. First he does wittingly misconster
the plain meaning of the Gloss, giving it this impious sense, that the words
of God, are not of as good authority as the Popes: and that they are to be
believed, not because they are Gods, but because the Pope has pleased to put
them in the Canon law; which doctrine the Glosser never dreamed of, who by
canonizing the sentence of Solomon, The Glosser by canonizing the words, of
Salomo^ does not understand the making them Canonical Scripture, but only a
part of the Canon law, or a rule in the Ecclesiastical Court.
does not understand the making it divine, and Canonical Scripture, but the
making it a Canon law, with authority to bynd, or a rule to decide doubts in
the Ecclesiastical Court: which authority a Prince that can make laws, may
give to a place of Scripture, if he do utter his law in words thereof. For
all sentences of Scripture, though truths which must be believed, have not the
necessity to bynd as laws, but some only as directions, and counsels, which
may be made laws of a Commonwealth, either civil or Ecclesiastical by the
Princes, and Governors thereof. This sentence of Christ, for example, he that
strikes with the sword, shall dye by the sword, is a truth, that such as
strike with the sword, though perchance they do not kill, yet deserve the
punishment of death, which is a law in some Countries. Now suppose that the
Parliament intending to make a law, that those that go into the field, or fight
with eminent danger of their lives, be punished with death, should set down
that law in these words of Christ, Qui gladio percutit, gladio peribit, he that
strikes with the sword, shall dye by the sword; should not the Parliament give
to that sentence of Christ the power of a civil, and politic law, which it
had not before? Should not they bestow and impart their authority upon it?
Should not they authorize that part of Scripture to be a part of our Common
law? Is there any blasphemy or absurdity in this speech? Does it give any
advantage unto Atheism? Were he not an absurd fellow, or an Atheist, that
would thereupon infer, that the Parlame^t gave divine authority unto that
sentence? That the word of the Parliament is of more authority then the word of
God? All which Babels, and many more, page 74.
this Babel-Bachelour does infer out of the saying of the Gloss, that a
sentence of Solomon, was inserted by the Pope into the Canon law as a rule, or
law how to proceed in the Ecclesiastical Court. Now has he not religiously
discharged his duty to truth, and given Atheists vantage where they had none?
Is not this proceeding to be detested by all that have either religion, or
conscience in them?

7. Secondly, he does conceal from his Reader, that these words of the
Gloss, both in regard of their harsh sound, as also because they are grounded
upon a gross oversight in the Glosser, in all the latter Editions of the Canon
law, reformed by Gregory the 13. are left out; so that now they should not be
seen so much as in a secret Pamphlet, did not such children of darkness as our
Bachelour is, bring them to light, to give advantage unto Atheists, to obscure
the light of all truths, that God is. And here, M. Crashaw, I cannot but charge
you upon your Allegiance unto God, to discharge your duty to the truth, and
shame the Devil, by taking away the vantage you may have given Atheists; are
not these words indeed left out in the latter impressions of the Canon law I
named? Hear his answer, and then judge of the religion of the Minister. If
(says he) they have left it out in any latter impression, so it be with open
confession, and detestation of the fault, it is well, but sure I am, it is in
the impression I have, and in all other which I could borrow: and further I do
not know any Pope or Popish writer, that has with authority, and allowance,
condemned and reproved this Atheism: If they know any, they may do well to
produce them. Do you perceive how he that before was so hot, to discharge his
duty to the truth, now is become so cold in the same duty, that he flies from
confessing the truth like a Bear from the stake, feeding us with iffs, and
ands, loath to bereave Atheists of the advantage he has given them? And not
only does he conceal the truth, but also against his conscience utters a
main and malicious untruth, that he could not borrow any impression, where
these words were left out, which to be notoriously false, this very Sermon does
convince, in which he does cite very often page 5^ (...) 70. page 72 page 42.
the new impression of the Canon law, corrected by the appointment of Gregory
the 13. that of Lions, and that of Paris, in both which impressions, and all
other, the aforesaid recited words are left out: and his iffs, and ands, and
humming about the matter does make it more then suspicious, that he did find
them left out in that impression, but would not confess it, nor discharge his
duty to the truth, which by the former flaunder he might have obscured. And I
desire the Christian Reader, specially the Gentlemen of the Temple, to charge
M. Crashaw to show according to his promise the reformed Edition of Gregory the
13. which he did borrow and cite in this Sermon, whereby they may make trial of
his honesty, and bring this lurking Atheist to light, who under pretense of the
Gospel, seeks wickedly to convey Atheism into his Auditors hearts, which
yet shall be made more plain.

8. Thirdly, concerning the error, and oversight in the Gloss, for which the
former words were discharged, whereas M. Crashaw requires open detestation
thereof, he cannot but know, that we do curse and detest it, who seeing he could
with no color of truth charge that error upon the Roman Church, unto which
his own Church does come much nearer, concealing the same from his Auditors,
in lieu thereof, fathereth his own Atheistical brat upon us. For what was that
error, and oversight in the Gloss? To think that the Sapientiall books of
Solomon, among which are the Proverbs, were not Canonical, mistaking a place
of S. Hierome, and of another Gloss, where some books ascribed to Solomon, as
that of VVisdome, and Ecclesiasticus, were accounted Apocriphall, reading the
place, sat cito, sed non sat been, with more have then good speed, as M. Morton
excuses his In his Animaduersio^s in the very end. 2. p. Apol. Cathol. Vide
De^ret. l. 2. tit. 23.
ouersights. For a little after the former words in that very place, the
Glosser moves the question in terms, whether the Proverbs, and other books
of Solomon be Canonical, and of authority, or no, and answers, that by the
sentence of Hierome, it seems they are not, quod (says he) est valde
notabile, which is a thing much to be noted. And it is in very deed notable to
discover the fraud, and perfidious dealing of this Bachelour, who seeing he
could not charge the Church of Rome with this error, that Salomons books are
not Canonical, knowing we admit not only the Proverbs, but also the books of
VVisdome, and Ecclestasticus, which Protestants reject, he gives us quid for
quo, instead of this error and oversight of the Gloss, caused by over hasty
reading the words of S. Hierome, such an horrible blasphemy and monster, as
could scarce fall into the imagination of man: which impiety against God, and
injury unto us, Protestants may better understand by this example. Luther not
out of over sight, as this Glosser, but obstinately does reject the Epistle of
S. James, calling the same contentious, swelling with pride, and not worth a
Praefat. in Ep. Iacobi: contentiosam, tumidam, aridam, stramineam. in edit.
Ienensi.
rush. If one to comfort Atheists should charge Luther, and the whole
Protestant Church for his sake, that they teach, that holy Scripture, and the
word of God is contentions, proud, not worth a rush, were not this wicked and
perfidious dealing? might not Protestants justly, and would they not bitterly
exclayme against us? who yet are so blinded that they permit their Bachelour to
build such wicked Babels against us, to father such falsehoods upon us, making
that mistaking of one Glosser, doubting of the Canonical authority of one
book of Scripture, a denial, and contempt of all Scripture, and even of the
known word of God in the whole Catholic Church. I want words to express
this wickedness, which therefore, I leave to the ponderation of the Reader, and
what a Church that is, which permits, and in what dreadful danger they are,
that hear such Preachers, who covertly seek to strengthen Atheism, showing
that their own iudicio^ Protestant writer Hooker In his Ecclesiastical
Hierarchy.
had reason to conceive much fear, that Puritans, and such hoat-spurrs, and
enemies of the Pope, as this Bachelour, under color (says he) of rooting out
Popery, will make in the end a way for Paganism, or for extreme Barbarity to
enter.

9. In the same wound he does notoriously slander our learned Countreyman
Doctor Heskins, which though in regard of the matter they may seem light and
nothing, compared with the former, yet they be great tokens of his great
malice. Doctor Heskins in his Parliament of Christ tells a story of one whom he
heard upon the reading of the book of Ecclesiastes, earnestly say, that it was
a naughty l. 1. c. 2. fol. 7.
book. What was he (says the Bachelour) that spoke it? a Protestant? No a
Papist. Which is more then Doctor Heskins says, though he make it his answer.
For the man rather seems to have been a Protestant, seeing upon conference
had with the Doctor upon the matter, he seems not to have yielded to the
definition, and doctrine of the Church, which seems the Protestant practice
of private spirits. Secondly, he said Doctor adds of a Gentlewoman, Heskins
ibid.
that hearing a ^ext of Scripture, which seemed more lively to describe the
^hamlesnes of some women, and their immodest behavior under hedges, the^ her
bashfulnes could well endure, said, that ^he would no more believe Scripture,
for it was naught. Here the Bachelour asks again, what was she that said
this? His answer is, which he pretends to set down in Doctor Heskins words,
A virtuous Catholic Gentlewoman, and ^ne that feared God. Here is another
trick of the Bachelour, ^dding the word Catholic, which is not in the Author,
though the Bachelour might perchance very probably ^hesse by her blushing at
women's shameless immodesty, that ^he was not like those Godly sisters that go
weekly (as I ^m informed) to gossip with him to Pemlico. Thirdly he ^hargeth
Doctor Heskins, that he tells these stories rather with approbation, then
with any detestation of them, which to be a manifest slander, the words of
Doctor Heskins which follow upon this story declare. May not this (says he)
^rieue a Christian heart, that the Scriptures, Gods holy word should be ^^us
blasphemed? Is this to approve those sayings? Does he not detest them as
blasphemies? Does he not openly condemn them? How does malice blind this
Bachelour, that dares utter such open and impudent slanders?

10. I omit his other cauils at Doctor Heskins his sayings, as his accusing him
of blasphemy, for saying, that the song of Solomon seems wanton in the
outward face: that the Book of the Preacher seems vehemently to diswade from
wisdom Here the Bachelour does also falsify D. Heskins, making him say of the
whole book what be spe^keth of one only sentence thereof.
: that some speeches of Scripture a modest man cannot repeat without blushing,
which the holy Ghost did purposely utter, that modest men should speak them
with blushing, that others might see their own shame, not blushing to do what
the modest blush to name. These cauils I say, the Reader of himself does see
to be foolish, which D. Heskins brings to prove, that it is not convenient that
ignorant people should commonly read the Scripture in their vulgar tongue,
which does much distaste our Bachelour, because he says in another place His 3.
wound. page 62.
had his women, and vulgar people the Bible in their mother tongue, they would
startle, and hearing in pulpit some doctrine they do not understand, would
soon say, that is false doctrine: which whether it be good discipline or no,
Pride.
that women should by the Bible in their mother tongue, get tongues of Mothers,
presuming to teach their Fathers; and of sheep that should hear the voice of
their Pastors, Disorder.
become shrewes, chiding them out of pulpit, as he makes his vulgar people to
do with the Italian Friar Bernardinus de Busto: whether this (I say) be good
discipline, and whether reading Scripture in the vulgar tongue be not worthily
forbidden by the Church of Rome, if it do produce the former effects of
startling, correcting their Pastors, and some saying they know not what, these
things I remit to the judgment of any prudent Protestant, or discreet man. I am
sure, had this order been kept with this Bachelour in this Sermon made at the
Cross, to wit, that men might have soon said, that is false, that is a lie,
that is a slander, that is folly, knocking such Babes of Babel on the head
straight, as they came thick and threefold out of his mouth, he might have
been, I dare say, interrupted so often, that he would not have ended in a
year. But the Church of God, and God himself does rather require, that women,
and vulgar people have the ears of daughters, then the tongues of mothers, not
to startle from the beaten way of the faith of their Ancestors, when they hear
any doctrine preached they do not understand, nor so soon say, that this is
false doctrine, but enquire modestly of their Husbands at home, or of others
that are more learned. But you M. Bachelour, that like startling, and
soone-saying, why do you reject D. Heskins his Gentlewoman, that did both
startle, and soone-say, rejecting the book of Ecclesiasticus, iumping with
you, both in a chief point of your belief, as also in the very principle
thereof, of following her private spirit?

The seventh slander, or wound; That Images are made Laymens books.
11. HIS seventh wound, but fourth Babel, about Scripture is, that we make
Images books for Laymen instead of Scriptures. And mark (says he) how this
wound has been made deeper, and wyder. First they taught, that the Scripture
and Images together were good books for Lay men. Then that Images without the
Scripture were to be accounted books for Laymen. Now at last Images are
easier, and readier, and therefore better books for Laymen then the
Scriptures. Thus according to his fashion does he clymbe, buylding the Babel of
slanderous falsehoods, one upon another, without any ground; that still in the
end the Babel falls on his own head, leaving him buried either in horrible
Atheism, or extreme ignorance, or both, as you shall see clearly by this
seventh wound. For on what does he build Babel? Upon a mere babble, or babery
rather, that I doubt not, but even Protestants themselves will laugh at his
gross mistaking, and wonder at his intolerable impudency, obiecting his own
more then babish ignorance, as a wound of our Church. All this high
Babel-building of our Church in a worse and worse doctrine is grounded upon his
childish reading amiss the words of Peraldus, who is made Prince of the
doctrine which joins Scriptures, and Images in the same commission (to use
his phrase) to be Laymens teachers. Thus he reads Gulielmus Peraldus summa
virt. and vit. tom. 1. c. 3.
Peraldus: Vt Scripturae litterae sunt Clericorum: sic Scriptura, and sculptura
litterae sunt Laicorum. As Scriptures are the books, and contain the learning
of the Clergy; so Images and Scripture are the learning and books of Laymen.
Thus he. Where first you may note, that whereas in the Latin commission by him
cyted, Peraldus gives Scripture the first place, the Bachelour puts in the
English Images before them, which may be thought malicious in him, who is so
exact, and curious to carp at the placing of our words one before another, that
because Scribanius, even in a verse, placed the Virgin before Christ; Ergo
Parens, and Nate meis aduertite votis. He does thence gather, Jesuits.
that he Marshals them in the order of his judgment, and affection, and that as
he placed the Virgin before her Son in his verse, so we all do prefer and
give her the precedence in the devotion of our soul.

12. But indeed the true sentence of Peraldus has not Scriptures at all, which
the Bachelour put in to have occasion to rail at the Pope, as though he had
made them to be left out in latter writers, for the words are, Pictura, vel
sculptura litterae sunt Laicorum Tom. 1. summae virtutum and vitioru^. de
iustitia part. 6. quae est de dulia. c. 3.
, painted or carved Images (of Christ, and Saints, and historyes of their
lives) are books of laymen. Where you see the Bachelour was either blind, that
he could not discern betwixt Scriptures, and Pictures, or rather wittingly
mistook the word, to take an opportunity to build by degrees his Babel, which
may seem probable, having had good experience of his truly imoderate, and
insatiable desire to cavil, and exagitate the Roman Church upon every
imaginable fancy, even though it may give advantage unto Atheists, as you have
heard. And this suspicion that he does willingly take upon him this ignorance,
is strongly confirmed by his quoting the place of Peraldus in such sort, as it
might not be easily found, without turning over the whole book, to wit,
Peraldus summae virt. and vit. tom. 1. cap. 3. By which quotation there being
many thi^d Chapers in that Tome, to wit, as many as he does handle several
virtues, the place can hardly have been found without turning over the whole.
Wherefore having some security that we could not discover his false dealing by
tracing his treacherous steps, he falls bouldly to exagitate the Pope for
leaving out Scriptures, which only himself put into Peraldus his sencence. page
81.
Peraldus (says he) gave Scripture so much honor, as to be joined in
Commission with Images, they two to be joint teachers of the Laity: Shameless
lying and railing.
now comes the great Penitentiary (Lelius Zecchius) and is well allowed by the
Pope to leave out the Scriptures as needles, and to give all power to Images.
Thus he. What can a man say to such impudent, and shameless lying, that Zecchius
left out Scriptures in Peraldus? Nay that the Pope did allow him to do it,
where they never were? Must Popes, and Catholics be rayled at, if Protestant
Bachelours cannot read? Let any moderate Protestant judge, whether these be not
Babells indeed, showing babish ignorance joined with extreme malice? Which two
things joined togeathet make this Babe that even now could not spell his
lesson, straight fall on babbling Scriptures against the Pope, leaping from
Peraldus to him, because they begin with the same letter, in so ridiculous
manner, as sobernes it self might smyle thereat. Search the Scriptures says
Christ, and look on them: page 80.
and on Images, says the Pope. How read thou, says Christ: it is painted
and graven, says the Pope. Thy word (says David) is my light (not the golden
Cherubins:) but non says Popery, even in the new Testament ^^e Scripture, and
images are laymens light. Thus he. Might not (...) Parrat chatter Scriptures
as much to the purpose, as he does, making Christ pose poor men that cannot
read, such as Peraldus means, with his question unto the lawie^ Quomodo
l^gis? how read thou? This forsooth is the new Gospel: men are not saved
by believing, but by reading, not by their works, but by their book; they
must learn their ^eck-verse against the day of judgment, when a tatling sister
that has read Scriptures, and can prate of them like a parra^, shall be better
then an unlearned Catholic, that has went many tears for his sins, praying
before an Image of the passion of Christ.

13. Touching the doctrine it self, that Images are books which teach and
instruct ignorant men that cannot read, what man well in his wits would deny
it? Does not dai^y experience teach, that the Images of Christ as he was borne
in great poverty, and need, in a stable, crucified, full of many sores and
wounds, of his flagellation, crowning wi^h thorns, and other passages of his
life, do help ignorant men to call to mind, and lively apprehend these
mysteryes; moving them to devotion and love, and sorrowful contrition for their
sins? What needed this Bachelour to search out later Authors to find this
doctrine, which most ancient Fathers teach? Thus S. l. 9. ep. 9. ad Serenum
Massiliens^m.
Gregory writes; Quod legentibus Scriptura hoc idiotis praestat pictura
cernentibus; quia in ipsa etiam ignorantes vident quod sequi debeant; in ipsa
legunt qui literas nesciunt. What Scriptures teach the learned, the same things
do pictures teach the simple; Pictura quasi Scriptura ad memoria^ filium dei
reducit. Idem Greg. lib. 7. epist. 54.
in them the ignorant behold what they ought to follow; in them those read
which cannot read. This is the doctrine of this learned Father above a thousand
years ago, which the Bachelour does so wonder and rage to find in modern
Authors, as though we were not to follow the doctrine delivered unto us by the
ancient Doctors of Gods Church.

14. Concerning which, you are to note two other false and fraudulent tricks
he uses to make our doctrine seem more harsh. The first is, to extend as
generally spoken of all Laymen, what all our Authors he brings, speak
namely, and expressly of ignorant Laymen only; Laicorum qui nesciunt
litteras See Peraldus, lo^o citato.
(says Peraldus:) Pictures are books for such Laymen as cannot read, ijs qui
litteras ignorant Zecchius in su^ma moral. Theolog. c. 90. art. 18. p. 609.
(says Zechius:) such as know not the letters: simplicibus and idiotis, for
simple people and idiots, says Feuardent. lib. homil. page 16. and 17.
Feuardentius: this is one notable fraud, and falsehood often reiterated in this
wound, to incense Laymen against us, as though they were forbidden to read
Scriptures, and sent to look on pictures; among whom many are learned, and
able to understand Scriptures in Latin, or any other learned language, as well
as diverse Churchmen. Secondly, because Feuardentius says, that simple people,
and idiots, do more easily and in short time learn the mysteries, and miracles
of Christ's life, then they could by reading Scriptures, he does charge him to
teach, that Images are better books then Scriptures, which he calls, Popery
grown to his full ripeness strange and fearful doctrine, which in truth is
but his own strange and fearful lying; there being no mention of (better) in
Feuardentius Ex Imaginum conte^platione discunt facile and breuiter simplices
and idiotae illa diuina mysteria, miracula, and opera, quae ex sacris libris
aut vix aut nu^qua^ percipere valiant.
his sentence. And this inference (they are readier, and easier, and therefore
better books) is not ripe, but rotten gear, or rather such green, and
childish stuff, that I wonder to see the same brought by one that may seem to
be come to the ripenes of reason For who does not know, that the best books
are not ever easiest, nor the easiest ever best. The books of Aristotle in
Philosophy are accounted best, and yet are most hard: nay if we believe the
holy Fathers, no book harder then holy Scripture, which S. Ambrose terms a
sea of deep knowledge, and enigmaticall sentences Mare est Scriptura diuina,
habens in se profu^dos sensus etc. epist. 44.
: in which says S. Multis and multiplicibus obscuritatibus etc decipiuntur qui
temere legunt: quibusda^ autem locis, quid vel falso suspicentur, non
inueniunt. lib. 2. de doctr. Christiana c. 6.
Augustine, many are deceived, which rashly read it: and in some places is so
deep (says he) that we can neither suspect, nor imagine what meaning it has.
May one hence infer that Scripture is not the best book, because it is
hardest, and darkest, and in some place almost impossible to be understood? May
M. Crashaw be thought to be come to the use of reason, who makes this
inference, so void of reason, which even children know to be false, who learn
first the easiest books, but not the best? Might not the Church of England with
more credit have sent their Bachelour with his Babels to some school among
children, then choose him as their Champion to wound the Church of Rome with
his babish reading, fond arguing, and childish chattering of Scriptures?

THE THIRD CHAPTER. THE Eight wound, and slander, concerning adoration of holy
Images; where the Catholic doctrine in this point is showed to be far from
Idolatry, and false worship; and M. Crashaws manifould slanders, and
corruptions of our Authors are so discovered, that, will he stand to his word,
he must publicly recant at the Cross.
THE spirit of pride essential unto heretics our Bachelour does notably
discover throughout his whole Sermon, but most singularly in this eight wound,
concerning worshipping of Images; where he accuses the Church of Rome, and all
our approved Authors throughout all ages successively since the days of
Aquinas, for teaching fearful doctrine, and mayntayning horrible Idolatry, to
wit, that Images of Christ, or Crucifixes are be worshipped as God himself is,
with divine worship page 82.
He does confess page 85
that this imputation is generally cast of by Catholics with this answer, It
is not so, it is but an ignorant and malicious slander, for the Romish Church
gives only a certain reverence to holy Images, but does not worship them at
all, or at least with no divine worship page 85.
. Now can any know better how we honor Images then we our selves? If we
generally reject the imputation of worshipping images with divine worship, as a
false slander, how can it be the general received doctrine of our Church?

2. Moreover he does acknowledge that some of his own profession (to wit the
grauest and learned of their side, who use to read, and can understand our
Scholasticall Doctors) do take our part herein, ashamed, A friendly admonition
unto M. Crashaw putting him in mind of himself.
as it should seem, their Bachelours should either so grossly mistake, or
falsely misreport the doctrine of our Authors in this point of worshipping
Images by themselves with divine worship. And truly, M. Crashaw, me thinks a
man of more ^^^^^g, learning, understanding and judgment then you may justly
presume your self to be, would suspect his own ignorance, mistrust his own
weakness, fear to be deceived in this case, where all Catholics stand
constantly in it, that you do them wrong; and some Protestants second them in
their complaynt, that you, and such Cauillers mistake our doctrine, and shoot
wide of our Authors meaning. You say you know your own weakness page 83.
, which if you do, how can you stand so peremptorily on your own judgment
against so many thousands, partly Protestants, partly Catholics that contest
against you? If you know what ignorance, and learning is, can you so strictly
condemn many thousands of Deuines, successively in many ages Halensis,
Albertus, Bonauentura, Richardus, VValde^sis, and others whom M. Crashaw
cites in his magent page 83.
, confessedly learned, as their excellent works do witness, and of great
sanctity, and gravity, as the histores of their lives do credibly report, of
being so sottishly blind, that they taught, wrote, and sought to prove by many
arguments, that a stock, or stone is to be worshipped and prayed unto, as God
himself is? Which error is so void of sense, that I doubt, whom I should think
more blockish, the man that indeed does teach it, or him that can persuade
himself that any learned man does teach it.

3. But no buckler of defense can save the Church of Rome from the deadly wound
of his tongue; neither respect unto the learning of all Christian Deuines, so
many in number, so renowned for knowledge, and famous for sanctity in all ages,
since the days of S. Thomas, nor love to the brethren, and professors of his
Gospel, whom nothing but evidence of the truth could move to take our parts,
can stay his fury, who like Ismael, whom Scripture terms serum homine^ Genesis
16. v. 12.
that is, as the English Bible translateth, fierce, cruel, or as a wild ass
See the English translation, that of ^eneua printed anno 1595. in the margent.
whose hand was against every man, and every man hand against him; he lays
about him, wounding whosoever come in his way, friend or foe, ancient or
recent, Catholic or Protestant, breaking through armies of opposits to lay
this slander upon the Church of Rome. And first the ancient Catholic Deuines,
namely S. Thomas, he drives away with a valiant shot of reproaches, saying;
they bring wodd^^^ pitiful arguments, to fortify damnable Idolatry; that
they do (...) dally with holy things; that they were blind in their
understanding, and drunk with Babylons spiritual abominations. With no less
fiercenes does he assault his own brethren, that durst speak a word in the
defense of the Church of Rome, M. Crashawes charity toward his own brethren.
saying, they are either ignorant, or malicious, or hollow-harted, whom divided
in these three ranks, he deuideth his charity amongst, pitying the ignorant,
scorning the malicious, hating hollow-harted. Thus all the friends of the
Church of Rome are put to flight by the valiant railing of one Bachelour, she
remaining alone without friend, at the mercy of his merciless tongue.

4. Now, M. Crashaw, before you lay this gross slander upon her, you may
remember what glorious marks of the true Church, the Roman has; how many
Nations she has converted unto Christ, how she was the first that taught
England to call upon the sweetsauing name of Jesus; how many Doctors renowned
for learning, famous for sanctity, glorious for miracles, have been her
children; how when your Church either was not, or durst not show her face, she
maintained so many ages together alone the name of Christianity in the world,
which otherwise might have perished from mankind. Let so many reasons move you,
not to lay the wou^d of this senseless doctrine to her charge, of worshipping,
adoring, and praying unto a stock or stone, as unto God, from which you know
her children do generally disclayme. Nothing will stay our Bachelour. What is
said of a beggar on horseback, proves true of him in pulpit, he will gallop,
thinking it a glorious thing to have liberty to lie, and rail as he list,
without being controlled. For hear how crank he is, and how he craketh, and
croweth on his own dunghill. Let others come (says he) and conceal her
shame, page 83. 84.
and ^ide the whore of Babylons filthiness, as they will. I say for my self,
let the tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth, if I spare to discover her
skirts, A fond and foul defiance.
and lay open her filthiness to the world, that all men seeing her, as she is,
may detest and forsake her. Wherefore in the words of truth, and sobernes, I
do here offer to this Honorable Audience, that I will willingly come to this
place, and recant it with shame, if I prove not apparently to the judgment of
every reasonable man, that this is the common and general doctrine of the
greatest number of their best approved Authors that have written in these
latter days: namely, That an Image of God, or a Crucifixe, especially one made
of wood whereon Christ dyed, or that Cross it self, are to be worshipped with
(...), that is, with the worship due unto God.

5. Thus he, Where, for my part I confess, that though M. Crashaw do
earnestly say, that he made this defiance being sober, yet cannot I believe,
but before he came to the Cross to preach against the worshippers of the
Cross, he had offered a morning sacrifice in Malmesey, unto the God of the
enemies of the Cross Enemies of the Cross of Christ, whose God is their belly
ad Philip. 3. v. 18.
, frequent sacrificing to which God, make Ministers fervent discouerers of the
whores skirts, and greater deuotes to the pictures of Cupid, and Venus, then
unto the Images of Christ, and the Virgin, specially the holy Cross, whose
tender hearts do profess to hate this sign of the Savior, and the salvation
of Beza.
mankind. And that M. Crashaw had not digested that morning devotion, when he
brake forth into this foul, and fond defiance, he may justly doubt that shall
consider, what he undertakes to prove, by what means, in what manner, and
under what penalty he does promise to prove, that it is the general and common
doctrine in our Church, that, the Image of Christ, and Cross it self (not
Christ, in, or before it) is to be honored with the worship due unto God. This
he will prove by producing the greatest number of our latter Authors, which
mount to thousands. He will bring not ordinary ones, but the very best; and all
this he will perform, not probably, but apparently to the judgment, not of the
learned alone, but also of every reasonable man, that if one reasonable man be
found in the world, that does not see apparently that the greatest number of
our best Authors worship the Cross as God, he will come to the Cross and
recant this slander with shame, which promise I much fear the event will
show, was not spoken in the words of truth, though happily it were spoken
soberly and wittingly enough, seeking by this show of confidence to drive
deeper into ignorant peoples heads this odious conceyt, that the Catholic is
an Idolatrous religion. Yet that he may have no excuse to slip hi^ neck out of
the collar of this promise which must draw hi^ again to the Cross to recant,
page 82.
except he will be thoughts deceiuer, and a breaker of his word given before so
Honorable an Audience, M. Crashaws dealing in this Wound.
I will show (I make no doubt) apparently to the judgment of all men that
understand Theological matters, that he does not understand the Authors whom
he cites; that he most grossly, and slanderously peruerteth their plain and
pious sayings; that most commonly also either he leaves out, or mistranslateth
their words which contain the substance of their doctrine, uttering many
falsehoods which he could not but know to be such.

6. Which that you may better understand, you must know there are two opinions
among Catholic Deuines, Two ways or ma^ners to declare, or practice honoring
Images of the Church.
or two ways to declare the manner of worshipping the Images of Christ, or
Crosses, which yet, as you shall see, come in effect to be both one. The one is
to worship the Images of Christ by themselves, as holy things appointed to
represent our Savior in his passion, or birth, or some other mystery of his
life, by directing, and giving unto them some honor, and reverence, inferior
unto divine, and less then is given unto any holy man; and this honor is only
a reverent, or respectfull use of them, like unto that special care and
respect, with which men use to keep things that be^ong to the person they
dearly love, specially when the same does lively represent him, and are left,
or given in memory of him, wearing them about them, or laying them up in decent
places. This manner of worshipping Images is clear from the least shadow of
giving divine worship to the Images themselves, that even our friend M. Crashaw
could not find any hook or crook to fasten that imputation upon it, which is
the opinion of Bellarmine lib. 2. de imaginibus c. 21. and 25.
Suares Tom. 1. in 3. p. D. Thom. disput. 54. sect. 5.
Saunders De honoraria Imaginu^ adorat. l. 2. c. 7.
and diverse others, that Images are not truly and properly honored, but in
this sort.

7. And as this first manner of honoring Images is pure from any show of
Idolatry, so much less would M. Crashaw accuse the other, did he understand
the same, which gives less honor unto Christ's Image, then this first; and is
so far from giving divine worship, that it may rather seem, and does so seem
unto some to give no worship at all, but only worship Christ with divine
worship, before his Image. For this manner is, that by the image remembering
Christ, we worship and honor him, directing unto him the reverence which is
due, showing outward signs thereof before his image, as kneeling unto,
kissing, and embracing the same, referring those acts (as the Council of Trent
teaches Imaginibus veneratio impertienda, non quod credatur inesse ipsis
aliqua diuinitas, vel virtus propter quam sint colendaes sed quoniam honos qui
ipsis exhibetur, refertur ad Prototypa quae representa^t. sess. 25. decret. de
sanctis Imaginibus.
) to testify the inward respect, and affection we bear toward our Savior,
resembled by his image; by which signs of divine worship, though not directed
to the Image of Christ, yet done before it, does redound some kind of honor
unto the very image, these signs showing the dignity thereof, the greatest an
image, as image, can have, to wit, to represent him whom we worship with divine
worship, whom, did not that image resemble, we would not worship before it.
This manner of honoring Images, not by honoring them directly in themselves,
but another, in, or before them, both with one and the same act, may be
declared by a contrary example of the profaning, and dishonouring of Churches
by the sacrilegious murder of a Priest, or sacred person in them. For that
sacrilege, though not done directly upon the Church, which is not killed, nor
the murderer so sottish as to intend the killing thereof; yet by doing the
murder in the Church, or near the Church, the same Church is truly profaned
by that very murder, wherewith the Church is not hurt. And as it were folly to
infer, the Church is profaned by the same act a man is killed, which is
murder, therefore the Church is murdered, or that act is a murder of the
Church: so likewise it is gross ignorance to argue, that we give divine
worship to Christ's Image, because the same is honored together with Christ,
by one, and the same act, which act is divine worship of the one, but not of
the other. By this you may perceive that there is small difference if any (as
Bellarmine notes) lib. 2. de Imag. c. 25.
betwixt these two manners of declaring the adoration of Images, for both agree
that the respect, and honor due, and given to the Images of Christ by
themselves, is infinitely inferior unto divine, and such as does not reach to
the honor due unto the meanest Saint: but is answerable only to the dignity of
a sign, or figure to put us in mind of him, whom we worship as God; and in
this all Catholics agree against the slanders of the Bachelour, and his
Mates. The seeming difference is in the manner, how this inferior respect and
honor comes to Christ's Image, whether by a proper and special act of
reverence given unto it, which is a more perfect manner of honoring a thing,
or by worshipping Christ before the same, many times without so much as
thinking of the Image, which is indeed most perfectly to adore the Image of
Christ, as an Image, whose office is, not to stand for it self, but for
another, and to make us only think of, and love, and reverence him, whom it
does represent, forgetting all other things: as when we cast an account, we
only remember the number of 20. 50. or 100. for which the counter stands, not
regarding the same in it self, whether it be brass, or silver, black or
yellow, great or little. This supposed, let us come to the particular Authors,
whom M. Crashaw traduceth of worshipping Christ's Image as God.

8. And first as touching all the ancient, and our approved Deuines
successively in all ages since Aquinas, the six he quoteth in the margent, in
very truth, do in express terms teach the contrary in those very places, page
83.
which might be convinced by the several testimonies of each of them: but
seeing he does but touch them by the way, and it should seem he has not so
much as read them, whom he does so confidently accuse, I will not stand upon
it: only you shall hear the first, and the last of the six speak for the rest,
the rather, because both of them are our Countrymen, famous in former ages for
their learning See Posseuine in his apparatu sacro. tom. 1 and 2.
. The first is one of the most ancient Deuines Alexander Halensis lived in the
year 1240.
, who was Master unto Aquinas, or S. Thomas himself, Alexander Halensis, who
in the place by this Bachelour noted, moves this question, Whether greater
honor be due to the Cross, or to a man. p. 3. q. 30. a. 3. Ille mayor honor
qui exhibetur Cruci, refertur ad rem significata^, cuius est signum: no^ ad
ipsam crucem in se. Thomas VValdens. vixit. ann. 1410.
Note (says he) somethings are Images of God by participation, that is, do not
only represent, but also have in them part of the power, wisdom, and goodness
of God: such Images are intellectual creatures. Other Images are only signs of
some benefits we have received of God, as of his incarnation, passion, and
such other mysteries of Christ's life. When an Image is a bare sign only, the
whole honor is referred to the person represented in it, whereupon Damascen
says of the Cross, that adoring it, we adore the passion of Christ, or Christ
stretched upon it: but when we adore an Image of God that does not only
represent but participate also of his wisdom and goodness, we use the honor
of (...), which is due unto a creature, as it does participate of the wisdom,
and goodness of God, which dignity the Cross has not. So that the greater
honor given to the Cross, is referred to Christ, whom it resembles, not unto
the Cross it self. Thus writes this Author, showing that divine honor is
not directed, or referred unto the Cross, or the Image, when we worship the
same, but unto Christ before it. Can any thing be more pious then by help of
his Image to remember Christ, and forgetting all other things to love, and
reverence him before the same, as this Doctor teaches? The last of the six is
Thomas Waldensis, whom M. Crashaw does no less unconscionably slander of
honoring an Image of Christ as God, who delivers the contrary doctrine in
this short but substantial sentence: To adore Images, says he, as things of
nature, though so they signify God, is folly: to adore them as God, or Gods, is
Idolatry: to adore them, that by them we may adore God, is piety Adorare eas vt
res naturae, quamuis sic mihi significent Deu^, fatuu^ est: adorare eas pro Deo
vel Dijs, sacrilegum est; sed adorare eas, vt per eas adoremus Deum, sanctum
est. tom. 3. c. 156. n. 6.
. And further declaring how by Images we adore God, or Christ in them, he
notes Sicut vident multi quosdam vestitos, qui interrogati de color vestis,
ignorant, quia toti ferebantur in hominem: ita qui adorat imaginem, adorat eum
cuius est imago, ita quod pene obliuiscitur Imaginis, dum prima co^templationis
instantia rapitur in signatu^. VValde^sis vbi supra.
, that as sometimes when we see a friend whom we dearly love, though we see
his apparel, yet do we not mark, nor can tell of what color, or fashion the
same is, our affections are so totally employed upon his person: so when we
devoutly worship the Image of Christ, we forget in a manner the Image, not
marking of what metal, or color, or fashion it is, only remembering Christ,
and thinking on him whom in that Image we love, and fear, and worship,
testifying our inward affections toward him by outward signs before his
Image. Now is this damnable Idolatry? Is this to worship not Christ but the
Image of Christ with divine worship? If we commit Idolatry, as this Bachelour
says, when forgetting all things but Christ, we worship him before his Image:
then must it needs follow, that Christ is by Protestant Divinity an Idol.

9. But let us now come to our later writers, whom our Bachelour does specially
accuse, promising to bring the very best, and the greatest number, teaching
divine worship to be given to the Image of Christ, where you shall see him
discover his own skirts, and lay open both the nakedness of his learning, not
understanding the Authors whom he traduced, and filthynes of his conscience,
corrupting their sentences which he cites; which the particulers here proved
against him will make clear I hope, in the judgment of every reasonable man.
He cites the testimonies of only three, whom he thought, having spared no
labor to peruse our Authors, to favor most this blasphemy.

10. The first is Gregorius de Valentia, whom he brings in with this encomion,
page 83.
a Jesuit, a prosessour of Divinity, as Bellarmyne is, of his own Sect, whom
he makes speak in this manner. It is certain, that Images are to be
worshipped, so as properly the worship shall rest in them, not for themselves,
nor for the matter, nor for the forms sake, but for his sake they resemble,
and in this sense they are to be worshipped, so as they be whom they resemble,
and therefore the Image of Christ as man is to be worshipped with the same
worship due to Christ himself. Thus does our Bachelour translate Valentia,
using three fraudulent tricks in Englishing few lines. First he makes him say,
that Images are to be worshipped, so as properly the worship shall rest in
them; but he leaves out, suo quodam modo Sic quidem venera^dae sunt Imagines,
vt ipsae quoque proprie suo quoda^ modo sint terminus venerationis. Tom. 4. q.
24. pu^ct. 2.
, that is, in a certain manner of their own, or proper and peculiar unto
Images; which words are the wings of his sentence, that make divine worship
fly from the picture to the person of Christ, and therefore the Bachelour did
clip them. For this manner proper unto Images, est tantum relative terminare
motum honorationis, is only that Images have honor given them relatiuely, as
Valentia here says, which relative worshipping what it is, he declares in his
third to me upon S. Thomas, to which he refers himself in this place in
these very words: When Nos prototypum ex imagine cogita^tes, coram ipsaque
actione^ honorificam, proinde ac si prototypon similiter esset praesens
exerce^tes, velle Prototypi excellentiam protestari, adeoque de ipso excitare
opinione^ excellente^ etc. Tom. 3. disput. 6. de Idololatria q. 11. pu^cto. 6.
it is said (says he) that the same worship is given to the Image, which is
given to the person represented by it, the sense is, that by means of the
picture calling to mind the person represented, and before it doing some act of
honor or reverence, as if the person were there present, we do thereby
testify, and declare the dignity and excellency of him, whom the picture
represents, and so make others that behoulds us to conceive reverently of the
said person. What can be more clear then these words of Valentia, that he
does not give divine worship to the Image, but unto Christ only, whom the
Bachelour does still suppress, as though we never so much as thought of
Christ, when we honor his Image, whom only our thoughts behold, and our inward
reverence and affection only does respect, as Valentia teaches?

11. Secondly these other words of Valentia, Imagines venerandae sunt non per
se quatenus tali materia continentur, sed per aliud, scilicet ratione
prototypi, he does imperfectly translate: Images are to be worshipped not for
themselves, nor for the matter nor forms sake, but for his sake they resemble.
Which translation though Valentia had said no more, does sufficiently condemn
the Bachelour of slanderous accusing us to teach that Images are to be
worshipped as God, seeing God must be worshipped for himself, and for his own
dignity and Majesty, not for another sake only whom he resembles, as Images
are. Nay to worship God in that sort were rather to blaspheme, then worship
him: for did we honor him only as resembling one greater, and more glorious
then himself, we should not honor him as God, but as an Image of God, which
were a senseless blasphemy. So that Vale^tia telling his tale in English,
endited by M. Crashaw himself, bears witness against him, that Images in our
doctrine are not worshipped as God is, but as Images ought to be for another
sake whom they resemble. But indeed Valentia says yet more in Latin, which the
Bachelour would not let him utter in English, for he says, that Images are not
to be worshipped per se, sed per aliud, not by themselves, but by another, that
is, they are not only to be honored for his sake only whom they represent, and
not their own, but also not to be worshipped in themselves, Saints are
honored by themselves, yet for another sake Images neither for their own
sake, nor by themselves without Christ.
by directing any honor, as kneeling, praying, and the like, to show out
inward love, reverence, and subjection unto them, but by worshipping another in
them, to wit, the person whom they represent Could not M. Chrashaw distinguish
betwixt doing a thing, propter alium, and per alium, for another, and by
another? Makes he no difference betwixt writing for another, and writing by
another? When one writes for another, though he write not for his own sake,
yet does he truly write, but he that writes only by another, cannot truly, and
properly be said to write himself. The like is in our case, if we should
worship Images for another sake, yet might we be thought truly to worship
them in themselves, by directing honor unto them for his sake whom they
represent, in which sort we worship Saints, praying, and kneeling unto them,
though all be finally for his sake whose friends, and servants they are. But
when it it said, we worship Images, not by themselves, but by another whom they
resemble, the sense is, we do not worship at all the Images by themselves, but
the person whom they represent, in, and before them.

12. Thirdly having wounded the head, and middle of this sentence, he comes at
last to mangle the legs, or rather to cut them clean off. Valentia concludes
in this sort: Christi Imagines latria venerandae sunt per aliud, the images of
Christ are to be worshipped with divine worship by another, that is, not by
worshipping them directly in themselves with divine worship, but another whom
they represent before the^. The Bachelour makes him say in English, The Image
of Christ as man, is to be worshipped with the same worship due to Christ,
where he leaves out per aliud, by another; as though it did nothing import,
being indeed the substance of all, as Valentia declares by these words in
that very place. Images Valentia tom. 3. conclus. 4.
(says he) though as they are holy things, that serve for piety and devotion,
in that respect are decently, and reverently to be used: yet as they be Images,
Honorando videlicet ipsum prototypu^ quatenus in illis secundum quandam
peculiare^ habitudinem inest.
that is, as they be representative of another besides themselves, they are to
be honored relatiuely, and by that other whom they resemble. In what manner,
or what is it to worship them relatiuely, Vale^tia declares himself
perspicuously, saying: to honor Images relatiuely, or by another, is to honor
the person it self represented, as it is in the Image, by a peculiar
reference, and relation, as the thing represented is in his picture: So that
Images are in place and steed of their prototypes, or the persons whom they do
resemble. Thus writes Valentia. Which he proves out of Athanas. who writes,
that the Image of a King could it speak, would say, I and Ego and Rex vnu^
sumus, quia ego in illo sum, and ille in me. Athanas. sermon. 4. co^tra Arian.
the King are one, for I am in him, and he in me. Whereupon Athanasius
concludes, Qui adorat imagine^, in illa adorat ipsum Regem; he that adoreth
the Image, adoreth the King himself. What can be more clear, then that
Valentia teaches not to direct divine worship, service, and love unto Images,
but to Christ? Ex imagine (says he) cogitantes Christum, by the Image calling
to mind Christ, we worship, love, and adore him. What is holy, if this be
whorish doctrine? Has not our Bachelour notably discovered his own skirts?
Does not his want of conscience, and learning notoriously appear?

13. Now let us give hearing to the second witness, to wit Gretzerus, whom also
he bringes in with great titles, The very hammer of heretics, The Champion of
Papists, page 86.
of the same University with Gregory de Valentia, into whose mouth he puts
these words: We affirm according to the more common opinion, and more
received in Schools, that the Cross and all Images, and signs of the Cross
are to be worshipped with (...), that is divine worship. Here M. Crashaw
clappeth his hands, saying: Can any man speak more plainly then these two
Jesuits do? How plainly Valentia spoke to make this Bachelours ignorance, and
want of conscience appear we have already showed; and a no less clear witness
against him will Gretzerus be, when we have heard him out his tale, to wit, the
negative words, that follow in the same sentence, which he cut off, containing
the very form, and substance of his doctrine, which are these: Non quidem per
se, sed per aliud, non absolute, sed cum habitudine, and relatione ad
prototypum Gretz. l. 1. de cruce. c. 49. Crux ipsa and omnes Imagines, and
signa Crucis, latria, hoc est cultu diuino adoranda sunt; non quide^ per se,
sed per aliud; non absolute, sed cum habitudine ad prototypum.
, that is, Images of Christ are worshipped with divine worship, not by
themselves (directing divine honor unto them) but by another (whom in them we
honor, and adore) not absolutely, but relatiuely, by ordayning, and referring
that divine worship unto the person whom they resemble, to wit Christ. For (as
Gretzerus declares) nature itself has made Images instruments to convey the
honor showed them by outward signs unto their Prototypes, that is the persons
whom they resemble: which to be true none can deny, seeing even common people by
light of reason do understand, that as S. Ambrose says, he that crowns the
Image of the Emperor Qui Imaginem Imperatoris coronat, eum vtique coronat,
cuius ea Imago est. sermon. 10. in Psalm. 110.
honors him whose Image he crowns. And as that which is given me
relatiuely for another, that is, not to be kept for my self as my own, but to
be made over unto another, as a due, or gift, cannot properly by said to be
mine, nor given me: so divine worship and love done before the Image relatiuely
unto Christ to be conveyed, and made over by that means unto him, cannot be
properly said to be given unto the Image, but unto Christ. This does Gretzerus
teach, and largely prove in that place, by which you may perceive how the
Bachelours tongue can cleave to the roof of his mouth, when by being dumb and
suddenly silent, in the middst of a sentence, he may seem to leave our
Authors teaching blasphemy, and get a color to rail at the seeming absurdity
of their mangled sayings, as Ajax in his fury scourged his own curtaild dog
instead of Ulysses. So that hitherto we find none of our Deuines later or
ancient that teach divine worship to be given unto any Images in themselves,
but the clean contrary in express terms, not to the Image, but unto Christ,
in, and before his Image.

14. From Deuines he passes to Casuists, or Summists, which write Resolutions,
to settle doubting consciences, as he says. Among whom he chooses Iacobus de
Graffijs, to speak for all Romish Confessors, answering a poor Papist, whom
he makes to ask this question: How far may I worship a Cross, or with what
kind of worship? Hearken (says he) how they answer: Holy Images considered as
they be pieces of wood or metal, Iacobus de Graffijs decis. casuu^ conscient.
Tom. 1. l. 2. c. 2. art. 3.
or some such things are to have no honor given them: but in them another
matter is looked at; namely the Image of him whom they resemble, and not the
matter whereof they are made, in which respect look what reverence and worship
is due to him whose Image it is, the very same by good right is to be bestowed
on the Image. This answer he makes this Monk of great name, and Grand
Penitentiary of Naples, as he terms him, give to a poor Papist, which I do
not see, why it might not satisfy the richest Minister, were they as greedy of
truth, as of gold, did they apply their minds to learning, as they do to
lucre, that they might be able to understand our Authors they cavil at, which
the Bachelour surely does not. For who that understands the words of this
Author would cavil, or reprehend his doctrine, as giving divine worship to an
Image of stone, or wood, or other metal, who says the plain contrary, that in
the Image (for example of Christ) we must not worship the Image of wood, or
metal, or any such thing, but we must look for another matter, another
Image? what other form can we find in Christ's Image besides the Image, form
and figure of his sacred person, whom that Image of wood does resemble? Which
Image or figure of Christ represented in that Image of wood, and not the Image
of wood it self, we are (says this Penitentiary) to worship with divine
worship. So that in this Image of Christ we consider two Images; the one of
wood which we see with our corporal eyes, but do not worship the same, nor
any thing that is truly, and really in it, with divine honor Imagines si vt
res quaedam considere^tur, nulla eis tribuenda est reuere^tia. De Graff. loc.
citat.
; the other of a more sacred, and divine matter, to wit, of the sacred flesh of
our Savior, which we see only with the eyes of our minds, and worship with
divine worship before that other of In illis Imago eius cuius sunt atte^ditur,
non materia ex qua formatae sunt. Ibid.
wood. Now does this Casuist teach that divine worship is given unto Images of
wood, or stone, or brass? Is the figure, and form of Christ's person, which in
the Image we must look after, and worship, made of such metal, and not of
virginal Deified flesh, full of most precious blood, the least drop whereof
might suffice to redeem a million of worlds, and therefore most worthy of
sovereign worship? And out of this doctrine of Iacobus de Graffiis, we may
frame an answer unto the poor Papist, whom M. Crashaw makes importune to
know, how far, and in what sort he may worship Christ's Image? My son, thou
must not regard in the Image, of what metal the same is, wood, or stone, or
brass, or silver, or gold, nor the form or figure thereof, whether the same be
cunningly either painted, or carved, In what ignorant people are taught to
honor Christ's Image.
or graven; thou must look after another matter, and another Image, to wit,
the sacred person of Christ, seeking to set the same before the eyes of thy
mind, in the most lively sort thou art able; and then again, look and
consider well, what devotion, what reverence, what honor, and love is due unto
Christ, give the same unto the Image, and figure of his sacred person, or to
him figured, and imagined, whom by his Image of wood or stone, or other
metal thou see. This is the answer which the Grand Penitentiary makes to
the poor Papist, which will satisfy him without doubt, except M. Crashaw have
robbed the poor man of his wits, leaving him poorer of judgment, then the
Purseuants of temporal goods. For no resolution can be either clearer in the
truth thereof, even by the light of Nature, or freer from the least suspicion of
false worship, or more to the capacity of the meanest; which I can be content
to remit to the judgment of the learned and discreet Reader.

13. But yet we are not come to the height of this Chymericall Babel, which now
M. Crashaw begins to build by our Breuiaryes, to the skies, even as high as
Christ, making the foundation to be this prayer; page 89.
All hayle o Cross, our only hope, we pray thee in this holy time of Lent
increase justice, and righteousness in Godly men, and grant pardon to the
guilty etc. against which prayer this Bachelour declaymeth very largely, that
we call upon, and pray unto a wodden Cross, which (notwithstanding his promise
to bring neither trifles, nor triuiall things) is a common and triuiall
slander that has been answered by Catholics (I speak within compass) a
thousand times; The Bachelour puts into our Breuiaries these words, we pray
thee o Cross.
yet to show themselves indeed children of Babel that will not be healed, for
want of better matter, they come still forth with the same, adding new
falsehoods unto the former, as our Bachelour of Babel now adds to the text
these words, We pray thee (o Cross) which are not in the text, nor in the
intention of that prayer. For the prayer is not directed to the Cross, but to
Christ, though more to express the ardent, and burning desire we have of the
pardon, and justice which Christ did deserve for us on the Cross, by a
Rhetorical Metonimia.
figure, the speech seems to be directed to the Cross, on which Christ dyed,
and from whence salvation comes. By the like figure the Prophet Esaias, to show
how he did burn with desire to see the Savior and Redeemer of mankind in flesh
upon earth, speaks to the heavens and clouds, from whence he was expected, to
send him down: Isa. 45. v. 8.
O ye Heavens (says he) power down your dew, and let the clouds rain down
the Savior. Which prayer is meant unto God, that rules in the heavens and
clouds, though seemingly directed to the very heavens, and clouds, the Seat
and Throne of God. So likewise the foresaid verse of our hymn, All hayle o
Cross, is intended unto Christ, that redeemed us by the Cross, though
seemingly the words speak to the Cross, the throne of his grace, and mercy.
But says our Babeller, If we direct our hearts unto Christ, why then direct we
our words to the Cross? Is he not as worthy of the one, as the other? Which
question you see he might as well make to the Prophet Esaias: If he directed his
heart unto God, why did he direct his words to the heavens, craving from them,
not justice and mercy only, but the very fountain of both? And the answer is
easy, to wit, that the holy Ghost did inspire the Prophet to use that figure in
his speech and prayer, both to declare the ardency of his desire, and to the
end, that the very strangenes thereof might stir up the hearers, and readers, to
reflect upon the great necessity of that gift and Savior. And the same holy
Spirit upon the like reasons (...) Cross of Christ, for the Church sings,
All hayle o Cross, our only hope etc. The argument Sed contra brought by the
Bachelour as the resolution of S. Thomas.
This is all that he brings, which were it truly alleged, is little to the
purpose. For S. Thomas in this place does not say, the prayer is not made unto
Christ, which the Bachelor does accuse him of, nor that it is made to the
Cross, but only that we place the hope of our salvation in the Cross, which
we may do in diverse things to which we do not pray. But indeed the Minister
does allege falsely S. Thomas, who in that article brings the former argument
before he delivers his own opinion, arguing the question according to his
custom on both sides, after which he comes to conclude, and give his verdict
and reason thereof, whereof we shall straight ways speak largely: so that our
Bachelour does make the objection, the answer and definitive doctrine, which
is a gross and notorious falsification, specially saying expressly, that S.
Thomas does conclude first, and then bring the former argument afterward, which
is so apparently false, that I cannot see, how he can excuse it from wilful
falsehood.

Honor no^ debetur nisi rationali naturae: creaturae autem insensibili non
debetur honor nisi ratione rationalis naturae. Et hoc dupliciter, vno modo in
quantu^ representat rationalem naturam; alio modo in quantum ei quocumque modo
coniungitur. Primo modo consueuerunt homines venerari Regis imaginem: secundo
modo eius vestimentum. Vtrumque autem venerantur eadem veneratione qua
venerantur and Regem.
19. Now in the body of the article, S. Thomas is so far from teaching to pray,
and give divine worship to the Cross, by it self, and not to Christ, that he
teaches the contrary expressly, for thus he does discourse. To the Cross
(says he) by it self no worship at all (either divine, or not divine) is to
be given, because reverence, and honor is due only to a reasonable creature:
insensible things we must worship only as they concern reasonable, or
intellectual natures, which they may do two ways, either because they
represent, or because they touch some person that is worthy of honor. In this
sort men worship both the Image, and garment of a King, because the one does
represent, the other touch his sacred person, both which things they worship
by the same worship they worship the King, that is, not giving or directing
acts of worship to his Image or garment a part by themselves, but giving Royal
honor unto the King represented in the one, and clothed in the the other: so
that by kissing the Kings robes, we do testify the duty we owe, not to the
garment, but to the King. In this manner S. Thomas teaches, that we ought to
worship the Cross of Christ, which is both his Image, representing the form
and figure of his crucified body, as also a Relic that touched his sacred
flesh, grayned with his precious blood, not directing divine worship to the
Cross, but in his Cross conceauing him as stretched upon it, and as
sanctifying the same with the sacred touch of his divine person, in which we
do so lively apprehend Christ, and behold him with the eyes of our mind, that
(says he) Crucem alloquimur quasi ipsum Crucifixum; which words the Bachelour
does translate: We speak unto the Cross, as well as unto him that dyed on it;
giving the sentence a blasphemous sense, contrary both to the sound of the
words, and meaning of the Author, which indeed is that we speak to the Cross,
as if we spoke to Christ crucified himself; as in representations, he that
bears the person of the King, the rest alloquuntur eum quasi Regem, speak
unto him, not as well as to a King, but in the same manner as they would speak
to that King he represents, were he indeed present, whom they imagine present
in him that represents his person, as Catholics do, and all Christians ought
to do when they see Christ's Image, to look on the Cross, not as it stands
for it self, but for him that dyed on it, whom we imagine as present, and
pray unto him, as if we saw him before us with our eyes, stretched in form of
a Cross. Which devotion that holy Roman Matrone S. Paula did practice, and is
in this respect highly commended by S. Hierome: Hiero^. in epitaph. Paulae. ep.
27.
Prostrata ante crucem, quasi pendentem Dominu^ cerneret, a^orabat, prostrate
before the Cross she did adore, as if she had seen Christ present before her;
not doubting in devout reverence to that divine relic, to lick the same with
her tongue Crucis lambere lignum. ep. 17. Hiero^.
, giving in that pure, and primitive age an example of devotion to the Cross
to future Christian Ladies to practice, notwithstanding the profane scoffs of
belly-Gods, and enemies of the Cross, who shaming to honor the sign and
instrument of salvation, shall have their end destruction, and their glory
confusion Ad Philip. 3.19. Inimici Crucis Christi, quoru^ deus ve^ter, finis
interitus and gloria in confusione ipsorum. page 93.
.

20. But further concerning this doctrine of S. Thomas, that the Cross is to
be honored together with Christ by the same act, I cannot omit an
intolerable falsehood uttered in this place by M. Crashaw, who having cited
this doctrine of S. Thomas, does say, that never Popish Author approved by our
Church reproved the same, or taught and wrote the contrary, which to give it
the gentlest censure in S. Augustines own words, is the speech of a man that
does little understand matters about which he much loves Hominis est, vt
mitishme dicam, parum intellige^tis, res de quibus loqui amat multu^. Aug. de
vtilit. cred. c. 1.
to babble. For who does not know, that it is a famous question in Catholic
Schools, whether an Image is to be honored by it self, or only together with
the prototype, and that many Deuines by our Church approved, and still allowed
have written contrary to S. Thomas, and have reproved his doctrine by name, as
Gabriel Biel in 3. p. did. 9.
, Catherinus de ador. Imag. co^cl. 6. and 7.
, Martinus de Aiala de tradit. p. 3. c. de cultu imagine.
, Sanders lib. 2. de honor. ador. imag. c. 7.
, Bellarmine l. 2. de imag. c. 12.22.25.
, who seeks to prove largely, that properly speaking the Image is not
worshipped at all, when we worship Christ in, or before it, namely reproving S.
Thomas his manner of speech, saying, that he would have changed the same had he
seen the seventh general Council; so little does the man know of matters of
which he does so talk, and for which he does so insult upon us. And as for
that speech of S. Thomas, that Images of Christ are honored together with
Christ by divine worship, though taken by it self from the rest of S. Thomas
his words, it may have an harsh and offensive sound in the ear of the
ignorant, as Bellarmine says: yet as it is by him uttered in his learned Sum
by the whole form of his discourse, the meaning thereof is made so apparent,
that it cannot by any intelligent Reader be taken in the Bachelours blasphemous
sense, that the Cross is to have a distinct act of worship, as good, and
perfect, as that which is given to Christ, but contrariwise, that when we
worship the Cross, we do not use two distinct acts of worship, one toward
Christ and another toward his Cross, but by one and the same we worship them
both; which act is divine worship, not as it honors the Image, but as it is
directed unto Christ, as (in the example we brought before) the Sacrilege that
prophaneth the Church is murder, though not murder of the Church which it
does profane, but of the man that is killed when the Church is profaned.

21. Moreover to free yet further this Angelical Doctor from this devilish
slander, he that shall look into that 3. p. q. 25.
place of his Sum this Bachelour does cavil at, shall find that he does
detest the least show of giving divine worship to any creature, which is the
cause that he does teach, that a man, though a reasonable creature, and an
Image of God most perfect, yet may not be worshipped with God by the same act
of honor; because that a reasonable creature is capable of honor by it self,
and therefore if divine worship were given by it unto God, that might be
occasion of error, vt scilicet motus adorantis sisteret in homine, to wit,
that the motion or act of honor might be stayed in the man, and not be
referred unto God whose Image he is, that is, should we do outward signs of
divine worship unto God before a man, some cause might be given, either unto
the ^an to vanish away in his own fancyes, into a foolish surmise of his
Godhead, or else unto the behoulders of these humble acts of servitude, to
think that he is in very deed, Images of stone and insensible matter may be
honored with God without danger.
or else that we take him to be more then a man; Quod non potest contingere
(says S. Thomas) de imagine sculpta, vel picta in materia insensibili; which
danger cannot happen in a dead Image made of senseles matter, as is brass, or
stone, or paper. For neither is the Image endued with sense and reason that it
may think those acts of divine worship are done to it self, nor any man so
destitute of understanding, as to judge, that kneeling, and praying before an
Image of Christ, we do not remember him, and intend to worship, and honor him
conceived by this Image. Where you see first, that S. Thomas does teach, that
we must take heed, not only not to give divine worship to any creature, but
also not to offer any just occasion of such a surmise. Secondly that the
Bachelours grossenes seems to have surpassed the capacity of S. Thomas,
seeing he does accuse even S. Thomas himself of praying not before a wodden
Cross unto Christ, but unto a wodden Cross, and not unto Christ; which
grossnes this (...) What shall we think of this Bachelour, that does so often
repeat this false slander, and misconster this Angelical Doctor, that he
taught to pray to a wodden Cross, not unto Christ, but that he is a Doctor of
that black Angels making, who created Lather Doctor of his Gospel in l. de
Missa angulari tom. 7. VVitteberg. fol. 443.
in his nights conference with him at the first commencement thereof.

23. Wherefore not to trouble thee longer (gentle Reader) I will conclude this
discourse about Images, wherein I have been the longer to make the Bachelours
slanders apparent to the judgment of all reasonable men that understand these
matters, and to show their shameful lying about Idolatry, most frequent with
their most ignorant Preachers. And to a Jury of learned or intelligent men,
that will speak as they think, of what Religion soever, I am content to refer
this whole cause for them to judge, whether the Protestant Procter has
performed his promise; or whether failing therein, he be not bound to recant
publicly with shame at the Cross. His promise (if you remember) was, to prove
three things apparently to the judgment of every reasonable man. First to bring
the greatest number of our later writers that give divine worship to Christ's
Image; in performance whereof he has brought only the testimonies of three or
four at the most. M. Crashaw has not proved what he undertook.
Now, are our late writers not above the number of seven, that four are the
greatest number of them apparently in the judgment of every reasonable man?
What Chymera's will he dream of being drunk, that can imagine such fables
being sober? The second part of the promise was to bring our best approved
Authors for the former doctrine; which promise if he were sober when he made
it, doubtless he forgot to be sober when he came to perform it. For he
brings only Valentia, Gretzerus, Graffijs, and Chrysostomus a Visitatione,
who are I confess learned Authors; but whether they are our best I much
doubt. Many will prefer Bellarmine, Suares, and Saunders before them; and sure
I am, they are not the best apparently in the judgment of every reasonable man.
But the third part of his promise to prove that these authors give divine
worship to Christ's Image apparently in the judgment of every reasonable man, is
much more exorbitant, and void either of truth, or sobernes; seeing in their
sentences they use many terms, as per se, and per aliud, absolute and
relative, imago vt imago, and vt resquaedam, and the like, as you have heard,
which it is as clear as noonday, are not understood of every reasonable man.
Nay M. Crashaw does not understand them himself, as has been clearly showed,
whom yet in this respect we will not number among brute creatures.

24. Where I will not omit to remove a doubt which I find a stumbling block to
some Protestants of no mean understanding, to wit, A difficulty of some
Protestants against honoring Images answered.
that these distinctions wherewith we declare the worship of Images, are
obscure, which vulgar people understand not, and that consequently they cannot
tell how they may safely worship Images, without danger of false worship. To
which I answer, that many times the actions that in practice are most easy and
facile, their natures are most obscure, and hard to be speculatiuely declared,
and made known unto vulgar people, who know how to do them, though not how to
declare them. What more easy for a man then to move, or walk, An example.
and yet to declare the nature of that action the Philosophers are forced to
use the distinctions of intrinsece vel extrinsece, per vltimum non esse, vel
primum esse, and the like, which can never be beaten into the heads of common
people, whose feet are no less, perchance more nimble, and skillful to move
then are the Philosophers, whose head is full of these quirkes. The same does
happen in the worshipping of Images, then which no religious action is more
easy to practice piously, and without error, nature it self teaching us to
honor and love the Images of them that are dear unto us, which even children
and women by instinct of nature do practice, thinking that therein they show
their love to their friends, though they know not the means which Deuines, and
Philosophers use to declare the matter. And as comom people who know no more of
moving, then that it is to set one foot before another, walk as fast, and
with as little danger of falling as the greatest scholar that can with his
subtle wit anatomize that action: so likewise ignorant men or women that know
no more of worshipping Images, then that they must remember Christ when they
see them, and kneel unto him before them, kissing, and embracing them, to
signify how dearly they do love him, whom those resemble: such men and women,
I say, may worship an Image of Christ, as devoutly, as securely, and with as
little danger or false worship, as the most learned Divine, that can learnedly
explicate the manner, how by the Image divine honor is conveyed unto Christ,
and how by honoring Christ in his Image, honor is derived unto the Image, by
one, and the self same act, which is divine honor to Christ, but not of the
Image, worshipping the same, not absolutely, but relatiuely, not by it self,
but by another. For this honoring of him, whom we love in his Image, kissing
and embracing the same, is an action as natural to a man, and with as great
facility done, as walking, or any other. Faith does teach that Christ is God,
and to be honored with divine worship, and the spirit of God moves our heart
to love him, as so great a Lord, and lover does deserve; which faith and love
supposed, it is as facile and natural in men, to kiss and embrace Christ's
Image, to show the honor, and love they bear him, as is for any other man or
woman, to do the same toward the image of one whom they affect; which is so
ingraffed in their nature, that none that are come to the use of reason are so
rude, and gross, but can use the same without further teaching.

M. Crashaw in steed of performing his promise has brought witnesses against
himself.
25. Finally the Bachelour has been so far from performing his promise
apparently, to the judgment of every reasonable man, that he has not brought
so much as one that may be thought to deliver that doctrine, by any that can
understand their words; nay all whom he brings do teach the plain contrary,
in the places by him cyted, to wit, that divine worship must be directed to
Christ, not to the Image by it self, honoring his Image, by honoring him
before it, by one and the same act, which Authors he has grossly corrupted,
changing, leaving out, and mistaking their wordrs and sentences, to make their
savings sound of blasphemy, which after so many, and still new promises of
truth and sobernes is incredible impudency.

26. But above all other things, to all modest ears most hateful, is his
foul language, of discovering the whores skirts, and laying open her
filthiness, An example declaring the chaste love of the Catholic Church toward
Christ, in honoring his Image and Cross, and the wrong M. Crashaw does her in
terming her in that respect.
which in the Roman Church is no other then to do acts of love and reverence
unto Christ in his Image, which the very instinct of nature does move us to
give to the Image of whomsoever we love. And (to declare this with a familiar
example) suppose some Lady having an Image of her absent Lord, or a jewel of
great price left her by him at his departure, grayned with his very blood, shed
in defense of her honor, should kiss, and lay the same to her heart, upon her
eyes, washing it with her tears, using patheticall speeches unto it, as if she
saw her Lord there present in it; if one should accuse this Lady, as disloyal
to her Lord, as showing want of affection to him, by these very acts of love,
unto the pledge of him for his sake, interpreting them to be signs of a
corrupted mind, and of her honoring the Image, not her Husband, loving the
Jewel, not her Lord, would not this seem extreme barbarity in the judgment of
every reasonable man? And should such a slaunderer persist, saying, that he
will never leave to discover her skirts, and lay open her filthiness to the
world, till the tongue cleave to the roof of his mouth, I am content he be
tried by a Jury of any reasonable women in the world, even of M. Crashawes
choosing, so they be honest, whether such a guest, babbling within the doors of
his mouth, without judgment, modesty, and truth, should not deserve to be
plucked out from under the roof. And to the same Jury of reasonable women, I
will remit M. Crashaw for his doom, whether he be not guilty of the like, or
rather more horrible fury against the Spouse of Christ his Church, The reason
the Church has to love and honor the Cross of Christ.
whom he does perpetually term Whore, with a promise never to cease
charging that reproach upon her, except his tongue rust to the roof of his
mouth, only because she does honor the Cross of Christ, a Jewel of
inestimable price, imbrued with the blood of her Spouse, shed to redeem her,
whereon the sacred bleeding members of her dying Lord, left printed the height,
depth, length, breadth, and the full stature of the greatest lover that ever
was, or heart can imagine; which jewel she does embrace; and kiss, and bath
with her tears, speaking unto her Lord in it, with devout and extaticall
prayers, as if she saw him with her eyes bleeding upon it, to show how sweet,
dear, and lovely he is to her, specially in that act of his peerless, and
incomparable love, which the Cross does most lively present to her thoughts:
which signs of love to Christ in his Cross, no Christian, that has not a
tough, and savage heart can deny him: which, that they are intended by the
Church to the Cross of wood, and not to her spouse, and Lord and God, whom
that represents, none can imagine that has not either by some mishap
distempered, or out of extreme malice lost his judgment; from which censure, I
am sure no man of learning will clear M. Crashaw, till he see him publicly
recant his slanders at the Cross, according to his promise, which I pray him
that dyed on the Cross, he may have grace to do.

THE FOVRTH CHAPTER. A Confutation of innumerable falsehoods, lies, and
slanders heaped together by the Bach. concerning S. Francis, and Indulgences:
Which point of Catholic doctrine is cleared from diverse slanders, and
cauills, and proved out of the consent of Antiquity.
WE have been longer about these first eight wounds, then the refutation of such
evident slanders upon so silly proofs might seem to require; forced
thereunto by the shameless audacity of the Bachelour, the chosen Procter of
English Mynisters to justify them from his lying, and railing, who durst so
confidently avouch the same upon his own knowledge, supplying defect of proofs
with excess of impudency, falsifying, and corrupting our Authors, to bring
them witnesses against us, with so many notorious frauds, even when he
protests greatest sincerity, that they might have seemed incredible, had not
they been made so evident to the eye. But now fearing the Reader is no less
tired then my self with this serious refutation of empty Babels, and his ear
cloyed with the continual noise of this Babellers loud clamours, many times
without judgment, most commonly without modesty, ever without truth, I will
endeavor to be as short as may be in my answer unto the rest, rather noting,
then largely refuting the twelve slau^ders which remain, which are more
gross, and palpable then the former, and do sufficiently confute themselves.

The ninth wound; An heap of lies touching S. Francis, uttered by this Minister.
IN the ninth wound he brings in S. Francis whom he terms the Italian
Friar Francis, page 97.
which humble Saint he will make in our doctrine a Babel-tower, reaching unto
Christ, M. Crashaw begins to lie by heart.
and much above him: where our Minister supposing himself now skillful in his
art of lying, begins to try how he can lie without book, and by heart, charging
upon us the worst, and most horrible blasphemies his heart could wish men should
believe of us, without cyting the words of any Author, in which any such
blasphemy may so much as seem to be spoken.

2. For having uttered by way of a prologue against the book of Conformities
some trifles, and Babels, as that we paint S. Francis following Christ with a
Cross, which is done to signify, that the Saint did embrace that counsel of
Christ, He that will come after me, let him take up his Cross, and follow me:
where the Bachelour has nothing to cavil at, but that S. Francis his Cross
is as big as Christ's, having measured them with compasses, as it should seem,
else I see not how he can know so certainly that they are both just of the same
bigness. Secondly, that we paynt Christ, and S. Francis both on the same Cross:
which the Religious men of his Order do not to make him seem equal with
Christ, but to express, how truly this Saint crucified to the world, might say
with S. Paul, I am nailed together with Christ on the Galat. ^, v. 19.
Cross. Thirdly, that in the beginning of the book we term Jesus Christ,
our Lord, and S. Francis, our Blessed Father, adding this slander, that the
book is compiled neither to the honor of God, nor of Christ but of holy
Francis; which to be a gross untruth the very first words of the book do
show, which are these, In the name of our L. Jesus Christ. For what is to do a
thing in the name of Christ, but his honor and glory? Which very speech, and
phrase S. Paul uses, exhorting us to do our actions, in the name of our Lord
Jesus VVh^^ soever you do either in word or work, do it in the name of our
Lord Jesus Christ ad Colos. c. 3 v. 17.
Christ. Fourthly, that a prayer is made to S. Francis, which can fit for none
but God himself, because S. Francis therein is called the typical Jesus, and
desired to cure our sins, and the diseases of our soul; which this Bachelour
accuses as blasphemy out of intolerable folly. For the title of typical
Jesus, is so far from being fit for God only, that it may not without blasphemy
be said of Christ, who is the true, not the typical Jesus, not like the
Savior, and a type of him, as S. Francis was, but the very Savior of mankind.
Neither can it be blasphemy to say, Saints cure the diseases of souls by their
intercession, of whom S Aug. in Psalm. 88
Augustine says, that no doubt they pray for us in heaven, that the grace and
blessing of God may rest upon men: having (I say) uttered these four Babels by
way of preface, upon the title and pictures of the book, he launcheth forth
into the deep, uttering vast untruths, that may well seem seas of falsehoods.

3. First (he says) we begin at the birth, and conception, nay the very
Prophesies and promises made of Christ, and so proceed to his life, page 67.
his death, his Resurrection, and Ascension: and in all and every of these, and
in euerything else, whatsoever may be said of Christ, the very same do we not
shame to affirm of the man Francis. These be his very words; and can one
imagine a more vast untruth? Look into the book of Conformities, and you
shall see the the titles given to S. Francis are different from those which are
given to Christ, and such as only declare some likeness, which this Saint had
with Christ in forty particular privileges and virtues: but neither in these,
Many things said of Christ that are not said of S. Francis.
nor any other is he made equal with Christ. Besides which tytles there named,
thousands are, or may be said of Christ, which in those books are not affirmed
of S. Francis: as for example, to be truly borne of a Virgin mother, to be the
eternal Son of God, conceived without sin, the promised Messiah of the
Jews, the only (...) Christ proved himself to be God, I hope no Protestant,
but does both see, and detest it. And as for the taming of wild beasts, and
their obeying, and honoring Gods Servants, as if they were endued with reason,
the lives of Saints both of the old and new Testament, are full of examples, as
Balaams Number. 22.
Ass, Elias his 1. Reg. 3. ^ 17.
Crow, Daniels Daniel c. 14.
Lions, and in the new, the two Lions that made S. Paul the first Hermit his
grave, in their language seeming to bewail his death Hiero^. in eius vita
. And the like story to this of the wolf tamed by S. Francis, you may read of
another wolf in Seuerus Sulpitius a most ancient He lived anno 400. Dial. 1.
c. 8. Tua haec vi^tus Christ, tua su^t haec Ch^iste miracula. Etenim quae in
tuo nomine operantur serui tui tua sunt. Et in hoc ingemiscimus, quod
Maiestate^ tua^ se^^^ senti unt, homines non verentur.
Father, which story he concludes in another manner then M. Crashaw, thus
exclayming unto Christ. This is thy power o^ Savior, these thy wonders, for
the miracles which thy servants work in thy name be thine; but this we lament,
that men d^ not fear thy Majesty, which even wild beasts do feel. Thus this
Saint did give honor to Christ that could tame wolves, and wild beasts, and
make them subject to his servants; which miracle M. Crashaw takes in great
snuff we should urge him, and his fellows to the like: (and no wonder, though
he fear, seeing one wolf will devour another) though he pretend this excuse,
because Christ Jesus their Captain (forsooth) never did such a wonder. But if
you pose them with written wonders, he and his Hugonots know how to do them at
their fingers ends. And if I might pose them I should only require, that he and
his good fellows of England meet with their Brethren Hugonots of France midway
betwixt Dover and Calis, walking upon the waters as Christ and S. Peter did,
which when they have done, we may promise never to bid them more to go tame
wolves, seeing they so snuff we should urge them with S. Francis his miracles;
nor do any other wonder after that, which alone might suffice to send them to
their true Captain, and rid Christendom of a great deal of trouble.

The tenth, and eleauenth wounds or slanders, concerning Indulgences granted
by the Pope to Churches, and Graynes.
THIS lying without book or proof, M. Crashaw does likewise observe in his
two next wounds, a page 105. ad p. 114.
against Pardons, and Indulgences, granted unto Churches, and Grains, which he
begins with a most palpable untruth, That two or three hundred years ago,
Indulgences did grow to such height of rotten ripeness, that all men of
understanding, even of the Popes own brood, were ashamed of them, and that
many of the wiser, even in that misty time, did see, and laugh at the
nakedness of Popery in that point. Where to omit the putred terms of
rotten-ripenes, and misty times, which are fit phrases for a Bachelour of his
brood, the substance of his saying is such, that the Minister may seem to
dream, that he is speaking to posts, not unto men of learning, among whom are
none but know, The doctrine of Indulgences has been more fully handled with in
these last 400. years then ever before.
that Catholic Deuines within the last 400. or 300. years have written more
copiously, clearly, fully, and resolutely of this matter, then any before, as
he that will discover the Bachelours bouldnes in talking he knows not what,
may see the Deuines upon the 4. Sentent. distinct. 20. the Canonists upon the
Decretalls, tit. de Poenitentijs, and remissionibus, besides many others that
have written large and peculiar Treatises of this subject; so far they were
from being ashamed thereof. And I much wonder that such shameful fooleries
could creep into print, and that Ministers do not blush at their Bachelours
bold ignorance herein.

8. But before we come to prove the sacred, and venerable antiquity of this
practice, we must clear our doctrine of Pardons, from the gross slander
wherewith our Bachelour seeks to apparel Popery, standing, he says, naked in
this point, and as shameless in her impiety, as the Whore in her sin, the
same modesty, and charity moving him now to cloth her with lies, and
slanders, which in the eight wound forced him to discover her skirts, to wit,
to make her odious, and hateful. The slander is, That we teach that Beads,
or Buckles of brass hallowed by the Pope, have such virtue of Pardon and
Indulgence annexed unto them, that Christ's own blood can have no more page 108.
: and that for a toy, or trifle, a man has granted him many thousand years
of Pardon, and is absolved from the guilt both of sin, and pain, and made
clear, and free as he was the hour he was p. 105.
baptized. Which vggly rags of horrible blasphemy we do detest, teaching,
concerning Indulgences, the points of doctrine that follow.

9. First that whereas the least drop of Christ's precious bold might suffice
to redeem a thousand worlds, no grain, nor holy place can have power or
virtue annexed unto it, to remit the guilt of the least sin, no not of a
venial sin, as Catholic Deuines teach Vide Bellar to^. 3. l. 1. de Indulg.
c. 7. conclus. 1. Per indulgentias non absoluimur nec soluimur a reatu cul pae
vllius, id est, nec laethalis nec venialis. Et quide^ de culpa laethali nulla
dubitatio esse potest.
: and as for mortal sins committed after baptism (for those before baptism
are remitted by that Sacrament) no such sins can be forgiven but by
confessing the same with sorrow, and contrition of heart to a Priest, that has
authority to absolve: which to be our doctrine no child in our Church that is
come to years of discretion but does know. Secondly that though the guilt of
sin be remitted by the Sacrament of penance through the merits of Christ's
precious blood: yet there does often remain an obligation of temporal
punishment to be paid by satisfactory works in this life; or if we neglect
them, by Purgatory fire of the next. Thirdly, that these Pe^nances may be
either voluntarily assumed by ourselves, or imposed by the Church upon us,
wherein she may use some pardon, requiring less then the grieuousnes of our
sins deserve, forgiving the rest by the power of those keys which Christ
left her to bynd and loose on earth, not only temporal satisfactions, but even
sin also in the Sacrament of Pe^nance. Fourthly that the cause of this pardon
must not be a toy, or trifle, but just Conuenitinter omnes, si ne iusta causa
indulgentia^ non esse rata^, quod attinet ad expiandu^ reatu^ paenae coram Deo,
vel in hac, vel in alia vita Bellar. loc. citat. c. 12.
, and the penance enjoined have some proportion to obtain so great a pardon,
which wanting the pardon, is as S. Cyprian says, Paxirrita perniciosa
dantibus, and accipientibus non profutura Sermon. de Baptis.
, an empty peace or pardon, pernicious to them that grant it, and not
profitable to such as take it. And as we are certain that Pastors of the
Church have power to grant such pardons upon just causes: so likewise not
knowing always certainly when the cause has due proportion with the pardon,
the counsel which prudent Catholics give, and take, is, that men so embrace
the pardons of Bishops, or Popes, that they neglect not thereupon satisfactory
works; which works whosoever does neglect, not doing what he is able in that
kind upon confidence of these pardons, some Deuines Caieta^. tract. 10. de
Indulgent. Arnulph. verbo Indulg.
hold no pardons can profit them; which sentence Bellarmine terms both
pious, and profitable in practice, though not certain, nor perchance Quae
sententia vtilis est and pia, sed fortasse no^ vera. loco citat. c. 13.
true.

10. And as for his manuscript of Indulgences written two hundred years ago,
page 103.
wherewith our Bachelour would now cloth the Church of Rome, she disdayneth to
put on that rotten, and worme-eaten garment, as justly she may for two reasons.
First because the Council Council. Latera^. sub Innocent. 5.
of Lateran long since, much about those times, gave warning to take heed of
such manuscripts, and copyes of Indulgences, full of idle, impertinent, and
empty pardons, granted upon trifling causes, put out by heretics or profane
fellows, that sought either to disgrace Catholic Religion thereby, or else to
enrich themselves by making gain of such Indulgences. Secondly, because
Hospinian Hospin. de templis. l. 2. c. 28. p. 348.
from whose shop the Bachelour received this rare piece of stuff shaped to his
hand, being an heretic, his known malice against the Church of Rome might move
him to set down the pardons of that manuscript, in the worst, and most
ridiculous fashion he could, making the garment for her, whom he did mortally
hate. And that in very deed he has dealt falsely with her, or else our
Bachelour for him, may appear by the Indulgences granted to S. Peter's, so
many 1000. years for going up the stayres of that Church; whereas S. Thomas of
Aquine writes, that those that came ad limina Apostolorum, to S. Peter's Church
in Pilgrimage from Countries beyond sea, gained five years pardon, such as
came from beyond the mountains three years, those that came from places
nearer Rome S. Tho^. in 4. d. 20. q. 1. a. 3. q. 2. ad 4.
one years only. The Indulgence also of the Lateran Church, granting freedom
from all sins, as he was in the hour he was baptized, only for going through
three doors thereof, is ridiculous in our doctrine; who teach no mortal sin
can be remitted without confession, as has been said. And much more ridiculous
is the Indulgence of S. Laurences Church to deliver a soul, granted to such
as shall sit down upon the stone whereon he was broyled. For what man among us,
or child does not know, that S. Laurence was broyled on a gridiron, not upon a
stone? Neither do Catholics use to sit down upon Relics, specially so
precious as these imbrued with Martyrs blood; such small reverence to so sacred
pledges, is Protestant devotion without doubt: and as the penance is of their
appointing; so likewise the Indulgence is of their granting.

Euangel. Roman. ann. 1600.
11. The other two copies taken out of an heretical Gospel of the Roman
Church, are of as little credit, and it is clear that M. Crashaw has mangled,
and patched them at his pleasure, to apparel therewith naked Popery; yet is
there nothing in them, which a moderate Protestant can reprehend the doctrine
of Pardons supposed. For both the graunts are moderate, the greatest pardon not
exceeding an hundred years, and the reasons of those graunts very pious and
just, as the praying for the conversion of heretics, confessing sins with
sorrow, frequenting the most divine Sacrament, examining of conscience, and the
like. By which the Reader may perceive the pious use of Pardons, and how M.
Crashaw has justified the Ministry of England from the imputation of railing
by his modesty, who having cyted a copy of these Indulgences, falls into this
exclamation against us. Fie upon these impostors and deceauers, who by these
their Atheistical mockeries expose religion to all contempt; Railing without
reason or rithme.
and these things being so common, and so notorions, no marvel, though Italy
(where these things are rifest) have, besides some privy Protestants, few but
are either Atheists, or sooles. Thus he. What reason might move the Bachelour
to make this inuectiue, and give such a barbarous censure of a doctrine that
may seem so pious, I know not any besides this, that a man who is wicked,
profane, and impious himself, will easily suspect others to be of the same
temper. And though such exorbitant railing upon so noble a Nation does deserve
a good penance in the judgment, I dare say, of any reasonable Protestant; yet
since we speak of Pardons, we will pardon him, with this gentle warning, that
somtymes he call to mind, and weigh with himself, that saying of the holy
Ghost; The fool going by the way side, thinks others to be as he is, being a
very fool himself Eccles. c. 10. v. 5.
. As for his Italian privy Protestants, seeing he knows them so well, M.
Crashaws privy Protestants.
we will believe upon his word there are such visible men in Italy, whom the
worst I wish, is, that they may long enjoy their privy, and latitant Churches,
and never come forth to infect that noble Nation with their noisome sent, by
preferring their private fancyes before the common consent of ancient Fathers,
as heretics do in this point of pardons, and all other; and therefore may be
well termed privy Protestants in this respect, as now we will clearly
demostrate.

12. For is it so clear, that the primitive Church did use to grant pardons,
and Indulgences, and relaxations of pennances unto penitent sinners, which
Protestants themselves cannot deny, seeing in the first Counsel of Nice the
11. Canon, the Council of Chalcedon act. 1. the Council of Aurica the 2. and
5. Chapter (to omit other general Counsels) are extant clear testimonies
thereof. Neither were the pennances that the primitive Church did use to pardon
only inflicted for enormous crimes, and not for ordinary, and lesser, as some
Protestants falsely affirm, seeing Innocent the first above 1200. years ago
does testify, that it was the custom of the Roman Church in that time of her
confessed purity, to release and pardon pennances, and satisfactions, non solum
grauioribus, sed etiam leuioribus epist. ad Decen. c. 7.
commissis, not only for greater, but also lesser offenses. And Burch. l. 19.
and l. 8. can. 18.
Burchardus an ancient writer Ann. 1020.
does likewise show, that in the Church, pennances were appointed, even for
many common, and ordinary sins, as idle or rash oaths were punished, some
with 15. some with 40. days; mayming with the penance of a whole year;
wounding with the fasting of forty days; fornication with penance of ten
days, and so other vulgar, and ordinary sins.

13. By which you may see, that if this doctrine, and practice of the ancient
Church be true, and sound, how many thousand years of pardon M. Crashaw does
need, for so many thousand slanders, untruths, and blasphemies against God,
and his Church he has uttered in his sermons since he began to preach? How
many thousands would one sermon set him on the skore? This only slander which
here he utters without proof or shame, that a little piece of white wax, or
crucifixe of a little metal, it may be brass, or copper such as the Jesuits
of late sent into England by thousands at once, as good enough to serve the
English Catholics, a little medall, or a little bead, or buckle, or other matter
of no more value; these toys, and trinkets, I say (says he) they can sell by
this means, and eueryday do utter at a higher rate then the Ieweller can his
pearl, or dyamond. And I somewhat marvel, that among these toys and
trinkets, medals and metals, beads and buckles, brass and copper he does not
also reckon lead, of which metal the Gentlemen of the Temple know that he can
make good gain, whom for shoo-buckles of brass, or latchets of leather one
may trust, for the matter is not great, but for a pearl, and diamond so
precious as is the soul, and in the affayre that concerns the eternal woe or
weal thereof to believe him, were extreme rashness and folly, seeing by this
untruth they may easily see he has care, neither of conscience or credit. For
any may easily know, that all Catholic Casuists, and Doctors teach it to be
Symony, and a damnable sin to sell any holy thing at a dearer rate because it
is holy Si carius vendantur ratione consecrationis aut benedictionis qua^ antea
valebant ratione suae materiae vel artis, Simonia committitur: haec est
co^munis Theologorum and Su^mistarum assertio. Suarez de Relig. l. 4. c. 14. n.
3.
: so that if the account of his lies vtterd in the former words were exactly
cast, I make no doubt, but the total sum would amount to millions. How many
thousand years of fasting and other penance would the primitive Church have
thought due to expiate so vast an untruth, which did appoint so long space of
penance for lesser sins? And yet does he marvel that men may need, and the
Church grant Indulgences of a thousand years, which thousand years are
understood of Canonical penance anciently used in the Church Indulgentia tot
dieru^ vel annorum etc. significat remissione^ paenite^tiae quae perage^da
fuisset tot diebus vel annis, secundu^ veterem Ecclesiae ritu^. Bellarm. l. 1.
de Indulg. c. 9.
, which still men are bound to practice, though the Church do not urge the
public use thereof. But the sharpnes of the punishment as sometimes in
Purgatory, or the fervor of penance which some use in this life may satisfy
the length of time, so that many thousand years sometimes may be satisfied
with the fervent penance or sharp Purgatory pains of one year, or day In hac
vita paenitentia multorum annoru^ potest vna hora persolui, si paenite^tes
te^poris diuturnitatem veheme^tia charitatis co^pe^sent. In Purgatorio quoque
acerbitatis vehementia faciat, vt debitu^ viginti millium annorum annis 300.
vel 400. expiari queat Bell. larm. l. 1. de Indul. c. 9.
: which truth supposed, it is easy to answer the ignorant cauills which the
Bachelour makes, at the granting of so many years pardon; because (says he)
Purgatory shall end with the world, and the world not last so many thousand
years; which we confess to be true, and further add, that many thousand
years of Canonical penance may be purged by the sharp pain of Purgatory in
one day, or hour.

14. It is clear therefore that the ancient Church did practice both imposing
of pennances for sins, and releasing of these pennances by pardon, which
Protestants cannot deny: but their answer is, that those pennances which by
Indulgence the Church did remit, were only appointed for orders sake as signs
of hearty repentance, to terrify by that severity the faithful to satisfy the
Church her discipline, not God his wrath. But will this devise serve their
turns to obscure the clear truth? No. The testimonies of Fathers are plain,
that those pennances were necessary to satisfy the justice of God Per
paenue^tia^ Deo satisfacere. Tertullian. l. de paenitent.
: that by these satisfactions sins were redeemed Satisfactionibus and
lamentationibus justice peccata redimuntur. Cyprian. lib. 1. epist. 3.
, God pacifyed Dominus nostra satisfactione placandus. Idem sermon. de la^sis.
, his justice satisfied Tum debet Sacerdos peccata dimittere, cum viderit
congruam satisfactionem. Innocent. 1. epist. 1. c. 7.
, and his mercy obtained: so that Kemnitius a pryme Protestant chosen among
thousands to enter in the field against the whole Council of Trent, does make
this public confession of this truth. I know well (says he) that the Fathers
do too largely extend the Canonical disciplyne of penance; that Tertullian
says that sins are expiated by satisfactions; Cyprian, that by them sins
are redeemed, washed, healed, and the judge appeased, Augustine, that God is
pacifyed by satisfactions for our former sins Ke^nit. in Exam. sess. 25.
Council. Trid.
etc. Thus Kemnitius writes. And the like confession does naked truth force
Calvin unto, another chosen Champion of the new Gospel to encounter the
Tridentine Council. I do see indeed (says he) many of the ancient Fathers, I
will speak plainly, in a manner all whose books remain, have erred in this
point, or spoken too crabbedly, or See Caluins Institutions translated into
English. l 3 c. 4. n. 38.
harshly. Thus you see the Protestants are compelled to grant two points of
Popery to have been the uniform doctrine of the ancient Fathers, and Church.
First that pennances, fastings, almes-giuing, and the like, were necessary, and
required by the primitive Christianity to satisfy God, not the Church only.
Secondly that Bishops of the primitive Church did use to pardon these very
pennances, and satisfactions, even which were necessary to appease Gods wrath,
which is the doctrine of Pardons, and Indulgences which we maintain.

13. Who will not laugh at armed heresy, that is driven by naked Popery, as
she terms this doctrine of satisfactions and pardons, from the field into a
mouse hole, or some less honorable refuge? For whither will Protestants run,
if we press them with the authority of the Fathers? Prouocabimus (says
Kemnitius) ad locum communem, in quo ipsi Patres pronunciant, quid de hominum
scriptis, sicubi a regula sacrae Scripturae declinare videntur iudicandum
Ke^nit. in Exam. sess. 25 Council. Trid.
sit. We will appeal and fly unto a common place, out of which the Fathers
themselves pronounce what ought to be judged of the writings of men, when they
swerve from the rule of Scripture. Thus Kemnitius. And unto the like extremity
is Calvin brought, who speaking of the Fathers doctrine about the exercises of
pe^nance and satisfaction, whereon pardons are consequent The Reader shall
pardon me (says he) if I speak what I think, they seem to have stood too
much upon them Calvin. l. 5. Instit. c. 3. n 16.
. Do you see, that Calvin to deny Pardons is forced to take a pardon without
the Popes granting, to contradict all the ancient Fathers? And is not this the
common place of all Aria^s, Nos Scripturarum sumus Discipuli. Apud Aug.
Nestorius, Cuius haec fuit scelera ta praesu^ptio, quod sacra^ scripturam se
solum, and primu^ intelligere, and alios omnes ignorasse iactaret. Vinc.
Lyrinens. c. 4^.
Heretics, out of which they do pronounce (a fit Bench for such a sentence)
that the Fathers, and Doctors of the ancient Church all, or in a manner all,
swarued from the rule of Scripture, which never any did truly understand but
themselves? In which common place M. Crashaw may seem to have been, when full
of Protestant courage he dares Papists, maintayning Pardons, page 114.
to appear before him. If lively faith and true repentance (says he) be in a
man, let us see that Pope, Cardinal, or other Papist, who dare say, that he
shall not have full remission, that never saw, nor touched one of these Blessed
Beads. Thus he.

16. But Sir, except your lively faith, and repentance include more then I
think you mean, to wit, sorrowful confession of your sins to a Priest, and
doing penitential and satisfactory works, I will bring forth ancient Popes,
and Papists, that will send your lively faith without confession unto hell, and
your repentance without satisfaction to fry in Purgatory for many years What
do you say of Saint Gregory, was not he a Pope, and a M. Morton puts S.
Gregory among Papists. 1. p. Apol. Cathol in c^talogo Po^tif. lit G.
Papist? Are you content to hear what he dateth say? Sins (says he) are not
only to be confessed but also we must seek to cancel them out of our souls
by a^sterity of penance Non solum co^fitenda peccata, sed etiam poenite^tiae
austeritate delenda. l. 6. in 1. Reg. expli^ans c. 15.
? Will you see another, and more ancient Papist, the most learned of the
ancient Fathers S. Augustine God (says he) out of his mercy will blot out our
sins, if we neglect not to do competent satisfaction for them misera^do delet
iam facta peccata, si non satisfactio co^grua negligatur Enchir. c. 7.
And again: Let the sin n^r come to the Pastors of the Church that have the
keys, and as an obedient child let him receive of the Ministers of the
Sacraments, the measure of his satisfaction, and penance Veniat peccator ad
Antistites per quos in Ecclesia claues ministrantur, and a praepositis
sacramentorum accipiat satisfactionis suae modum. l. 50. homil. homil. 50. c.
11.
. And yet more plainly: It is not enough to amend our lives, and to leave our
former evils, except we make satisfaction unto God for our sins already
committed Non sufficit mores in melius commutare, and a factis malis recedere,
nisi etia^ de his quae facta sunt, satisfiat Deo. Idem ib c. 15.
. And seeing you would feign see a Cardinal teaching this doctrine, let S.
Hierome appear, to whom some give that title See Alphons. Ciacon. l. de
Cardinalitia dignitate.
. Let the sinner (says he) wear haire-cloth, and bewail his sins, let him
return to the Church out of which he was cast for his sins, let him lie and
sleep upon sackcloth, punishing his former sinful pleasure with rigor, and
severity of penance Hier. Qui peccator est etc. cilicio accingatur,
ingrediatur Ecclesiam de qua propter peccata fuerat egressus, cubet in sacco,
praeteritas delicias vitae austeritate compenset. In cap. 1. Joel.
. Thus S. Hierome. Had not Calvin, and such delicious Ministers reason to
condemn ancient Fathers as harsh, and crabby Doctors, that durst teach a
doctrine so displeasing to flesh and blood? Neither will S. Ambrose,
notwithstanding the Bachelours daring Papists, fear to profess himself a
Papist in his sight, exhorting men, even to buy pardons with money given to
good uses. We have many means (says he) by which we may redeem our sins.
Have thou money? Redeem therewith thy sin. God is not salable but thy self:
thou did sell thy self by sin, redeem thy self by thy works, redeem thy
self with thy money Habemus plura subsidia quibus peccata nostra redimamus
pecuniam habes? redime peccatu^ tuu^. Non venalis est Dn^s; sed tu ipse venalis
es, peccatis tuis venu^datus es; redime te operibus tuis; redime te pecunia
tua. lib. de Helia and ieitm. c. 20.
. Could any Catholic now living have spoken more Popishly then this Saint? Who
yet says no more then the holy Ghost by the mouth of Daniel did teach a
sinner, Redeem thy sins with merciful deeds, and thy iniquityes with alms
to the poor Daniel. 4 24.
, which is the only market of Pardon and Indulgence, to which the Church of
Rome does exhort her children; other abuses in buying or selling pardons she
does detest Council. Trid. sess. 25.
.

17. Thus these four Doctors of the Latin Church, to which I might join the
rest in all ages, who impugn the Protestant plenary Indulgence of sole faith,
absoluing from the guilt both of sin, and pain, without any pardon of the
Church remitting the one or other; which Indulgence of this new Gospel is so
known and famous, that the Professors thereof, cum volunt indulgere genio (as
their own Ghostly Father Benedictus Morgensterne tract. de Eccl. p. 221.
confesses) non verentur dicere hodie Lutheranice viuemus, when they mean to
be Indulgent to themselves, to take their ease, and give the raynes unto lust,
fear not to say, This day we will live Lutheran-like. By which we may perceive
the folly, and vanity of our Bachelour, and his fellows that use to object
pardons unto us, as an indulgent, and dissolute doctrine, wondering page 104.
It is strange that all Papists are not saved.
that we are not all saved: whereas the first thing of many we exact to
salvation is the utter most which they require. For whereas we require in a
sinner to obtayn full pardon: first a lively faith in Christ: secondly hearty
contrition for his sins: thirdly, humble confession even of his secret sins
to a Priest, with full purpose to amend his life, and do the penance
^^ioyned: fourthly, to exercise himself in some satisfactory works, to
obtain the full remission of the reserved temporal pain: fifthly, that the
temporal pain, which is only ^emissible by the Popes pardons, be not remitted
but upon just, and grave causes, and by iniunction of some work, which though
it be not rigorously equal, yet has some proportion with the greatness of the
pardon: whereas (I say) we require all these things; Protestants M. Crashaw in
his Virginian Sermon, no true Christians faith can fail either finally or
totally. page 8.
teach that a sole act of true faith is sufficient, which once had can never be
lost by adultery, or murder Whitaker. de Eccles. Controu. 2. q. 5. page 301. Si
quis actum fidei habeat, ei peccata no^ nocere. Id quide^ Lutherus affirmat; id
nos o^nes dicimus.
, or any such crime; that by their Indulgence David still remained the child of
God, and in his grace, even when he stained himself with these horrible crimes
Fulk in the Tower disputation the second days Conference.
. Who ever preached, or granted such an ample, easy and plenary pardon, as
this of Protestants is, if license, and liberty to sin may be termed pardon?
what marvel though Italian privy Protestants contemn the Popes pardons,
which are nothing to this of M. Crashawes granting, which we will leave him to
preach in those privy Churches, for which both the doctrine and the preacher
were more fit, then for so honorable an Auditory, as is the Temple.

THE FIFTH CHAPTER. CONCERNING the Sacraments of Baptism, and the Eucharist,
and Sanctuaryes, answering his tweluth and thirteenth wounds.
HIs tweluth wound has two parts, or sores, as he terms them. The first about
the blessing of Bells, the second concerning Communion in one kind. And as in
other parts of his Sermon he excels in folly, a page 115. vsque ad 122.
and impertinent raising, any of his fellows, that have yet written: so here
he strives to surpass in impertinency and ridiculous absurdity himself,
seeking in very sober sadness, and good earnest to prove, that we do truly
baptize Bells: where if we answer him according to his folly, as the holy Ghost
does counsel Prou. 26 v 5. Responde stulto iuxta stultitiam eius.
, and beat his own Babel about his ears, that he may feel (seeing he will not
understand) his folly, he can have no cause to complain, nor the Reader to
think, that we deal with him otherwise then he does deserve.

2. First then, no Protestant I think, will, and sure I am no true Christian
can deny, but creatures are blessed, hallowed, and sanctified by Gods word, and
1. Tim. 4. v. 5.
prayer unto certain special uses in his divine service, which ever both in
the old, and new Testament has been practiced by the Church: neither need I
stand to prove so clear a thing; but a question may be to what uses these
creatures of God may be hallowed by his word, and by the prayer of his Church.
Three uses concerning the divine service, we may imagine of these creatures.
The first Natural, which I call that use these creatures are by their own
nature apt to be applied unto, as Churches for Christians to meet, Bells to
call them together, Chalices to contain the consecrated wine and blood of
Christ; and unto such ends I think no judicious, and moderate Protestant will
deny but creatures may be hallowed by the Church, which That the Church does
consecrate diverse outward things to the use of Gods service. l. 4. c. 31. p.
266.
D. Field does grant in express terms.

3. The second I term Sacramental, because they serve as the matter of
Sacraments which remit sin, and infuse grace, as water in Baptism, bread and
wine in the Eucharist. And here all Catholics do agree, that the Church
cannot hallow nor design any element, or creature, to be matter of a
Sacrament, besides these which God the Author of Grace has appointed for that
end; so that she can neither give Baptism in wine, nor the Eucharist in water,
nor any other kind of drink, then that which Christ instituted. Wherein some
Protestants Calvin, Beza, and the Church of Geneua. Pro vino aliudin ijs
regionibus vsitatae potionis genus vsurpare Sufficit quod ijsdem in genere
symbolis nempe cibo and potu vtamur. Bez. ep. 25.
are exceeding bold, teaching, that when bread and wine be wanting, the
communion may be given in any other proportionable meat and drink, that are
more usual in those places. And I have credibly heard, that in England
sometimes Ministers presume to give Baptism in the luyce of herbs, or
flowers, as in Rose water, which for want of the true matter, are not indeed
Sacraments, nor the children christened which receive them. But though the
Church cannot appoint the matter of Sacraments, yet those kind of creatures
which God has designed for that use, she may bless, and hallow to that end,
as water in Baptism, bread and wine in the Eucharist; which also is clear,
and Doctor Field does likewise grant The Church daily sa^ctifieth the
creatures of God, to be the matter of his Sacraments. l. 4. c. 31.
it.

4. The third use of these creatures may be termed Supernatural, that is, to
work certain miraculous, and strange effects, which surpass the power of
their nature, as to expel Devils, heal diseases, and the like; and herein
the controversy betwixt us, and Protestants does consist, whether the Church
may hallow creatures to work these effects, namely to expel Devils. Doctor
Field does grant, that such as have the gift of miracles may bless, and
hallow creatures, bread, wine, oil, and the like, to work miraculous effects.
So did the Saints both of the old, and of the new, as he does confess of an
holy man called Joseph, whom S. Epiphanius Haeres. 30.
does write to have caused a fire to burn which the Devil hindered, by
hallowing water, and casting it into the fire: but such as have not the gift of
miracles (he says) may not hallow creatures for those uses which they have not
power to effect. Where first I do not see how speaking consequently, he can
deny, but the Church may hallow, and bless creatures to expel Devils out of
men's bodies, or other places, seeing Christ has given her power and authority
over Devils to command them, as the use of Exorcismes may witness, which have
ever been in the Church, and Ministers specially ordained with authority for
that See Iodocus Cocc. tom. 1. l. 4. art. 7.
office. And though the Church had not this power, which daily experience does
show she has; yet the promise which Christ has made to hear her prayers
Matthew. 7. v. 7. and 10. Marc. 11. v. 24. Luc. 11. v. 10. Joan. 14. v. 13. and
15. v. 7. c. 6.23. ep. 1. Joan. c. 3. v. 22
, may suffice, and be a sufficient warrant, that she may hallow creatures by
her prayers, desiring God, that at the presence of them the power of the enemy
may be restrained, his fury curbed so far forth as God shall see it to be for
the good of them, that having faith in her prayers, and Christ's promises unto
her, do use such creatures against their Ghostly enemy; the application and
use of which creatures is a kind of prayer, representing unto God, and renewing
the former petitions and prayers of the Church. And in this sort are bells
hallowed against Devils, specially to restrain their power in the air,
wherein they are more potent For which cause the Apostle names the Devil
Prince of the air. ad Ephesians. c. 2. v. 2 and spiritual wickedness that are in
high places. Ephesians. 6. v. 12.
: the ringing of which bells by Christians is a kind of virtuall prayer
wherewith God is moved to mercy, and the Devils frighted, as innumerable
examples do sufficiently prove of diverse witches, whom the Devils that carried
them in the air, frighted by the sound of the sacred Bells, have let fall,
whereof I could bring some certain, and recent Martinus Delrius l. 6. c. 2.
sect. 3. q. 3. Binsfeldius de co^fess. malefic. post conclus. vlt. dub. 6.
proofs.

5. And like to these Bells of Christians were the trumpets of the old
Testament, which Number. 10.
Moses made by Gods order, to call the people together, to give them sign
when to march, when to fight, which trumpets Josephus describing, says, that
their end was like to a bell Desinebat in extremitate^ campanulae similem. l.
3. Antiq. c. 11.
, the sound of which trumpets was a prayer in Gods ear, moving him to mercy,
and to deliver them in their distresses. For thus does Moses promise;
Clangetis vlulantibus tubis, and erit recordatio vestri coram Domino Deo
vestro, vt eruamini de manibus inimicorum vestrorum v. 9.
. You shall sound your trumpets, and the remembrance of you shall mount before
your Lord God, that you may be delivered from the hands of your enemies. Now is
not God as prone, and ready to defend the Church as the Synagogue? What virtue
to move God was in these trumpets, which is not in our bells? Why should the
sounding of the one, rather then the ringing of the other, if it be done with
equal devotion and faith, be a prayer, carrying up the memory of his servants
unto Gods throne? Certainly this practice of the old Testament may more justly
move any Christian to allow this blessing of Bells, then all the cauills and
scoffs, wherewith our adversaries deryde it to refuse the same: and the sound
of these trumpets in any judicious, and religious care will be able, I do not
doubt, to drown the loud clamors, and cries, which our Bachelour, and his
fellows roar out against this ancient ryte and ceremony of the Church.

6. Now concerning the ceremony of washing the Bell, which has been used many
hundred years in the Church, whereof Alcuinus He lived ann. 800.
our learned Countryman, and Master to Charles the Great does write, as of an
ancient custom in his time Neque nouum videri debet, campanas benedicere, and
vngere, and eis nomen imponere. de divine. offic. de sabbato sancto Paschae.
, I see no reason why the Bachelour should mislike it, rather then the washing
of Churches, Altars, and Agnus Dei, which ceremonies used in bells and all the
rest, are referred to the same end to express the purity of life, and other
propertyes which ought to be in a preacher (...) annoynteth the same in the
name of the Trinity, betwixt which two actions, passes a great space of time,
the office of that solemnity being very long. Now the Bachelour joins
together the beginning, and end, head, and foot, washing and annoynting. The
Bell is washed (says he) and anointed in the name of the Trinity; so couching
together his words, that the Reader may be deceived, to think that the Bell
is both washed, and anointed in the name of the Trinity, which is a manifest
slander: yet if he be charged with that sense, he may say, he referred the
name of the Trinity unto the annoynting only, not to the washing. Now is this
sincere dealing? Is there any conscience in such proceeding, specially after
such Protestations of truth? By the like iugling together of actions that are
divided, one might prove that meat is christened, and baptized, because it is
washed, and blessed in the name of the Trinity, to wit, washed by the Cook
before it be put into the pot, and blessed by the Priest in the name of the
Trinity when it is brought to the table.

A most gross lie about baptizing bells.
9. The second untruth is yet more gross, and apparent, to wit, that the
Pontifical reformed by Clement the eight, does appoint, that the Bell must
have Godfathers, and they to be persons of great note. For in that Pontifical
of God fathers, either of great or little note, there is no mention at all, as
any that will look into the book may see; so that this untruth is palpable:
but whether it be a low or loud lie, page 120.
a base or an alt, let the Reader judge, and wonder at this Ministers
impudency. That we give a name to the Bell, as we do to the child, and that
none must wash the Bell but the Bishop, are other two untruths. For we give not
names to bells as we do to children, calling them John, or Mary, but as we do
to Churches, calling them S. Mary, S. John etc. because they are dedicated unto
them, as the like naming of Churches even Protestants in England observe. The
bell also is washed by the Acoluthi, or Ministers which assist the Bishop, who
are not Priests, whereof any that has seen this Ceremony can bear witness:
so that you shall sooner find fishes on a mountain, then any true sentence in
this railing inuectiue.

10. No less false, but much more foolish is that which he says, that in the
baptism both of bells, and children we use cream, and salt. For cream is so
strange a ceremony in our Church, See the Catholic Manuals.
that it may seem he did dream of eating a mess of Cream with his Gossips
at Pemlico, when he put it into his sermon. Salt we use in the baptism of
children, laying salt on their tongues, praying they may have salem sapientiae,
the salt of wisdom, See Coccius in Thesauro. tom. 2. l. 5. c. 17.
which ceremony is very ancient, to which S. Augustine seems to allude,
saying, that from the very womb of his mother he was marked with the sign of
the Cross, and seasoned with the salt of Christ, thereby expressing his
affection to Christianity and baptism. But that in the blessing of the bell we
use salt, laying the same on the bells tongue or clapper, I find no such
ceremony in our Pontifical, neither is it like to be made a ceremony in our
Church till M. Crashaw come to be Pope. And seeing he says we use spittle in
the baptism of the child, I somewhat marvel, he does not also add that we
use the same in the blessing of the bell, spitting into the bells mouth, as
they say we do into the childs. And I much fear this Minister has not been
Christened as S. Augustine was, nor had his forehead marked with the sign of
the Cross, nor his mouth seasond with the salt of Christ, for want whereof the
one is so void of shame, and the words of the other so destitute of sense, that
he neither bl^sheth to utter known untruths, nor perceyueth himself to speak
palpable fooleryes.

11. Among which (to note one or two) this is very notorious, that he says we
pray for the bell in the blessing thereof, to wit when we pray, that at the
sound of the bell, the deceipts and fantasyes of Satan, the danger of
whirle-wynds, thunders, lightnings, tempests, may be driven away, and that
devotion may increase in Christian men when they hear it, M. Crashawes extreme
sottishnes and want of salt.
that such as come to Church at the sound thereof may be free from the
temptations of the Devil. These prayers does this wiseman cite, and avouch
that in them we pray for the bell, yea that we ask greater things for the
bell then for the child (excepting salvation) which little grain of salt he
straight lets fall out of his mouth, saying absolutely, that the prayers for
the bell are for greater purposes: what man of judgment does not laugh at this
folly? page 118.
For are the aforenamed things beneficial unto bells? Can faith and devotion
increase in them? Do they fear to be scarred, tempted, or deceived by the
Devil? Do they care whether it be fair or foul weather, thunder, or
sunshine, calm or storm? How then do we pray for bells, which the things we
pray for do neither help nor hurt? Can any thing be more void both of rithme
and reason, salt, and season, then this speech?

12. But no where does he more discover his want of reason, then in the manner
of his argument out of an accidental, and genericall likeness, which the
blessing of the bell has with a child's Christening, inferring the same to be
Baptism in this form. They give a name to the child, so they do to the bell,
Incredible folly.
the child must be washed in water, so must the bell, the child must be crossed,
so must the bell, the child must be anointed, so must the bell, they pray for
the child, so they do for the bell, nay at the washing of the bell, more
prayers are made, and more psalms read: Ergo, it is a more solemn Baptism
then that of the child. This is the argument wherein he does triumph against
Bellarmine, not perceiving seely Bachelour, that by a like discourse one may
infer, that a Bel-wether, or any other brute creature is as good a man as he
is, in this form (which if his be good) does no less infallibly conclude. VV.
Crashaw has head and brains, so has a Bell-wether, nostrils, lips, mouth,
teeth and tongue, so has a Bel-wether, flesh and blood, skin and bone, so has
a Bel-wether, nay a Bel-wether has four legs, whereas he has but two, and a
long tail, and horns, which he perchance wants, ergo, a Bel-wether is at
least as good a man as M. Crashaw. This argument I hope does make his folly
apparent to every reasonable man, and sensible to himself, which I have
proposed, not out of malice to the man, whose credit I do not desire to
impair, further then he does abuse the same to the prejudice of his soul, and
of other ignorant and credulous people, the desire of whose salvation has made
me labor to make this folly of this sottish slander so apparent, that if this
Bachelour, or any other of his fellows presume to bring the same hereafter,
they may hiss him out of pulpit, except he can show that there is greater
likeness between a bell blessing, and a child's baptism, then betwixt a
Bel-wether and himself, which he will never be able to do; nay I am content
that any man endued with reason be judge, whether there be not greater likeness
between a Bel-wethers head, and his, then is between the receiving of a
christened creature into Gods Church, and the hanging of a bell that is blessed
in the steeple, which he makes the first, and head of his twelve similitudes
betwixt them. And if the Bel-wether want a reasonable soul, wherewith the
Bachelour is endued, so likewise the washing of the Bell does want the
prescribed form of words, wherein does consist the form of Baptism, and if he
can prove that that blessing may be truly said to be Baptism, without the
form thereof, in any Christian University of the world I will undertake to
prove in the same, that a Bel-wether may be truly said to be as good a man as
he is, though it want a reasonable soul.

13. One thing only in this Babell may require an answer, and the Reader
desire to be satisfied, what is the cause a Bell must be blessed by a greater
Minister the^ the Child is, Why the Bell is blessed by a greater Minister then a
child is Baptized.
to wit, by a Bishop, and longer prayers made at the blessing of the one, then
in the baptism of the other. To this I answer, that the reason is, because
baptism is a Sacrament, the virtue thereof does not depend on the goodness or
greatness of the Minister, nor on the Churches prayers, but has infallibly
effect by Christ's institution, and word, and therefore neither are the prayers
so long, nor the Minister requisitely so great as a Bishop, this Sacrament also
being so necessary for all, God would not have the administration thereof tied
unto Bishops who are but few, nor ever at hand. But the Bells blessing has
virtue from the authority of the Church, and the efficacy of her prayers, and
therefore this blessing is of more virtue, when both the Minister thereof is of
greater power, and the prayers used thereat more devout, and pleasing unto God,
so that the greater solemnity in this blessing, the^ in that of baptism, does
rather prove against our Bachlour then for him, that one is a Sacrament and not
the other. And thus much which I confess, is too much of such a Babel.

The second sore of his tweluth wound, concerning Communion in one kind.
14. I see no reason why the Bachelour might not have made this a distinct
wound, page 120. 121. 122.
being a slander, or cavil, no less different from the former then any of
the rest, perchance he was resolved not to exceed the number of twenty, or else
having handled the same once before in this sermon, this repetition he thought
not worth the name of a wound. Howsoever, we will briefly examyne, and answer
what he says in either place, and show how notoriously he does corrupt not
only the holy Counsel of Constance, but also the story of the Gospel. page
47.
Whereas (says he) it is known, and granted that Christ at his last supper
ordayning the holy Communion did consecrate and give it both in bread, and
wine, and commanded his Ministers after him, Do this: and yet for all that
comes the Popish Council of Constance, and calls it a perverse fashion, and
ill order to give the people the Sacrament in both kinds, and do further
decree, that Council. Constant. sess. 13.
Notwithstanding Christ ordained the Sacrament in both kinds, and though the
eldest Church did so receive it: yet for all that this custom is lawfully, and
laudably brought into the Church, that the layity shall receive in one kind
only; and that whosoever shall hold the contrary, shall be proceeded against as
an heretic etc. This is the Canon of the Council cast in the mould of M.
Crashawes head, out of which he seeks to wound the Pope and the Church of
Rome with the poisoned bullet of Blasphemy, saying, the Pope denies the cup in
the Sacrament to the layity though Christ ordained the contrary. But read the
Canon in the Council, and you will marvel at the impudency of this Minister,
changing the shape, form, sound, and sense thereof, for thus the Council
defines, Licet Christus post coena^ instituerit, and suis discipulis
administrauerit sub vtraque specie panis and vini hoc venerabile Sacramentum;
tamen hoc non obstante sacrorum Canonum laudabilis, and approbata consuetudo
Ecclesiae seruauit, and seruat, quod huiusmodi Sacramentum non debeat confici
post coenam, neque a fidelibus recipi non ieiunis etc. Synodus Constant. ses.
13.
Though Christ did institute the Venerable Sacrament after supper, and
administer the same in both kinds to his Disciples, yet the laudable authority
of sacred Canons, and approved custom of the Church has practiced, and does
still practice, that the Sacrament ought not to be consecrated after supper,
nor be received of the faithful but fasting. This is the true Canon, no more
like that of M. Crashawes making, then is an aple to an oyster, or a figtree to
a Fox. For by these words it is apparent, that the non obstante is not
referred to Christ's ordination or commandment of both kinds (which
commandment the Council does expressly define in that Canon that Christ never
gave) but to the celebration after supper, not commanded by Christ, but so
practiced by him upon a special reason, which notwithstanding the Council
defines that the Sacrament is not to be recyued but of such as are fasting.
Neither can I see which way the Bachelour having perused diligently the Canons,
and the whole scope thereof, could without wilful malice mangle the text,
leaving out after supper, and fasting, except it be, that he perused the same
after the supper of a Puritan fast, kept with good wine and venison Their
gluttony, and chamber cheer which they call fasting, and color with terms
of godly exercises. Sutclif. in his answer to a libell supplicatory page 89.
, which might perchance make his pen stagger, when he wrote out the Canon. And
herein he brings no new corruption, but follows the lying steps of his
Father Luther, who long ago slaundered the Council of the same blasphemy,
corrupted the words of the Canon in the same manner Luth. in disput. contra
Conc. Co^st.
, for which Bellarmine Bellar. l. 4. de Euchar. c. 26.
does challeng him, as even the Bachelour does acknowledge page 48.
, who nothing moved therewith, do what we can, will needs run headlong into
the same pit of falsehood, though he see it in Bellarmines books gaping before
him, trampling upon the text of the Canon with the same impure, and shameful
corruption. Such is his desire to cleave to his Father, giving us just cause to
say of him, what Christ said of the Devil, mendax est, Joan. 8.44.
and pater eius, Englishing the words as a Minister did, he is a liar, and so
was his Father before him.

15. But not only this Bachelour dares corrupt the Canon of this Council,
page 47.
but also falsify the words of Christ, and story of the Gospel, to make the
Council seem to have crossed, and contradicted the same. It is known and
granted (says he) that Christ at his last supper ordayning the holy Communion
did consecrate, and give it both in bread, and wine, and commanded his
Ministers after him Do this. Where you see he would have his Reader think,
that Christ spoke the co^mau^ding words, Do this, of the Sacrament in both
kinds; in proof whereof he says in the margent, See all the Evangelists, and
S. Paul 1. Cor. 11.23. which at his request we have done, and find great want
of conscience in this pattern of truth, and small respect to Gods sacred word.
For I find that not all the Evangelists as he says, but S. Luke cap. 22. v. 19.
only makes mention of the precept, Do this, who notes expressly the same was
said of bread only, as the Church of Rome does practice, saying, that Christ
took bread, gave thanks, brake, and gave to his Disciples, saying, This is my
body, Do this. But of the Chalice he says, that Christ did bless and give to
his Disciples, but not together this precept, Do this, so directly does S.
Luke contradict the Bachelours Gospel, that Christ said of both kinds, Do
this, S. Paul also speaks of the same precept 1. Cor. 11.23.
though not according to M. Crashawes Gospel, but with S. Luke, that Christ
said of the Sacrament in form of bread absolutely, Do this in remembrance of
me, but coming to the Chalice, his divine wisdom foreseeing, that heretics
would be more greedy of wine, then bread, does change his phrase, and manner of
speech, saying co^ditionally, Do this (as often as you drink) in remembrance
of me, not absolutely commanding the faithful to drink of the cup, but only
requiring when they did drink, to drink in remembrance of him, leaving it
either to their private devotion, which was the practice of the primitive
Church, which did use indifferently the Sacrament in one, or both, as
Bellarmine lib. 4. de Euchar. c. 24.
, and other Catholics do demonstrate, or to the Churches determination, which
upon just reasons does forbear to give the cup unto Lay men. Wherein the Church
does not offer them wrong, as the Bachelour cauilleth, seeing in her doctrine,
and in truth they receive every drop of Christ's precious blood under form of
bread. Neither do we deny wine to our Communicants, which though it be not
consecrated, yet does as truly, and really conteyne within it the precious
blood of Christ, as does the wine of Caluins supper Corpus Christi a nobis (in
coena) tanto locoru^ interuallo distat, qua^to caelum abest a terra. Calu. in
co^sensione de re Sacramentaria in fine.
, by which no less then by his, they may mount to remember, and to drink by
faith the blood of Christ in heaven. Heretics in deed have offered the wrong,
not only to Lay men, but to the whole Church, taking away the Real presence of
Christ's body, and blood, the very essence, form, glory, and splendour of the
Sacrament, who exclayme against us for bereauing the people of a cup, in their
doctrine no more in substance then ordinary wine, or not giving them the sole
accidents of wine, as we teach, who give (as has been said) the blood also
with the body in the form of bread, wherein they may seem to deal with the
Church of God, like a Cauiller that having devoured the oyster meat, should
deliver unto the owner two empty shells only, bitterly exclayming against
another, who restores the oyster whole, and entyre, though but upon one shell.
But to return to M. Crashaw, you see he is no less bold with the Lord then
with the servant, corrupting the story of his Gospel no less then the text
of the Council, charging him to have given a precept which he never gave, to
take occasion thereby to slander the Church his spouse of neglecting a duty,
to which she was never bound.

16. And that Christ did give no such precept of communion in both kinds, I
dare appeal from Luther to Luther in the same sort as Plutarch does report a
woman did from Philip to Philip, from him distempered with wine, to him sober.
For though love of wine, and women the cause of Luthers Apostasy in which he
did daily increase, as did in him the love of his Gospel, may seem in the
end to have in a manner bereaved him of his wits; in which fit he wrote, that
to multiply, and increase was a precept, and more then a precept Luther. sermon.
de Matrim. tom. 5. VVitte^b. 119.
, and to drink wine in the Lords supper a commandment of the eternal King
Lib. de captiuit. Babyl. c. 1.
, though also afterward growing worse, and worse, drunken more with heresy then
with material wine, though well tipled with both, he sets up the non plus
vltra of obstinate malice, saying Si quod Conciliu^ statueret aut permitteret
vtra^que speciem, nos nequaqua^ vtraque vti vellemus, sed in despectum Concilij
vna aut neutra, aut minime vtraque vti vellemus etc. Luther. in formula Missae
cited by Hospin. Histor. Sacram. p. 2. fol. 13. a.
: If the Council should in any case decree communion under both kinds, least
of all then would we (says he) use both kinds, yea rather in despite of the
Council, and that decree, we would either use one kind only, or neither, and
in no case both: where guyded by the spirit of giddines, he does expressly
contradict the commandment, and institution of Christ, falling into that
blasphemy in plain terms, whereof he does falsely accuse the Council. Which
spirit of heresy, and contradiction seems also to have conquered in Luther
the strongest of all his loves Nothing is more sweet the^ the love of a woman.
etc. Luth. in a marginal note upon the proverbs. c. 31.10.
, and the most essential point of manhood in him to marry a wife Quam non est
in meis viribus vt vir non sim, tam non est mei iuris, vt sinc muliere sim.
Luth. ser. de matrim. vbi supra.
, which though a precept, and more then a precept, yet, if the Idem tom. 2.
oper. Germ. fol. 214.
Council should grant Churchmen liberty to do it, he would think that man
more in Gods grace, who during his life time kept three whores, then he that
married according to the Counsels decree, and that he would command (whose
commandment must conquer the precept, and more then precept of God) under
pain of damnation, that no man should marry, upon that grant, but live chaste,
or else not despair though he keep a whore: though I say Luther did thus both
write and preach in his drunken fit, yet when he was more sober, though an
enemy to the Roman Church, the force of truth made him pronounce this moderate
sentence, that Christ in this matter, in receiving in one, or both kinds,
commanded nothing as necessary, and that it were better to embrace peace then
to strive about the kinds Quamuis pulchrum quidem esset vtraque specie in
Eucharistia vti, and Christus hac in re nihil necessarium praecepit, praestaret
tamen pacem sectari quam de speciebus contendere. Luth. ep. ad Bohemos. page
121.
; which sober sentence does show that M. Crashaw was scarce sober when he wrote,
that we are plain Statesmen, and Politicians, who have nothing in our heads
but to maintain the height of our Hierarchy, and Majesty of our Monarchy,
seeing we will not amend that, which we see and know to be contrary to Christ's
institution, and whereof many of the better sort of our selves are utterly
ashamed.

17. Thus he rages: but as for Politicians, and Statesmen, that term may
best agree to himself, who is a man of so great policy, and a Minister of so
simple truth, that he does confess, that he made public this sermon to
justify the state, much more then honor the truth, which promise he does
accordingly perform, as may appear by the last words of this inuectiue, that
we know and see our practice to be against the institution of Christ, and that
many of the better sort of our selves are utterly ashamed of communion in one
kind, not citying either in text, or margin any Catholic author, many or
few, better or worse that were either outwardly or inwardly ashamed of this
practice, which is a sign, The Kingdom of Christ consists not in material
wine.
that he does here utter a lie without shame, which can be small honor to the
truth, howsoever it may justify the state. That we have nothing in our heads
but to maintain the height of our Hierarchy, and majesty of our Monarchy, is a
speech that has a little rythme in sound, but no reason in sense, a wanton
playing on the letter, without truth in the matter. For either he does place
glory, and majesty in a cup of only wine, or in the precious blood of Chist
contained in the cup: if in a cup of wine only, therein indeed does consist the
Kingdom of Bacchus, not of Jesus, the power of Cupid Vinu^ in quo est luxuria.
ad Ephesians. 5. v. 18.
, not of Christ whose wine breeds Virgins Zachar. 9. v. 17.
. To the height, or rather depth of which drinking Hierarchy, Luther attained,
who as his scholars write as a great wonder, could drink deeper into a pot,
then any other new Ghospeller, the Creed, the Pater noster, and Decalogue at a
draught. But if the majesty, and glory of a Christian does consist in the real
receiving of the precious blood of Christ, the Laity is not deprived of this
dignity, and honor, by our doctrine, who teach that they do no less truly
and really then Priests receive every drop of Christ's blood, together with the
body under the form of bread. And if we have nothing in our heads (as indeed
we should not) but the height of the celestial Hierarchy, and the majesty of
Gods blessed Kingdom, to this we may no less certainly attain by eating the
body of Christ, together with his blood under the form of bread only, then by
eating and drinking the same in both kinds, seeing Christ says, I live by my
Father, Joan. 6.
and he that eats me shall live by me. He that eats this bread shall live
for ever. Finally speaking of outward pomp, I see not why our Hierarchy might
not seem as high, and our Monarchy as full of Majesty, though we gave the
Sacrament in both kinds unto Laymen, did not other reasons urge to this order
besides pomp, and Majesty, though the Bachelour very charitably without fear of
rash judgment says we have nothing else in our heads. Which reasons, he that
desires to be further satisfied in this point, may see alleged by Bellarmine
lib. 4. de Euchar. cap. 28.
, and Becanus tom. 2. de co^mun. sub vtraque specie. c. 8.
, and so discover the vanity, and falsehood of the Bachelour, that does measure
the emptines of others heads by his own.

The thirteenth wound about Sanctuaryes, as impudent, accusing the Church of
Rome, as guilty of all the bloodshed upon earth.
18. THE thirteenth wound, and the first dish of his second table (for the
Bachelour parts his feast of falsehoods, and banquet of slanders into two
tables) is that we allow sanctuaries for wilful murder, whence he infers
that ours is a bloody Church, defender of blood, and murder, weltring, and
wallowing, and bathing herself in blood, having made her self accessory by
this doctrine, and practice, to all the murders, and bloodshed upon the earth:
for to maintain (says he) so many refuges, and defenses for a sin, is to
maintain the sin it self. Thus he. Where to omit weltring, wallowing, and
bathing in blood, phrases which might better become a Butcher, then a
Bachelour, I wonder what Protestants think lying, and railing is, if this
wound of M. Crashaw be not railing, the vanity and falsity whereof is such, as
the very ground or principle whereon it is built, to wit, that to maintain many
Sanctuaries, is to maintain the sin it self: contains blasphemy against
God, who in the old Testament did allow Sanctuaryes for some offenders, namely
in the case of manslaughter, when in casual frayes they should chance to kill
their enemies Qui no^ est insidiatus sed Deus tradidit illu^ in manus eius,
constituam ei locum ad quem fugere debeat. Exodus 21. v. 13. Parcit illi (lex)
qui iusto dolor prouocatus inimicum occurrente^ occidit. Hieron. Oleaster in
illum locu^.
, and yet none without blasphemy can affirm God to have been a maintayner of
that sin, or that he did welter, and wallow, and bath himself in blood. And
this privilege to protect offenders that fled unto them, Christian Churches
have enjoyed ever since Constantines days, that is, from that time that
Christians had publicly Churches in the world. The Council of Orleans above a
1100, years ago, speaks largely of this immunity, and defines in this
sort. Concerning murderers, adulterers, and thieves that take sanctuary in the
Church, that shall be observed which the Ecclesiastical Canons have decreed, and
Roman laws appointed, to wit, that it is not lawful to pluck away offenders
either from the Court of the Church, or house of the Bishop. Before which
Counsel S. Augustine Epist. 187. ad Bonifac. Orosius writes of Masceril
punished by Gods special providence for violating this immunity of Churches.
l. 7. c. 36.
makes mention of this immunity, reprehending the Earl Bonifacius for
presuming to take by force a malefactor out of a Church. And who does not know
how generally received the custom was in S. Chrysostomes days In the year
399.
when the Eunuch Eutropius a wicked man, as great an enemy of the Church, as a
favorite of the Emperor Arcadius Socrates l. 6. c. 5. Sedulo dedit operam vt
lex ab Imperatoribus promulgaretur, ne quisquam ad Ecclesia^ tamqua^ ad asylum
profugeret, sed vt ij qui eo profugerant inde abriperentur.

Simulatque promulgata fuit, Eutropius in offensionem Imperatoris incurrens
confugit ad Ecclesiam. Socrates vbi supra.


having caused the said Emperor to make a law against the immunity of Churches
to defend malefactors that fled unto them, few days after the promulgation of
that impious law, was forced, being accused of treason against the Emperor, to
fly and take Sanctuary therein himself, whom the Emperor following stayed at
the Church door, notwithstanding his law, Altar reueritus, as S. Chrysostom
says, bearing such reverence and respect unto the Altar, on which he knew the
body and blood of Christ was offered Chrysostom. tom. 3. homil. in Eutrop. That
the coat or the flesh it self of Christ Jesus had not this priuilegde to be a
sanctuary unto offenders. page 128.
.

19. By which you may gather the profaneness of this Bachelour who dares
avouch, that the running even unto Christ in person and touching his garment
ought to be no defense for a malefactor showing that in such a case he would be
ready to kill such guilty persons, even at the feet of Christ, sprinkling their
blood upon his garments, or the most respect he would bear him, were to draw
such a malefactor by violence, without his leave, from his feet to kill him,
more barbarous then the Barbarians themselves, who in the Sack of Rome spared
all that fled unto Christian Churches, as S. Augustine writes August. l. 1. de
ciuit. c. 6.
which respect and reverence unto Christ is the cause that some Hostiensis in
c. Eccles. de Immunit. Ecclesiaru^ Nauar. in manu. c. 25. Suarez l. 3. de
relig. c. 9. in fine.
say, that a malefactor flying unto a Priest, carrying the most divine
Sacrament in the streets, ought to have sanctuary by Christ's person present in
that sacred host, which the Bachelour rages against, calling that most divine
Sacrament blasphemously our Breaden God, not knowing what we believe, that it
is not bread, but the body of Christ, as the ancient Church did: with greater
reason he might object a breade^ God unto his Father Luther, who joins bread
with the flesh of Christ in his supper. Neither is the Bachelours argument
against Sanctuaries drawn from Christ's example beating buyers, and sellers out
of the Temple worth a rush, seeing all teach, the Church cannot be a Sanctuary
against such sins as are done in the Church, the man deserving not to enjoy
the privilege of that place, the sanctity whereof he does profane Frustra
inuocat auxilium legis, qui committit in legem.
. Could he prove that Christ did drive out of the Temple any malefactors that
had run thither for refuge, he might seem to speak something to the
purpose, but such a bloody mind was as far from him, that was meek and humble
of heart, as it was natural unto Calvin, who without any necessity, and being
Superintendent of Geneua, did sometime sit in judgment upon criminal causes
and pronounce sentence of death upon the guilty This does Heshufius a famous
Protestant report of Calvin from the mouth of those that saw him do it. In
assert. co^tra blasphemam Caluinist. exegesim. vide Prateolu^ verbo Caluinistae.
.

20. And as Calvin took such delight to be a Judge, and dealing in bloody
matters, his scholar M. Crashaw seems no less to long to be hangma^, raging
that by our Sanctuaries some be kept from his claws: which greedines of blood
makes him think they are more the^ indeed they are, to wit, that the allowance
of Sa^ctuaries even for wilful murder is practiced in Countries Catholic,
which is most false. For though some Deuines hold, that such murderers may
enjoy the benefit of Sanctuaries, and that only treacherous murderers are
excepted by the sentence of God, if a man kill his neighbor of set purpose,
and by lying in wayt for him, thou shall take him from my altar, and let him
dye Exodus 21. v. 12.
; of which opinion our Bachelour says Anastasius Germonius is: out of whom he
cites much, I do fear with the same treachery he has used commonly withal
our Authors, as has been showed, though I cannot therein convince him, not
having seen that Author. But howsoever he and others hold, that a Church may
be a Sanctuary for such a murderer, yet the common opinion is, that wilful
murderers enjoy not that privilege, and the practice generally received in
Catholic Kingdoms is agreeable unto this doctrine, as Contrarium tame^ saepe
fit in praxi, propter plurium Doctoru^ setentiam. l. 2. var. resolut. c. 20. n.
7.. In his and Nono.
Couarruuias does witness, not permitting Churches to be Sanctuary for such
offenses; which cases of exception, not expressed in the Cano^ laws; yet
custom therein is equivalent unto a law In casibus exceptis in iure vel
aequiua le^ti co^suetudine, extrahi potest delinquens. Ita Doctores omnes.
as our Doctors uniformly teach, by which custom neither rauishers nor
thieves have benefit of Sanctuaryes Suarez l. 3. de relig. c. 11. n. 4. Fures
simplices non gaudent hac immunitate, ex consuetudine. Suarez in loc. cit. Nec
raptores virgin. n. 27.
: so that if this Minister mean to be a Hangman in a Catholic Kingdom, he
shall not have his power so much abridged by Sanctuaryes, as he does imagine.

21. This being the doctrine, and practice of our Church, you may perceive this
Bachelours folly, who cannot keep his tongue from railing, though he speak
not a wise word, nor any thing to the purpose, declayming, that this Doctrine
of Sanctuaries is the cause, that poysonning, and stabbing, and killing, and
all kind of blood shedding is rife in Popish states, and, that murderers,
adulterers, and rauishers find favor in the Popes law, for they are, says he,
amici Curiae: but thieves and robbers are not so: and such like Babells he
heapeth together without any judgment or truth: for why may not thieves and
robbers be accounted amici Curiae, as well as murderers, and adulterers, but
only that the Bachelour will make the Popes friends whom he pleases? And to
show that he does it by his lying art, in which he that has not a good memory
will often contradict himself, in this very wound he makes thieves whom now
he rangeth among the enemies of the Pope, that cannot enjoy sa^ctuaries, such
friends of this Cour^ that he says the vildest thief (by our doctrine of
sanctuaryes) may easily escape the halter at Rome. As for poisoning and
stabbing, and such like assassinats, who does not know that they are
treacherous murders, for which no Sanctuary is allowed by the general practice
of the Church, as even he does confess.

22. And seeing such kind of murders be most practiced by Italians, when they
mean to be revenged of their enemies as the world knows, how can our
Sanctuaryes be the cause of such murders, in which they can find no defense by
our law, and practice? Who does not see how malice blinds this poor
Minister? Which does more appear by this argument a fortiori, which he makes.
If this be so (says he) so far from Rome as Portugal, then we may easily judge
how the world goes in Rome and near it, which is gross ignorance, and folly.
For Churches in Rome, and near about, are not Sanctuaryes for any offense
against even the secular Judges of the Pope, as Nauar notes In vrbe, nulla
Ecclesia vtitur hac immunitate aduersus Iudices etiam saeculares Papae. in Man.
c. 25. n. 18.
: so that Churches in Rome with less show of reason are traduced, as causes of
murder then in any other City. And as for Portugal, the same Nauar says,
that no Sanctuary is there allowed for any murder, no not for them that kill
their adversary in the field Secundum leges Lusitaniae vsu relapsas qui alium
de proposito aut in duello occidit, aut percutit, non gaudet hac immunitate. in
Man. c. 25. n. 21.
. Neither does Oleaster In c. 4. Genesis
complain thereof, but only that some did escape justice by pretending to be
in Orders when they were not, or by taking upon them Orders after murder
committed, which is contrary to the disciplyne of our Church; by whose laws,
wilful murder makes a man irregular that he cannot take Orders, wherewith the
Pope never dispenses Council Tride^t. sess. 24 c. 7. de reformat.
. Such an enemy our Church is to murder and bloodshed, though by the disciplyne
of the Protestant Church (for any thing I know) butchers may be Bishops, and
their Ministers hangmen.

23. Finally that by this practice of Sanctuaryes the Church of Rome is
accessory to all murders, and bloodshed upon the earth, as our Bachelour
deduceth, I know not by what devise he will build up this Babel. For how many
murders are done in Turkland, and in other Countries of Infidells which have no
more relation unto our Sanctuaryes, nor so much as has M. Crashaws head to a
cockscombe? What also shall we think of so many murders, committed by
Protestants, so many hundreds that yearly are hanged in England? how can the
Church of Rome be accessory to their death? Or if she be not, how can the blood
of all slain upon the earth sound in her? Moreover Ministers many times kill,
and murder their wives when they are weary of them, to marry some young wench
whom they more affect, whereof England has affoarded some lamentable examples,
and of the rifenes of this bloody, and barbarous practice in Scotland Archibald
Hamilton confu. Calu. l. 2. c. 29.
, and Germany Silu. Crecanouius de corruptis moribus vtriusque partis.
themselves do complain. I cannot imagine, though a man would feign, by what
Chymericall devise Sanctuaryes may be made the cause of these murders, nor how
the blood of Ministers wives so barbarously slain by them may be laid upon the
Pope, though I willingly grant the Bachelours wit, and brain to build Babels
surpasses my capacity, as also the wisdom of the Church of England to print
this Sermon, for a pattern to justify themselves, that they use neither to
lie, nor rail in pulpit.

THE SIXTH CHAPTER. CONTAINING An answer to his five next wounds, concerning
unclean matters, wherein he wastes the rest of his Sermon.
FROM Sa^ctuaries he passes unto stews, or rather his impudency takes
Sanctuary in them, hoping modesty would stay us from the pursuit of him, and
discovering his fraudulent steps upon such impure objects, which S. Paul would
not have so much as named among Christians ad Ephesians. 5. v. 3.
wherein yet this Puritan Ghospeller spends the rest of his Sermon, scarce
uttering one sentence which has not whores or harlots, or concubynes, or other
more shameful stuff in it, in the pronouncing of which words, he seems to
take such delight, as if they were sugar in his mouth. But his impudency is
such, and so injurious to grave, and learned Authors, that the modest Reader
will not be offended, I hope, though I discover some of his shameful
slanders, about that immodest object, from which otherwise modesty would have
caused me to abstain: wherein I will procure to be as short as may be; for as
the Author of purity is my witness, my pen did often stop, out of shame to set
down his soul phrases, for which cause I seek, when I can, to amend, and
utter his mind in more modest words.

The fourteenth wound, concerning stews: How perfidiously he deals with our
Authors, namely Nauar, and Graffijs, accusing them of that doctrine, which even
in the places by him cyted, they detest.
2. IN the fourteenth wound then, he accuses the Pope for the allowing of
stews, for building, page 132 ad 140.
and erecting places for that purpose, for defending and patronizing such as
profess that sinful trade, taking rent for the same, and making gain
thereof. The man whom he does principally traduce as patron of this trade, and
in this respect much honored by the Pope, is the famous, and learned Author
Martinus Nauarrus, renowned also for his grave, and holy life, Iuris Canonici
scientissimus, vir summae sobrietatis and pietatis Posseuin. in apparatu sacro
tom. 2. page 135. Nauarrus in manual c. 17. n. 195.
whom Popes, and other Princes did highly esteem for his advise, and direction
in matters of conscience, who^ this Minister does so notoriously abuse, as is
scarce credible, did we not see it with our eyes. Nauar (says he) one of their
greatest Canonists of this last age, and one whom the Popes held worthy to be
called to Rome for his continual advise and discretion, deals very plainly in
this matter, and says, that Kings, Princes, States, and Magistrates of Cytties
appointing stews, and seting out places for them in some convenient place of
their Cittyes, wherein whores may exercise their whorish trade, it seems to be
no sin. This he makes to be the doctrine of Nauar, and adds this applause
thereunto: See here a piece of Spanish devotion, and modesty. Surely no
marvel though this man was sent for from Spain to Rome: for it seems by
this doctrine he was for the Pops tooth, and much more for his Cardinals. Thus
the Bachelour. But with more cause may I say, behold here a piece, not of
English but Protestant impudency, accusing this grave, and learned Spaniard for
teaching those things which he does expressly detest in plain terms and in
most earnest manner in that very place; whose doctrine in this point I will set
down at large that all may see both how far from any the least allowing of
that damnable sin, Respo^dimus primo. Licet potestati publicae permittere. vt
in ali qua ciuitatis part meretrices sint. Man. c. 17. n. 195.
the Catholic Church is, and what conscience, and forehead English Ministers
have, that dare with such impudency flaunder Authors.

3. Concerning this matter then, Nauar teaches these five points. The first,
is which is all that may any way sound of the favoring of stews, that
Magistrates may permit women publicly to be in a part of their City,
according to S. Augustine Quid sordidius etc. meretricibus, lenonibus etc.
Aufer meretrices de rebus humanis, and omnia turbaueris libidinibus l. 2. de
ord. c. 6.
, cited by S. Thomas, and commonly received of all, that as God does permit
some sins to avoid greater evils, or for greater good; so the power of
Kings, and Princes may do the like, imitating God therein. Thus he writes,
and makes this marginall note, Augustinus l. de Ordine, cap. 6. hoc habet.
Verba eius citare non libuit, ne illi turpitudini fauere quomodocunque videamur
Nauarrus in Enchirid. c. 17. n. 195. tom. 3. operum Lugdun. ann. 1597. page 137.
Augustine does indeed teach it. His words I would not cite, not to seem any
ways to favor that unclean practice. This tooth against stews does this
Spanish Doctor show, let us see the English Bachelours tooth against truth, who
upon this saying of Nauar rayseth two notorious slanders. First out of this
speech; and the like, where it is said, Stews may be permitted, he does
infer, and accuse us that we do allow them. Does the Roman Clergy (says he)
think them so vile, and yet allow them? See the iniquity, and filthiness of
their Religion. But more reason have we to say, see the filthiness of his
conscience, charging us with the allowance of that which he must needs know we
condemn, and detest. Neither can he find either this doctrine in any Catholic
Author, that stews are allowable, or allowed, or this folly in any Gra^marian,
or latin Dictionary, that permittere, and approbare, to permit a thing, and to
allow a thing ate all one. Who does not know that God does often permit sins
which he does never allow, nay which he ever abhors? Who may not see in
these slanders so false and foolish his want both of conscience, and judgment,
and the filthiness of that religion that put such slanderous Babels in print?
The second slander is, that Nauar does say, that Magistrates which do
appoint, and set up houses for these women wherein they may exercise their
whorish trade, seem not to sin. Does Nauar say this? No truly; but no more
then you have heard, that Magistrates may permit the erecting, appointing, and
renting out of such houses: but that they may erect, or appoint, or set out
houses themselves Nauar does not say: nay he says the contrary in express
Quamuis possit potestas publica permitteremeretri ces and adiutores earum;
tame^ non potest efficere, quod illae and hi non peccent: and negari non potest
eum qui locat domum meretrici ad meretrica^du^ iuuare ipsam ad illud.
terms in that place. Though (says he) Magistrates may permit harlots and
their counselors, fautours, abetters, and such as go to them; yet cannot
authority make, that such as help, and favor them, do not sin: neither can
it be denied, but such as build, or set out houses unto them, that therein they
exercise their trade, do help, and abetter them in their sin. Thus writes
Nauar. Does the Bachelour blush at his slander, or has he the forehead of one
of these women which will not blush?

4. The second point of Nauars doctrine is, that Respo^dimus secu^do, quod non
licet permittere lupanaria (eo modo quo alicubi constituu^tur) co^stituendo eis
patronos, and locando domus carius quam locarentur honestis etc.
Magistrates may not permit (as in some places is accustomed) stews, appointing
them patrons, or renting out houses unto them at an higher rate then unto
honest persons, in regard of their more gayn full trade, receiving part of
their filthy lucre, because (says he) this practice implies participation of
gain, rising out of sin, and as Caietan says learnedly, no permission of
sin is lawful which is conjoined with participation of lucre given before
the permission thereof. These are Nauars words, which make me wonder at the
strange bouldnes of this Bachelour, who in the latin quotation of Nauar in his
margent brings these customs of appoynting patrons, and framing houses at a
dearer price then unto honest women, as part of Nauars doctrine, which he
taught to please the Popes tooth, leaving out, and skipping over the words of
Nauar, in which he does reject, and condemn the said custom. Can any dealing
be more unconscionable, and shameless then this, to insult upon this learned
Doctor, and whole Spanish Nation for his sake, as teaching that doctrine which
in that very place, had the Minister put down his words, he does openly
detest, and earnestly impugn? And yet does this Doctor proceed further to
detest the stews, and to show what a tooth and tongue this Minister has to
slander, and belie Authors.

that sin is secretly winked at, even such as are known, who they are, go as
gay, and gallant as any other, without any note to be discerned from the rest
Constitue meretrices matronarum loco, labe ac dedecore omnia dehonestaueris.
Aug. l. 2. de ord. c. 6.
. Finally such women in Spain and Italy in the holy time of Lent are forced to
frequent Sermons; and if any be converted, houses are erected where they may
remain the rest of their life, to do penance, and such as continue obstinate
against such exhortations the whole time of Lent, in some Cittyes are made on
good friday to go bare footed, and bare legged in Procession in a scornful
attire with a red cross on their backs; which penance were women in London
that profess that trade, sure to be put unto once a year, they would
perchance be more restrained thereby, then by being a day or two in Bridewell,
which now and then, and very seldom some of them endure for a show. Wherefore
whether a better course to keep this raging sin within some moderate
compass, seeing it cannot be altogether restrained, be held in Rome, or in
England, a question I say may be moved, the decision whereof I am content to
refer unto those that are more skillful in matters of government, and policy
then my self.

8. This I am sure, that most Protestants will not think probable what the
Bachelour says of the Romans, that would the Pope forbid stews in Rome as he
does Protestant Churches, we should soon see as few, or fewer whores in Rome,
then there be good Protestants. This praise of the Romans, I say, not only
Protestants, but even of Catholics, the most affected unto Rome will scarce
think likely to be true: and I do much fear, that were such a law made there
would be then more privy Queanes in Rome, then now are privy Protestants, as M.
Crashaw terms his sweet brethren; though also I do not deny, but many
common Courtezans may be secret Protestants, and the public stews their
privy Churches, which by the instinct of their religion they have more devotion
to haunt, then Churches, holy places, relics, tombs of blessed Saints, and
Martyrs, whereof Rome is full. And the falsehood of M. Crashawes conjecture
about Rome, may be proved by the experience of London, where stews are not
tolerated, yet I think he dare not say, and sure I am he cannot say with any
show of truth that there are fewer whores in London, then Protestants in Rome.
I know that a Minister of M. Crashawes M. Richard Ieffrey in his sermon at the
Cross the 7. of October. 1604.
coat, in a Sermon at the Cross made not long before he came to that honor,
said openly and set it out in print, that by the experience in some travels he
had found, that more wantonness was practiced generally in England particulerly
in the City of London, then done in Italy it self: which seeing it cannot be
imputed unto toleration of stews, nor unto the clymate which does less
inclyne to carnal sin then the Roman, may justly be thought to proceed from
the root and route of the new Gospel.

9. But now to return to Nauar, you see his tooth against stews, who does
absolutely mislike the least permission of them: yet perchance he did allow
imposts and yearly reuenews gathered from them, and therefore was for the
Popes tooth, to which the Bachelour says all gain is sweet, and all rent
welcome, though it come from whores. Let us see, what he teaches in this
point, which is the fifth point of his doctrine. Peccatum mortale est quaerere
lucrum ex meretricio.
Hinc infertur (says he) esse peccatum mortale etc. Hence is inferred that it
is a mortal sin to seek gain or tribute from whoring, or the unclean game
and trade of such women; which lucre, or rent Nicephorus l. 16. Histor. c. 20.
Vectigal impurum, detestable, absurdum, Deoque inuisum, terris quibusque
barbaris indigum, and execrandum piaculum.
does worthily call an impure impost, detestable, absurd, hateful before God,
unworthy of any savage and barbarous people, and a most execrable crime. This
does Nauar write in the place by the Bachelour quoted after his coming to
Rome, and being in Rome, with the knowledge, approbation, liking, and applause
of Popes: and in the Index of his works you shall find this doctrine,
Meretricia ex opera tributum capere importunissimae dementiae Vide Indicem
operum Nauarri tom. 3. verbo Meretrix.
est: to take tribute of the trade of whores, is most importune, or impudent
madness. Did not the Bachelour say true, that Nauar deals very plainly? Could
he speak more plainly to prove him a liar in saying, that he was sent for from
Spain to Rome, because he was for the Popes tooth, to which all gain though
coming from whores is sweet? If the Popes did follow his continual advise,
and direction (as the Bachelour says, and it is certain Romae plures annos ad
su^morum Pontificu^ congregationes de casibus conscientiae adhibitus. Posseuin.
in Appar. tom. 2. verbo Martinus Aspilcueta.
they did) it is a gross flaunder that they take tribute for the permittance
of those places: for this tribute had they taken, and allowed, they would never
have sent for Doctor Nauar out of Spain to be their directour in matters of
conscience, nor ever have permitted him in Rome to proclayme that practice, as
a most impure, and horrible sin, hateful to God and man, as you see he does.
Surely the Bachelour, except he have lost all shame and modesty together with
whores, whom his tongue speaking out of the abundance of heart does so often
name, will blush at his own madness to accuse Nauar after diligent perusal of
his doctrine as an approuer of that practice which he condemns as insolent
madness. But if he be past grace and shame that he cannot blush, let some
Protestants blush for him, to see the falsehood, ignorance and impudency of
their English Bachelour, striving with the gravity, learning, and modesty of
this Spanish Doctor. In sooth for Countries sake I am ashamed thereat; neither
do I think M. Crashaw would have played such a foul pranke, had not he been
in the stews, where like a cock, on his own dunghill he thought he might crow
and crake and revile whom be lists, as he does with the rest of the Authors
cited in this wound, whom we will briefly run over.

10. The first is Cornelius Agrippa, whom he brings to witness that the
Pope takes rent from the stews 20000. Ducats a year, page 133. page 134.
and that Pope Sixtus the fourth built a goodly stews in Rome. Surely (says
the Bachelour) his Holiness, because he scorns ordinary company, built that for
himself, and his Princes and Peers the Cardinals. Thus he. Where mark his
surely, which is both a sure lie, and a folish lie, and a clear lie. Sure,
because he could not be sure of the Popes intention, whereof yet he does give a
sure censure. Folish, because it contradicts it self, for how did the Pope
build a place to be a stews, that is a public and ordinary haunt, and yet not
for ordinary company, but for the Cardinals and himself? Clear, because had
such a fair, and goodly house been built, it would be seen some fair day or
other in Rome, which hitherto never man set his eye on. For let Protestants
that repair to Rome tell how big the same is, of what matter it is built, in
what stret of Rome it stands, how nigh unto the Popes palace, seeing he built
it for himself. Perchance the sure liars of the new Gospel will say, that
place cannot be seen, accusing the Pope of building invisible stews ^s
themselves brag to have enjoyed in former ages privy and invisible Churches.
Onuphrius in the life of this Pope writes, that he built a goodly Hospital
for the sick Xenodochium sancti Spiritus absoletum disiecit, and pulcherimis
aedificijs ampliauit.
and assigned houses for children whom their parents had left to the wide
world, bestowing portions upon diverse young Pro puellis ex positis and eoru^
nutricibus.
maids that they might he honestly placed, which works of charity these with a
sure-lye, interpret to be erecting of stews: and hence Cornelius Agrippa took
occasion to raise this foul slander against him. And as for Agrippa, the
Bachelour says, he was a man of no mean place, nor ordinary understanding,
which we do confess, for he had special intelligence, and was in very great
credit with the Devil, being a Necromant and Heretic Agrippa quas pectore
occuluerat haereses in Lotharingia^ profugus coepit euomere. Martinus Delrio l.
2. disquis. Magic. q. 29. sect. 1. page 157. edit. Lugdun. an. 1608.
and for such a one famously known, and his books for both respects censured,
and condemned by the Church of Rome; by which you may see the vanity of the
Ministers reasons, why we should believe Agrippa.

11. First (he says) he was a learned Papist, which is so notoriously false,
that fearing to be taken napping in a lie, eating up his word, he adds, that
he was a Papist for the most part, which is as foolish as the other was false.
Who does not know that the Professors of our Church must not be part Papists,
part Heretics, part Protestants, part Necromants? whosoever is heretic in one
point, factus est omnium reus, he belieueth Catholickly no part of Christian
faith. To join parts and sects of diverse kinds, Caluinists, Lutherans,
Zwinglians, Brownists in one body, is the monster of the Lutherans revolt,
whose Church may seem like that Poetical Babell, or mingle mangle of
different beasts, Prima leo, postrema draco, media ipsa Chimera est. But
whatsoever he was (says this wise man) he had no reason (mark this reason) to
belie the Pope: as though there could be some reason why men should lie, or
many men did not lie without reason, or if it had not been a trick of
heretics, and Necromants in all ages to belie the Pope without any just cause
or reason, as Simon the Magitian and first heretic dealt with S. Peter the
first Roman Bishop, leaving this hereditary hatred against the Pope unto his
cursed stock. What has the Apostolical Sea deserved of thee (says Cathedra
tibi quid fecit Ecclesiae Romanae? Our Cathedram Apostolicam, Cathedram
appellas pestile^tiae? l. 2. co^tra litteras Petil. c. 51.
S. Augustine unto an heretic) that thou do call it the Chair of
pestilence? And the same we might demand of M. Crashaw, what reason he has to
tell so many lies and slanders of the Pope as have been convinced against
him, and namely this late lie, that he called Nauar to Rome to be a Patron and
procter of the whorish trade, because he was for his tooth, so greedy of gain,
that he takes it from stews? Truly no reason I think can be alleged
thereof; for though the Pope were as wicked as he would make him, yet it is
ashame to belie the Devil, much more the Vicar of Christ, the Father of
Christians as the Pope indeed is, and has ever been so esteemed by the famous
Christianity in all ages. Now, hear the third reason. We hired him not (says
he, to wit Agrippa to belie the Pope) we thank him for nothing but the truth.
That Protestants hired not this Necromant to belie the Pope he does not prove,
but barely say it, leaving us as doubtful as we were before, besides bewraying
that such practices of hyring lying writers and witnesses do pass through
their thoughts; which so great malice as this Bachelour does show against the
Pope, may move us to fear and suspect that many do intertayne, hyring others
to do that they practice themselves, which may be the cause that so many lying
Books and Pamphlets fly abroad, even in some Catholic Countries. And thus
much about Agrippa.

12. The second Author is Oleaster, a Spanish Doctor, and Inquisitor, page 155.
who is not (he says) subject to exception as Agrippa was; whom he brings in
complaining, that filthy gaynes are taken by some Ministers of the Church
Oleaster in cap. 23. Deuteron.
. But does he speak of the Pope? or of rent and revenues taken from stews?
Neither of the one nor of the other; but of such presents, and gifts which such
women did voluntarily offer unto the Church, which God forbids to be taken
Deuts 23. v. 18.
, and yet some Priests did accept thereof, as he complaynes. But what is this to
the Pope? If some Priests did take the gifts of such women, how does it follow,
that the Pope does exact of them so many thousands a year? Where also you may
note by the way his fraud, who to make Oleasters words sound somewhat to his
purpose, which truly cited have not the least connection with it, changes the
sentence, putting in words of his own, and leaving out the words of the
Author both in Latin, and English. For whereas Oleaster says, Noluit ab his
munera acceptari: God would not have the presents, and gifts of harlots
accepted, he leaves these words quite out, and puts these of his own in
their room, Vetat ne merces meretricum ei offeratur; God forbids to bring into
his house the hyre of the whore, which is not Oleasters sentence, but is put in
wholly by the Bachelour to obscure, and darken the meaning of his complaynts, as
though they were against the Pope, for taking a rent of the Whorish trade, who
complayneth (as has been said) against some inferior Ministers for taking
voluntary gifts of such women.

13. The third Author is In candelabro aureo tit. de confess. number. 60.
Alphonsus Viualdus, page 136.
whom he brings next after Nauar, as the second maintayner of the stews,
because he says, that such women are not comprehended in the yearly
excommunication, which Bishops pronounce against such as do not confess, and
communicate at Easter. Do you not perceive how for want of direct proof this
Minister is feign to go about the bush to get some of our Authors that may
seem to favor his foolish slander? And I am sorry I cannot come to the sight
of this Author, whom it is apparent the Bachelour does abuse by iumbling
together things that have no cohere^ce together, as the reasons which he
makes Viualdus bring for this opinion, that such women are not excommunicate,
do show. The first, because the Romish Church does never publish nor denounce
them. The second, because none thereupon does refuse their company, which are
idle reasons to prove that intent, seeing many are excommunicated by our Church
who are not denounced by name, and whose company men are not bound to avoid.
And when I pray you do these men, that object want of severity unto us,
excommunicate such women, and denounce them by name? Who did ever hear that
after excommunication any man refused their company out of fear to incur
their Bishops censure? What practice has their Church of public penance,
without which none of these women can be admitted to the Sacraments of our
Church? Do not such women go from their houses in London which are but too
much known, to the Church and communion without any other penance, and
preparation besides an act of sole faith, by which made as holy and pure (in
Sumus pares matri Dei and aeque sancti sicut illa. Ser. de Natiuit. Mariae.
Luthers Doctrine) as the B. Virgin, they return sanctified to their wonted
haunt, which they sanctify by such works as are suitable with sole faith? And
yet Ministers great Preachers forsooth of penance, stout maintayners of Church
discipline, doughty and deadly enemies of Whores, if once a year they put one
in a white sheet, have forheads which do not blush to object want of severity
against such sins in the discipline of the Catholic Church, because all
Bishops do not yearly denounce them excommunicate by name, for not receiving
at Easter; which is done (as Viualdus says) out of contempt of such shameless,
and impudent women, whom the Church judges unworthy, and too base to lay her
censures upon Meretrices non su^t dignae l^queis legum.
. For though other sins are more heinous and hurtful, yet none more base,
and contemptible then this, by which contempt it is thought they may more
efficaciously be reclaimed, then be her censures.

14. The fourth is Iacobus de Graffijs Iacobus de Graffijs tom. 1. l. 1. c. 9.
art. 8. and 9.
a learned Casuist, whom not only he accuses as a favorer of the stews, as
falsely and impudently as he did Nauar, but also charge him, that to make up
the measure of his iniquity, he does teach, that the law does so far forth
tolerate fornication and stews, that it takes order to compel the whores to
refuse no man, if he offer her her pay. The words (says he) are too bad to be
repeated in English Quid tacendo amplius criminaris? Vere. cundiam simulas vt
Lector te putet parcere, qui mentiens nec animae tuae pepercisti. Hierom. Apol.
3. in Ruffin. c. 6.
. Here indeed is a piece of Protestant modesty, that is of shameless impudency,
to which perchance all other of their impudent prancks may stoop. For he
repeateth whatsoever may be obscene in that sentence with more impure words
then the Author uses, and then makes a show to stop, out of modesty forsooth,
as though the words following might not be rehearsed without shame. But his
Virginal modesty shall give us leave to repeat them, that the cause of his
sudden stop and bashfulnes may appear. These be the words which for modesty
he would not utter: Ita Decius L. Inuitus. number. 7. etc. that is: So did Decius
hold, or so did he declare the civil law; where he charge Iacobus de
Graffijs with the opinion of Decius. But what more says Graffijs in that
place? let us hear him out, and if the Bachelour blush to see his falsehood, it
will be some sign of grace, at the least a sign that he is not altogether
past shame, for he that does not blush in this case, must have I think a face
of brass. Quam opinionem (says de Graffijs) vt erroneam, and nullo facto
probabilem impugnat Couarruu. Var. resolut.
Couarruuias. Which opinion as erroneous, and in no case probable Couarruuias
impugneth; with whom he joins other learned Authors rejecting the said
opinion of Decius, out of whom he brings this evident demonstration, Graffijs
loco ^it.
conuincing Decius his opinion to be false and erroneous; Meretrix non tenetur
mortale peccatum cum quolibet committere, ergo nec inuita potest ad coitum
compelli. Bad women are not bound to commit mortal sin with any, wherefore
they cannot be compelled against their will to any sinful act. These were the
words, and doctrine which the Bachelour out of blashfulnes did omit; such
Virgins the Protestant Church breeds, which blush not to charge, and revile
Authors for teaching that which they leave rejected by grave authority, under
sharpest censure, and confuted with evident reason. Let the Reader judge which
is the graceless child, impudent as his mother, Iacobus de Graffijs, or
William Crashaw, and thereby guess, if by the children a conjecture may be
made of the mother; which Church, Protestant or Catholic deserve the title of
harlot so frequent in his mouth. Where also you must note that Decius does not
speak of any law made by the Church of Rome, page 138.
as the Bachelour lies, saying that the Romish Church tyeth whores by a law to
refuse no man, but according to the civil law, by which in Decius his opinion,
he that should offer violence to a woman that does publicly profess that
trade, is not punishable by the civil law (for no question but in conscience
before God he does sin most grievously) though therein l. 3. var. resolut. c.
14. Extraordinaria poena omnino puniendus erit.
Couarruuias proves, that even by the civil law such offenders are to be
punished, though not ordinaria poena, which is appointed for rauishers of
Virgins, and honest women, yet poena extraordinaria, at the arbitrament of the
Judge, as Bartolus teaches; and Couarruuias Vbisubra. Neapolitana constitutio
poena mortis puniendos esse statuit.
adds, that in some places, namely in Naples, such violence even unto public
women is punished as felony with loss of life.

15. Now follows Cardinal Tolet, to whom, he says the stews were much
bound, for teaching, that such women are not bound to restore the price of
their hyre, how much soever it be, after it be once given, because that action
is not against justice; whereupon he adds, that the Church of Rome byndeth
men by a law to pay such women their hyre. page 138.
But never expect to find the doctrine of our Authors truly related, or their
words faithfully cited, page 139.
and translated by this Bachlour, nor any thing but foolish lies inferred out
of them, howsoever he protest to the contrary. In this little sentence of Tolet,
first these words, quamuis accipiant in excessu, though they take money in
excess, that is, something above their due, he does falsely translate, how much
soever it be: secondly in these words, si libere eis donetur Toletus in
instruct. Sacerdot. l. 5 c. 10. edit. Lugdun. 1606.
, if it be freely given them, he leaves out freely, in which word all the
force of that doctrine does consist, translating it, if it be once given, they
are not bound to restore; which is false, and expressly against Tolet, and the
rest of our Casuists, who say, that when that money is not freely, and frankly
given but extorted by fraud and deceit Cum fraud extorquetur pecunia. ibid.
, these women are bound to restore, though it were once or twice given. Thirdly
he peruerteth Cardinal Tolets reason, which is not, because that sin is not
against justice, for sometimes when the man or woman is married, it is against
justice; but because the woman in that sinful act, to wit, in taking the money
which is freely given as a recompense thereof, does no injustice to the man
that does freely give it; nam volenti non fit iniuria, as the Philosopher
says, a man cannot be wronged in a thing he is willing unto. Fourthly, his
inference is a false slander, that the Roman Church has a law to tie men to
pay the hyre unto such women. For neither does Tolet speak of any law of the
Church of Rome, but declares the law of nature, when gifts are valide, and when
they are to be restored again: nor does he say, that men are bound in justice
to pay such women, but such women may retain, or not return unto their lewd
mates, what was once freely and frankely given them; but neither can they make
any such bargain, nor after the performance thereof exact the hyre as a due
without sin, as our Peccat meretrix accipiendo mercede^, tamquam debitum
operae suae fornicariae. Nauar. in man. c. 17. n. 40.
Casuists teach, namely Nauar, whom he does most traduce as a favorer of this
practice. And M. Crashaws eagernes to have such women bound in justice to
restore, may make us suspect, that he does expect some good sums would
return to his hands home again, were such restitutions made; but he should
before hand have remembered that Orators saying, Non amo tanti poenitere.
Neither do I think Protestant Queanes use to make such repayments, seeing
among those of their better sort, restitution of any thing, though not freely
given, but fraudulently gotten, is a rare byrd. But these men that love to have
Babel the subject of their Sermons, must babble something, though it make much
more against themselves then any man else.

16. In the last place comes the Pope himself in person to be Patron of the
stews: and why think you? page 140*
what does he in their favor? All the Bachelour can invent against him is,
that in the Bulla Coenae, which he makes to meet with all his enemies at once,
he does not put in Whores. Where the Bachelour does much complain, that the
Pope excommunicating Caluinists and Lutherans, and such heretics, does not
join all the Whores in the world with them, perchance because (as he says,
when the Pope does curse any, God will bless them Virginian Sermon page 60,
more) he does grieve, that women whom he loves so dearly should be without
this blessing. But such follyes deserve no answer: neither do I think, that
Protestants use to excommunicate such women in their Bulla Coenae: and sure I
am, that some of their own friends do complain, that in the very week before
Easter, even on good Friday after their Lords supper, in some places they are
more dissolute, drunken, and use the company of such women more then at other
times Quoties nos cum magno dolor vidimus in ipsa magna Hebdomada laruis
indutos discurrere, and crapula atque libidine in ipsa sacra Parascene
ludibu^dos diffluere in omni genere obscoenitatis atque lasciuiae. Crecanouius
de corruptis moribus etc.
. And yet as though they were great lovers of chastity, and mourners for our
misery, the Minister does conclude; Seeing man (says he) cannot separate whom
the Devil has joined, let us leave the stews in Rome, and the Pope in his
stews, and mourning for their misery, let us proceed.

17. But, M. Bachelour, if you proceed in this sort you will soon proceed
Doctor, and put the Devil in danger to loose his Chair. And though you have
played the Purseuant in Rome, seeking into the synkes of the city to find some
things against us; and even into priuyes to find some privy Protestants and
members of your Church; yet will I not follow your example to play the
Constable in London, and search into your dunghills at Pickthach, and near
unto Bedlam, and in Shorditch, which are places but too well known: and you
know much more probable it is that I might find many Ministers, and your self
among others in one of these hau^ts, then you the Pope in any stews in Rome.
But I will spare you at this time, and only wish you to reflect on that which
the world knows, and some of your side do much wonder at, to wit, that when
any of our Priests can be kept no longer from stews, they run incontinently
unto your Churches. And tell me, I pray you, if you know, or inform your self
Atkinso^, Rouse, Smith, and others.
if you know not, whether the first Protestant Church these Conuertites visit
and do their devotion in, be not ever commonly a known Conuenticle of your
women professors? Whether such Penitents be not first admitted unto the
profession of your religion in the lap of that loving Congregation? where they
make the first general confession of their infirmityes with little shame and
much sorrow to have been so long chaste; where they are absolved from their vow
of chastity, and in penance are bound to wallow in the sharp thorns of
carnal lust, in which the swynish beginner of your Church by marriage with Bore
the Nun, does say, that S. Bennet being tempted might better have rubbed his
skyn then in material Benedictus fise in se^tes and vrticas co^iugalis vitae
coniecisset, plus profecisset cutemque Sua^ long melius perfricuisset. in
Alcorano. p. 318. Vide Sedul. prae. scrip. aduhaeres. 20. n. 6.
thorns; where finally stripped naked of all goodness they begin to put on the
sole-faith-suite of your Gospel. And this manner of receiving Apostaticall
Proselites into the body of your Church being so known, yet your Puritanicall
sanctity can set a face on the matter, as though you longed our conversion from
stews to your chaste conuenticles, mourning for our misery upon the banks of
Babylon, who feast and banquet and sing Geneua psalms for joy upon the banks
of the Thames in the sunne-shyne of your new light with your loving sisters by
your side: where we must leave you, and would willingly leave to speak further
of these vncleant matters, but being once in the stews, you will not out till
your Sermon be ended.

His fifteenth wound or slander: That a man may keep a wife, or a whore, as
he pleases by our practice.
18. IN this fifteenth wound which follows as an Appe^dix to that of the
Stews, he charge the Church of Rome with allowing Concubines, never allowed
(says he) in the old Testament, and absolutely condemned in the new. He cites
to this purpose the words of the Canon law, He that has not a wife, but for a
wife a Concubine, let him not for that he repelled from the Communion, yet so,
that he be content with one woman, either a wife or Co^cubine Is qui non habet
vxore^ sed pro vxore Concubinam, a co^munione non repellatur. Decret. d. 34. c.
4.
. But the Canon law (that none might be deceived, but such as would wilfully
shut their eyes not to see the truth, among whom this Bachelour is one) both
before and after this Canon, does declare in what sense the word Concubine is
taken in it. By Concubine, in the following Canon, is understood the woman that
is married without legal instruments, but yet is taken with conjugal
affection, which makes her wife, though in law she be called Concubine
Co^cubina hic intelligitur quae cessantibus legalibus instrumentis vnita est,
and coniugali affectu asciscitur: hanc coniugem facit affectus, concubinam vero
lex nominat.
which acception of the word Concubine is conformable to the Civil law, and
also to holy Scripture, which calls Agar, Genesis 25.
and Cecura both wives, and Concubynes of Abraham: wives, because they were
taken by conjugal affection with obligation to live together: Concubines,
because they were not solemnly married; so that their children had no title to
their fathers goods; by which you see, that it is a manifest lie that we make
such Concubines lawful which were not allowed in the old Testament. The sense
then of this Canon is, that the man that will not solemnly, and publicly
marry, may be admitted to the Sacraments, so that he marry privately; but such
as keep women, and will neither solemnly, nor yet secretly marry, are to be
altogether repelled from the holy communion. How impudent is the Bachelour
that does exclayme, page 143.
Is not this a holy table of the Romish Sacrament, from which he shall not be
forbidden, that openly keeps a whore in room of a wife? And to show that he
sins not out of ignorance, but out of set malice against his own knowledge:
I know (says he) they have coined a distinction, whereby they would cover this
wound, and say that a Concubine here is to be taken for a woman whom a man
has, and keeps with the affection of a Husband, only in outward fashion, and
solemnity she is not a wife, nor publicly married. Thus he.

19. Do you know this, M. Bachelour? Do not you then speak against your own
knowledge, that we forbid not the Sacrament unto such as openly keep a whore in
room of a wife? The word Co^cubine very ordinarily in all sorts of Authors
does signify a wife not solemnly married.
Be all women not publicly married, whores? or rather have not you the
forehead of one of these shameless women, that dare openly confess, and glory
in your shame? but what say you against this distinction? You call it a
distinction of our coining, but that shows you to be a Bachlour of small
reading, this distinction being so common in Authors, both Ciuilian, and
Canonists, holy Fathers, and divine Scriptures, as may be seen in Justinian
Nouella 18. cap. 5. August. de bono coniug cap. 5. Genesis 25. You say the best is
naught, though you should grant all that we say; but you know not what to
mislike. Perchance you are offended that we grant not that freedom that your
Father Luther approves, that if the Mistress will not, the Maid may: and that
a man may have a wife, and concubyne, which that Si quis habens vxore^
co^cubinam habeat, a communione repellatur.
Council does condemn, though Luther say it is no more forbidden Christians,
then it was the Luther in c. 16. Genesis edit. Ienensi. non magis abrogatam quam
cetera Mosayca, id est libera^, nec prohibitam.
ancient Patriarchs. You say that no cloak will cover the shame of this Canon
which is written in the forehead thereof; to wit, this title: He that has not
a wife must have a Concubyne in her room, which you take to be a commandment
for all Catholics to keep whores, or else be repelled from the most holy
Sacrament: so little wit you have in your head, and so little shame in your
forehead; the sense of that title being plain, that he that will not
altogether refrain from the company of women, must either marry publicly or
privately, or else be forbidden the Sacraments. What absurdity is there in this
doctrine?

The sixteenth wound or slander: That we make Matrimony worse then Whoredom,
and Wives worse then Strumpets.
20. BUT our Bachlour not content to have brought his Babel to this height,
that by our doctrine a whore is made equal to a wife, he will prove by our
doctrine, that a wife is made worse then a whore, an adultresse, and common
strumpet, and that we teach, that some had better lie with a whore then marry a
wife of his own. But here I seem to perceive some sign of grace in M.
Crashaw, if out of shame he be loath to tell what kind of good-men, or
good-wiues they are whom we account worse then adulterers and strumpets,
having indeed great cause to blush so much as to name the^. For say truth, M.
Crashaw, do not we mean Martin Luther, and Katherine Bore, that good man, and
good-wife, that Apostata Fr^er, and runnagate Nun, and the like, who having
first by sollemne vow professed chastity, and wedded themseues unto Christ,
could neither marry, nor have any husband of their own, no more then a woman
that is already married can take a husband, her first living.

21. This is the doctrine, not of Albertus Pighius only, whom the Bachlour does
father it upon, but of all ancient Fathers, as we will prove, having first
purged Pighius his sentence from his corruptions, page 134.
who would feign wrest and wring the same to an obscene sound, and some wicked
sense. He makes Pighius move this question, Had they that keep not their vow of
continency better marry? and then gives him this answer, Nay assuredly. Which
is an assured lie. For neither does Pighius move that question, nor makes that
answer. His question is this, Pighius Controuers. 15. fol. 215. An nubere his
minus malu^ minusque da^nabile quam vri? Nam molius dicere non potes quod
Apostolus damnationi imputat.
Such as are not only tempted, but also do burn, were it a less evil, and a
less damnable sin for them to marry? For better (says he) thou can not
say it were, seeing the Apostle lays damnation upon them for making void
their first faith or promise. Where our Bachelour commits two faults; first
concealing the doctrine of the Apostle, which condemns to hell the cradle of
Katheryne Bores Church; secondly forcing Pighius to propose a question, which
he does purposely avoid, as unworthy of a Christian. To this question then
Pighius makes this answer. Consider (says he) which is the worse or lewder
servant, he that by negligence or unwary usage of his body, makes himself so
weak, that he faynts in his masters service, or he that proudly shakes of
the yoke? Which is the worse scholar, he that learneth, though not all his
lesson (which he might have done had he not slept over long, and filled his
belly with too much meat) yet a good part thereof; or he that plays the
truant, and leaves the schole, not learning so much as one word of his lesson?
This is Pighius his answer, set down in his words, which the Bachelour does
suppress, because they give, as you see, great light to his doctrine.

22. And having falsified the question, the answer, and reason thereof, page
144.
at the last he corrupts the conclusion also which in Pighius is, that to
sin out of infirmity is a less sin, quam si iugum in totum excutiamus,
then if we wholly cast of the yoke; which this Minister does translate, then to
marry, for this is wholly to cast of Gods yoke; where he puts in, to marry, into
Pighius his sentence (which he neither names nor meant) out of desire to mar
the sense of his words, as if he had condemned true marriage, as not only a
sin, but also as wholly casting of Gods yoke and law. The like trick he uses
with the last words of Pighius, which are these. We do not approve
fornication, but compare a sin committed out of infirmity with a deliberate,
and continual incest without any shame: which our Bachelour does make English
thus: we compare a slip or fall of infirmity with marriage, which in this case
we account no better then a resolved, or deliberate, or continual incest,
utterly without all shame. Which you see is falsely translated without all
shame, to make the ignorant Reader believe we account true marriage to be a
continual incest, whereas Pighius speaks only of the wicked conjunctions of
such men and women, as have solemnly vowed, and wedded themselves unto Christ,
which matches can no more be marriages, then that should be of a shameless
woman that would keep with another man as his wife, page 147. 143. 144.
wedding her self to him, as far as she is able, her first husband being yet
alive, as Christ the Spouse of professed Virgins, and Votaries never dies.

23. This is Pighius his doctrine, which lays open the uncleanness of the
wedding bed of the votifragous Gospel, betwixt Bore and Luther, which
therefore the Bachelour calls one of the sweet flowers of the Popes garland,
Pope holy doctrine, that is beastly, profane, bold, blasphemous, hateful, and
hoggish, never taught by the Church of Rome that I know (says he) till these
latter, and more shameless times, that the whore has got her a brazen face.
Thus he. Which storm of shameful reproaches I do not marvel to see bluster
out of his mouth, who has not been much conversant with any learned, or
ancient Doctors, nor knows against whom he speaks Quaecu^que ignorant
blasphemant.
. But I do somewhat wonder that the Church of England would publish in print
this ignorant railing, having many learned that know it to be the uniform
doctrine of the most ancient Fathers. I will allege some one, or two, and
refer you unto Bellarmine l. ^. de Monach. c. 25.26.27.
if you desire more number. The first shall be Non se fallat qui a virginitatis
curriculo, ad vitia carnis deflexit; non est enim libera, neque mortuus est vir
eius, vt cui velit nubat etc. Basil. de vera virg. post med.
S. Basil, who in his book de vera Virginitate, speaks largely of this
matter, proving that Virgins are wedded unto an immortal husband, the King of
Kings, and therefore can never marry another seeing their spouse never dies,
which if they attempt, they do not marry, but incur a shameful, and
ignominious state of conjunction, though some (says he) after their profession
of Virginity drawn away and conquered with the false sweetenes of carnal
pleasure, seek to Virginitatem Domino professae, stupriscelus honesto coniugij
nomine obtegere cupiunt. Basil. ibid.
cloak their wicked incest with the honorable name of marriage. The second is
S. Chrysostom, who writing to an Apostata monk full of Luthers spirit though
less impudent then he was. Marriage (says he) is honorable, but thou may
not enjoy the priuiledg of marriage: though thou call thine marriage, yet I hold
it so much worse then adultery, as a blessed Angel is better then a mortal
Angelorum societatem relinquere, adulterij crimen incurrere est: quamuis
freque^ ter nuptias voles, ego tame^ adulterio tanto peius existimo, quanto
melior est mortalibus Angelus. Ep. 6. ad Theodor. lapsu^.
man. Now would I gladly see that brazen face that dares say either that S.
Chrysostom does not hold such marriages as Luthers was to be worse then
adultery, or that the doctrine of these two Fathers is blasphemous, hateful,
hoggish, and the Church in their days a whore with a brazen face. With these
Fathers agree the ancient Counsels of the Church. The Council of Towers in
France above a thousand years ago decrees in this sort: Tom. 2. Council. can.
21. fol. 656. in edit. Bin.
If any Monk marry a wife, let him he excommunicated, and separated from her
lewed company, using therein (if need be) the help of the secular judge to part
them. Which Council does also testifye that to draw any vowed virgin out of
her Monastery, was punishable by death, by the Civil and Imperial laws. What
would the fathers of this Counsel have thought of the marriage of Luther and
such Progenitors of the Protestant Gospel? And no less peremptory against
these marriages are the fathers of Calcedon, one of the first four general
Councels, which S. Gregory did honor as the four Gospells l. 1. ep. 24.
, and the Church of England does profess to receive See Thom. Rogers of the
doctrine of the Church of England.
: Virgins (says this Council) that have consecrated themselves unto God, and
likewise Monks may not contract marriage, which if they be found to attempt,
let them be excommunicated. Thus decrees that Great, Ancient, and Venerable
Counsel. Let Protestants give their Bachelour leave to brand it with style of
a Church with a brazen face.

24. But he will needs make the Jesuits the chief fautors and Authors of this
piece of Popery, that they have (to use his loathsome phrase) lickt up the
imperfect heap of Pighius his doctrine, and brought it to form, and
perfection. page 145.
He accuses specially Cardinal Bellarmine, because he teaches, that the
speech of S. Paul, They that cannot conteyne themselves, let them marry, for it
is better to marry then to burn, is not understood, nor can rightly be said of
them that have vowed, for both are naught (says Bellarmine) to marry, and to
burn; yea it is worse of the two to marry, whatsoever Protestants say to the
contrary. Thus he accuses Bellarmine: but still you shall be sure to find him
tripping, for he leaves out the words of Bellarmine, wherein he puts all the
force of his doctrine, praecipue ei qui hahet votum solemn, specially and
principally for such as have a solemn vow of chastity it is not better to
marry then to burn, for unto them that have a single vow, he says, it is
absolutely better to marry then to burn, though in some respect worse, as
shall be declared. Now if the ripenes, and perfection of Popery does consist in
this doctrine, that the sentence of S. Paul, It is better to marry then to
burn, is not true in such as have a solemn vow of chastity, Popery was
brought to ripenes 13. hundred years at least before Jesuits were heard of, by
the diligence, devotion, and modesty of the most ancient, learned, and pious
Doctors of Gods Church. S. Ambrose writing to a Virgin that after her vow had
married, seeking to recall her, answers this objection that might be made in
her behalf. Dicet aliquis melius est nubere quam vri Ambros. ad Virgin. lapsam
l. 5.
. Some will say it were better to marry then to burn. Is not this, M.
Bachelour, the defense, and plea that you make for your mother Bore, that she
did so burn in the monastery, that fire forced her to fly to be cooled in
Luthers bed? Harken what S. Ambrose does urge against her. Hoc dictum (says
he) ad non pollicitam pertinet, ad nondum velatam etc Ceteru^ quae se spopondit
Christo, and sanctu^ velame^ acce pit, iam nupsit, iam immortali iuncta est
viro. Si voluerit nubere communi lege connubij, adulterium mortis perpetrat^
ancilla mortis efficitur.
. This speech of the Apostle concerns such as have not yet vowed, that are
not yet veyled: but she that has espoused her self to Christ, and taken the
holy veyle, is already married, and wedded to an immortal husband, if she
seek to marry as other women do, she commits adultery, and is made the
handmayd of death. Thus S. Ambrose. What more does Bellarmine say then this
ancient Father? What Catholic could more condemn the burning of your Father
Luther, wherewith he set the Christian world on fire? And yet S. Hierome
speaks no less clearly, saying Virgins quae post consecratione^ nupserunt
non tam adulterae su^t quam incestae. Hieron. l. 1. in Iouin. c. 7.
, that Virgins that have dedicated themselves to Christ, the Apostle gives no
leave unto them to marry, but after consecration, and solemn vow, if they
marry they are not so much adulterous, as incestuous Queanes. With whom S.
Augustine does agree: Such as do not contain, it is expedient (says he) they
should marry, and that is expedient which is lawful; but after the vow of
continency, it is neither expedient nor lawful Illis qui se non continent,
vtique expedit nubere and quod licet expedit: quae autem vouerint co^tinentiam,
nec licet nec expedit. l. 1. de adult. coniug. c. 18.
.

25. Concerning such as have made a single vow of chastity, Bellarmine does
teach, that absolutely speaking, it is a less sin to marry then lead an
incontinent, or scandalous life Minus peccatum est nubere post votu^ simplex
quam perpetuo cu^ aliorum scandalo impudice viuere. l. 2. de Mon. c. 34.
; and that therefore S. Hierome did exhort a Virgin, that after such a vow lived
scandalously, rather to marry; not that it is no sin (says he) to marry
after a vow, as Protestants think, but because it is a less sin then to
lead an incontinent life, and both wisdom and reason teach, of two evils to
choose the less. Thus Bellarmine, who adds, that in some sort it is a
greater sin for a Virgin to marry after a single vow, then to commit
fornication; because by marriage she does altogether unable herself to keep
her vow, which she does not by fornication: whereat our Bachelour rages,
saying, that it is plain, that Popery voweth against marriage, not against
adultery or fornication, against wives, not against whores: which cauilling
does show that Ministers are resolved not to understand what they mean never
to keep. For Bellarmine teaches, that the vow of continency is broken either
by fornication, or by marriage, but in different sort. After fornication such
as have vowed and broken their vow, may repent, and keep their vow of chastity
the remnant of their life, which after marriage they cannot. For though they
repent of the breach of their vow, yet being married, they cannot lead a single
life, having given away the power of their body by that contract, in which
respect to marry, is more against their promise of fidelity, though absolutely
the other be the greater sin. Which may be showed by the example of a woman,
that having betroathed herself to one, marryeth another, absolutely speaking,
she sins less by this marrying then by committing fornication; yet if we
regard her promise, she breaks that more by marrying, which makes her unable
to keep her promise, though she would: to which fornication does not
altogether unable her. Who can deny this to be true, that has use of reason?
Would our Bachelour cavil thereat, did not malice against Popery make him a
puppy, or rather a pig of Luthers sow, or of Katherine Bore, who to defend that
profane, and execrable marriage of his ghostly parents, dares accuse the
doctrine of the most ancient Fathers to be hoggish, and hateful: to make that
runnagate Nun, and impudent Strumpet of their Gospel seem an honest woman,
does charge the Church of God to be a whore with a brazen face, licking up the
swinish doctrine of that hateful Heretic Iouinian Augustine. haeres. 82.
wherewith he drew so many Nuns out of their Cloisters, accusing Catholics
for feeding on the sweet flowers and odoriferous herbs of the Fathers
sentences, as has been proved.

The seventeenth and eighteenth slanders; That we permit Priests to have
Concubines at a yearly rent, and force such as would live chaste to pay the
rent, because they may have Concubines if they will.
26. NO where does this Bachlour show us his face more impudently, then in his
two next wounds, obiecting among the generally received doctrines, and
practices of our Church, these two. First, that Priests are allowed to keep
Concubines under a yearly rent. Secondly, that such as will live chaste, must
yet pay a yearly rent, because they may keep whores, and Concubines if they
will. What dares not this fellow say? Look into the Canon Decrit. Did. 81.
and 82.
law, and the Council of Trent, and you shall see how this practice is
condemned, and severe punishments enacted against them that fall into such
crimes Decret. de reformat. c. 14. sess. 25.
. We know that Bishops are forbidden to tolerate such sins under pain of
being suspended from their office Decret. did. 83. c. Si quis Episcopus.
. It is a sin to inuit to say Mass, or to affoard necessary ornaments to
notorious Concubinary Priests, or to be present at their Mass, under pain of
mortal sin Nauar. in Man. c. 25. n. 80.
, which if any do, they receive a curse instead of blessing. Could the Church
of God use greater diligence to banish and abolish this sin, then she has
done, whose Counsels make most severe laws against them, whose Bishops are
bound under pain of suspension from their office to punish them according to
those laws: whose children finally are bound under pain of eternal damnation
to disgrace them? What if a Bishop or two in Germany, who are also temporal
Princes, against the Laws of the Church did permit Concubynes unto some
Priests; must the fault of one or two Bishops be urged as the doctrine, and
general practice of our Church? What can be more folish, and full of ignorant
malice then this cavil? And yet does he not prove substantially that ever any
Catholic Bishop did permit any such practice. For the centum Grauamina
Germanorum, which he cites, are insufficient witnesses, being as himself
confesses Papists but in part, that is Protestants in very deed, the head
whereof was Luther: so that against his promise he does produce his own
Authors against us. Espencaeus whom likewise he brings, though disgusted with
the court of Rome, he gave much liberty to his pen; yet he speaks only upon
the report of these Protestant Germans, not giving full and absolute assent
thereunto, but saying, would to God the Germans had complained thereof falsely,
and without Vtina^ and falso, and immerito extaret inter Grauamina Germanorum.
Espenc. l. 2. c. 7. de co^tinentia.
cause. Which words the Bachelour does translate, whereof the German Nation
complained long ago, and upon too great cause, making no difference as you see
between a doubtful, and an absolute speech. When will this Bachelour or child
of Babel be healed, and leave this false trick? Did not I say in the beginning
too truly, and upon too great cause, that he cites no Author whom he does not
corrupt? For he uses the same fraud in the other testimonies of Espencaeus,
Epenc. loc. citato.
who doubting of the truth of the Germans complaynt, that Priests that would
live chaste were constrained to pay rent, says thereof: Si credere dignum est,
if it be a thing that deserves credit, which the Bachelour translates, it is
horrible to believe, but too true. Which is quite kym kam, as you see: which
treacherous dealing to use it so perpetually in every quotation after such
oaths of sincerity is horrible to believe, but too true.

27. That some Priests, and Monks live dissolute lives, disagreeing from their
profession, whereof some of our Authors and Bishops complain, the complaynt
has been as ancient as the public profession of Christianity in the world Et
nos nouimus tales, sed non perijt fraternitas propter eos qui pro fitentur quod
non sunt.
, an unavoidable evil, whereof Christ says, Scandalls must needs come Matt.
18. v. 7.
: neither ought the examples of some that made shipwreck, daunt others from
this gaynefull navigations in the ship of chastity, with the gale of the holy
Ghost, Christ being Pilot A fructuosa nauigatione, nauigio continentiae
gubernatore Christo spiritus sa^cti afflatu- Nissen. l. de virgin. c. vlt.
, to use the words of S. Gregory Nissen brother unto S. Basil. Heluidius the
heretic an enemy of Virginity did object the same, that some Virgins kept
tauernes, which S. Hierome does not deny, neither did he think it any disgrace.
Ego autem (says he) and plus dico etc. Nay I say more, that some Virgins live
in adultery, some Priests keep Innes, some Monks are unchaste: but who does not
see, that neither Virgins ought to keep tauernes, neither Priests Innes, nor
Monks commit adultery? What fault has Virginity, if counterfaite Virgins be
faulty? Thus S. Hierome: showing that the fault of some ought not to be imputed
unto all, nor those sins disgrace a profession which none but such as swerve
from it can commit. The state of chastity is high, to which none can mount that
are not full of the fire of divine love, which when it dies, Quis no^ statim
intelligat, nec tabernariam virginem, nec adulteru^ Monachum, nec Clericum
posse esse cauponem? Numquid virginitas in culpa est, si simulator virginitatis
in crimine est? Hier. adu. Heluid.
those that were before Nazaraeans, more white then snow, become incontinently
more black then a coal; whose scandalous life, the Devils instruments use as a
coal to black, stayne, and denigrate the good name of the rest Seruis Dei
detrahunt, and quorum vitam peruertere non possunt, famam decolorare nituntur.
August. epist. 136.
, as our Bachelour now does, which was their custom even in S. Augustines
time. If (says he) a Bishop, or a Priest, or a Monk, or a Nun fall into
some sin, they (the enemies of vowed chastity) bestir themselves, they labor
even till they sweat, to make the world believe, that all Bishops, Priests,
Monks, and Nuns are such, though they cannot be proved to be such. And yet
(mark their partiality) when a married women is taken in adultery, they neither
put away their wives, nor accuse their mothers Ad quid suda^t isti, quid alij
capta^t, nisi vt quisquis Episcopus etc. omnes tales esse creda^t, sed non
posse omnes manifestari. Et tamen etiam ipsi cum aliqua maritata reperitur
adultera, ne^ proijciunt vxores suas, nec accusa^t matres suas. epist. 137.
. Thus S. Augustine.

28. The Bachelours remedy against this frailty to permit them that have vowed
chastity to marry, when they begin to burn, is injurious unto God, to whom
they made their vow, against the perpetual practice of the Church, against the
doctrine of the ancient Phisitia^s of men's souls, who exhort those that have
vowed chastity in such cases to seek remedy by prayer, and by penance, by
fasting, wearing haireclothes, lying on the hard ground, and specially by
meditation of hell fire, of the joys of heaven, the life of Christ, and of
other objects, that may awake in their hearts the flame of divine love. And if
these remedies do not prevail, in vain will they seek by the company of one
woman to quench that fire that never says enough, except a man by reason set a
non plus vltra unto it. What miseries, and disorders have flowed into Germany
together with Luther and his sensual doctrine, in which ou^ Bachelour agrees
with him, that S. Paul commands all that burn to marry, Protestants
themselves complain, to wit, that this Gospel has bereaved men of honesty,
women of modesty, children of simplicity, Vt ex illa peruersa Paulinae legis
interpretatione (says Siluest. Crecanou. de corruptis moribus
one) multo grauiora nobis Christianis expectanda sint, quam Turcis ex sua
Polygamina, quibus tot licet, quot libet vxores ducere. That out of this
perverse, and false interpretation of the place of S. Paul, we Christians may
expect more impure, and beastly practices, then are even among Turks, who by
their Poligamy may marry as many wives as they list. Hence it is (says he)
that in former ages so frequent, and so manifold, and abominable venery has
been practiced, as now is by both sexes, and all ages We see young boys go
openly to Queanes, from which if they be drawn, they stubbornly demand wives
The same is also in young mayds, when they are lascivious and wanton, being
checked, they straight crave husbands, both pretending Luthers law, that none
can live chaste The same does the Protestant Wigandus report, de bonis and malis
Germa^.
; that venery is as necessary as meat and drink. Thus he. What murders and
massacres of their wives this fire has driven Ministers unto, seeking to
quench their own wanton flames in their wives blood the same Protestant does
largely recount, namely of a Minister Crecanouius vbi supra.

At Newburge in Germany.


that poisoned his wife, and being demanded the cause that moved him to so
bloody a fact, made freely this answer: Coniugium in Lutheranis Sacerdotibus
non extinguere vagas libidines: That marriage in Lutheran Ministers is not
sufficient to quench the fire of their wandering lust, and affection to diverse
women.

29. Wherefore M. Crashaw, if you seek not to quench your fire by such water
of penance, and devotion, as ancient Fathers prescribe, it is much to be
feared the same will not burn long within your own doors, nor your wife
without danger keep in so furious a flame, specially if you be of the fiery
temper that Zuinglius, and other your first Ghospellers were of, who say Non
aliam matrimonij causam apud Paulu^, quam carnis ad libidinem aestum reperire
licet, quem feruere in nobis negare non possumus cum huius ipsius opera nos
coram Ecclesijs infames reddiderint etc. Zuinglius tom. 1. fol. 115. edit.
Tigur. an. 1581.
that in S. Paul no other motive of marriage is found, but only the burning of
carnal lust; which cause they confess was so manifest in them, that our
burning (say they) has made us infamous before the face of Churches: and by
burning lust we understand carnal desires, and longings, wherewith a man even
set a fire, does think of no other thing, then the pleasing of his libidinous
appetites, spending all his thoughts, and meditations therein, wholly employing
himself how to satisfy the raging of his flesh. These are the very words of
the first firebrarnds of your Gospel, and this was the fire and fervor which
moved them to preach against the Pope, which whether it were from hell or
heaven, from God or the Devil, from the motion of the spirit, or fury of the
flesh, let the Reader judge; and whether marriage may be thought able to quench
such raging flames of Apostaticall Priests, or how neighbors may be secure,
who^ but a wall does part, from such fires; or rather let us leave this matter,
and judgment to him, who shall judge the world by fire, the light whereof will
show, I make no doubt, more Catholic Priests that lived continent without any
woman, then Ministers that were content with one.

An Answer to the nyneteenth wound.
30. THE nineteenth wou^d deserves no Answer, being only an heap of slanders
without any proof, where putting his head out of the stews, loath to leave
them, he says in a loud voice, that our Liturgy is full of blasphemy, our
Legend full of lies, our Cerimony full of superstition; which Liturgy being
lately corrected, yet I dare say (says he) that for one evil taken out there
is another put in, and some stand unremoved, and that both in pictures, and
points of doctrine they are as ill as the former at least. This is all the
proof he brings, or you may expect of him; to wit, that he dares say it, whom
you cannot but believe, M. Crashawes Dare-say.
being (as by this Sermon appears) a man so modest, that no words are more
rife in his mouth then whores, and harlots, not blushing to spend many hours
in pulpit upon that subject; so sincere, that no Author is by him cited without
some fraudulent trick to wrest their sayings from a true and plain to some
false and slanderous sense; so loving toward the Church of Rome, that he does
beat and busy his brains to devise the most horrible blasphemies, and
barbarous practices heart can imagine to charge upon her: finally so religious
toward God, that out of scruple of conscience to spare the Pope, he does tell
manifest slanders, that may give vantage unto profane men to deny him.
Wherefore this wound being made only upon the bare word of so grave a witness,
we must leave it as incurable, not being in our power to stay his tongue from
wounding the souls, and consciences of credulous people, that will believe all
he dare say, without any proof, on whom he loadeth many damnable wounds that
must needs cause in them (if they be not healed) eternal death.

THE SEVENTH CHAPTER. AN Answer to his last wound, concerning the bad life of
Catholics.
IN the last wound, he turns to his stews, and their demaynes again,
therein ending his Sermon, a page 156, ad. 166.
and bidding his Auditory good night, and giving us our last farewell with a
charge of Adultery, Drunkenness, Ambition, Idleness, Dissimulation, Deceipts,
Cosenages, Murders, VVhoredomes in all estates, particulerly in the Clergy,
with Ignorance, Negligence, Sodomy, Symony, and other corruptions to attain
places and honors in the Church, bringing Bernardus Marlanensis a Poet, S.
Brigit, S. Vincent Ferrere, and Pope Adrian the sixth complaining, that such
sins and abuses were in the Church, desiring the same might be reformed;
fearing otherwise that God would lay heavy scourges upon Christendom. With
this and such like stuff does he fill up ten or eleauen pages, mingling lies,
slanders, railing, and follyes with some truths. This accusation as it is the
vaynest and emptiest of all other August. de unit. Eccl. c. 18.
so is it most rife in the mouth of Protestants: therewith they do deceive,
and delude ignorant people more then with any other, as Donatists Quod
propterea (Do^atistae) faciunt, quia firma and robusta veritate subnixa in
uenire no^ possu^t documenta, quibus causam suam tueantur: and volunt videri
aliquid dicere, dum tacere erubescunt, and loqui inania no^ erubescu^t. Aug. de
unit. Eccl. c. 18.
, and Manichees Aug. de moribus Eccles. Cathol. c. 15.
and other Heretics did in former times. Concerning which we will briefly
consider two things. First the quality of the witnesses which he brings, and
how they make against him. Secondly the accusation it self, how vain, and
empty, and of no substance it is.

2. To begin with the witnesses that complain of the lewd life of some
Catholics, I demand of M. Crashaw, whether they were Protestants or Catholics
themselves? not Protestants, for then he should produce, contrary to his
promise, his own men against us. They were Catholics then, as he does
confess. Then I demand again, whether they had conscience or no? if they
were without conscience, then does he produce faithless witnesses, ready to
speak untruth without any scruple; wherefore the Bachelour does grant also
that these Catholics, or Papists (as is his phrase) had conscience, and out of
remorse of conscience, and fear of God, did confess freely, and deplore
bitterly the misery that the sinfulnes of the Romish Church would bring upon
the world. Thirdly I demand, where they came to that conscience, or fear of
God? By the preaching of what Ministry? By the Sacraments of what Church? By
the doctrine of what faith? Doubtless of the Roman faith, Ministry, and
Church, wherein they both lived, and dyed obedient children. This being
certain, let M. Crashaw call to mind what he teaches against the Brownists,
that a good conscience cannot be severed from effectual calling. And how can
that be (says he) but a true Church, wherein men are ordinarily begotten to
God? How can that be but an holy, and lawful Ministry that brings men to
salvation? page 30.
Thus he. Now let M. Crashaw speak whether it were not a good conscience, the
remorse whereof moved these men to detest the sinfulnes of many in the Roman
Church? Whether that was not true fear of God that did make them so bitterly
deplore it? Then again either these men came to conscience without effectual
calling, or were effectually called by the means of a false Church: or else
the Roman is the true Church, detesting bad life, whose doctrine breeds in
her loving children such an hatred thereof. And these Saints, and holy men, as
they are witnesses against the bad life of Catholics, which we much more then
Protestants abhor; so likewise their example of not forsaking the Church,
notwithstanding the known bad life of some, will be a testimony at the day of
judgment against the damnable pride of the Protestant revolt, out of a
pretended horror against sin: wherein they are neither like these holy men of
our Church, nor the ancient Prophets, who (as S. Augustine Lib. 3. co^t. Cresc.
Grammat. c. 38. Sanctos and Prophetas Dei inter conte^ptores legis, Dei mandata
sernare licuit atque in ipsos transgressores multa digna and vera verba
iaculari.
says) did keep the commandments of God among the transgressors of his law,
living together with them in the same Church, and darting many worthy, and
true sayings against their bad life. But though they did detest, abhor, and
reprehend such heinous sins, yet durst they not, sibi alterum populum quasi
purgatum, and liquatum separatione sacrilega constituere, make a sacrilegious
revolt, and gather together a new company, as it were purged, and purified
from these sins. So likewise (says S. Augustine) we may neither follow the
wicked deeds of our Bishops and Prelates, and other Profestours, which you do
rather object then prove, nor yet thereupon forsake the holy Church, which (as
the Apostle says) does increase and fructify in the world: so that these men
living and dying members of our Church, the sins of whose Professors they did
reprehend, and yet having conscience, grace, fear of God, which cannot be come
by but in the true Church as M. Crashaw confesses, it is clear, that these
witnesses condemn Protestants of impious, and pernicious presumption, as S.
Non veniat in cor nostru^ impia and perniciosa presu^ptio, qua existimemus nos
ab his esse separandos, vt peccatis eorum non inquinemur. in Breuic. collat.
tertij diei. c. 4. circa med.
Augustine terms, running from the communion of the true Church, not to be
stained with sins and abuses, which were, are, and will ever be in any
company of men, though most holy, living upon earth.

3. Among other witnesses of the bad life of Catholics especially of the Court
of Rome, he brings Pope Adrian the sixth, with many great praises, that he was
one of the honestest hearts, that ever had the hindrance to be a Pope, the best
that was these many years, of whom if it be possible of any, there was
expectation of some reformation in the Church; a good man, too good to be Pope,
at least too good to be Pope long, that after he had forgot himself, page 160.
193.
and the honor of his Apostolical seat (which cannot err nor do amiss, as
he like a fool confessed) sorthwith order was taken that he should not trouble
the world, nor disgrace his place any longer, for he soon dyed. Where he would
give his Reader to understand, that the life of this Pope was by Catholics
abridged, because he might seem to affect the Protestant reformation. Now the
praises the Bachelour lays on this Pope, coming from such an adversary of
Popes, no man may think other motive did force him thereunto but truth, as
indeed this Pope was both pious, wise, and learned, a Doctor, and Reader in
Louayne, Master afterward to Charles the fifth Emperor of famous memory, and
Governor of his Kingdoms in Spain in his absence, from whence he was called
to the dignity of the Roman Sea. But for his affection to the Protestant
deformation, it is so false, that never any Pope did more abhor, never any
more severely censure it, never any more earnestly impugn Luther, nor gave
cause of greater hope, that by his diligence and industry, that schism and
faction might have been suppressed, as any will perceive that shall read
Luthers Tom. 2. operum Luther. edit. VVitteberg. 1562. fol. 354. and sequent.
ad 359.
letters against this Pope, or the letters of this Pope against him, especially
those to the Duke of Habetur tom. 4. Council. fol. 706.
Saxony, where among other things paynting out Luther in his own colors,
thus he writteth, and let the Bachelour mark the words of this Goodman, for
they do no less concern him then Luther. Seeing it is written (says this
Pope) that raylers, and reuilers shall not possess the Kingdom of God, and
our Lord says in his Gospel, He that shall call his brother fool shall be
guilty of hell fire, can any man be so blind, as not to see, that Luther is the
Apostle of Antichrist, who not only on the Priests of God, but also on the
Prince of Priests, the successor of S. Peter, Christ's Vicar on earth loadeth
most vile, and infamous names? whom he does rent and tear in pieces with such
strange reproaches, contumelyes, and blasphemies never heard of before, which
both a modest tongue will blush to rehearse, and chaste ears tremble to hear?
Who also does not cease with his impious, and pestilent tongue to call the
Apostolical Sea the Chair of Pestilence, the Kingdom of Antichrist, and of
the Devil; loading other more horrible and nefandious names which he could
i^uent on that sea, in which the head of Apostles Peter sat, so many holy
Bishops ruled, which the glorious Martyr Cyprian did not doubt to call the
Principal Sea, whence Priestly dignity flowed.

4. This, and much more writes this Pope. By which you may perceive first what
a lewd fellow, and naughty heart Luther was, unto whom this Good man, and honest
heart was as opposite as heaven unto earth, Christ unto Belial, God unto the
Devil. Secondly how falsely this Bachelour did avouch, that this Pop forgot
himself, and the honor of his Sea, which cannot err, nor do amiss as he
like a fool confessed, where, besides the scurrility of his speech, laying
that title on so learned, and worthy a Prelate, which under pain of hell fire
may not be given to the meanest Christian: Besides this scoff, I say, mark
the fate (shall I say) or folly of this fellow whose luck is such, that when he
would seem wise, and censure others as fools, he still plays the fool
notoriously himself, as now in saying that Pope Adrian did disgrace his Sea by
confessing like a fool, that the same could not err, nor do amiss. For is
it a disgrace to a Bishop, or to his Chair, that he cannot err, nor do
amiss? How the^ did the Pope disgrace his Chair, or play the fool in
confessing that his Chair could not err. But to leave the Bachelours folly,
who by great chance stumbled on a truth against his will, let us take his
meaning, which was to tell a lie, to wit, that Pope Adrian did confess his Sea
could err, which other Popes and Catholics deny; which to be false is made
clear by the former words of the Pope, in which he does constantly mayntaine
the dignity of his Sea against Luther as you have heard.

5. And suppose he had granted, that some Popes his Predecessors in that Sea
had abused their authority, had not lived so well as that great dignity did
require, had erred in matters of fact, though in the very truth this Pope does
not say so much, but only that some abuses were in the Court of Rome, which
are, and ever will be more or less in all Courts in the world, which he made
promise to do his best to reform: yet had the Pope granted that some of his
predecessors had done amiss, did he therefore forget himself, and the dignity
of his Sea? What Catholic does attribute this dignity to the Roman Sea, that
the Bishop thereof may not lead a bad life, and in his deeds swerve from his
doctrine? Nay contrariwise we challenge this to be the dignity of his Sea, and
chair, that though the Bishop thereof be wicked, and of ill life (as he may
be) yet he can never teach nor define any false doctrine, which is the
privilege of the true Church, and the Pastor thereof, as S. Ne du^ boni puta^t
se maloru^ permixtione culpari, per humanas and temerarias dissentiones aut
paruulos perdant, aut paruuli pereant, vsque adeo caelestis Magister cauendu^
praemonuit, vt etiam de praepositis malis plebem securam faceret, ne propter
illos doctrinae salutaris Cathedra desereretur, in qua cogu^tur etiam mali bona
dicere. ep. 166. ad Donatist. in fine.
Augustine taught long ago. To the end (says he) that none might presume to
separate themselves from the unity of the Church under pretense to fly the
company of the wicked, our heavenly Master does make his people secure, even
of their bad Pastors, least to shun them they should forsake the chair of
saving doctrine, in which even the wicked are forced to speak the truth. For
the things they speak are not their own, but of God, who in the Chair of
unity has placed the doctrine of verity. Thus S. Augustine, showing that the
doctrine of truth cannot be heard out of the Sea of Peter, which keeps the
whole Church of God in unity and peace, which we are secure cannot err, that
even the wicked Popes, and places have not power to define any errors.

6. Now touching the accusation it self, I will briefly, but clearly show five
things against Ministers concerning this point; which if they consider well,
may suffice to stop their railing mouths against the life of Catholics; to
wit, that therein they show themselves ungrateful, vain, impudent, malicious,
and wilfully blind. First they are ungrateful unto the bad life of Catholics,
on which Luther built his pleasing, and sensual Gospel of sole-faith, which
he could never have done but upon the corrupted life of Christians, among whom
had the ancient love of good works and penance flourished, he had never laid
three stones one upon the other in his building. This is not my conceit, nor
my hard opinion of his doctrine, but that great Architect of Churches does
himself confess the same in express terms. If (says he) the face of the
ancient Papacy did now stand In cap. 4. ad Galat. fol. 399. 400. tom. 5. edit.
Wittenberg. ann. 1562. Si staret illa facies veteris Papatus, parum forte
nostra doctrina de fide contra eum efficeremus, presertim cum iam parum
efficiamus.
, perchance we should not prevail much against it by our doctrine of faith.
And more clearly in the same place. If Popery had the same sanctity, and
austerity of life, which it had in the time of the Fathers, Hierome, Ambrose,
Augustine, and others, what should we be able now to do against it? Thus
Luther. Where you see he does both confess that the ancient Fathers most
famous for sanctity were Papists, the Church in their days Popish, and that
had he preached his Gospel in their days, or they lived when he began to
preach, their sanctity would have detested the same, their learning have crushed
the brat of liberty in the cradle. Let the Reader judge what a Gospel that
is, which antiquity would have resisted, sanctity detested, the Church of God
in her best times, not so much as have heard of; which finally could never have
prevailed, but in this last age, when dissolution and love of liberty has
prevailed against the ancient discipline, and sanctity of the Church, so that
by this railing they defile their own nest, they shake the ground of their
Gospel, styr that stinking puddle, out of which their Progenitors did issue,
and show themselves unthankful unto their Parent, and Mother, which is the
rotten, and corrupt life of many Catholics.

6. The second, to wit their vanity does appear by their aiming at a mark
quite opposite to the drift of their Gospel, which is to impugn not the
dissolution, but devotion, not the sinfulnes but the sanctity, not the
wickedness but the holiness of our Church, not our transgressing Gods precepts,
but our following Christ's Counsels. This to be their quarrel against us,
Luther himself their Captain General does witness. We Non pugnamus contra
Papatum hodie palam impiu^ and sceleratu^, sed contra speciosissimos eius
Sanctos, qui putant se Angelica^ vitam agere. Luther. in c. 4. ad Galat. tom.
5. fol. 400.
fight not (says he) against the open wickedness, and dissolute life of the
Papacy, which those that are sound amongst them detest, but against her most
beautiful Saints, which think they lead an Angelical life, and that they do
not only keep the commandments of God, but also the Counsels of Christ, and
do works of supererogation which they are not bound unto. Thus does Luther
write, showing that his intention is to lay wast the Sanctity of our Church,
giving her just cause to complain, as that woman of Thecua 2. Reg. 14. v. 7.
, Extinguere volum scintillam meam, they seek to extinguish and put out that
little spark of ancient sanctity, fervor and charity, that as yet remains
in me. To which sanctity Luther was such a deadly foe, as he does profess in
the same place, he will not spare any most ancient Father, or Fathers, nor the
whole army of them, did they now live, as they once did guilty thereof.
Fingamus igitur illam religionem and disciplina^ veteris Papatus, and obseruari
illo rigore quo Eremitae, quo Hieronymus, Augustinus, Gregorius etc. and alij
multi obseruarunt etc.
Let us suppose or imagine (says he) that the piety, and disciplyne of the
ancient Papacy did now flourish, and were observed with the same rigor that the
old Hermits, that Hierome, Augustine, Gergory, Bernard, Francis, Dominick did
observe it: yet ought we (says he) by the example of S. Paul impugn false
Apostles, and fight against the Iusticiaryes of the Popish Kingdom, and say,
though you lead a most chaste life, though you punish and weary your body with
frequent pennances, though you walk in religion and humility like Angels, yet
you are slaves of the law and sin, and of the Devil, and to be cast out of
the house as children of Agar.

7. Thus does this Saracen inueigh against ancient Fathers, the disciplyne and
sanctity of the Primityue Church, whom he does slander to have sought
salvation by their works, and not by Christ, showing the tooth of his Gospel
to be not against riot and ribaldry of dissolute drunkards, but the penance
and piety of greatest Saints, which being the drift of their
sole-faith-religion, M. Crashawes long railing against our sinful life, may
seem from the purpose. Yet perchance I may herein be deceived, and he goes
more cunningly about the matter then we imagine. For as the Falcon that flies
at the Herne, seems often to take a contrary course, yet working into the
wynd comes before one is aware over the Herns head to give her the deadly
stroke: so M. Crashaw, and other Ministers seeming in their Sermons to take a
course against the open dissolution, and wickedness of some in our Church, as
though their desire were to reform the same, they do so wynd, and turn the
poor people about, that from the hatred of them that are wicked amongst us,
they bring them to detest, and abhor even the sanctity, and religious
practice of piety in our Church, which the Genius of their Iouiall Gospel
cannot endure; and at the overthrow whereof it does, as you have heard Luther
confess, principally aim: so that though their endeauours herein be not so
vain, and impertinent, yet their intention is much more wicked, and impious.

8. But that which makes me wonder is their want of reflection, and their folly,
that seeing nothing is more shameful then a reproach returning upon the
Author; yet they object such unto us, which without extreme blyndnes they
cannot but perceive, that we may easily, and more strongly, and with advantage
retort upon Haec nos multo copiosius, and probabilius obijcere possumus non ea
inanitate qua isti, vt in eis causam constituamus; sed vt eis ostendamus, non
ideo nos nolle talibus fidere quia non inuenimus talia quae dicamusus sed ne
tempus rebus necessarijs vtile in rebus non necessarijs conteramus. Aug. de
unit. Eceles. c. 18.
them. For what more evident to the eye, more notorious to the world, more
confessed, and complained of by themselves, then that their Church is fuller of
all horrible, and execrable sins then the Roman is? Who does not see that the
accusation of Adulteryes, Drunkenness, Ambition, Idleness, Dissimulation,
Deceyts, Cosenages, Murders, Whoredoms in all estates, Ignorance, Negligence,
Sodomy, and Symony of the Clergy which the Bachelour obiecteth to the Roman,
like balls of iron cast against a wall of Diamond, reflect strongly upon the
face of their own Church, condemning her as a strumpet, void both of shame and
judgment, for accusing others of the sins for which she is more notable, and
hateful her self, even by the judgment of her own friends and children,
whereof they complain in this sort, namely of the Church of England. What eye
so blind, that it does not gush out with tears to behold the misery of our
supposed glorious Church, I mean the great ignorance, that superficial
worship of God, the fearful blasphemies, and swearings in houses and streets
etc. the dishonor of Superiors, the pride, cruelty, fornications, adulteryes,
drunkenness, covetousness, vsuryes, and other like abominations? O behold, and
pity the woeful and lamentable state of our Church in these things!

9. Thus their own brethren complain. Alexander Seuerus Emperor when one had
set up an Epigram in praise of Fescennius Niger, whom he had put from the
Empire, his friends storming thereat, he commanded the same should stand,
giving this reason: If he were so valiant, let men know whom we did conquer; if
not, yet let men think we were able to conquer such an one. The like we may
say of the sins of Catholics which M. Crashaw does exalt, and extol to the
uttermost in this wound, let them stand, that if they be true, men may know how
valiant in wickedness Protestants are, who in few years have surpassed the
daily increasing wickedness of many ages; if they be false (and much indeed is
exaggerated beyond modesty and measure) yet seeing it is their own fault and
falsehood, they have no cause to complain, though they should be thought more
wicked then indeed they are: for that they go beyond us in bad and dissolute
life, how wicked soever they make us, themselves do confess. The confession of
Luther is known that the world grew worse by his doctrine In ser. conuiual.
Germ. f. 55.
; and of Calvin complaining of his Ghospellers, that they did scoff and jest
at the dorages of Papists, but themselves were unworthy ever to return to
Popery Mayor pars tot hominu^ qui cupide Eua^gelio nomen dederunt, homines
Lucianici and Epicuraei Papistaru^ inepria^ lepide irride^t: sed ipsi indigni
sunt qui vnqua^ ad Papismum reuerta^tur. Calu. de scand. inter opera eius
Geneu. im press. ann. 1562. page 859. and 865.
again.

10. These two may suffice for Germany and France, Luther being the Patriarch
of the one, Calvin of the other, who cannot be thought to have spoken, either
out of want of affection, or knowledge of them whom they begot and loved as
their children. For England, let the testimony of a famous man in their Church
suffice, D. King now exalted to high honor, who in a Sermon upon Jonas,
speaking of the Protestant reformation, showing how men were made worse thereby,
complayneth in this manner: Such King upon Jonas sect. 32. p. 442.
strangers a^ we (says he) to the work and fruits of repentance, that
scarcely we understand what repentance means. And so far it is of, that we
are become true Israelites with Nathaniel, or but almost Christians with
Agrippa, that we are rather proved fully Atheists. And that which Tully
reports amongst his wonders in nature, that in one Country drought causes
dirt, and rain stirs up dust, may be truly applied unto us, that abundance
of grace has brought forth in us abundance of sin: and as some took
occasion by the law to wax more sinful: so iniquity had never been so rife
amongst us, but through the rifenes of the Gospel. Thus he. Behold a miracle
to confirm the new Gospel, which being so manifest, and apparent, he may
verily be thought a miracle, or monster, that shall desire any other to prove
the grace and goodness thereof. That the law of Moses made some more sinful, no
wonder, seeing the same gave knowledge of sin Per lege^ cognitio peccati Ro^.
5. v. 20.
, not grace to overcome it, which was never had but through Christ The law was
given by Moses, Grace and truth by Christ Jesus. Io. 1. v. 17.
Jesus. But that the grace of Christ, and of the Gospel should cause rifenes
of sin, and the rain of the holy Ghost from heaven should raise up the dust of
worldly desires, and hide God from men's sight, making them more addicted unto
temporal things, is such a wonder, that I dare say the like was never heard of
before Luthers time, nor shall be seen again till the worlds end. So that to
conclude, their Professors being, as themselves confess, worse and more
wicked then ours, they cannot wound us, but through their own sides, and the
Babels they rear up against us, come in the end to fall on their own heads;
such is their folly in their inuectiues against us. Nay these sins fall more
heavily upon them, and leave them more deeply buried in shame, who after such
clamors, and outcryes against Catholics for dissolute life, promising to
reform all within few years, fell into the depth of more horrible, and
abominable sins, then the Church of Rome, declining from her first fervor
of piety and charity, did arrive unto in many ages, as themselves are forced to
confess. If it be the quality of a bad weed (as our Proverb is) to grow apace,
how wicked a weed may their Church be thought, that in few years is mounted
higher in all manner of wickedness, and sinful life then the Roman in so many
ages, whose sins our Bachelour says, now come to reach to the clouds?

11. Fourthly, they show their malice, so eager to say something, that making
the bad life of our men seem worse then it is, they urge that, as an incurable
wound of our Church, which is an unavoidable misery of this life, to have many
wicked joined with the just, many sinners with Saints, even the worst with the
best. From which misery the Church of Christ can never be free nor healed, till
she become glorious without spot or wrinkle in heaven Ephesians. 5. v. 27.
. Now she is a great house which conteyneth vessels of reproach, together with
vessels of honor 2. Tim. 2. v. 20.
: a net which draws good and bad fish, through the waves of this life to the
shore Matt. 13. v. 47.
; a floor that now is threshed, having chafe mingled with corn Matt. 3. v.
12.
; a field where the Devil sows his darnell amidst Christ's wheat Matt. 13. v.
25.
which must grow together till harvest, when a division shall be made no less
joyful for the one, then woeful for the other; when chafe by heaps, darnell
by bu^dells shall be cast into unquenchable fire, the choice corn and wheat of
the elect laid up in the granary of eternal glory. This is the blessed state,
the Church of God does expect: the mean time the office of good men is with
great patience to suffer, whom neither their charity can convert, nor their
authority punish, seeking to keep themselves unspotted, not by running unto
another Church, nor by knowing the sins of others, but by not consenting unto
what they know, nor judging rashly of what they know not Non malefacta hominu^
cognosce^do, sed cognitis non co^se^tie^do; de incognitis vero no^temere
iudica^do innoce^tiam custodimus. August. de unit. Eccl. l. 2.
, expecting the glorious coming of the great God Tit. 2. v. 23.
, when secrets shall be seen 1. Cor. 5. v. 5.
, and men rewarded according to their works Matt. 16. v. 27.
. Vos interea quid saeuitis? (to speak unto Protestants in the words of S.
Augustine against heretics of his time) quid excaecamini in studio partium?
quid tanti erroris longa defensione implicamini l. 1. de moribus Eccl. Cathol
c. 35.
etc? In this interim of mortal life, why do you rage? why do you blind your
self with partial affection unto your own side? why do you loose your
selves in so long and vain defense of your vast errors? seek corn in the
field, grain in the floor, which will easily appear, and show it self to
such as seek it. Quid nimis in purgame^ta inte^ditis oculos? Quid ab opimi
horti vbertate imperitos sepium asperitate terretis? Est certus aditus, quamuis
paucioribus notus qua possit intrari, quem vos aut esse non creditis, aut
inuenire non vultis.
Why do you cast your curious eye upon chafe only? Why do you detayne
ignorant people from the entrance into this fruitful garden, by showing
thorns and briars that grow in the hedge? There is a passage which leads men
into this orchard, though not so obuious unto all, which either you do not
believe, or else will not find. Thus S. Augustine.

12. And thence appears the fifth thing I intended to prove, that Ministers
in this point are wilfully blind, who cast their eyes every way to seek
cauils against us, not enduring to see the great, and heroycall sanctity of
many in our Church. And first concerning our Ancestors 400. years ago, whose
sins this modest Minister rippeth up to lay them upon us, they have left so
many famous momuments of zeal and piety, that Protestants are no ways
comparable with them, whose religious liberality erected Churches, and endowed
them with rents, and revenues for Catholic Priests, which married Ministers,
with their wives and children now enjoy, who otherwise might go a begging, how
much soever they brag of their nursing Kings, and Queens M. Crashaw in his
Virgin. Sermon.
: which superiority above them in works of piety, one of the^ does confess
with shame enough, saying: If we look M. Stubbs in his motive to good works
printed. 1596. p. 43.
into the ages past, we shall find more godliness, devotion, zeal (though
blind) more love one toward another, more fidelity, and faithfulness eueryway
in them, then is now found in us. And yet further: Is page 72.
it not a shame unto us, that our forefathers living in the times of
superstition etc. should notwithstanding so far pass us in good works, that
we may not once be compared with them in any small measure? Thus he. Showing
the blyndnes of our Bachelour, and such Mates as rail at the lives of our See
likewise the testimony of the Centuriators cent. 7. c. 7. col. 181.
Ancestors, with whom their Church is no ways comparable; which howsoever she
brag of her sunshine, is more dark and obscure the^ Egypt it self, if we
respect the light of good works, which Christ did command Matt. 5. v. 14.
to shine in his Church. And that now also there is an entrance into our Church
to find out many good, and holy men, our Adversary Sir Edwyn Sands can witness
upon his own knowledge, who writes in this sort: Let Protestants look with
the eye of charity upon the Popery, as well as of severity, and they shall find
some excellent orders of government, some singular helps for increase of
godlynes and devotion, for the conquering of sin, for the profitting in
virtue In his relation of the religion used in the west ^^^ts of the world.
sect. 48.
. And of our Catholic Clergy he says. In their Sermons much matter both of
faith and piety is eloquently delivered by men surely of wonderful zeal, and
spirit sect. 6.
. All Countries are full of the Jesuits books of prayer and piety to their
language, and wonderful is the reputation which thence redounds to their Order
sect. 7.
. Thus does this Protestant write of our Church upon certain experience after
long travails: whereas M. Crashaw, who never moved foot out of England, by
the intelligence he gets from his Gossips at Pemblico does pronounce this
judgment and censure, that our Church is delivered unto a general, and
universal pollution in all estates, and many other big words to the same
purpose.

13. But when he comes to touch either the sins, on sanctity of his own
Church, you may wonder how he does mince his words about the one, and open his
mouth wide in the other. Touching the sins in his Church he does confess
some are incurable, which he terms little petty Babells, or daughters and
sprigs of Babylon. Examples of great Sanctity he has none, but had he any to
dilate upon, how his tongue would swell in their praise you may see by this,
that commending two Churches in London, S. Antlings, and S. Mary Oueryes,
famously known to be the hauntes of Puritans and Brownists, he says: In a
Church in London (meaning one of the two) every day in the week prayers and a
Sermon at six a clock in the morning, a blessed and rare example, scarce
matchable in the world. Thus does he rarify his one Church in the world; which
howsoever compared with other Protestant Churches may seem a great Lady of
Israel: yet parallelled with the piety, devotion, and continual prayers
practiced throughout the Catholic world in many Churches, the most favorable
eye can judge her no more then a little petty Babell. For to omit so many
thousand of Catholic Churches in the world, where the name of God is daily
called upon publicly before six in the morning, what can the Bachelour say to
so many hundred Monasteries, and so many thousands living in them, that rise
every day in the year at midnight to sing Psalms, and praises unto God, to
read the divine Scripture, and commonly hear an Homily, or Sermon of some
ancient Father thereupon. And not only men but also women (true Daughters of
Israel indeed) many of Noble families, which might have had great fortunes in
the world forsaking the green woods of fading pleasure, have voluntarily shut
themselves up in the cage of a religious Cloister to be as it were Nightingals
to sing day and night praises unto God, not failing in this devotion even in
the heart of winter, when his best and holiest Ministers, and even relapsed
Friars who whilst they were with us kept this custom, snort, and sleep
soundly in their soft bed, with some petty, or pretty daughter of Babylon by
their side.

14. I know Ministers when they hear but the name of Monastery, knowing that
in so bright a glass of godliness, their wicked, or at least worldly, and
ordinary manner of life would seem more ugly, have ever at their tongues end a
tale to stain, and defile the same, either foolish, or fabulous, or false, or
perchance true; yet the fault of some few, can no more in justice, and equity
disgrace the Religious of that family, then the treason of Judas the sanctity
of the other Apostles. And would Protestants with an impartial eye with the
eye as well of charity, as of severity, look on such Religious Orders, on the
close and retired life of Carthusia^s, the rigor and penance of Capuchins,
the Obedience and charity of Jesuits, ready to go to the most savage people to
convert them, wherein so many hundred of them do fruitfully labor, and on other
holy and pious practices which diverse Relgious Companyes do profess,
considering these things impartially, they would not deny the face of Christ's
Church, which Quis nescit sumae contine^tiae hominum Christianoru^ multitudinem
per totum orbem in dies magis magisque diffu^di? Multi vsque adeo Dei amore
flagrantes, vt eos in su^ma contine^tia, atque mu^di huius incredibili
conte^ptu etiam solitudo delectet.

Quis non illos miretur and praedicet, qui contemptis atque desertis mundi
huius illecebris, in communem vitam, castissimam, sanctissimamque congregati,
simul aetatem agunt, viuentes in orationibus, lectionibus, disputationibus?
Haec est etiam vita feminarum Deo solicit casteque seruientium, quae
habitaculis segregatae ac remotae a viris quam longissime decet, pia tantum
illis charitate iungu^tur, and imitatione virtutis. lib. 1. de mor. Eccles.
Cathol. c. 31.


S. Augustine described in his time, is now among us, and that we may truly say
unto Ministers what that Father said unto the Manichees: with whose words I
will heal up this wound, and seal up my answer to M. Crashaws wounds. Look
on these men, oppose your self unto them, name them with disgrace if you can
without untruth, compare your fasting with their fasting, your chastity with
their chastity, your attire with their attire, your diet with their diet, your
modesty with their modesty, your charity with their charity, and that which
does most import, your Orders with theirs, you will soon see what a main
difference there is betwixt vanity, and sincerity, walking the right way, and
wandering betwixt truth and hypocrisy, solid strength, and proud swelling,
betwixt blessedness and misery, superstition and religion, De more Eccles. cap.
34.
the Syrene songs of deceiptfull heresy, and the secure haven of Christian
piety.

THE EIGHT CHAPTER. Containing a Conclusion of this Treatise. SHEVVING The
impiety of the Protestant revolt from the Church of Rome, by the same four
arguments wherewith M. Crashaw urges the Brownists for their Shcismaticall
separation from the Church of England.
WE have seen how M. Crashaw has builded the two first quarters of his Babel,
the first of the charity and falues of his Church, the second of the obstinacy
and wounds of the Roman, and have laid open the ridiculous vanity of his brags
about the one, and the intolerable falsity of his slanders touching the
other. Other two points of his Sermon or quarters of his Babel remain, page
16^. page 168.
to wit, the obligation of Christendom to forsake the Church of Rome, and his
Prophecy that the Church of Rome shall forth with be destroyed, and be
fearfully confounded by the mouth of God, when their separation is ended in
Gods good time: about which I will add a word or two for Conclusion of this
Treatise, wherein I will not be long, neither shall I need, the Bachelour is so
short, saying thereof little or nothing at all.

2. First if the revolt, and forsaking which began in Luther by the kindling
of that fire that must burn the whore of Babylon, two things seem unto me
very wonderful and strange therein. The first is, that Luther who was raised by
Fox Act. and Monument. page 400.
God, as these men say, to blow against Antichrist, never thought thereof till
passion and pride against Dominican Friars made him to puff and blow, to see
them preferred before his Order, and by this accident and chance not dreaming
of any thing else, he fell to blow, and belch out the fire of his passions
against our doctrine of Pardons. Shall the blast of envy, pride, passion, and
hatred be accounted the breath of Christ? Had Christ no other instrument to
inspire, then an unruly and passionate Hospian. p. 2. histor. sacram. fol. 5.
Friar?

3. Another thing is yet more wonderful, and no less evident, confessed even
by Luther himself de Missa angulari. tom. 7. operum Wittenberg. fol. 443.
, to wit that the Devil in person came from hell, joining his mouth with
Luthers to blow both together against the Pope: nay the Devil was the first
that did breath and inspire into Luther the doctrine of Christ, if the doctrine
which Luther preached against the holy Sacrifice of the Mass were Christ's
Lutherus a Diabolo edoctus, quod Missa priuata res mala sit, eius rationibus
conuictus eam aboleuit. Hospin. p. 2. Histor. fol. 131.
. Had Christ no Angel in heaven that might be spared for that office, that the
Blacksmith of hell, so the Scripture terms the Devil Fabru^ sufflantem in
igne prunas, and proferente^ vas in opus suum. Isa. 54. v. 16.
, was to be called out of his shop to blow the coals of faith in Luthers
breast, to set the whore of Babylon a fire? They may believe it, that can think
all antiquity erred; that Christianity failed; that no true Church of Christ
was seen upon earth for many ages; that have no other Judge to decide their
doubts, or to expound Scripture, but the Devil or their private spirit, which
is all one; to whom M. Crashaw is driven by the Brownists to appeal in this
Sermon, saying: The Devil himself cannot find one deadly wound in our Church,
blessed be the Lord that has thus healed us page 28
. Is not the Devil, think you, a fit judge to take up the matter betwixt
them, and the Brownists, which of them two is the sound Church? Though I might
ask M. Crashaw, when he spoke with the Devil last, that he can say so
certainly, that the Devil now can find no fault with his Church? If he saw him
not lately, his Church may perchance be deadly wounded since. But how shall we,
with whom the Devil does not confer, know so much of his good opinion of
their Church, who have no such curiosity to know the secret, that we mean to
go to hell to ask him? And though the Devil should say it again, and again,
that their Church is healed, should we therefore believe it? No truly; that were
as great madness, as was Luther to believe upon the Devils words, and arguments
the Catholic Church was wounded.

4. This is the goodly beginning of that forsaking, or Apostasy which this Man
calls Christendom, and thinks the same shall daily increase till the
Church of Rome be overthrown, which we see does rather daily decrease, and the
venom and malice of their breath to be now well spent, and the air so
purified by the writing of Catholics, that the venomous serpe^ts that hitherto
have infected the world, do themselves fear that shortly they must be forced
to creep into their caves, and become privy Protestants again, not having any
hope but in temporal power of some States, which being sand (for what else are
humane things?) their building cannot be sure, nor continue long, but must
expect the same issue that other Apostaticall reuolters, The Aria^s.
and heretics have had, who did insect greater Countries, then these have
done, Virgin. Ser. page 39.
and had more mighty Princes, and Kings on their side, howsoever the Bachelour
brag of the nursing Kings, Queens and Princes, that lick the dust of his new
Israel or Churches feet, very vainly as all men know, seeing their Church
falls down at the feet of Kings making them their Heads, ready to lick up
the dust of their feet, and do rather with the rents, and revenues anciently
given to the Church, nurse Kings and Queens, or at least many of their
followers.

5. But further to show the impiety of this revolt, and to leave nothing in
this Sermon untouched, I will briefly examine what he says against Brownists,
who use, as he says, against the Church of England the words of his text: We
would have cured Babel, but she would not be healed, let us forsake her. This
tall Champion will wrest this text out of their hands, and turn, he says, the
dint of their weapon against themselves, page 20.
that is, against their errors, and this their bitter and Schismatic
separation, which he does with such dexterity like a man flourishing blindfold,
that he lays never a blow on the Brownists, which is not a deadly stab into
the heart of his own Church, and yet is he and she so senseless, that neither
does he perceive the sense of his words, nor she feel the smart of his
wounds. His turning the dynt of the text against the^, consists in four
questions, which if they can answer, M. Crashawes 4. questions to the Brownists
he will (he says) become one of them, which perchance he spoke from his heart,
who may be one of them already, though his body be Protestant. The four
questions are: VVherin the Church of England is deadly wounded? In what Church
were they, the Brownists healed? page 27. 28. 29. 30. 31. 32. 33,
How they have sufficiently endeavored the healing of the English Church?
Finally, whither will they go if they forsake her? Let us examine Luther upon
these questions, in M. Crashawes own words, and you shall see how he turns
the dynt of this text against his own Church in Luthers Ioynes.

6. And first let us ask Luther, and the rest of the reuolting Companies with
him, how they had sufficiently endeavored our healing before their running
from us. M. Crashaw says of the Brownists, It Is certain, page 31.
none of them can have of them can have an assured testimony to his conscience,
that he has done all he can possibly for the healing of the English Church,
till which time they may not forsake her, complaining of them, that instead of
healing them, contrariwise (says he) they forsake us and run into corners, and
rail on us, and call us Babylon, and Antichristian, and the Synagogue of the
wicked; and that, we are no Church, and that Christ is not amongst us. Are
these the plasters with which you would heal us? Thus he. Verily, if M.
Crashaw and his Church had grace to apply these plasters to themselves, they
would be salues of great force to cure the wound of their damnable revolt. For
may they not therein, as in a glass, behold their own peevish proceeding with
the Church of Rome? After their big brags of curing wounds, being called by
the Council of our Surgeons or Bishops, to see what salues and plasters they
brought, did they appear? Did they come to show us our wounds? Nay did they
not forsake us, run into corners, rail on us, and call us Babylon,
Antichristian, and that we are no Church, and that Christ is not amongst us?
Do they storm that Browinsts use them, as they used us, and lay the same text
of Scripture, and plaster of reproaches to their true sores, which they
applied to our supposed wounds? Do not they see that they complain without
cause, seeing as Tertullian says, Idem licuit Valentinianis, quod and
Valentino lib. de praescrip. c. 42.
, Marcionitis quod and Marciano de arbitrio suo fidem innouant etc. The
heretical disciples of Valentinus, and Marcion had as good reason and might
as well leave their Masters and begin a new sect of their own head, as their
Masters did forsake the Church of Rome, and the rest of Christendom? Why then
may not Brownists run into corners, rail at their pleasure, build Babylons,
and Israells, coin Christ's and Antichrists, make Churches and no Churches in
the sand of their own fancyes, as Protestants gave them example?

7. And why may not Brownists have as an assured testimony of a good
conscience, that they have sufficiently endeavored the healing of the English
Church, as Protestants have that they have labored fully the curing and
converting of the Roman? Of what can M. Crashaw crake that the Brownists may
not brag of the like, or better? That his men have written many learned books,
specially these later years; that, if he may give his judgment, the skirts of
the Romish whore were never more clearly discovered: but have not Brownists
also written many books? Do not they plentifully alleadg Scripture? And if
they might speak freely their judgment at the Cross as this Wise man does,
The Brownists books.
would they not say, they have clearly discovered the skirts of the English
Babylon, or Whore? Will our Bachelour boast of his Churches devotion and prayer
for the conversion of Rome? But can he accuse Brownists as slack in this ponit,
as not wishing heartily, or not praying earnestly for the conversion of England?
The Church of S. Antlings in London praying every morning at six a clock, his
example scarce matchable in the world, Their prayers.
are they not all, or most of them Brownists, and their friends, and fauourits
that fill the Church, and pray so loud that they be heard to Rome, and shame
the Pope, Their examples.
and Cardinals for their negligence in this duty? Can M. Crashw except against
the Brownists example of professing their own religion in Englands sight? How
many of that sort live openly, and are known generally in the Realm,
particulerly in London? whereas Protestants if any be in Italy or in Rome, they
are privy, so close, that no eye can see them, and so sweet that none have list
to smell them out.

8. M. Crashaws fourth salve of making laws, executing in justice, and
suspending in mercy, Brownists yet have not used toward him and his fellows,
because they have not the sword of temporal authority in their hands, which
if they get (and to get it they have done, and still use their best endeauours,
wherein M. Crashaw cannot justly accuse them of slacknes) they will make
Protestants understand, that they can plaster them with their own salues,
both execute in justice, and suspend in mercy, as well as they, making Ministers
wear sheets instead of Surplisses, and their Bishops look through ropes, as
they do now through Rochets. So that I see not which of M. Crashawes salues and
plasters applied to us, Brownists have not with their best skill used unto
them that were in their power to use, and therefore have as good testimony to
their conscience for their discharge, as Protestants can have: nay, far better,
and more assured; the reason thereof is apparent, and a consideration of great
moment.

9. For the English Church being yet but new, errors, and wounds in her, as
she is distinct from the Roman, are new and green, and therefore neither deep,
nor needing any extraordinary salues. The wounds of the Roman, if she be
wounded, must needs be old M. Fulke says: Some Protestants have written, that
the Pope has blinded the world, some say 900. some 1000. some 1200. years In
his Treatise against Staplet. and Martial. page 25.
, and therefore dangerous, and hard to be cured: to undertake the healing of
which with only ordinary and usual salues, as are writing books, praying for
them, giving example, and the like, which every religion does use in their
kind, is the attempt of ignorant, and unskillful Surgeons, or rather fond
endeauours of vain glorious fools, making boasts of their little love. In
truth to men of Judgment, that do seriously consider of the matter, the vanity
of the new Ghospellers must needs seem admirable, who confessing the wounds of
the Roman Church to be so old, having rankled in her body a thousand years
together at least, and so deep, that the same errors were universally spread,
yet they come to cure us with triuiall toys, and trifles. If they write three
or four books very learned in their own judgment; Great vanity of
Protestants.
if in one Church in the world some few of them meet at six a clock in the
morning to pray; if some Ministers walk modestly, and demurely in the streets,
which very few of them, and very seldom they use, they think their prayers are
heard over the world, that the Pope and Cardinals do wonder at them, and as
though all men must needs be straight converted that read their books, or do
but see their outsides, they are amazed that all Christendom has not yet
forsaken the faith of their Ancestors, which because they have not done, these
good Surgeons must needs pronounce them incurable: so full of folly and vanity
they are, and so fondly conceipted of their great skill, and excellent salues.

10. But are these toys sufficient means to heal old sores? Does God use to
apply no better plasters, when he will have men forsake the faith of their
Ancestors? The practice of all ages past shows the contrary: nay Luther does
himself confess other stronger and extraordinary salues are required.
Vbicumque Deus ordinaria^viam mutare vult, ibi semper miracula Luther. tom. 3.
Ien. Germ. fol. 455. and apud Sleida^. l. 3. ann. 1525. and in loc. commu^.
class 4. page 38. Deus nu^quam alique^ misit, nisi vel per hominem vocatum vel
per signa declaratum.
facit. When God intends to change the ordinary course of things in his
Church, he does ever work miracles. And in another place he bids us examine
Surgeons or Preachers when they come to practice their Physic, Vnde Vbi
sigilla quod ab hominibus sis missus? vbi miracula quae te a Deo missum esse
testantur? tom. 5. Ien. Germ. fol. 491.
venis etc. Whence come thou? Who sent thee? Show thy Patents if thou be
sent from men: show Miracles if thou be sent from God. These are the salues
which must heal old wounds, without which we must not change the old, and
ordinary way to heaven. Now who does not know, but that Luther did change the
ordinary course of things, and in the same change does his Posterity continue?
Who sent him with authority, and commission to make this change? to preach this
doctrine? to give this strange Physic? If God does never change the ordinary
course without miracles, doubtless he will work some miracles for the
Protestant change, if the same be from him, and not from the Devil? But have
Protestants done this? Have they miracles to heal us? Have they proved by this
means the goodness of their doctrine and physic, without which we may not
admit it? What dead men have they raised? What lame man have they cured? To
what blind man have they given sight? If since the unfortunate trial of their
Physic made by Calvin upon wretched Bruley Bolsec. in vita Caluini. c. 13.
they never durst prove the same by doing miracles upon men, let them show the
virtue thereof by working wonders upon a dead dog, or blind cat, or lame horse?
Let them give life to the one, sight to the other, and make the third run
Nullus illoru^ adhuc extitit, qui vel equum claudum sanare potuit. Erasmus de
libero arbitrio contra Lutherum.
, and then they may give us some cause to look more into their Physic, which
now being against the ordinary course of Christianity for so many ages, we
cannot with a safe conscience so much as intertaine a good conceit thereof,
according to those rules of Physic which even themselves allow.

11. The other question we will ask Luther and his company, is, seeing they
will forsake us, Whither will they go? M. Crashaw tells the Brownists, that
to forsake one thing for another, no better, is seely, but for a worse is folly
and madness. And then he asks them to what other Church will they go? page 32.
To the low Countries? To the Church of Scotland? To the Cantons of
Zwitzerland? To the States and Princes of Germany? To the Church of France, or
the Church of Geneua, or the free Cittyes of the Empire? And then he stops
their passage to any of these Churches, by laying the block of an huge lie in
their way, saying, they are all of our Religion, At which impudent untruth, as
Brownists might be offended, so many judicious Auditors that had travailed into
forrayne parts did (no doubt) smile to see with what manifest falshods seely
people were deluded. But let us now (as I said) examine Luther wither he will
go with his new company, seeing he will needs go from the Church of Rome?
Will they go to the Jews? Or to the Turks? Or to Atheists? Such indeed most
of the reuolters proved as themselves Doctor King upon Jonas page 442. Calvin.
de scandalis page 118. 127.
confess, which I suppose at the first they never intended. Will they join
with the Grecian Church? That they sought, and would feign have done, but the
Grecians did reject and condemn them as heretics, and would have none of
their company Vide censuram Orientalis Ecclesiae.
. Whither then will Luther go a Gods name, if he goes not away in the Devils
name rather, with whom he did confer therabout? I cannot but conclude in M.
Crashawes own words, page 32.
and let the Reader judge, whether the dynt of this weapon do not pierce into
the heart and bowels of his Church? VVhither will you go, or what remaynes for
you to go unto, but unto your corners, and conuenticles, where you are your
own caruers, your own judges, your own approuers, but have not one Church in
Christendom to approve you? Could any thing be spoken more properly against
Luthers revolt, then this?

12. And that you may better understand how this argument does wound Protestant
religion, I will propose a question or two unto M. Crashaw. First, whether when
Luther made his revolt, any Christianity, or Christian Church was in the world,
or not? If not, why should any believe in Christ, whose words, and promises
concerning his Church have proved vain, that the gates of hell should not
prevail against it Matt. 16. v. 18.
, that he would be with Christians to the worlds end Matthew. c. vlt. v. vlt.
? To omit diverse other Prophesies of the glory, and Majesty of Christ's Church,
which if we find to be false, as they must needs be false, if the Church of
Christ failed, why should we think any of the rest deserve credit, which
depend upon the infallible word of the speaker? But if true Christianity was
then in the world, then I ask again, whether that was the Church of Rome, or
some other distinct from it, and not subject to it? If the Church of Rome, then
why did they forsake the Christian Church, and the Christianity of the world,
the very note of heresy as all grant Exieru^t ex nobis sed non erant ex nobis.
1. ep. Joan. 2. v. 19. Out of your selves shall arise men speaking perverse
things. Act. 15. v. 24. These be they that segregate themselves. Jude v. 19.
? If that Christianity was distinct, and separate from the Roman, why did they
not join with it? Why did they not take their authority, and commission from
that Church? why did they run into the corner of a new Congregation and
become their own Judges and approuers, admitting no other Judge but the
Scripture which has ever been the refuge of heretics and the practice which
themselves do now condemn in the Brownists? Let M. Crashaw think seriously of
a full and clear answer to this question: in the mean time I must leave both
Luther and him separated from all Christianity that was when they revolted, in
the world, changing not only for no better, which is seely, and for a worse,
which is folly, and madness, but also (which is plain infidelity) for no Church
or Christianity at all, except we say, that the Christianity which Christ began
with so many pains and prayers did perish: but Friar Martyn by his marriage
with Katherine Bore begot a new Christian company, which shall continue to the
worlds end, and never fail.

13. If these things so necessarily consequent upon Luthers revolt, be most
absurd, let Protestants look back, and see what reasons have moved them to
forsake the Church of Rome and all Christianity with her that was in the world
when they began: let them consider another question of M. Crashawes which we
will propose unto them: Wherein are we deadly wounded? In which question M.
Crashaw making himself ignorant of the wounds which the Brownists charge upon
the Church of England, blows strongly against them with an interrogatory
blast of words without substance, only repeating the same in a different
phrase for half a page together, at which if some Brownist sister might have
startled, and soon have said, page 62.
that it is false (the proceeding which M. Crashaw does allow in his vulgar
multitude with our Preachers) she would have laid so many errors to the charge
of the English Babylon, and have proved them to be such with so many texts of
Scripture, that for my part, I think M. Crashaw would have been blown out of
his pulpit, and fearfully confounded by the breath of a woman.

M. Crashawes wounds.
14. But we that have refuted M. Crashawes wounds which he lays to our
charge, and have proved that they are not our errors, but his slanders, not
our doctrines, but his falsehoods; blasphemies, neither delivered nor practiced
by us, but devised and preached by him, we may now confidently demand of him,
wherein is the Church of Rome deadly wounded? And if M. Crashaw having spent the
whole course of his studyes in seeking wounds in the diseased body of Popery,
sparing neither cost to get, nor labor to peruse our Records, yet was so
far from finding any true wounds, that he was forced to tear and rent our
Authors sayings into pieces, to make our doctrine seem wounded; how hoale and
sound may the Church of Rome instly be thought, which can be traduced by no
accuser but malice, convicted by no witness but falsehood, condemned by no Judge
but folly joined in commission with fury? How miserable are those that have
forsaken the only Christianity, that was for so many ages in the world, scared
with shadows, and frighted with falsehoods?

15. Pliny writes of a certain kind of Eagle which makes prey on
water-foule, whom when they perceive houering in the air, they dyue into the
water where they are secure. But the Rauener what he cannot get by force,
obtayneth by craft. He places himself on the side of the river, in such sort,
that his shadow or shape appears on the other, which the foolish foul
perceauing make toward the contrary side, and flying the shadow rise up where
the true Eagle does indeed expect them Specta^da dimicatio: aquila vmbram sua^
nanti sub aqua a littore ostendente, and rursus aue in diuersa tendente, and
vbi se minime credat expectari emer ge^te. Plin. l. 10. not. Hist. c. 3.
. The Devil seeks to make prey specially on such as live in the clear and
deep water of the Catholic faith taught successively in all ages, within
which, whilst they keep themselves, they need not fear the violence of their
inuader, who therefore to seize on by craft, whom he cannot surprise by force,
by the help of his false and lying Preachers, casts into these clear waters
his own shape, that is ugly shows and shadows of blasphemy, wherewith some
seely people frighted, make toward the side of herefie, and taking their
flight from the confessed Christianity of many ages, fall into the claws of
the true Eagle, into most horrible blasphemies indeed, being forced to say,
that contrary to Christ's promise his Church, and Christianity failed, or
instead of being visible and glorious, the joy of Kings and Nations, as was
foretold for many hundred years at least, was never seen upon earth.

16. Seeing then Protestants cannot have the testimony of a good conscience,
that they here sufficiently indeauoured the healing of the Church of Rome, nor
can forsake her without also forsaking all Christianity in the world, flying
into corners, and Conuenticles, they are their own caruers, their own Judges,
their own approuers, without any Church of Christendom to approve them,
seeing the causes of this their alienation and revolt from us, are fables,
falsehoods, slanders, places of Authors corrupted, shadows, and shows of
blasphemy void of truth, upon which no private man were to be forsaken, much
less a Church, and so glorious a Church as the Roman, let them seriously
ponder M. Crashaws other question to the Brownists, wherein they may see the
many benefits received of the Church of Rome, and be moved to look back to
the rock from which they are cut, and unto Sara that begot them. Let them
consider, I say, and apply to themselves, what M. Crashaw asks the Brownists,
page 27. 29.
where they came to know God, if they ever knew him? Where they were healed,
called, regenerated, and begotten unto Christ? Was it not (says he) in the
womb of this our Curch, page 30.
and by means of the immortal seed of Gods word that is daily sown in our
Church? And, by the Ministry of those men that were called in our Church? And
he concludes, that, that Church and Ministry that bringes a man to grace, and
to faith, is able to bring him to glory and salvation, and that which is all
effectually to begin, is able effectually to finish the good work of God in
any man, and therefore not to be forsaken. This doctrine, and these grounds
supposed, I demand what Church converted our English Nation first unto Christ?
By whose means came Englishmen to know God, and Christ, if ever they knew him?
By the ministry of what men, Catholic or Protestant? By seed of which word
and doctrine, the Lutheran, or Roman? Was not the English Nation (and the like
may be said of most Nations in Europe) first converted unto Christ by preachers
sent from Rome, above a thousand years ago? By the immortal seed of Gods
word, that is daily sown in our Church?

17. What will M. Crashaw answer? Will he say with Sir Edward Hobby, that the
English Nation was not converted unto Christ by S. Augustine, whom he terms
proud In his better to T. H. page 92.
and insolent Augustine, Gregoryes delegate, affirming that he taught us no
more, then we knew before, setting some frivolous ceremonies aside? Which
notorious falsehood I know M. Crashaw, or some other trencher Minister cast on
Sir Edwards trencher, to put into his book. Nay further they make the
credulous Kinght say, that when we speak of the conversion of England by S.
Gregoryes means, we weary the world, and bob our credulous Ladies with a
circular discuss, as though we had never heard of Gildas his testimony, that
the Britons received the Christian faith from the beginning; nor what Baronius
has told, that S. Peter was here; Theodoret that S. Paul; Nicephorus that
Simon Zelotes, and some that Joseph of Arimathia did plant the faith amongst
us. Thus the Knight writes by their suggestion, by which it is clear, that he
never read the Three Co^uersions of England.
book he seems to speak against; nay he does not know so much as the
subject, and argument thereof, to wit, of the three Conuersions of England,
which book the Ladies (if they have it at hand, as he seems to complain
that it is still on their Quid quod libelli Stoici inter sericos iacere
puluillos amant? says Sir Edward, as it may seem of this book, to the Romish
Ladies etc. page 4.
Cushions) cannot look into without seeing the falsehood of this saying, and
how the trencher Scholemasters of the Knight would bob them also with a plain
untruth, as they have done him. For that book takes notice of, and handles
largely De extidio Britan. c. 6. see this testimony handled in the Three
Co^uersio^s p. 13.
Gildas his testimony, declaring the meaning thereof to be, that in the time of
Tiberius Christ appeared to the world, not that Christian faith then entered
into Brittayne, which is altogether improbable; seeing Tiberius lived but five
years after Christ's Resurrection, in which time the Apostles either went not
out of Jury, or did not preach but to the Jews only; nemini loquentes verbum
nisi solum Iudaeis Act. 11. v. 19.
: as S. Luke says in the Acts. That S. Peter was here, that Treatise does
take notice of, and brings diverse arguments to confirm the same, urging his
preaching, as the the first conversion of England, though other Apostles S.
Paul, S. Simon,
and Disciples Joseph, Aristobulus. Of these that Treatise does take notice,
bringing diverse authorities to confirm their preaching in our Island. p. 21.
22. 23. 24.
might help thereunto. Neither do I think any English Christian is so auerted
from the Roman Sea, that he will scorn this Kingdom should be the Co^uertite
of that great Apostle, though the first Roman Bishop. These things in our
books we take notice of, and examine them more exactly then Protestants have
done. But to what purpose are these brought by Protestants? The Britons
received the Christian faith, some of them at the least in time of the Apostles
under S. Peter the first Roman Bishop, the whole Realm openly and publicly
under Eleutherius Pope in the second age In the year of Christ 180.
, by Fugatius and Damianus sent from Rome in King Lucius his time, which Sir
Edward makes no mention of: what is this against the third Conversion of the
English Nation, which long after this time, being heathen having expelled the
Britons, began to inhabit the Realm; who (the Britons neglecting them) were
converted by S. Augustines means, sent by Gregory Pope, as that Treatise In
the year of Christ 180.
proves, and all Historyes of our Country do witness, and even Protestants
themselves do confess, as is proved in the first Chapter and first section of
the learned Treatise of the Protestants Apology for the Roman Church, and that
it was converted to the now Catholic Roman faith? Thus do Ministers bob Sir
Edward, making him print such stuff either false or impertinent with the loss
of his honor, which I dare say, had he seen the book, he would never have
done against his conscience and knowledge.

18. Now how great this benefit is to have been converted by such men, and in
such manner we may perceive, if we confer the same with the conversion and
plantation of religion intended in Virginia by the new Gospel, M. Crashawes
New-yeares-gift to Virginia.
whereof I will speak a word, seeing M. Crashaw in great glory and triumph made
a long Sermon thereof, with many false and bitter slanders against us. In which
Sermon he does denounce unto all, that do know the true intents of that
conversion, that they are bound to help thereunto, either with their persons,
page 27.
or purses, or prayers, and such as assist it not, discover themselves to be
unsanctified, unmortified, and unconverted men. But this conversion not being
performable without Preachers of Gods word, the obligation of going in person,
page 21.
did lie chiefly upon Ministers, who brag to be so specially converted
themselves from Paganism and Popery, and therefore bound to convert others
according to M. Crashawes text. But did any troop of Ministers undertake that
voyage? Do they prepare for it now? Do they learn the language of the
Savages to be able to convert them hereafter? Do not they think rather of
converting themselves to their wives, then Heathens unto God? Do not they
desire to beget rather carnal then Ghostly children? Their deeds speak. Truly
for my part I make no doubt, that had there been a married Ministry in the
Church in former ages, most Nations had been unconverted at this day.

19. But M. Crashw makes a show that the Pope is the cause they are so cold,
page 60.
that they are afraid of him. Oh (says he) the Pope will curse us. Doubtless
he can name many Popes that have cursed Heretics for converting Nations unto
Christ, and yet the man dares not only doubtingly, as you have heard, but
constantly and plainly avouch in print and pulpit: page 62.
We know (says he) that as soon as this intent, and enterprise of our Nation
is known at Rome, forthwith there will be a Consistory called, and consideration
will be had (with wit and policy enough) what course may be taken to cross us,
and ouerturne the business. But if they have never a Gamaliel left (says he)
let me tell them (and we are willing to hear him, for now he will speak a
truth, which is a rare thing in him) if this work be only of men, it will come
to naught of it self without their help. Which Prophesy taken out of
Scripture, the event has showed most true. But the other that the Pope would
gather a Consistory, and employ his policy against it, the world knows to be
false; and no marvel being a prophesy devised in M. Crashawes head, and
uttered out of his own spirit. And poor soul, that dreameth the Pope would
hinder him and his fellows from that voyage by cursing them, whom should the
Kings Majesty press to go in person, and leave his new wife, the man would (I
dare say) take it very unkindly, and though the Pope should prick him on with a
spur, yet would he draw back.

20. No M. Crashaw, the miseryes which the enterprise of co^uerting Savages
does bring with it, the wanting your native soil, friends and Gossips wherewith
now after Sermon you may be merry, the enduring hunger, cold, The difficult
enterprise of co^uerting barbarous Nations.
nakedness danger of death, and the like, but specially the want of the new
Ghospells blessing, a fair wife, too heavy a lump of flesh to be carried into
Virginia; these be such curses, and such hindrances, as you may speak of
unsanctified, unmortified, and unconverted men yet once again, before you
sanctify, or mortify, or quicken any for that voyage. And as for your self, as
you say of the Players, that they are so multiplied in England, that one cannot
live by the other, and therefore are grieved that no Players are sent, by which
means those that remain would gain more at home, I fear you do here bewray
your own disease, and speak of others out of your own heart, who seeing
Ministers to be so multiplied that you cannot well live one by the other, you
would feign have moved, and mortified some to forsake their Benefices, and go
to Virginia in person, that you might have stepped into one of their rooms
with your wife, who^ percha^ce then you had in heart if not in house (for you
married not long after) but howsoever you might be minded to be a Virgin then,
we are now out of hope you will go to Virginia in have, or any store of married
Ministers, till Virginia be in such ease as you may keep there your wives as
gallantly as in England, which is not like to be in your days, though you say,
you do not doubt to see the day men shall speak of this Plantation, as it is
spoken in another case In the Genitive case, in which case M. Crashaw then was,
who says in this Virginian Sermon, that a man cannot forget the time he
married. page 17.
, though the beginning be small, yet thy latter end shall greatly increase: by
which you may seem to imagine to have a long lease of your life, to see the
end of so great an enterprise, which is a sign, that you think little of
death, and therefore may be well termed in your own phrase an unmortified man.

21. Truly I heard a Gentleman of Honor say, that he heard it from the Lord
De-la-VVare himself, that making means in both Universities to move Ministers
to go with him this Apostolical journey, yet he had gotten no more then one;
The valiant exploit of an Apostolical Minister in Virginia.
which one as I have heard also credibly reported played the man. For when a
troop of some English had arrived in Virginia, being in great distress, having
nothing left to live on but a few pease, which spent they were to digg their
dynners out of the ground; the pease being at the fire, the Savages came upon
them, whom the Minister exhorting in the Lord to fight valiantly, himself
remained to be Cook: and not to be idle whilst others were fighting, set
sharply on the pease-pottage, and devoured greedily (for he had fasted long
against his will) that poor pittance, showing himself no less valiant then
they were, who as they all fought for him, so did he eat for them all.

22. Well, seeing we can get no more Ministers to be Virginian Apostles, let
us see what other Ghospellers we can find, where M. Crashaw says, he will
press no man to go in person, whom their own resolutions do not press: yet
I have heard many were pressed, either to go to Virginia, or to the Gallows
as they had deserved, which was a strong vocation to be Apostles. And for the
whole Apostolical company, though M. Crashaw would feign grace them with the
best names, page 25.
and the best he can in his bounty give them, is, to be even such as remain of
all sorts, better or worse: which though it be no great commendation for
Apostles; page 36.
yet I know not how it may be any ways honorable to such as remain, seeing M.
Crashaw cannot deny, but that not mockers only, but also friends did object as
a great discouragement the shamlesnes of their beginning, and poverty of their
proceeding, and that they were men in debt, lewd, loose, licentious, riotous,
and disordered persons, rapt up, and the refuse of the Realm, unfit to bring
to pass any good action. And though against mockers he stands upon the
justification of that Apostolical crew, page 36.
yet to his friends he says, that it is true for some, they were lewd fellows
indeed, but not for all. And in truth I think some very few may be excepted;
but he adds, We do, and must send such as we can, not such as we would. And
therein he has reason. For what can they do, the State being so full and
swelling, as they cannot stand one by another, but send away the riffraff, and
rascality of the Land to be the Conuerters of Nations, seeing some must go, and
Ministers being better provided will not go. Wherefore they called Apostles
from under hedges, from Tauernes, or where they could find them: yea many were
taken when they were seeing Plays, and Players, to whom Virginia in this
respect was more behoulding then unto Ministers, howsoever M. Crashaw speaks
against them as her deadly enemies. Being thus taken up they were brought
together, men and women, better and worse, and married at the first sight:
then straight shut up, some in one place, some in another, least they should
have run away. All which was done in such have that meeting together when
they were to depart, neither could the Husbands remember their wives, nor the
wives their Husbands, but some were fayn to put it to hap-hazard, thinking even
in this case, changery to be no robbery, as our Proverb is.

23. O England my dear Country, in this glass thou may see thy great
happiness, A speech unto England co^paring her conversion by S. Augustine, with
this intended of Virginia.
that thou were not left to be converted till this later age, when that a
married Ministry takes this Apostolical office unto it. Had thou been in
this age without the knowledge of Christ, uncivil, heathnish, barbarous, as
once thou were, these wiuing Ghospellers which now sit in the sunme-shine of
thy wealthy State, driving them away whom they call Locusts that seek to
convert thee to thy first faith, would have kept themselves within a full and
swelling State with no more thought and care of thy conversion, then now they
have of the Indyes, of which they blush not to say Beza cited by D. Sarauia in
his book de diuersis gradibus Ministr. page 309. edit. anni 1592.
non est nobis magnopere laborandum; we are not much to trouble our selves:
Longinquas illas peregrinationes Locustis ementientibus Nomen Jesus relinquamus:
Let us leave these long (Apostolical) iourneys unto Locusts that falsely take
upon them the name of Jesus.

24. Thus they rid themselves of the Indian charge committing them to the care
of Locusts, who must go into barren Countries, where even corn is wanting, to
Christen and Baptize them, whom when they shall have brought to be a rich and
flourishing Christianity, then you shall see Ministers do their best to drive
away those Locusts, that themselves Locusts indeed, fruges consumerenati.
may there swell, and swym alone with their wives and children in that full
State. And put case some te^porall respects had moved them to think of thy
Conversion, yet would they have dealt with thoe, as they do with Virginia now,
into which they send not a troup of learned men, but under pretense of
converting her, they empty into her bosom the refuse of their Realm, whom
they term the very excrements of their swelling State. Thou do know Rome
dealt not so with thee: she sent not such as the Virginian Messengers of thy
Gospel were, Men whom thy self were glad to be rid of, but grave, learned,
and Relious persons, and even that man who was the S. Gregory.
Mirror of that age, parallelled for his learning with Augustine, for his
eloquence with Cyprian, for his sanctity with Antony Vicit sanctitate Antoniu^,
eloque^tia Cyprianu^, sapientia Augustinu^. Hildef. de vir. ill.
was coming unto thee in person to have done this office, had not God
myraculously stayed him for a greater use and benefit of the world; yet he
came unto thee in his Disciples, with whom he sent thee his heart, his love,
his spirit, his sanctity, his learning. These thy Apostles were not taken from
Tauernes, but from Monasteryes; not from Play Houses, but from Churches, and
houses of prayer: they came not to conquer, but to convert thee; not to be thy
Lords, but thy Fathers; not to take thy temporal commodityes, but only to
affoard thee heavenly blessings. They came with no other Standard then the
Cross, and the Image of Christ Cruce^ pro Vexillo fere^tes argentea^, and
imaginem Domini Saluatoris in tabula depicta^. Beda lib. 1. Hist. gentis
Anglor. c. 23.
: with no other sword then truth: with no other armor then their Religious
habit: sounding no other Al-arme to the battle, then the prayers and Litanyes
of Saints Litaniasque canentes pro sua and eorum propter and ad quos venerant
salute. Ib.
. By these men Rome begot thee unto Christ; she brought thee forth the Daughter
of God, heir unto his eternal Kingdom; she washed thee from thy sins with
the water of life; she nursed thee with the milk of Christian doctrine; she
adorned thee with the attyres of all virtues, that although all the glory of
the Kings Daughter be within Omnis gloria filiae Regis ab intus, in fimbrijs
aureis. Ps. 44. v. 14.
, yet also the very hemmes of thy garment trayling on the ground were of gold,
I mean Monuments of piety planted upon the ground, Churches, Monasteryes,
Colleges, Hospitalls, and such like, some particles whereof left by thy late
Deformers, still remain wonders of ancient piety, spectacles of magnificent
liberality, and are at this day the greatest ornaments of thy land. This Church
first taught thee a Christian Language; turned thy barbarous tongue into the
sweet sound of Alleluia; banished from thy lips the uncouth names of Paynim
Gods, put into thy mouth the saving name of Jesus. She fed thee at her own
table with grace, which from her Sacraments flows; she gave thee celestial
educatio^, teaching thee to converse with God, and Angels. She by her words
inspyred into thy heart contempt of the world, heroycall thoughts worthy of thy
noble birth, which made so many of thy Kings Sigebert, Elfride, Coenrede, Offa,
Inas, Ceololfe, and others.
, and Queens Queen Alfrede, Ethelburg wife to K. Inas, Etheldred, Sexburge etc.
, and Princely Children forsake the fading flowers of worldly glory. This
benefit the chief of all others, to which compared the rest are nothing, have
thou received from that Church, whom some of thine, a degenerous offspring of so
noble a Stock, would persuade thee to pursue with sword and fire, for
maintayning that very faith, which from Paganism she converted thee unto. A
benefit so clear, that without apparent impudency none can deny it: so great,
that whilst thou have any Christianity in thee, thou will ever esteem it Quod
nos magno beneficio affecit Gregorius, id se^per gratissima memoria recolemus.
Whitaker. lib. 5. cont. Duraeum. page 394.
: and it is great want of judgment in any of thy children, that desire to
retain the name of Christians, to make a show to contemn it.

25. Now if the Roman Church and Religion can bring men unto God, as by this
Conversion of our Country it proved (to say nothing of so many barbarous
Nations, that are daily converted from Paganism to Christ by the Ministry of
our men, Protestants having so much business at Nobisdomi and in propinquo satis
superque est Beza vbi supra. And what business this is, Tertullian told long
age: Negotium est Haereticis non Ethnicos conuertendi, sed nostros peruertendi.
de prascript. c. 42.
home, that they have not leisure to attend to it: it follows out of M.
Crashaws own Principles, that the Roman Church is not to be forsaken, seeing
the Church that does beget men unto Christ, can make them perfect in Christ;
she that began, can effectually finish Gods work in any man: finally the
Church that can bring men to God, to grace, to faith, can bring them likewise
to salvation, and glory. And seeing it is most certain, and we confess it
(and Protestants also) in the Nicen Creed, that the Church is Neque enim multae
Sponsae Christi. Cyprian. epist. 75.
one, that it is Catholic, to wit, the same every where over the world, it is
clear that they which are not one, and the same Church with the Roman, where
God, grace, faith, salvation, and glory is found, are without true faith, out
of Gods grace, and can never attain to salvation, which cannot be had but in
the one, and Catholic Church. The Paschall Lamb must be eaten in one house,
quia (says S. Augustine) in vna Catholica Ecclesia vera hostia redemptionis
immolatur Ser. 10. de tempore.
; because in the one Catholic Church the true Sacrifice of redemption is
offered. And if you desire to know where this one Church is more particulerly,
hear the same Father in another place. The Munus beatae vitae non nisi intra
Ecclesiam reperitur, quae supra petra^ fundata est, quae ligandi, and soluendi
claues accepit. l. 4. de lapsis cont. Donatist. c. 1.
gift of blessed life (says he) is not found but within that Church which is
founded upon the rock, which received of Christ the keys to loose and bynd.
This Church is one, which does hold, and possess the whole power of her
spouse, and Lord. Thus S. Augustine.

26. Wherefore they do deceive men who make them believe that they will bring
them from the chamber of their mother, because she is an Adultresse, in
conclaue Patris, into the conclaue or closet of the Father, not knowing, or not
understanding, or not being willing to believe the saying of S. Cyprian:
Adulterari non potest Sponsa Christi, the Spouse of Christ cannot be an
Adultresse, she is undefiled, she is chaste, she keeps with inviolable
chastity the sanctity of one chamber Incorrupta est, and pudica, vnam domum
nouit, vnius cubiculi sanctitate^ casto pudore custodit. ep. 73.
. And what undutiful children are these that accuse their mother of adultery
An vt dogmata (Caluiniana) defendas, and coniugis Christi and matris suae
viscera instinctu nefario, non erroris, sed furotis infamas? August. contra
Julian. l. 3. c. 17.
without any proof of the time when, or the place where, or the person with
who^e she committed the same? She is the Schismaticke (says M. Crashaw) for
separating her self from Christ. The Roman Church (says another) is indeed our
mother, in whom, and by whom God did beget us, and brought us forth the heirs
of his Kingdom; but because she is a whore, and adultresse, we contest, or
bear witness against her Romana Ecclesia est matter nostra, in qua, and per quam
Deus nos regenerauit etc. Sed quia Meretrix and Adultera est, merito co^tra eam
contestamur. Sarauia de diverse. gradibus Minist. p. 57.
. But can these witnesses tell the time when she went from her first faith?
When she played this foul part? No truly. Some See the Protestants Apology.
tract. 1. sect. 9. subd. 25
say, straight after the Apostles, others in Constantynes time, others in S.
Gregoryes days, others some two hundred years after. Do they know with
whom? Some say it was Pope Hildebrand or Gregory the 7. others Boniface the
third, others S. Leo the great Beza confess. general. c. 7 sect. 12.
, others S. Siluester Napier upon the reuelatio^s. page 43.
, and some think that Antichrist was borne in the Apostles time, glau^cing at
S. Peter, as though he were the man Powel l. 1. de Antichristo. 34. n. 10.
. And be these think you co^uenientia testimonia, agreeing testimonies? Did
the testimonies of the false witnesses against Christ more jar then these do
against his Spouse? If the very Jews in their extremity of malice durst not
for shame condemn Christ by witnesses contradicting one another; what shall we
think of these men that condemn the Church they confess to be their mother,
upon such evidence as does far less agree? But against them all let S. Cyprian
be heard, who says, that infidelity can have no access to the Roman, and
principal Sea Ep. 55.
. Let S. Hierome speak: Be it known (says he) that the Roman faith praised by
the Apostle, cannot be changed Hieron. l. 3. Apolog. cont. Ruffin. c. 4.
. And though two agreeing witnesses may suffice, let us add a third of no less
credit, S. Augustine, who upon Gods own book deposes: the Roman Chair is
the rock, which proud gates of hell do not August. in Psalm. contra partem Donat.
conquer.

27. Wherefore for a friendly farewell, I wish M. Crashaw were like to the
clean beasts that chaw the cudd, that he would weigh, and ruminate his own
words, that seeing he does profess himself a Preacher, he were one of the
Mystical Tables the Prophet Ezech. c. 40. v. 43.
speaks of, which were types of Preachers that had labia reflexa intrinsecus,
their ledges, which the Scripture terms lips, inwardly reflexed, signifying
as S. Gregory notes Tunc mensarum labia intrinsecus reflectuntur quando
Doctores ad cor reuocant tacita cogitatione quid dicunt etc. homil. 21. in
Ezech.
, that a Preacher ought to reflect his speech upon himself; and what he
preaches O doctor, intus reflecte labium, id est, ad cor reuoca sermone^: audi
quod dicis, operare quod praedicas. Gregor. vbi supra.
to others ears, seek by reflection to print in his own heart; in which heart
of M. Crashaw and his Auditors, I wish these his own words engraven page 29.
: How undutiful, and unthankful are they to their spiritual Mother that
forsake her, and cast the dust of contempt in her face, that bare them in her
womb, and brought them forth the Sons of God.

A TABLE OF THE CHAPTERS AND SECTIONS handled in this Book.
IN THE FIRST PART.
THE Preface to the right Honorable and Worshipful, the Students of the
Common Law in his Majesty's Innes of Court. page 3. M. Crashawes and other
Ministers extreme folly, in their ordinary applying the words of his text (we
would have cured Babell etc.) to the progeny of Martyn Luther, against the
Church of Rome. page 63. page 88. M. Crashawes impious stage-playing in Pulpit,
bringing in a Babylonian to speak like a Catholic; seeking to disgrace thereby
ancient Christianity, and the glorious marks of the true Church, taught by the
ancient Fathers. page 112. Constance, and of Trent. page 125.
IN THE SECOND PART.
THE first Chapter, concerning the Errors and Blaspemyes, termed by him
Wounds, which the Bachelour does falsely, and slanderously impute unto the
Roman Church. page 145. The second wound and slander, That the Pope can do
more then God has done. page 156. The third slander; That we teach to appeal
from God to the Virgin Mary. page 162. 173. An answer to the fourth wound or
slander; That the Popes Decretalls are made equal to holy Scriptures. page
147. The fifth slander; That the Popes Decretals are of more authority then
divine Scriptures. page 177. The sixth wound; In discovery whereof the Bachelour
gives advantage unto Atheism. page 179. The seventh slander, or wound; That
Images are made Laymens books. page 187. The eight wound and slander,
concerning adoration of holy Images: where the Catholic doctrine in this point
is showed to be far from Idolatry, and false worship; and M. Crashawes
manifould slanders, and corruptions of our Authors are so discovered, that,
will he stand to his word, he must publicly recant at the Cross. page 162. S.
Francis, and Indulgences: Which point of Catholic doctrine is cleared from
diverse slanders, and cauills, and proved out of the consent of Antiquity. page
221. The ninth wound; An heap of lies touching S. Francis, uttered by this
Minister. page 222. The tenth, and eleauenth wounds or slanders; concerning
Indulgences granted by the Pope to Churches, and Graynes. page 227. page 238.
The second sore of his tweluth wound, concerning Communion in one kind. page
248. The thirteenth wound about Sanctuaryes, as impudent, accusing the Church
of Rome, as guilty of all the bloodshed upon earth. page 354. page 260. The
fourteenth wound, concerning Stews: How perfidiously he deals with our
Authors, namely Nauar, and Graffijs, accusing them of that doctrine, which even
in the places by him cyted, they detest. page 261. His fifteenth wound or
slander: That a man may keep a wife, or a whore, as he pleases, by our
practice. page 277. The sixteenth wound or slander: That we make Matrimony
worse then Whoredom, and VViues worse then Strumpets. 279. The seventeenth
and eighteenth slander; That we permit Priests to have Concubines at a yearly
rent, and force such as would live chaste to pay the rent, because they may have
Concubines if they will. page 285. An Answer to the nyneteenth wound. page
289. page 291. containing a Conclusion of this Treatise: Showing the impiety of
the Protestant revolt from the Church of Rome, by the same sour arguments
wherewith M. Crashaw urges the Brownists for their Schismatic separation
from the Church of England. page 306.
Faults escaped in the Printing.
Page Line Fault Correction 29 8 to Tables the Tables 31 29 somtymes that
confess that 32 5 fire to. fire. To 35 4 no not 52 16 pistilent pestilent 69
38 falsily falsity 79 26 book brook 107 29 the they 113 36 is it 120 30
begotted begotten 135 24 gain to gain 141 36 Anthors Authors Ibid. Ibid. they
their 166 10 thy fury in thy fury 180 2 peosy poesy 257 38 rangeth ranketh 272
30 be by 273 1 modest modesty 288 25 polygamina polygamia

FINIS.

