A BRIEF DISCOVRSE, TOUCHING THE HAPPY UNION OF THE KINGDOMS OF ENGLAND, AND
SCOTLAND

DEDICATED IN PRIVATE TO HIS MAJESTY.

AT LONDON Printed for Foelix Norton, and are to be sold by William Aspley.
1603.

A BRIEF DIScourse, touching the happy union of the Kingdoms of England, and
Scotland. DEDICATED IN Private to his MAJESTY.
I DO not find it strange (excellent King,) that when Heraclitus, he that
was surnamed the obscure, had set forth a certain book, which is not now
extant: many men took it for a discourse of Nature, and many others took it
for a Treatise of Policy, and matter of estate. For, there is a great
affinity and consent, between the rules of Nature, and the true rules of
Policy: The one being nothing else but an order in the government of the
world, and the other an order, in the government of an estate. And therefore,
the education and erudition of the Kings of Persia, was in a science, which was
termed by a name, then of great reverence, but now degenerate and taken in ill
part. For, the Persian Magic, which was the secret literature of their Kings,
was an observation of the contemplation of Nature, and an application thereof
to a sense politic (...) taking the fundamental laws of Nature, with the
branches and passages of them, as an original, and first model, whence to
take and describe a copy and imitation for government.

After this manner, the foresaid Instructors fet before their Kings, the
examples of the celestial bodies, the Sun, the Moon, and the rest, which
have great glory and veneration, but no rest or intermission, being in a
perpetual office of motion, for the cherishing, in turn, and in course, of
inferior bodies. Expressing likewise, the true manner of the motions of
government, which though they ought to be swifte and rapide in respect of
occasion and dispatche, yet are they to be constant and regular, without
wavering or confusion.

So did they represent unto them, how that the Heavens do not inritch
themselves by the Earth, and the Seas, nor keep no dead stock or untouched
treasure, of that they draw to them from below, but whatsoever moisture they
do levy and take from both the elements in vapors, they do spend and turn
back again in showers, only houlding and storing them up for a time, to the
end to issue and distribute them in season.

But chiefly they did express and expound unto them, that fundamental law
of Nature, whereby all things do subsist and are preserved: which is, that
every thing in nature, although it has his private and particular affection
and appetite, and does follow and pursue the same in small moments, and when it
is delivered and freed from more general and common respects: yet
nevertheless, when there is question or cause, for the sustaining of the more
general, they forsake their own particularities and proprieties, and attend
and conspire to uphold the public.

So, we see the Iron in small quantity will ascend and approach to the
Lodestone, upon a particular Sympathy. But, if it be any quantity of
moment, it leaves his appetite of amity with the Lodestone, and like a good
Patriott, falls to the earth, which is the place and region, of massy bodies.

So again, the water, and other like bodies, do fall toward the center of
the earth: which is, as was said, their region or Country. And yet, we see
nothing more usual, in all water-workes and Ingens, then that the water
(rather then to suffer any distraction, or disunion in Nature,) will ascend:
forsaking the love to his own region or Country, and applying it self to the
body next adjoining.

But, it were too large a digression, to proceed to more examples of this
kind. Your Majesty your self, did fall upon a passage of this Nature, in
your gracious speech of thanks unto your Council. When acknowledging
Princely, their vigilancye and well deseruinges, it pleased you to note, that
it was a success and event above the course of Nature, to have so great a
change, with so great a quiet: forasmuch as suddayne and great mutations, as
well in state as in Nature, are rarely without violence and perturbation. So as
still I conclude, there is, as was said, a congruity between the principles
of Nature, and and of Policy. And, least that Instance may seem to appone to
this assertion, I may, even in that particular, with your Majesty's favor,
offer unto you a Type or Pattern in Nature much resembling this present eue^t in
your state: namely earthquakes, which many of them, bring ever much terror and
wonder, but no actual hurt; the earth trembling for a moment, and suddenly
stablishing in perfect quiet, as it was before.

This knowledge then, of making the government of the world, a mirror for the
government of a state, being a wisdom almost lost (whereof the reason I
take to be, because of the difficulty, for one man to embrace both
Philosophies;) I have thought good to make some proof, (as far as my
weakness, and the straights of time will suffer,) to revive in the handling
of one particular wherewith now I most humbly present your Majesty. For,
surely, as has been said, it is a form of discourse, anciently used toward
Kings. And, to what King, should it be more proper then to a King, that is
studious to conioyne contemplative virtue and active virtue together.

Your Majesty is the first King, which has had the honor, to be Lapis
angularis, to unite these two mighty and warlike nations of England and
Scotland, under one Soueraignety and Monarchy. It does not appear by the
records and memories, of any true history, nor scarcly by the fiction and
pleasure of any fabulous narration, or tradition: that ever, of any antiquity,
this Island of great Britain was united under one King, before this day. And
yet, there be no Mountains or races of hills, there be no seas, or great
rivers, there is no diversity of tongue or language, that has invited or
provoked this ancient separation, or divorce.

The lot of Spain was, to have the several Kingdoms of that continent (
Portugal only except,) to be united in an age, not long past: and, now in our
age, that of Portugal also, which was the last that held out, to be
incorporate with the rest. The lot of France has been, much about the same
time likewise, to have reannexed unto that crown, the several Duchies and
portions, that were in former times dismembered. The lotte of this Island, is the
last reserved for your Majesty's happy times, by the special providence and
favor of God: who has brought your Majesty to this happy conjunction, with
great consent of hearts, and in the strength of your years, and in the maturity
of your experience. It rests therefore, but that, (as I promised) I set
before your Majesty's Princelye consideration, the grounds of Nature, touching
the Union and commixture of bodies; and the correspondence which they have with
the grounds of Policy, in the conjunction of states and kingdoms.

First therefore that Position, vis vnita fortior, being one of the common
notions of the mind, needs not much to be induced or illustrate. We see the
Sun (when he enters, and while he continues under the sign of Leo) causes
more vehement heates, then when he is in Cancer: what time his beams are
nevertheless, more perpendicular. The reason whereof, in great part, has
been truly ascribed, to the conjunction and Corradiation in that place of
heaven, of the Sun, with the four Stars of the first magnitude, Syrius,
Canicula, Cor Leonis, and Cauda Leonis.

So, the Moon likewise, by ancient tradition, while she is in the same sign
of Leo, is said to be at the heart, or, to respect the heart. Which is not for
any affinity, which that place in heaven can have, with that part of man's body:
But only, because the Moon is then (by reason of the conjunction and
neerenesse with the stars aforenamed) in greatest strength of influence: and
so works upon that part, in inferior bodies, which is most vital and
principal.

So, we see waters and liquors, in small quantity, do easily purrifie and
corrupt: but, in large quantity, subsist long, by reason of the strength, they
receive, by Union.

So, in Earthquakes, the more general do little hurt, by reason of the united
weight, that they offer to subvert: but, narrow and particular Earthquakes,
have many times ouerturned whole towns and Cities.

So then, this point touching the force of Union is evident. And therefore it
is more fit to speak of the manner of Union. Wherein again, it will not be
pertinent, to handle one kind of Union, which is Union, by victory: when one
body, does merely subdue another, and conuerteth the same into his own
Nature, extinguishing and expulsing, what part so ever of it, it cannot
overcome. As, when the fire conuerteth the Wood into fire, purging away the
Smoke and the Ashes, as unapt matter to inflame. Or, when the body of a
living creature does convert and assimilate food and nourishment: purging and
expelling whatsoever it cannot convert. For, these representations do
answer in matter of Policy, to Union of Countries by conquest: where the
conquering State does extinguish, extirpate and expulse any part of the
estate conquered, which it finds so contrary, as it cannot alter and
convert it. And therefore leaving violent Unions: we will consider only of
natural Unions.

The difference is excellent, which the best obseruers in Nature do take,
between Compositio and Miltio; putting together and mingling. The one being
but a conjunction of bodies in place, the other in quality, and consent: the
one, the mother of sedition and alteration, the other of peace and continuance:
The one rather a confusion, then an Union, the other properly a Union.
Therefore we see those bodies which they call Imperfecte miltio, last not, but
are speedily dissolved. For, take for example, Snow or froth, which are
Compositions of air and water: in them you may behold, how easily they sever
and dissolve, the water closing together, and excluding the air.

So, those three bodies, which the Alchymists do so much celebrate, as the
three principles of things, that is to say, Earth, Water and Oil, (which it
pleases them to term Salt, Mercury and Sulphur:) we see, if they be united
only by composition, or putting together, how weakly and rudely they do
incorporate. For, water and earth, make but an imperfect slime, and, if they be
forced together by agitation, yet, upon a little settling, the earth resides in
the bottom. So, water and Oil, though by agitation it be beaten into an
Ointment. Yet, after a little settling, the Oil will floate upon the top.

So as, such imperfect minglinges, continue no longer, then they are forced:
and still in the end, the worthiest gets above.

But, otherwise it is, of perfect mixture. For, we see those three bodies, of
Earth, Water and Oil; when they are joined in a regetable or Mineral, they
are so united, as without great subtlety of Art, and force of extraction,
they cannot be separated and reduced into the same simple bodies again. So
as, the difference between Compositio and Mistio, cleerelye set down is this:

That Compositio, is the joining or putting together of bodies, without a new
Form: and Mistio, is the joining or putting together of bodies, under a new
Form.

For, the new Form, is Commune Vinculum: and without that, the oulde Forms,
will be at striefe and discord.

Now, to reflect this light of Nature, upon matter of estate: there has been
put in practice in government, these two several kinds of policy, in
uniting and conioyning of states and kingdoms. The one to retain the ancient
forms still severed, and only conjoined in Soueraingtie; the other, to
superinduce a new form agreeable and convenient to the entire estate. The
former of these has been more usual, and is more easy: but the latter, is
more happy. For, if a man do attentively reuolue histories of all nations, and
judge truly thereupon: he will make this conclusion, that there were never any
State that were good commixtures, but the Romans: which because it was the
best state in the world, and is the best example of this point, we will
chiefly insist thereupon.

In the Antiquities of Rome, Virgill brings in Jupiter, by way of Oracle or
perdiction, speaking of the mixture of the Troyans and the Italians: Sermonem
ausonij patrium, moresque tenebunt.
Vtque est, nomen erit: comisti corpore tantum
Subsident Teucri, morem, ritusque sacrorum
Adijciam, faciamque omnes vno ore Latinos.
Hine genus Ausomo mistum quod sanguine surget,
Supra homines, supra ire deos pietate videbis
Wherein Jupiter makes a kind of partition or distribution, that Italy should
give the language and the laws; Troy should give a mixture of men, and some
religious rites, and both people should meet in one name of Latins.

Soon after the foundation of the City of Rome, the people of the Romans
and the Sabines mingled upon equal terms. Wherein the interchange went so
even, that (as Liui notes) the one nation gave the name to the place, and the
other to the people. For, Rome continued the name: but, the people were called
Quirites, which was the Sabine word derived of Cures, the country of Tacitus.

But, that which is chiefly to be noted, in the whole continuance of the
Roman government, they were so liberal of their naturallizations, as in
effect, they made perpetual mixtures. For their manner was, to grant the
same, not only to particular persons, but to Families and linages: and not
only so, but to whole Cities and Countries. So as, in the end it came to
pass, that Rome was Communis patria, as some of the Ciuilians call it.

So, we read, that Saint Paul, after he had been beaten with Rods, and
thereupon charged the Officer with violation of the privilege of a Citizen of
Rome: the Captain then said to him; Art thou then a Roman? That privilege
has cost me dear! To whom Saint Paul replied: But I was so borne. And yet,
in another place Saint Paul professes of himself that he was a Jew by
tribe. So as it is manifest that some of his Ancestors were naturallized, to
him and to his descendents.

So, we read, that it was one of the first despights that was done to Julius
Caesar, that whereas he had obtained Naturalization for a Cittye in Gaul, one
of the Citizens of that Cittye, was beaten with rods, by the commandment
of the Consul Marcellus.

So we read in Cornelius Tacitus, that, in the Emperor Claudius time, the
nation of Gaul, that part which was called Comata, the wilder part, were suitors
to be made capable of the Honors of being Senators and Officers of Rome. His
words are: Cum de supplendo, Senatu agitaretur, Primoresque Galliae quae
Commata appellatur, foedera et Ciuitatem Romanam pridem assecuti, ius
adipiscendorum in vrbe honorum expeterent: multus ea super re, variusque rumor,
et studijs diuersis apud Principem certabatur: and, in the end, after long
debate, it was ruled, they should be admitted.

So likewise, the authority of Nicholas Machiauell, seems not to be
contemned: who, inquiring of the causes of the growth of the Roman Empire,
does give judgment, there was not one greater then this, that the state did
so easily compound, and incorporate with strangers.

It is most true, that most Estates and Kingdoms, have taken the other course:
of which this effect has followed, that the addition of further Empire and
territory, has been rather matter of burden, then matter of strength unto
them; yea, and further; it has kept alive the seed and roots of reuoltes
and rebellions, for many ages: As, we may see in a fresh and notable example
of the kingdom of Aragon, which though it were united to Castile by mariadge,
and not by conquest, and so descended inhereditarie union by the space of more
then a hundredth years: yet, because it was continued in a divided government,
and not well incorporated and cemented with the other Crowns; entered into a
Rebellion, upon point of their Fueros, or liberties, now, of very late years.

Now, to speak briefly, of the several parts of that form, whereby states
and kingdoms are perfectly united: they are, besides the soueraignety it
self, four in number. Union in Name, Union in Language, Union in Laws, and
Union in Employmentes.

For Name, though it seem but a superficial and outward matter; yet it
carries much impression and enchantment. The general and common name of
Grecia, made the Greeks always apt to unite (though otherwise full of
divisions amongst themselves:) against other nations, who they called Barbarous.

The He^^^tian name, is no small band to knit together, their leagues and
confederacies, the faster. The common name of Spain, no doubt has been a
special mean of the better Union and conglutination, of the several kindomes
of Castile, Aragon, Granada, Nauarra, Valencia, Catalonia, and the rest:
comprehending also now lately Portugal.

For Language, it is not needful to insist upon it: because both your
Majesty's kingdoms, are of one language, though of several Dialects: and the
difference so small between them, as promises rather an enriching of one
Language, then a continuance of two.

For laws, which are the principal Synewes of government, they be of three
natures. Iura, which I will term Freedoms, or abilities, Leges, and Mores.

For abilities and Freedoms, they were amongst the Romans; of four kinds, or
rather degrees Ius Connubij, Ius Ciuitatis, Ius suffragij, and Ius Petitionis,
or Ius honorum. Ius Connubij, is a thing, in these times, out of use. For,
marriage is open between all diversity of Nations. Ius Ciuitatis answers to
that we call Denization, or Naturalization. Ius suffragij answers to voice in
Parliament, or voice in election of such, as have voice in Parliament. Ius
petitionis, answers to place in Council and office. And, the Romans did
many times sever these freedoms, granting Ius connubij, sine Ciuitate, and
Ciuitatem sine suffragio, and Suffragium sine Iure petitionis, which was
commonly with them the last.

For laws, it is a matter of curiosity and inconvenience, to seek either to
extripate all particular customs, or, to draw all subjects to one place or
resort of Judicature and Session. It suffices, there be an uniformity in the
Principal and fundamental Laws, both Ecclesiastical and civil. For, in
this point the rule houldes, which was pronounced by an ancient Father,
touching the diversity of rites in the church. For, finding the vesture of the
Queen, (in the Psalm) which did prefigure the church, was of diverse colors:
and, finding again, that Christ's Coat was without a seame: he concludes
well, In vest varietas sit, scissura non fit.

For Manners, a consent in them is to be sought industriously; but, not to be
enforced. For, nothing amongst people, breeds so much pertinacie, in houlding
their customs, as sudden and violent offer to remove them.

And, as for Employments; it is no more, but an indifferent hand, and execution
of that verse: Tros, Tyriusue mihi, nulle discrimine agetur.


There remains only, to remember out of the grounds of Nature, the two
conditions of perfect mixture: whereof the former is Time. For, the natural
Philosophers say well, that compositio, is opus homines: and Mistio, is opus
Naturae. For it is the duty of man, to make a fit application of bodies
together. But, the perfect fermentation and incorporation of them, must be
left to Nature and Time: and unnatural hasting thereof, does disturb the
work, and not dispatche it.

So, we see, after the grift is put into the stock, and bound; it must be
left to Nature and Time, to make that continuum, which was at first but
contiguum. And, it is not any continual pressing, or thrusting together: that
will prevent Natures season, but rather hinder it. And so, in liquors, those
mixtures which are at the first troubled: grow after clear and settled, by the
benefit of rest and time.

The second condition is: that the greater draw the less. So we see, when
two lights do meet, the greater does darken and drown the less. And, when
a smaller river, runs into a greater, it leeseth both his name and stream.

And hereof to conclude, we see an excellent example in the Kingdoms of Judah
and Israel. The Kingdom of Judah contained two Tribes; the Kingdom of Israel,
contained ten. King David reigned first over Judah, for certain years: and,
after the death of Isbosheth, the son of Saul, obtained likewise the Kingdom
of Israel. This union continued in him, and likewise in his son Solomon, by
the space of seventy years at least, between them both. But yet, because the
seat of the kingdom was kept still in Judah, and so the less sought to draw
the greater; upon the first occasion offered, the kingdoms brake again, and
so continued, divided for ever after.

Thus having in all humbleness made oblation unto your Majesty of these
simple fruits, of my devotion and studies: I do wish (and I do wish it, not in
the nature of an impossibility, to my thinking,) that this happy union of
your Majesty's two Kingdoms of England and Scotland; may be in as good an
hour; and under the like divine providence, as that was, between the Romans
and the Sabines.

FINIS.

