THE CHRONICLE HISTORY OF PERKIN WARBECK.

A Strange Truth.

Acted (sometimes) by the Queens MAJESTY'S Servants at the Phaenix in Drurie
lane.

Fide Honor.

LONDON, Printed by T. P. for Hugh Beeston, and are to be sold at his Shop,
near the Castle in Cornehill. 1634.

The Scene, The Continent of Great Britayne.
The Persons presented.
Henry the seventh. Dawbney. Sir William Stanly. Oxford. Surrey. Bishop of
Durham. Vrswicke Chaplain to King Henry. Sir Robert Clifford. Lambert Simnell.
Hialas a Spanish Agent. Constable, Officers, Servingmen, and Soldiers. James
the 4th King of Scotl. Earl of Hu^ley. Earl of Crawford. Lord Daliell.
Marchmount a Herald. Perkin Warbeck. Frion his Secretary. Mayor of Cork.
Heron a Mercer. Sketon a Tailor. Astly -- a Scrivener.
Women.
Lady Katherine Gourdon, -- wife to Perkin. Countess of Crawford. Jane
Douglas -- Lady Kath: maid.
TO THE RIGHTLY HONORABLE, WILLIAM CAVENDISH, Earl of New Castle, Viscount
Mansfield, Lord Boulfouer and Ogle.
MY LORD:
OVt of the darkness of a former Age, (enlightened by a late, both learned,
and an honorable pen) I have endeavored, to personate a great Attempt, and in
It, a greater Danger. In other Labor's, you may read Actions of Antiquity
discourst; In This Abridgement, find the Actors themselves discoursing: in
some kind, practiced as well What to speak; as speaking Why to do. Your ^op^
is a most competent Judge, in expressions of such credit; commissioned by your
known Ability ^n examining; and enabled by your knowledge in determining, the
monuments of Time. Eminent Titles, may indeed inform, who, their owners are,
not often what: To yours, the addition of that information, in BOTH, cannot in
any application be observed flattery; the Authority being established by
TRVTH. I can only acknowledge, the errors in writing, mine own; the
worthiness of the Subject written, being a perfection in the Story, and of It.
The custom of your Lops. entertainements (even to Strangers) is, rather an
Example, than a Fashion: in which consideration, I dare not profess a
curiosity; but am only studious, that your Lop^ will please, amongst such as
best honor your Goodness, to admit into your noble construction

JOHN FORD.

To my own friend, Master John Ford, on his Justifiable Poem of Perkin
Warbeck, This Ode.
THey, who do know me, know, that I
(Vnskil'd to flatter)
Dare speak This Piece, in words, in matter,
A WORK: without the danger of the Lie.
Believe me (friend) the name of This, and Thee,
Will live, your Story:
Books may want Faith, or merit, glory;
THIS, neither; without Iudgement's Lethargy.
When the Arts doat, then, some sick Poet, may
Hope, that his pen
In new-staind-paper, can find men
To roar, HE is THE WIT'S; His NOISE does sway.
But such an Age cannot be known: for All,
E're that Time be,
Must prove such Truth, mortality:
So (friend) thy honor stand's too fixed, to fall.
George Done.

To his worthy friend, Master John Ford, upon his Perkin Warbeck.
LEt men, who are writ Poets, lay a claim
To the Phebean Hill, I have no name,
Nor art in Verse; True, I have heard some tell
Of Aganippe, but never knew the Well:
Therefore have no ambition with the Times,
To be in Print, for making of ill Rimes;
But love of Thee, and Justice to thy Pen
Has drawn me to this Bar, with other men
To justify, though against double Laws,
(Waving the subtle business of his cause)
The GLORIOUS PERKIN, and thy Poet's Art
Equal with His, in playing the KINGS PART.
Ra: E'ure Baronis Primogen:

To my faithful, no less deserving friend, the Author; This indebted
Oblation.
PERKIN is rediviu'd by thy strong hand,
And crownd' a King of new; the vengefull wand
Of Greatness is forgot: HIS Execution
May rest vn-mention'd; and HIS birth's Collusion
Lie buried in the Story: But HIS fame
Thou has't eternized; made a Crown HIS Game.
HIS lofty spirit soars yet. Had HE been
Base in his enterprise, as was his sin
Conceived, HIS TITLE, (doubtless) proved unjust,
Had, but for Thee, been silenc't in his dust.
George Crimes, miles.

To the Author, his friend, upon his Chronicle History.
THese are not to express thy wit,
But to pronounce thy Judgment fit;
In full-fil'd phrase, those Times to raise,
When PERKIN ran his wily ways.
Still, let the method of thy brain,
From Errors touch, and Envy's stayne
Preserve Thee, free; that eu'r, thy quill
Fair Truth may wett, and Fancy fill.
Thus Graces are, with Muses met,
And practick Critick's on may frett:
For here, Thou have produced, A Story,
Which shall ecclipfe, Their future Glory.
John Brograue: Ar^

To my friend, and kinsman, Master John Ford, the Author.
DRammatick Poets (as the Times go) now
Can hardly write, what others will allow;
The Cynick snarl's; the Critic howles and barks;
And Ravens croake, to drown the voice of Larkes:
Scorn those STAGE-HARPYES! This I Will boldly say,
Many may imitate, few match thy Play.
John Ford: Graiensis.

PROLOGVE.
STudyes have, of this Nature, been of late
So out of fashion, so unfollowed; that
It is become more Justice, to reviue
The antic follyes of the Times, then strive
To countenance wise Industry: no want
Of Art, does render wit, or lame, or scant,
Or slothful, in the p^rch^se of fresh bays;
But want of Truth in Them, who give the praise
To their self-love, presuming to out-doe
The Writer, or (for need) the Actor's too.
But such THIS AVTHOVR'S silence best befitt's,
Who bidd's Them, be in love, with their own witt's^
From Him, to cleerer Iudgement's, we can say,
He shows a History, couch't in a Play:
A History of noble mention, known,
Famous, and true: most noble, 'cause our own:
Not forged from Italy, from France, from Spain,
But Chronicled at Home; as rich in strain
Of brave Attempts, as ever, fertile Rage
In Action, could beget to grace the Stage.
We cannot limitt Scenes, for the whole Land
It self, appeard too narrow to with-stand
Competitors for Kingdoms: nor is here
Unnecessary mirth forced, to indeere
A multitude; on these two, rest's the Fate
Of worthy expectation; T^V^H and STATE.
THE CHRONICLE HISTORY OF PERKIN WARBECK.
Actus primus,
Scaena prima.
Enter King Henry, Durham, Oxford, Surrey, Sir William Stanly, Lord
Chamberlain, Lord Dawbny. The King supported to his Throne by Stanly and
Durham. A Guard. King. STill to be haunted; still to be pursued,
Still to be frighted with false apparitions
Of pageant Majesty, and new-coynd greatness,
As if we were a mockery King in state;
Only ordaind to lavish sweat and blo^d
In scorn and laughter to the ghosts of York,
Is all below our merits; yet (my Lords,
My friends and Counsailers) yet we sit fast
In our own royal birthright; the rent face
And bleeding wounds of England's slaughterd people,
Have been by us (as by the best Physician)
At last both thoroughly Cured, and set in safety;
And yet for all this glorious work of peace
Our self is scarce secur^.

Dur^ The rage of malice
Conjures fresh spirits with the spells of York;
For ninety years ten English Kings and Princes,
Threescore great Dukes and Earls, a thousand Lords
And valiant Knights, two hundred fifty thousand
Of English Subjects have in Civil Wars,
Been sacrifi^d to an uncivil thirst
Of discord and ambition: this hot vengeance
Of the just powers above, to utter ruin
And Desolation had reigned on, but that
Mercy did gently sheath the sword of Justice,
In lending to this bloud-shrunck Commonwealth
A new ^oule, new birth in your Sacred person.

Daw: Edward the fourth after a doubtful fortune
Yielded to nature; leaving to his sons
Edward and Richard, the inheritance
Of a most bloody purchase; these young Prince^
Richard the Tirant their unnatural V^cle
Forced to a violent grave, ^o just is Heaven.
Him has your Majesty by your own arm
Divinely strengt^en'd, pulld from hi^ Boares stie
And struck the black Usurper to a Carcass:
Nor does the House of York decay in Honors,
Tho Lancaster does repossesse his ^ight.
For Edwards daughter is King Henry's Queen.
A blessed Union, and a lasting blessing
For this poor panting Island, if some shreds
Some vselesse remnant of the House of York
Grudge not at this Content.

Ox: Margaret of Burgundy
Blows fresh Coals of Division.

Sur: Painted fires
Without to heat or scortch^ or light to cheerish.

Daw: Yorkes headless trunck her Father, Edwards fate
Her brother King, the smothering of her Nephews
By Tirant Gloucester, brother to her nature;
Nor Glosters own confusion, (all decrees
Sacred in Heaven) Can move this Woman-Monster,
But that she still from the vnbottom'd mine
Of Devilish policies, does vent the Ore
Of troubles and sedition.

Ox: In her age
(Great Sir, observe the Wonder) she grows fruitful,
Who in her strength of youth was always barraine
Nor are her birthes as other Mothers are,
At nine or ten months end, she has been with child
Eight or seven years at least; whose twins being borne
(A prodegie in Nature) even the youngest
Is fifteen years of age at hi^ first entrance
As soon as known 'ith world, tall striplings, strong
And able to give battle unto Kings.
Idols of Yorkish malice.

Ox: And but Idols,
A steely hammer Crushes 'em to pe^ces.

K: Lambert the el^est (Lords) is in our service,
Preferred by an offi^ious care of D^^ie
From the Scullery to a Faulkner (strange example!)
Which shows the difference between noble natures
And the base borne: but for the vpstart Duke,
The new reviu'd York, Edwards second son,
Murdered long since 'ith Tower; he lives again
And vows to be your King.

Stan: The throne is filld Sir.

K: True Stanlie, and the lawful heir sitts on it;
A guard of Angels, and the holy prayers
Of loyal Subjects are a sure defense
Against all force and Counsel of Intrusion.
But now (my Lords) put case some of our Nobles,
Our GREAT ONES, should give Countenance and Courage
To trim Duke Perkin; you will all confess
Our bounties have unthriftily been scattered
Amongst unthankful men.

Daw: Unthankful beasts,
Dogs, villains, traitors.

K: Dawbney let the guilty
Keep silence, I accuse none, tho I know,
Foreign attempts against a State and Kingdom
Are seldom without some great friends at home.

Stan: Sir, if no other abler reasons else
Of duty or alegiance could divert
A headstrong resolution, yet the dangers
So lately past by men of blood and fortunes
In Lambert Simnells party, must Command
More than a fear, a terror to Conspiracy,
The high-borne Lincoln, son to De la Pole,
The Earl of Kildare, Lord Geraldine,
Francis Lord Louell, and the German Baron,
Bold Martin Swart, with Broughton and the rest,
(Most spectacles of ruin, some of mercy;)
Are presidents sufficient to forewarne
The present times, or any that live in them,
What folly, nay, what madness 'twere to lift
A finger up in all defense but yours,
Which can be but impostorous in a title.

K. Stanlie we know thou love Us, and thy heart
Is figured on thy tongue; nor think we less
Of anie's here, how closely we have hunted
This Cubb (since he vnlodg'd) from hole to hole,
Your knowledge is our Chronicle: first Ireland
The common stage of Noveltie, presented
This gewgaw to oppose us, there the Geraldines
And Butlers once again stood in support
Of this Colossicke statue: Charles of France
Thence called him into his protection;
Dissembled him the lawful heir of England;
Yet this was all but French dissimulation,
Aiming at peace with us, which being granted
On honorable terms on our part, suddenly
This smoke of straw was packt from France again,
T'infect some grosser air; and now we learn
(Mauger the malice of the bastard Nevill,
Sir Talor, and a hundred English Rebels)
Thei'r all retired to Flaunders, to the Dam
That nursed this eager Wholpe, Margaret of Burgundy.
But we will hunt him there too, we will hunt him,
Hunt him to death even in the Beldams Closet,
Tho the Archduke were his Buckler.

Sur: She has styled him -- The fair white rose of England.

Daw: Iollie Gentleman, more fit to be a Swabber
To the Flemish after a drunken surfeit.

Enter Vrswick. Vr: Gracious Sovereign, please you peruse this paper.

Dur: The Kings Countenance, gathers a sprightly blood:

Daw: Good news believe it.

K: Vrswick thine ear --
Thou Have lodgd him?

Vr: Strongly, safe Sir.

K: Enough, is Barley come to?

Vr: No, my Lord.

K: No matter -- phew, he is but a running weed,
At pleasure to be plucked up by the roots:
But more of this anon -- I have bethought me.
(My Lords) for reasons which you shall partake,
It is our pleasure to remove our Court
From Westminster to the Tower: We will lodge
This very night there, give Lord Chamberlain
A present order for it.

Stan: The Tower -- I shall sir.

K: Come my true, best, fast friends, these clouds will vanish,
The Sun will shine at full: the Heavens are clearing. Exeunt.

Flourish. Enter Huntley and Daliell. Hun: You trifle time Sir.

Dal: Oh my noble Lord,
You conster my griefs to so hard a sense,
That where the text is argument of pity
Matter of earn^st love, your gloss corrupts it
With too much ill placed mirth.

Hunt: Much mirth Lord Daliell?
Not so I vow: ob^erue me sprightly gallant:
I know thou art a ^oble ladd, a hansome,
Descended from ^n honorable Auncestrie,
Forward and active, do resolve to wrestle,
And ruffle in the world by noble actions
For a brave mention to posterity:
I scorn not thy affection to my Daughter^
Not I by good St. Andr^w; but this bugg-beare,
This whoresome tale of honor, ( honor Daliell)
So hourly chatts, and tattles in mine ear,
The piece of royalty that is stitched up
In my Kates blood, that it is as dangerous
For thee young Lord, to perch so near an Eaglet,
As foolish for my gravitie to admit it.
I have spoake all at once.

Dal: Sir, with this truth
You mix such Worm wood, that you leave no hope
For my disorderd palate, ere to relish
A wholesome taste again; alas, I know Sir,
What an unequal distance lies between
Great Huntlies Daughters birth, and Daliells fortunes.
She Is the Kings kinswoman, placed near the Crown,
A Princess of the blood, and I a Subject.

Hunt: Right, but a noble Subject, put in that too.

Dal: I could add more; and in the rightest line,
Derive my pedigree from Adam Mure,
A Scottish Knight; whose daughter, was the mother
To him who first begot the race of Iameses,
That sway the Scepter to this very day^
But kindreds are not ours, when once the date
Of many years, have swallowed up the memory
Of their originalls: So pasture fields
Neighboring too near the Ocean, are soopd up
And known no more: for stood I in my first
And native greatness, if my Princely Mistress
Voutsafd me not her servant, 'twere as good
I were reduced to Clownery; to nothing
As to a throane of Wonder.

Hunt: Now by Saint Andrew
A spark of metal, a'has a brave fire in him.
I would a had my Daughter so I knewt not.
But must not be so, must not: -- well young Lord
This will not do yet, if the girl be headstrong
And will not harken to good Counsel, steal her
And run away with her, dance galliards, do,
And friske about the world to learn the Languages:
It Will be a thriving trade; vo^ may set up by it.

Dal: With pardon ( n^ble Gourdon) this disdain
Suites not your Daughters virtue, or my constancy.

Hunt: You are angry -- would awould beat me, I deserve it.
Daliell thy hand, we are friends; follow thy Courtship
Take thine own time and speak, if thou prevail'st
With passion more then I can with my Counsel,
She Is thine, nay, she is thine, it is a fair match
Free and allowed, I Will only use my tongue
Without a Fathers power, use thou thine:
Self do self have, no more words, win and wear her.

Dal: You bless me, I am now too poor in thanks
To pay the debt I owe you.

Hunt: Nay, thou art poor enough -- I love his spirit infinitely.
Look ye, she comes, to her now, to her, to her.

Enter Katherine and Jane. Kat: The King commands your presence Sir.

Hunt: The gallant -- this this this Lord, this
Servant ( Kate) of yours, desires to be your Master.

Kat: I acknowledge him, a worthy friend of mine.

Dal: Your humblest Creature.

Hunt: So, so, the games a foot, I Am in cold hunting,
The hare and hounds are parties.

Dal: Princely Lady, -- how most unworthy I am to employ
My servic^s, in honor of your virtues,
How h^pelesse my desires are to enjoy
Your fai^e opinion, and much more your love;
Are only matter of despair, unless
Your goodness give large warrant to my boldness,
My feeble-wing'd ambition.

Hunt: This is scurvie.

Kat: My Lord I interrupt you not.

Hunt: Indeed?
Now on my life she will Court him -- nay, nay, on Sir.

Dal: Often have I tuned the lesson of my sorrows
To sweeten discord, and enrich your pity;
But all in vain: here had my Comforts sunck
And never risen again, to tell a story
Of the despairing Lover, had not now
Even now the Earl your Father.

Hunt: A means me sure.

Dal: After some fit disputes of your Condition,
Your highness and my lowness, given a license
Which did not more embolden, then encourage
My faulting tongue.

Hunt: How how? how is that?
Embolden? Encourage? I encourage ye? do you hear sir?
A subtle trick, a queint one, -- will you hear (man)
What did I say to you, come come toth point.

Kate: It shall not need my Lord.

Hunt: Then hear me Kate:
Keep you on that hand of her; I on this --
Thou standst between a Father and a Suitor,
Both striving for an interest in thy heart:
He Courts thee for affection, I for duty;
He as a servant pleads, but by the privilege
Of nature, tho I might Command, my care
Shall only Counsel what it shall not force.
Thou can but make one choice, the ties of marriage
Are tenures not at will, but during life.
Consider whoes thou art, and who; a Princess,
A Princess of the royal blood of Scotland.
In the full spring of youth, and fresh in beauty.
The King that sits upon the throne is young
And yet unmarried, forward in attempts
On any least occasion, to endanger
His person; Wherefore Kate as I am confident
Thou dare not wrong thy birth and education
By yielding to a common ^ervile rage
Of female wantonness, so I am confident
Thou will proportion all thy thoughts to side
Thy equals, i^ not equal thy superiors.
My Lord of Daliell youug in years, is old
In honors, but nor eminent in titles
Or in estate, that may support or add to
The expectation of thy fortunes, settle
Thy will and reason by a strength of Judgment;
For in a word, I give thee freedom, take it.
If equal fates have not ordained to pitch
Thy hopes above my height, let not thy passion
Lead thee to shrink mine honor in oblivion:
Thou art thine own, I have done.

Dal: Oh ^y' are all Oracle,
The living stock and root of truth and wisdom.

Kat: My worthiest Lord and Father, the indulgence
Of your sweet composition, thus commands
The lowest of obedience, you have granted
A liberty so large, that I want skill
To choose without direction of EXAMPLE:
From which I daily learn, by how much more
You ta^e off from the roughness of a Father,
By so much more I am engaged to tender
The duty of a Daughter. For respects
Of birth, degrees of title^ and advancement,
I nor admire, nor slight them; all my studies
Shall ever aim at this perfection only,
To live and dye so, that you may not blush
In any course of mine to own me yours.

Hunt: Kate, Kate, thou grow'st upon my heart, like peace,
Creating every other hour a Iubile.

Kate: To you my Lord of Daliell, I address
Some few remaining words, the general fame
That speaks your merit even in vulgar tongues^
Proclaims it clear; but in the best a President.

Hunt: Good wench, good girl y' faith.

Kat: For my part (trust me)
I value mine own worth at higher rate,
Cause you are pleased to prize it; if the stream
Of your protested service (as you term it)
Run in a constancy, more then a Complement;
I^ shall be my delight, that worthy love
Leads you to worthy actions; and these guide ye
Richly to wedde an honorable name:
So every virtuous praise, in after ages,
Shall be your hey^e, and I in your brave mention,
Be Chronicled the MOTHER of that issue,
That glorious issue.

Hunt: Oh that I were young again,
Sheed make me ^ourt proud danger, and suck spirit
From reputation.

Kat: To the present motion,
Heeres all that I dare answer: when a ripeness
Of more experience, and some use of time,
Resolves to treat the freedom of my youth
Upon exchange of troathes, I shall desire
No surer credit, of a match with virtue,
Then such as lives in you; mean time, my hopes are
Preser'd secure, in having you a friend.

Dal: You are a blessed Lady, and instruct
Ambition not to soar a farther flight,
Then in the perfumed air of your soft voice.
My noble Lord of Huntley, you have lent
A full extent of bounty to this parley;
And for it, shall command your humblest servant.

Hunt: Enough; we are still friends, and will continue
A hearty love, oh Kate, thou art mine own: --
No more, my Lord of Crawford.

Enter Crawford. Craw. From the King I come my Lord of Huntley,
Who in Counsel requires your present aid.

Hunt: Some weighty business!

Craw: A Secretary from a Duke of York,
The second son to the late English Edward,
Concealed I know not where these fourteen years,
Craves audience from our Master, and it is said
The Duke himself is following to the Court.

Hunt: Duke upon Duke; it is well; it is well heeres bustling
For Majesty; my Lord, I will along with ye.

Craw: My service noble Lady.

Kat: Please ye walk sir?

Dal: Times have their changes, sorrow makes men wise,
The Sun it self must set as well as rise;
Then why not I -- fair Maddam I wait on ye. Exeunt omnes.

Enter Durham, Sir Robert Clifford, and Vrswick: Lights. Dur: You find (Sir
Robert Clifford) how securely
King Henry our great Master, does commit
His person to your loyalty; you taste
His bounty and his mercy even in this;
That at a time of night so late, a place
So private as his Closet, he is pleased
To admit you to his favor; do not faulter
In your Discovery, but as you covet
A liberal grace, and pardon for your follies.
So labor to deserve it, by laying open
All plotts, all persons, that contriue against it.

Vrs: Remember not the witchcraft, or the Magic,
The charms, and incantations, which the Sorceresse
Of Burgundy has cast upon your reason!
Sir Robert be your own friend now, discharge
Your conscience freely, all of such as love you,
Stand sureties for your honesty and truth.
Take heed you do not dally with the King,
He is wise as he is gentle.

Cliff: I am miserable,
If Henry be not merciful.

Vrs: The King comes.

Enter King Henry. K: H: Clifford!

Cliff: Let my weak knees rot on the earth,
If I appear as leap'rous in my treacheries,
Before your royal eyes; as to mine own
I seem a Monster, by my breach of truth.

K: H: Clifford stand up, for instance of thy safety
I offer thee my hand.

Cliff. A sovereign Balm
For my bruised Soul, I kiss it with a greediness.
Sir you are a just Master, but I --

K: H: Tell me, is every circumstance, thou have set down
With thine own hand, within this paper true?
Is it a sure intelligence of all
The progress of our enemies intents
Without corruption?

Cliff: True, as I wish heaven;
Or my infected honor white again.

K: H: We know all ( Clifford) fully, since this meteor
This ayrie apparition first discradled
From Tournay into Portugal; and thence
Advanced his fi^ie blaze ^or adoration
Toth superstitious Irish; since the beard
Of this wild Comet, Conjurd'd into France,
Sparkled in antic flames in Charles his Court:
But shrunk again from thence, and hid in darkness,
Stole into Flaunders, flourishing the rags
Of painted power on the shore of Kent,
Whence he was beaten back with shame and scorn,
Contempt, and slaughter of some naked out-lawes:
But tell me, what new course now shapes Duke Perkin!

Cliff: For Ireland (mighty Henry:) so instructed
By Stephen Frion, sometimes Secretary
In the French tongue unto your sacred Excellence,
But Perkins tutor now.

K: H: A subtle villain!
That Frion, Frion, -- you my Lord of Durham
Knew well the man.

Dur. French both in heart and actions!

K: H: Some Irish heads work in this mine of treason;
Speak em!

Cliff. Not any of the best; your fortune
Has dulld their spleenes; never had Counterfeit
Such a confused rabble of lost Banquerouts
For Counselors: first Heron a broken Mercer,
Then John a Water, sometimes Major of Cork,
Sketon a tailor and a Scrivenor
Called Astley: and what ere these list to treat of,
Perkin must harken to; but Frion, cunning
Above these dull capacities, still prompts him^
To fly to Sc^^land to young James the fourth;
And sue for aid to him; this is the latest
Of all their resolutions.

K. H. Still more Frion.
Pestilent Adder, he will hiss out poison
As dangerous as infections -- we must match 'em.
Clifford thou have spoke home, we give thee life:
But Clifford, there are people of our own
Rem^ine behind untold, who are they Clifford?
Name those and we are friends, and will to rest,
It Is thy last task.

Cliff. Oh Sir, here I must break
A most unlawful Oath to keep a just one.

K. H. Well, well, be brief, be brief.

Cliff. The first in rank
Shall be John Ratcliffe, Lord Fitzwater, then
Sir Simon Mountford, and Sir Thomas Thwaites,
With William Dawbegney, Chessoner, Astwood,
Worsley the Deane of Paul's, two other Friars,
And Robert Ratcliffe.

K. H. Churchmen are turned Devils.
These are the principal.

Cliff. One more remains
Vn-nam'd, whom I could willingly forget.

K.H. Ha Clifford, one more?

Cliff. Great Sir, do not hear him:
For when Sir William Stanlie your Lord Chamberlain
Shall come into the list, as he is chief
I shall loose credit with ye, yet this Lord,
Last named, is first against you.

K. H. Vrswick the light, view well my face Sirs,
Is there blood left in it?

Dur. You alter
Strangely Sir.

K. H. Alter Lord Bishop?
Why Clifford stabbed me, or I dreamed a'stabd me.
Sir, it is a custom with the guilty
To think they set their own stains off, by laying
Aspersions on some nobler then themselves:
Lies wait on treasons, as I find it here.
Thy life again is forfeit, I recall
My word of mercy, for I know thou dare
Repeat the name no more.

Cliff. I dare, and once more
Upon my knowledge, name Sir William Stanlie
Both in his counsel, and his purse, the chief
Assistant, to the fai^'d ^uke of York.

Dur: Most strange!

Vrs: Most wicked!

K: H. Yet again, once more;

Cliff: Sir William Stanlie is your ^ecret enemy,
And if time fit, will openly profess it.

K. H. Sir William Stanlie? Who? Sir William Stanlie
My Chamberlain, my Counselor, the love,
The pleasure of my Court, my bosom friend,
The Charge, and the Controulement of my person^
The keys and secrets of my treasury;
The all of all I am: I am unhappy:
Misery of confidence, -- let me turn traitor
To mine own person, yield my Scepter up
To Edwards Sister, and her bastard Duke!

Dur. You loose your constant temper.

K. H. Sir William Stanlie!
Oh do not blame me; he, it was only he
Who having rescued me in Bosworth field
From Richards bloody sword, snatched from his head
The Kingly Crown, and placed it first on mine.
He never failed me; what have I deserved
To loose this good man's heart, or he, his own?

Vrs: The night does waste, this passion ill becomes ye;
Provide against your danger.

K. H. Let it be so.
Vrswick command straight Stanly to his chamber.
It Is well we are ith Tower; set a guard on him;
Clifford to bed; you must lodge here to night,
Weel talk with you to morrow: my sad soul
Devines strange troubles.

Dawb: Ho, ^he King, the King,
I must have entrance.

K. H. Dawbneys v^yce; admit him.
What new combustions huddle next to k^epe
Our eyes from rest? -- the news?

Enter Dawbney. Daw: Ten thousand Cornish grudging to pay your
Subsidies, have gatherd a head, led by a
Blacksmith, and a Lawyer, they make for London,
And to them is joined Lord Audlie, as they march,
Their number daily increases, they are --

K. H. Rascals -- talk no more;
Such are not worthy of my thoughts to night:
And if I cannot sleep, I Will wake: -- to bed.
When Counsels fail, and there is in man no trust,
Even then, an arm from heaven, fights for the just. Exeunt.

Finis Actu^ primi.
Actus Secundus:
Scaena prima.
Enter above: Countess of Crawford, Katherine, Jane, with other Ladies. Coun.
COme Ladies, heeres a solemn preparation
For entertainment of this English Prince;
The King intends grace more then ordinary,
Twere pity now, if a'should prove a Counterfeit.

Kat: Bless the young man, our Nation would be laughd at
For honest souls through Christendom: my father
Has a weak stomach to the business (Madam)
But that the King must not be crossed.

Coun: A'brings
A goodly troop (they say) of gallants with him;
But very modest people, for they strive not
To fame their names too much; their godfathers
May be beholding to them, but their fathers
Scarce owe them thanks: they are disguised Princes,
Brought up it seems to honest trades; no matter;
They will break forth in season.

Jane. Or break out.
For most of em are broken by report; -- The King,

Kat. Let us observe 'em and be silent.

Flourish. Enter King James, Huntley, Crawford, and Daliell. K. I. The right of
Kings (my Lords) extends not only
To the safe Conservation of their own;
But also to the aid of such Allies
As change of time, and state, has often times
Hurld down from careful Crowns, to undergo
An exercise of sufferance in both fortunes:
So English Richard surnamed Cor-de-lyon,
So Robert Bruce our royal Ancestor,
Forced by the trial of the wrongs they felt,
Both sought, and found supplies, from foreign Kings
To repossesse their own: then grudge not (Lords)
A much distressed Prince, King Charles of France,
And Maximilian of Bohemia both,
Have ratified his Credit by their Letters.
Shall we then be distrustful? No, Compassion
Is one rich Jewel that shines in our Crown,
And we will have it shine there.

Hunt. Do your will Sir.

K. I. The young Duke is at hand, Daliell from us
First greet him, and conduct him on; then Crawford
Shall meet him next, and Huntley last of all
Present him to our arms; sound sprightly Music,
Whilst Majesty encounters Majesty. Hob^yes.

Daliell goes out, brings in Perkin at the door where Crawford entertaines
him, and from Crawford, Huntley salutes him^ and presents him to the King: they
embrace, Perkin in state retires some few paces back: During which Ceremony,
the Noblemen slightly salute ^ryon, Heron a Mercer, Sketon a Tailor, Astley a
Scrivenor, with John a Watring, all Perkins followers. Salutations ended: cease
Music. War: Most high, most mighty King! that now there stands
Before your eyes, in presence of your Peers,
A subject of the rarest kind of pity
That has in any age touchd noble hearts,
The vulgar story of a Princes ruin,
Has made it too apparent: EVROPE know^s,
And all the Western World what persecution
Has ragd in malice, against Us, sole heir
To the great throne, of old Plantaginetts.
How from our Nursery, we have been hurried
Unto the Sanctuary, from the Sanctuary
Forced to the Prison, from the Prison hald
By cruel hands, to the tormentors fury;
Is registered already in the Volume
Of all men's tongues, whose true relation draws
Compassion, melted into weeping eyes,
And bleeding souls: but our misfortunes since,
Have ranged a larger progress through strange Lands.
Protected in our Innocence by Heaven.
Edward the Fifth our brother, in his Tragedy
Quenchd their hot thirst of blood, whose hire to murder
Paid them their wages, of despair and horror;
The softness of my childe-hood smild upon
The roughness of their task, and robbed them farther
Of hearts to dare, or hands to execute.
Great King they spard my life, the butchers spard it;
Returned the tyrant, my unnatural Uncle,
A truth of my dispatch; I was conveyed
With secrecy and speed to Tournay; fosterd
By obscure means, taught to unlearn my self:
But as I grew in years, I grew in sense
Of fear, and of disdain; fear, of the tyrant
Whose power swaide the throne then, when disdain
Of living so unknown, in such a servile
And abject lowness, prompted me^ to thoughts
Of recollecting who I was; I shook off
My bondage, and made have to let my Aunt
Of Burgundy acknowledge me her kinsman;
Heir to the Crown of England, snatched by Henry
From Richards head; a thing scarce known ith world.

K. I. My Lord, it stands not with your Counsel now
To fly upon invectiues, if you can
Make this apparent what you have discourst
In every Circumstance, we will not study
An answer, but are ready in your Cause.

War: You are a wise, and just King, by the powers
Above, reserved beyond all other aids
To plant me in mine own inheritance:
To marry these two Kingdoms in a love
Never to be divor'd, while time is time.
As for the manner first of my escape,
Of my Conveyance, next, of my life since,
The means, and persons, who were instruments;
Great Sir, it is fit I over-passe in silence:
Reserving the relation, to the secrecy
Of your own Princely ear, since it concerns
Some great Ones living yet, and others dead,
Whose issue might be questioned. For your bounti^,
Royal magnificence to him that seeks it,
WE vow hereafter, to demean our self,
As if we were your own, and natural brother:
Omitting no occasion in our person,
To express a gratitude, beyond example.

K. I. He must be more then subject, who can utter
The language of a King, and such is thine.
Take this for answer, be what ere thou art,
Thou never shall repent that thou have put
Thy cause, and person, into my protection.
Cosen of York, thus once more We embrace thee;
Welcome to James of Scotland, for thy safety,
Know such as love thee not, shall never wrong thee.
Come, we will taste a while our Court delights,
Dream hence afflictions past, and then proceed
To high attempts of honor, on, lead on;
Both thou and thine are ours, and we will guard ye.
Lead on. -- Exeunt, Manent Ladies above.

Coun: I have not seen a Gentleman
Of a more brave aspect, or goodlier carriage;
His fortunes move not him -- Madam, yare passionate.

Kat: Beshrew me, but his words have touchd me home,
As if his cause concernd me; I should pity him
If a' should prove another then he seems.

Enter Crawford. Craw. Ladies the King commands your presence instantly,
For entertainment of the Duke.

Kat. The Duke
Must then be entertained, the King obayd:
It is our duty.

Coun: We will all wait on him. Exeunt.

Flourish. Enter King Henry: Oxford; Durham; Surrey. K: H: Have ye condemned my
Chamberlain?

Dur. His treasons condemned him (Sir,) which were as
Clear and manifest, as foul and dangerous:
Besides the guilt of his conspiracy pressed him
So nearly, that it drew from him free
Confession without an im^ortunitie.

K: H: Oh Lord Bishop,
This argued shame, and sorrow for his folly;
And must not stand in evidence against
Our mercy, and the softness of our nature^
The rigor and extr^mitie of Law
Is sometimes too too bitter, but we carry
A Chancerie of pity in our bosom.
I hope we may repreiue him from the sentence
Of death; I hope, we may.

Dur: You may, you may;
And so persuade your Subjects, that the title
Of York is better, nay, more just, and lawful,
Then yours of Lancaster; so Stanlie houlds:
Which if it be not treason in the highest,
Then we are traitors all; perjurd and false,
Who have took oath to Henry, and the justice
Of Henry's title; Oxford, Surrey, Dawbney,
With all your other Peers of State, and Church,
Forsworn, and Stanlie true alone to Heaven,
And Englands lawful heir.

Ox: By Veres old honors,
I Will cut his throat dares speak it.

Sur: It Is a quarrel
To' engage a soul in.

K: H: What a coil is here,
To keep my gratitude sincere and perfect?
Stan^ie was once my friend, and came in time
To save my life; yet to say truth (my Lords,)
The man staid long enough t'indanger it:
But I could see no more into his heart,
Then what his outward actions did present;
And for '^m have rewarded 'em so fully,
As that there wanted nothing in our g^ift
To gratify his merit, as I thought,
Unless I should devide my Crown with him,
And give him half; tho now I well perceive
Twould scarce have served his turn, without the whole.
But I am Charitable (Lords) let Justice
Proceed in execution, whiles I mourn
The loss of one, whom I esteemd a friend.

Dur: Sir, he is coming this way.

K: H: If a'speake to me,
I could deny him nothing; to prevent it,
I must withdraw, pray (Lords) commend my favors
To his last peace, which I with him, will pray for:
That done, it does concern us, to consult
Of other fo^lowing troubles. Exeunt.

Ox: I am glad he is gone, upon my life he would
Have pardoned the Traitor, had a'seene him.

Sur: It Is a King composd of gentleness.

Dur: Rare, and unheard of;
But every man is nearest to himself,
And that the King observes, it is fit a' should.

Enter Stanly; Executioner: Vrswick and Dawbney. Stan: May I not speak with
Clifford ere I shake
This piece of Frailty off?

Dawb: You shall, he is sent for.

Stan: I must not see the King?

Dur: From him Sir William
These Lords and I am sent, he bad us say
That he commends his mercy to your thoughts;
Wishing the Laws of England could remit
The forfeit of your life, as willingly
As he would in the sweetness of his nature,
Forget your trespass; but how ere your body
Fall into dust, He vows, the King himself
Does vow, to keep a requi^m for your soul,
As for a friend, close treasured in his bosom^.

Ox: Without rem^mbrance of your errors past,
I come to take my leave, and wish you Heaven.

Sur: And I, good Ange^ls guard ye.

Stan: Oh the King
Next to my soul, shall be the nearest subject
Of my last prayers; my grave Lord of Durham,
My Lords of Oxford, Surrey, Dawbney, all,
Accept from a poor dying man, a farewell.
I was as you are once, great, and stood hopeful
Of many flourishing years, but fate, and time
Have wheeld about, to turn me into nothing.

Enter Clifford. Daw: Sir Robert Clifford comes, the man (Sir William)
You so desire to speak with.

Dur: Mark their meeting.

Cliff: Sir William Stanlie, I am glad your Conscience
Before your end, has emptied every burden
Which charged it, as that you can cl^erely witness,
How far I have proceeded in a duty
That both concerned my truth, and the States safety.

Stan: Mercy, how dear is life to such as hug it?
Come hither -- by this token think on me -- Makes a Cross on Cliffords face
with his finger.

Cliff: This token? What? I am abusd?

Stan: You are not.
I wetr upon your cheeks a holy Sign,
The Cross, the Christians badge, the Traitors infamy:
Wear Clifford to thy grave this painted Emblem:
Water shall never wash it off, all eyes
That gaze upon thy face, shall read there written,
A State-Informers Character, more ugly
Stamped on a noble name, then on a base.
The Heavens forgive thee; pray (my Lords) no change
Of words: this man and I have vs^ too many.

Cliff: Shall I be disgraced without reply?

Dur. Give loosers
Leave to talk; his loss is irrecoverable.

Stan: Once more
To all along farewell; the best of greatness
Preserve the King; my next suite is (my Lords)
To be remembered to my noble Brother,
Darby my much grie^'d brother; Oh! persuade him,
That I shall stand no blemish to his h^use,
In Chronicles writ in another age.
My heart does bleed for him; and for his sighs,
Tell him, he must not think, the style of Darby,
Nor being husband to King Henry's Mother,
The league with Peers, the smiles o^ Fortune, can
Secure his peace, above the state of man:
I take my leave, to travail to my dust,
"Subjects deserve their deaths whose Kings are just.
Come Confessor, on with thy Axe (friend) on. Exeunt.

Cliff: Was I called hither by a Traitors breath
To be vpbraided? Lords, the King shall know it.

Enter King Henry with a white staff. K: H: The King does know it Sir; the
King has heard
What he or you could say; We have given credit
To every point of Cliffords information,
The only evidence against Stanlies head.
A' dies fort, are you pleased?

Cliff: I pleased my Lord!

K: H: No echoes: for your service, we dismiss
Your more attendance on the Court; take ease
And live at home; but as you love your life,
Stir not from London without leave from us.
We Will think on your reward, away.

Cliff: I go Sir. Exit Clifford.

K: H: Dye all our griefs with Stanlie; take this staff
Of office Dawbney, henceforth be our Chamberlain.

Dawb: I am your humblest servant.

K: H: We are followed
By enemies at home, that will not cease
To seek their own confusion; it is most true,
The Cornish under Awdley are marched on
As far as Winchester; but let them come,
Our forces are in readiness, we will catch 'em
In their own toils.

Dawb: Your Army, being mustred,
Consist in all, of horse and foot, at least
In number six and twenty thousand; men
Daring, and able, resolute to fight,
And loyal in their truths.

K^ H: We know it Dawbney:
For them, we order thus, Oxford in chief
Assisted by bold Essex, and the Earl
Of Suffolk, shall lead on the first Battalia:
Be that your charge.

Ox: I humbly thank your Majesty.

K: H: The next Devision we a^^igne to Dawbney:
These must be men of action, for on those
The fortune of our fortunes, must rely.
The last and main, our self commands in person,
As ready to restore the fight at all times,
As to consummate an assured victory.

Dawb: The King is still oraculous.

K: H: But Surrey,
We have employment of more toil for thee!
For our intelligence comes swiftly to us,
That James of Scotland, late has entertaind
Perkin the counterfeite, with more then common
Grace and respect; nay courts him with rare favors;
The Scot is young and forward, we must look for
A sudden storm to England from the North:
Which to withstand, Durham shall post to Norham,
To fortify the Cast^e, and secure
The frontiers, against an Invasion there.
Surrey shall follow soon, with such an Army,
As may relieve the Bishop, and i^counter
On all occasions, the death-daring Scotts.
You know your charges all, it is now a time
To execute, not talk, Heaven is our guard still.
War must breed peace, such is the fate of Kings.

Exeunt. Enter Crawford and Daliell. Crawf: It Is more then strange, my reason
cannot answer
Such argument of fine Imposture, coucht
In witchcraft of persuasion, that it fashions
Impossibilities, as if appearance
Could cozen truth it self; this Duk-ling Mushrome
Has doubtless charmed the King.

Daliell: A' courts the Ladies,
As if his strength of language, chaynd attention
By power of prerogative.

Crawf: It madded
My very soul, to hear our Masters motion:
What surety both of amity, and honor,
Must of nec^ssiti^ ensue upon
A match betwixt some noble of our Nation,
And this brave Prince forsooth.

Dali: Twill prove to fatal,
Wise Huntley fears the threat^ing. Bless the Lady
From such a ruine^

Cra: How ^he Co^nsaile privy
Of this young Phueton, do skrewe their faces
I^to a gravitie, their trades (good people)
Were never guilty of? the meanest of 'em
Dreams of at least an off^ce in the State.

Dal: Sure not the Hangmans, it is be^poke already
For service to their rogueshippes -- silence.

Enter King James and Huntley. K: James, Do not --
Argue against our will; we have descended
Somewhat (as we may term it) too familiarly
From Justice of our birthright, to examine
The force of your alleagence: -- Sir, we have;
But find it short of duty!

Hunt: Break my heart,
Do, do, King; have my services, my loyalty,
(Heaven knows untainted ever) drawn upon me
Contempt now in mine age? when I but wanted
A minute of a peace not to be troubled?
My last, my long one? Let me be a Dotard,
A Bedlame, a poor sot, or what you please
To have me, so you will not stain your blood,
Your own blood (royal Sir) though mixed with mine,
By marriage of this girl to a straggler!
Take, take my head Sir, whilst my tongue can wagge
It cannot name him other.

K: Ia: Kings are counterfeits
In your repute (grave Oracle) not presently
Set on their thrones, with Scepters in their fists:
But use your own detraction: it is our pleasure
To give our Cosen York for wife our kinswoman
The Lady Katherine: Instinct of soveraigntie
Designs the honor, though her peevish Father
Vsurps our Resolution.

Hunt: O it is well,
Exceeding well, I never was ambitious
Of using Congeys to my Daughter Queen:
A Queen, perhaps a Queen? -- Forgive me Daliell
Thou honorable Gentleman, none here
Dare speak one word of Comfort?

Dal: Cruel misery!

Craw: The Lady gracious Prince, may be has settled
Affection on some former choice.

Dal: Inforcement, would prove but tyranny.

Hunt. I thank 'ee heartily.
Let any yeoman of our Nation challenge
An interest in the girl: then the King
May add a Ioynture of ascent in titles,
Worthy a free consent; now a' pulls down
What old Desert has builded.

K. Ia. Cease persuasions,
I violate no pawnes of faythes, intrude not
On private loves; that I have played the Orator
For Kingly York to virtuous Kate, her grant
Can justify, referring her contents
To our provision^ the Welsh Harrie, henceforth
Shall therefore know, and tremble to acknowledge,
That not the painted Idol of his policy,
Shall fright the lawful owner from a Kingdom.
We are resolved.

Hunt. Some of thy Subjects hearts
King James will bleed for this!

K. Ia. Then shall their bloods
Be nobly spent; no more disputes, he is not
Our friend who contradicts us.

Hunt. Farewell Daughter!
My care by one is lessened; thank the King for it, Enter.
I and my griefs will dance now, -- Look Lords look,
Heeres hand in hand already?

K. Ia. Peace old frenzy.
Enter Warbeck leading Katherine, complementing; Countess of Crawford, Jane,
Frion, Major of Cork, Astley, Heron and Sketon. How like a' King a looks?
Lords, but observe
The confidence of his aspect? Dross cannot
Cleave to so pure a metal; royal youth!
Plantaginett undoubted!

Hunt: Ho brave Lady!
But no Plantagenet byr Lady yet
By red Rose or by white.

Warb. An Union this way,
Settles possession in a Monarchy
Established rightly, as is my inheritance:
Acknowledge me but Sovereign of this Kingdom,
Your heart (fair Princes) and the hand of providence,
Shall crown you Queen of me, and my best fortunes.

Kath. Where my obedience is (my Lord) a duty,
Love owes true service.

Warb: Shall I? --

K. Ia^ Cossen yes,
Enjoy her; from my hand accept your bride;
And may they live at emnitie with comfort,
Who grieve at such an equal pledge of trothes.
You Are the Princes wife now.

Kath: By your gift Sir;

Warb: Thus I take seizure of mine own.

Kath: I miss yet
A fathers blessing: Let me find it; -- humbly
Upon my knees I seek it.

Hunt: I am Huntley
Old Alexander Guerdon, a plain subject,
Nor more, nor less; and Lady, if you wish for
A blessing, you must bend your knees to Heaven;
For Heaven did give me you; alas, alas,
What would you have me say? may all the happiness
My prayers ever sued to fall upon you,
Preserve you in your virtues; -- preethee Daliell
Come with me; for, I feel thy griefs as full
As mine, lets steal away, and cry together. Exeunt Hu^tley and Daliell.

Dal: My hopes are in their ruins.

K. Ia. Good kind Hun^ley
Is overjoyed, a fit solemnity,
Shall perfect these delights: Crawford attend
Our order for the preparation. Exeunt, manent, Frion, Major, Astley, Heron,
and Sketon.

Fri: Now worthy Gentlemen, have I not followed
My undertakings with success? Heeres entrance
Into a certainty above a hope.

Heron. Hopes are but hopes, I was ever confident, when I traded but in
remnants, that my stars had reserved me to the title of a Viscount at least,
honor is honor though cut out of any stuffes.


Sket: My brother Heron, has right wisely delivered his opinion: for he that
threeds his needle with the sharp eyes of industry, shall in time go
through-stitch, with the new suite of preferment.


Astley. Spoken to the purpose my fine witted brother Sketon, for as no
Indenture, but has its counterpawne; no Noverint but his Condition, or
Defeysance; so no right, but may have claim, no claim but may have
possession, any act of Parliament to the Contrary notwithstanding.


Frion. You are all read in mysteries of State,
And quick of apprehension, deep in judgment,
Active in resolution; and it is pity
Such counsel should lie buried in obscurity.
But why in such a time and cause of triumph,
Stands the judicious Major of Cork so silent?
Believe it Sir, as ENGLISH RICHARD prospers,
You must not miss employment of high nature.

Major. If men may be credited in their mortality, which I dare not
peremptorily aver, but they may, or not be; presumptions by this marriage are
then (in sooth) of fruitful expectation. Or else I must not justify other
men's belief, more then other should rely on mine.


Frion. Pith of experience, those that have borne office,
Weigh every word before it can drop from them;
But noble Counselors, since now the present,
Requires in point of honor (pray mistake not)
Some service to our Lord; it is fit the Scotts
Should not ingrosse all glory to themselves,
At this so grand, and eminent solemnity.

Sket: The Scotts? the motion is defi^d: I had rather, for my part, without
trial of my Country, suffer persecution under the pr^ssing Iron of reproach:
or let my skin be pincht full of oylett holes, with the Bodkin of Derision.


Ast: I will sooner loose both my ears on the Pillorie of Forgerie.


Heron. Let me first live a Banckrout, and die in the lowsee hole of hunger,
without compounding for six pence in the pound.


Major. If men fail not in their expectations, there may be spirits also that
digest no rude affronts (Master Secretary Frion) or I am cozened: which is
possible I grant.


Frion. Resolved like men of knowledge; at this feast then
In honor of the Bride, the Scotts I know,
Will in some show, some mask, or some Devise,
Prefer their duties: now it were uncomely,
That we be found less forward for our Prince,
Then they are for their Lady; and by how much
We outshine them in persons of account,
By so much more will our endeavors meet with
A liuelier applause. Great Emperors,
Have for their recreations undertook
Such kind of pastimes; as for the Conceit,
Refer it to my study; the performance
You all shall share a thanks in, twill be grateful.

Heron. The motion is allowed, I have stole to a dancing School when I was a
Prentice.


Astl: There have been Irish-Hubbubs, when I have made one too.


Sket: For fashioning of shapes, and cutting a crosse-caper, turn me off to my
trade again.


Major. Surely, there is, if I be not deceived, a kind of gravitie in
merriment: as, there is, or perhaps ought to be, respect of persons in the
quality of carriage, which is, as it is construed, either so, or so.


Frion. Still you come home to me; upon occasion
I find you relish Courtship with discretion:
And such are fit for Statesmen of your merits.
Pray'e wait the Prince, and in his ear acquaint him
With this Design, I Will follow and direct ee'.
O the toil Exeunt, mane Frion.
Of humoring this abject scumme of mankind?
Muddie-braynd peasants? Princes feel a misery
Beyond impartial sufferance, whose extremes
Must yield to such abettors; yet our tide
Runs smoothly without adverse winds; run on
Flow to a full sea! time alone debates,
Quarrels forewritten in the Book o^ fates. Exit.

Actus Tertius^
Scaena prima.
Enter King Henry, his Gorget on, his sword, plume of feathers, leading
staff, and Vrswicke. K: H: HOw runs the time of day?

Vrsw: Past ten my Lord.

K: H: A bloody hour will it prove to some,
Whose disobedience, like the sons 'oth earth,
Throw a defiance against the face of Heaven.
Oxford, with Essex, and stout De la Poole,
Have quietted the Londoners (I hope)
And set them safe from fear!

Vrs: They are all silent.

K: H: From their own battlements, they may behold,
Saint Georges fields orespred with armed men;
Amongst whom, our own royal Standard threatens
Confusion to opposers; we must learn
To practice war again in time of peace,
Or lay our Crown before our Subjects feet,
Ha, Vrswicke, must we not?

Vrsw: The powers, who seated
King Henry on his lawful throne, will ever
Rise up in his defense.

K: H: Rage shall not fright
The bosom of our confidence; in Kent
Our Cornish Rebels cozened of their hopes,
Met brave resistance by that Countries Earl,
George Aburgenie, Cobham, Po^nings, Guilford,
And other loyal hearts; now if Black heath
Must be reserved the fatal tomb to swallow
Such stifneckt Abjects, as with weary Marches,
Have travaild from their homes, their wives, and children,
To pay in stead of Subsidies their lives,
We may continue Sovereign? yet Vrswick^
We Will not abate one penny, what in Parliament
Has freely been contributed; we must not;
Money gives soul to action; Our Competitor,
The Flemish Counterfeit, with James of Scotland,
Will prove, what courage need, and want, can nourish
Without the food of fit supplies; but Vrswicke
I have a charm in secret, that shall loose
The Witchcraft, wherewith young King James is bound,
And free it at my pleasure without bloodshed.

Vrsw: Your Majesty's a wise King, sent from Heaven
Protector of the just.

K. H. Let dinner cheerfully
Be served in; this day of the week is ours,
Our day of providence, for Saturday
Yet never fayld in all my undertakings,
To yield me rest at night; what means this warning?
Good Fate, speak peace to Henry. A Flourish.

Enter Dawbney, Oxford, and attendants. Dawb: Live the King,
Triumphant in the ruin of his enemies.

Oxf: The head of strong rebellion is cut off,
The body hewed in pieces:

K: H: Dawbney, Oxford,
Minions to noblest fortunes, how yet stands
The comfort of your wishes?

Dawb: Briefly thus:
The Cornish under Awdley disappoynted
Of flattered expectation, from the Kentish
(Your Majesty's right trusty Liegemen) flewe,
Featherd by rage, and hartned by presumption,
To take the field, even at your Palace gates,
And face you in your chamber Royal; Arrogance,
Improu'd their ignorance; for they supposing,
(Misled by rumor) that the day of battle
Should fall on Monday, rather braved your forces
Then doubted any onset; yet this Morning,
When in the dawning I by your direction
Strove to get Dertford Strand bridge, there I found
Such a resistance, as might show what strength
Could make; here Arrows hayld in showers upon us
A full yard long at least; but we prevayld.
My Lord of Oxford with his fellow Peers,
Invironing the hill, fell feircely on them
On the one side, I on the other, till (great Sir)
(Pardon the oversight) eager of doing
Some memorable act, I was engagd
Almost a prisoner, but was freede as soon
As sensible of danger: now the fight
Began in heat, which quenched in the blood of
Two thousand Rebels, and as many more
Reserved to try your mercy, have returned
A victory with safety.

K: H: Have we lost
An equal number with them?

Oxf: In the total
Scarcely four hundred: Awdley, Flammock, Joseph,
The Ringleaders of this Commotion,
Raled in ropes, fit Ornaments for traitors,
Wait your determinations.

K: H: We must pay
Our thanks where they are only due: Oh, Lords,
Here is no victory, nor shall our people
Conceive that we can triumph in their falls.
Alas, poor souls! Let such as are escapt
Steal to the Country back without pursuit:
There Is not a drop of blood spilt, but has drawn
As much of mine, their swords could have wrought wonders
On their Kings part, who faintly were vnsheath'd
Against their Prince, but wounded their own breasts.
Lords we are debtors to your care, our payment
Shall be both sure, and fitting your Deserts.

Dawb: Sir, will you please to see those Rebels, heads
Of this wild Monster multitude?

K: H: Dear friend,
My faithful Dawbney, no; on them our Justice
Must frown in terror, I will not vouchsafe
An eye of pity to them, let false Awdley
Be drawn upon an hurdle from the Newgate
To Tower Hill in his own coat of Arms
Painted on paper, with the Arms reverst,
Defaced, and torn, there let him loose his head.
The Lawyer and the Blacksmith shall be hanged,
Quartered, their quarters into Cornwall sent,
Examples to the rest, whom we are pleased
To pardon, and dismiss from further quest.
My Lord of Oxford see it done.

Oxf: I shall Sir.

K: H: Vrswicke.

Vrsw: My Lord

K: H: To Dinham our high treasurer,
Say we command Commissions be new granted,
For the Collection of our Subsidies
Through all the West, and that speedily.
Lords we acknowledge our engagements due
For your most constant services.

Dawb: Your Soldiers
Have manfully and faithfully acquitted
Their several duties.

K: H: For it, we will throw
A Largess free amongst them, which shall harten
And cheerish up their Loyalties, more yet
Remains of like employment, not a man
Can be dismissed, till enemies abroad
More dangerous then these at home, have felt
The puissance of our Arms, oh happy Kings
Whose thrones are raised in their Subjects hearts.

Exeunt omnes. Enter Huntley and Daliell. Hunt: Now, Sir a modest word with you
(sad Gentleman)
Is not this fine, I trow, to see the gambolds,
To hear the Iiggs, observe the friskes, b'enchanted
With the rare discord of bells, pipes and tabors,
Hotchpotch of Scotch and Irish twingle twangles,
Like to so many Queresters of Bedlam,
Trowling a catch? the feasts, the manly stomaches,
The healthes in Vsquabaugh, and bonie clabbore,
The Ale in dishes never fetched from China,
The hundred thousand knackes not to be spoken of,
And all this for King Oberon, and Queen Mab,
Should put a soul int 'ee: look 'ee (good man)
How youthful I am grown, but by your leave,
This new Queen Bride, must henceforth be no more
My Daughter, no burladie, it is unfit.
And yet you see how I do bear this change,
Methinkes courageously, then shake off care
In ^uch a time of jollitie.

Dal. Alas Sir,
How can you cast a mist upon your griefs?
Which how so ere you shadow, but present
To any judging eye, the perfect substance
Of which mine are but counterfeits.

Hunt: Fo Dalie^^
Thou interrupts the part I bear in Music
To this rare bridal feast, let us be merry;
Whilst flattering calmes secure us against storms,
Tempests when they begin to roar, put out
The light of peace and cloud the Suns bright eye
In darkness of despair, yet we are safe.

Dal: I wish you could as easily forget
The Justice of your sorrows, as my hopes
Can yield to destiny.

Hunt: Pish then I see
Thou do not know the flexible condition
Of my ap't nature, I can laugh, laugh heartily
When the Gowt crampes my joints, let but the stone
Stop in my bladder, I am streite a singing,
The Quartane fever shrinking every limme,
Setts me a capring strait, do but betray me
And bind me a friend ever. what ^ trust
The loosing of a Daughter, (though I doted
On every hair that grew to trim her head)
Admitts not any pain lik^ one of these.
Come thou art deceivd in me, give me a blow,
A sound blow on the face, I Will thank thee for it,
I love my wrongs, still thou art deceived in me.

Dal: Deceived? Oh noble Huntley, my few yeare^
Have learnt experience of too ripe an age
To forfeite fit credulity, forgive
My rudeness, I am bold.

Hunt: Forgive me first
A madness of ambition, by example
Teach me humility, for patience scorns,
Lectures which Schoolmen use to read to boys
Incapable of injuries; though old
I could grow tough in fury, and disclaim
Alleagence to my King, could fall at odds
With all my fellow Peers, that durst not stand
Defendants against the rape done on mine honor.
But Kings are earthly gods, there is no meddling
With their anointed bodies, for their actions,
They only are accountable to Heaven.
Yet in the puzzle of my troubled brain
One Antidote's reserved against the poison
Of my distractions, it is in thee t'apply it.

Dal: Name it, oh name it quickly Sir!

Hunt: A pardon
For my most foolish sleighting thy Deserts,
I have culd out this time to beg it, preethee
Be gentle, had I been so, thou had owned
A happy Bride, but now a cast away,
And never child of mine more.

Dal: Say not so (Sir,) it is not fault in her.

Hunt: The world would prate
How she was handsome; young I know she was,
Tender, and sweet in her obedience;
But lost now; what a banckrupt am I made
Of a full stock of blessings. -- must I hope
a mercy from thy heart?

Dal: A love, a service,
A friendship to posterity.

Hunt: Good Angels
Reward thy charity, I have no more
But prayers left me now.

Dal: I Will lend you mirth (Sir)
If you will be in Consort.

Hunt: Thank yee' truly:
I must, yes, yes, I must; here is yet some ease,
A partner in affliction, look not angry.

Dal: Good noble Sir.

Hunt: Oh hark, we may be quiet,
The King and all the others come: a meeting
Of gawdie sights; this days the last of Revells;
To morrow sounds of war; then new exchange:
Fiddles must turn to swords, unhappy marriage!

Flourish. Enter King James, Warbecke leading Katherine, Crawford, Countess,
and Jane, Huntley, and Daliell fall among them. K: Ia: Cosen of York, you and
your Princely Bride,
Have liberally en^oy'd such soft delights,
As a new married couple could fore-thinke:
Nor has our bounty shortened expectation;
But after all those pleasures of repose,
Or amorous safety, we must rowse the ease
Of dalliance, with achievements of more glory,
Then sloth and sleep can furnish: yet, for farewell,
Gladly we entertain a truce with time,
To grace the joint endeavors of our servants.

Warb: My Royal Cosen, in your Princely favor,
The extent of bounty has been so unlimited,
As only an acknowledgement in words,
Would breed suspicion in our state, and quality:
When We shall in the fullness of our fate
(Whose Minister necessity will perfect,)
Sit on our own throne; then our arms laid open
To gratitude, in sacred memory
Of these large benefits, shall twyne them close
Even to our thoughts, and heart, without distinction.
Then James, and Richard, being in effect
O^e person, shall unite and rule one people.
Devisi^le in titles only.

K: Ia: Seat yee';
Are the presentors ready?

Cra^f: All are entering.

Hunt: Dainty sport toward Daliell, sit, come sit,
Sit and be quiet, here are Kingly buggs words.

Enter at one door four Scotch Antickes, accordingly habited; Enter at another
four wild Irish in Trowses, long hayred, and accordingly habited. Music.
The Maskers dance. K: Ia: To all a general thanks!

Warb: In the next Room
Take your own shapes again, you shall receive
Particular acknowledgement.

K: Ia: Enough
Of merriments; Crawford, how far's our Army
Upon the March?

Craw: At Hedenhall (great King)
Twelve thousand well prepared.

K: Ia: Crawford, to night
Post thither^ We in person with the Prince
By four a clock to morrow after dinner,
Will be w^ee; speed away!

Craw. I fly my Lord.

K: I: Our business grows to head now, where is your
Secretary that he attends'ee not to serve?

Warb: With March-mont your Herald.

K: Ia: Good: the Proclamations ready;
By that it will appear, how the English stand
Affected to your title; Huntley comfort
Your Daughter in her Husbands absence; fight
With prayers at home for us, who for your honors,
Must toil in fight abroad.

Hunt: Prayers are the weapons,
Which men, so near their graves as I, do use.
I Have little else to do.

K: Ia: To rest young beauties!
We must be early stirring, quickly part,
"A Kingdoms rescue craves both ^peede and art.
Cosens good night. Flourish.

Warb: Rest to our Cosen King.

Kath: Your blessing Sir;

Hunt: Fair blessings on your Highness, sure you need 'em.

Exeunt omnes, Manent, Warb^ and Katherine. Warb: Jane set the lights down,
and from us return
To those in the next room, this little purse
Say we'ele deserve their loves.

Jane. It shall be done Sir.

Warb: Now dearest; ere sweet sleep shall seal those eyes,
(Loves precious tapers,) give me leave to use
A parting Ceremony; for to morrow,
It wou^d be sacrilege to intrude upon
The temple of thy peace: swift as the morning,
Must I break from the down of thy embraces,
To put on steel, and trace the paths which lead
Through various hazards to a careful throne.

Kath: My Lord, I would feign go w'ee, there is small fortune
In staying here behind.

Warb: The churlish browe
Of war (fair dearest) is a sight of horror
For Ladies entertainment; if thou hear^st
A truth of my sad ending by the hand
Of some unnatural subject, thou withal
Shall hear, how I dyed worthy o^ my right,
By falling like a KING; and in the cloze
Which my last breath shall ^ound, thy name, thou fairest
Shall sing a requiem to my soul, unwilling
Only of greater glory, 'cause divided
From such a heaven on earth, as life with thee.
But these are chimes for funerals, my business
Attends on fortune of a spright^ier triumph;
^or love and Majesty are reconciled,
And vow to crown thee Empress of the West.

Kath: You have a noble language (Sir,) your right
In me is without question, and however
Events of time may shorten my deserts,
In others pity; yet it shall not stagger,
Or constancy, or duty in a wife.
You must be King of me, and my poor heart
Is all I can call mine.

Warb: But we will live;
Live (beauteous virtue) by the lively test
Of our own blood, to let the Counterfeite
Be known the worlds contempt.

Kath: Pray do not use
That word, it carries fate in it; the first suite
I ever made, I trust your love will grant!

Warb: Without denial (dearest.)

Kath: That hereafter^
If you return with safety, no adventure
May sever us in tasting any fortune:
I nere can stay behind again.

Warb: You Are Lady
Of your desires, and shall command your will:
Yet it is too hard a promise.

Kath: What our Destinies
Have ruled out in their Books, we must not search
But kneel too.

Warb: Then to fear when hope is fruitless,
Were to be desperately miserable;
Which poverty, our greatness dares not dream of,
And much more scorns to stoop to; some few minutes
Remain yet, let us be thriftie in our hopes. Exeunt.

Enter King Henry, Hialas, and Vrswicke. K: H: Your name is Pedro Hialas: a
Spaniard?

Hialas. Sir a Castillian borne.

K: H: King Ferdinand
With wise Queen Isabell his royal consort,
Write 'ee a man of worthy trust and c^ndo^.
Princes are dear to heaven, who meet with Subjects
Sincere in their employments; such I find
Your commendation (Sir,) let me deliver
How joyful I repute the amity,
With your most fortunate Master, who almost
Comes near a miracle, in his success
Against the M^ores, who had devoured his Country,
Entire now to his Scepter; We, for our part
Will imitate his providence, in hope
Of partage in the use o'nt; We repute
The privacie of his advisement to us
By you, intended an Ambassador
To Scotland for a peace between our Kingdoms;
A policy of love, which well becomes
His wisdom, and our care.

Hialas. Your Majesty
Does understand him rightly.

K: H: Else, your knowledge can instruct me, wherein (Sir)
To fall on Ceremony, would seem vselesse,
Which shall not need; for I will be as studious
Of your concealment in our Conference,
As any Counsel shall advise.

Hialas. Then (Sir)
My chief request is, that on notice given
At my dispatch in Scotland, you will send
Some learned man of power and experience
To join in treaty with me.

K. H. I shall do it,
Being that way well provided by a servant
Which may attend 'ee ever.

Hialas. If King James
By any indirection should perceive
My coming near your Court, I doubt the issue
Of my employment.

K: H: Be not your own Herald,
I learn sometimes without a teacher.

Hialas. Good days guard all your Princely thoughts.

K: H: Vrswicke no further
Then the next open Gallerie attend him.
A hearty love go with you.

Hialas. Your vowed Beadsman. Ex: Vrsw: and Hialas.

K: H: King Ferdinand is not so much a Fox,
But that a cunning Huntsman may in time
Fall on the sent; in honorable actions
Safe imitation best deserves a praise.
Enter Vrswicke. What' the Castillians past away?

Vrsw: He is,
And vndiscovered; the two hundred marks
Your Majesty conveyde, a' gently purst,
With a right modest gravitie.

K: H: What wast
A' mutterd in the earnest of his wisdom,
A' spoke not to be heard? It Was about --

Vrsw: Warbecke;
How if King Henry were but sure of Subjects,
Such a wild runnagate might soon be cag'd,
No great ado withstanding.

K: H: Nay, nay, something
About my son Prince Arthurs match!

Vrsw: Right, right, Sir.
A humd it out, how that King Ferdinand
Swore, that the marriage 'twixt the Lady Katherine
His Daughter, and the Prince of Wales your Son,
Should never be consummated, as long
As any Earl of Warwick lived in England,
Except by new Creation.

K: H: I remember,
'Twas so indeed, the King his Master swore it?

Vrsw: Directly, as he said.

K: H: An Earl of Warwick!
Provide a Messenger for Letters instantly
To Bishop Fox. Our news from Scotland creepes,
It comes so slow; we must have ayrie spirits:
Our time requires dispatch, -- the Earl of Warwick!
Let him be son to Clarence, younger brother
To Edward! Edwards Daughter is I think
Mother to our Prince Arthur; get a Messenger. Exeunt.

Enter King James, Warbecke, Crawford, Daliell, Heron, Astley, Major, Sketon,
and Soldiers. K: Ia: We trifle time against these Castle walls,
The English Prelate will not yield, once more
Give him a Summons! Parley.

Enter above Durham armed, a Truncheon in his hand, and Soldiers. Warb: See,
the jolly Clarke
Appears trimd like a ruffian.

K: Ia: Bishop, yet
Set open the ports, and to your lawful Sovereign
Richard of York surrender up this Castle,
And he will take thee to his Grace; else Tweede
Shall overflow his banckes with English blood,
And wash the sa^de that cements those hard stones,
From their foundation.

Dur: Warlike King of Scotland,
Vouchsafe a few words from a man enforced
To lay his Book aside, and clap on Arms,
Unsuitable to my age, or my profession.
Courageous Prince, consider on what grounds,
You rend the face of peace, and break a Leag^e
With a confederate King that courts your amity;
For whom too? for a vagabond, a straggler,
Not noted in the world by birth of name,
An obscure peasant, by the rage of Hell
Loosd from his chains, to set great Kings at strife.
What Nobleman? what common man of note?
What ordinary subject has come in,
Since first you footed on our Territories,
To only feign a welcome? children laugh at
Your Proclamations, and the wiser pity,
So great a Potentates abuse, by one
Who juggles merely with the fawnes and youth
Of an instructed complement; such spoils,
Such slaughters as the rapine of your Soldiers
Already have committed, is enough
To show your zeal in a conceited Iustice^
Yet (great King) wake not yet my Masters vengeance:
But shake that Viper off which gnawes your entrayles
I, and my fellow Subjects, are resolved
If you persist, to stand your utmost fury,
Till our last blood drop from us.

Warb: O Sir, lend
Me ear to this seducer of my honor!
What shall I call thee, (thou gray bearded Scandal)
That kickst against the Soveraigntie to which
Thou owe alleagance? Treason is bold-fac'd,
And eloquent in mischief; sacred King
Be dea^e to his known malice!

Dur: Rather yield
Unto those holy motions, which inspire
The sacred heart of an anointed body!
It is ^h^ surest policy in Princes,
To govern well their own, then seek encroachment
Upon another right.

Crawf: The King is serious,
Dee^e in his meditation.

Dal: Lift them up
To heaven his better genius!

Warb: Can you study, while such a Devil raues? O Sir.

K: Ia. Well, -- Bishopp,
You Will not be drawn to mercy?

Dur: Conster me
In like case by a Subject of your own!
My resolutions fixed, King James be counseld.
A greater fate waits on thee. Exit Durham cum sui^.

K: Ia: Forage through
The Country, spare no prey of life, or goods,

Warb: O Sir, then give me leave to yield to nature,
I am most miserable; had I been
Borne what this Clergi^ man would by defame
Baffle belief with, I had never sought
The truth of mine inheritance with rapes
Of women, or of infants murdered; Virgins
Defloured; old men butchered; dwellings fired;
My Land depopulated; and my people
Afflicted with a Kingdoms devastation.
Show more remorse great King, or I shall never
Endure to see such havocke with dry eyes:
Spare, spare, my dear dear England.

K: Ia: You fool your piety
Ridiculously, careful of an interest
Another man possesses! Where Is your faction?
Shrewdly the Bishop ghest of your adherents,
When not a petty Burgess of some Town,
No, not a Villager has yet appeared
In your assistance, that should make 'ee whine,
And not your Countries sufferance as you term it.

Dal: The King is angry.

Crawf: And the passionate Duke,
Effeminately dolent.

Warb: The experience
In former trials (Sir) both of mine own
Or other Princes, cast out of their thrones,
Have so acquainted me, how misery
Is destitute of friends, or of relief,
That I can easily submit to taste
Lowest reproof, without contempt or words^

Enter Frion. K: Ia: An humble minded man, -- now, what intelligence
Speaks Master Secretary Frion.

Frion. Henry
Of England, has in open field ore'throwne
The Armies who opposd him, in the right
Of this young Prince.

K: Ia: His Subsidies you mean: more if you have it?

Frion. Howard Earl of Surrey,
Backed by twelve Earls and Barons of the North,
An hundred Knights and Gentlemen of Name,
And twenty thousand Soldiers, is at hand
To raise your siege. Brook with a goodly Navy
Is Admiral at Sea^ and Dawbney follows
With an unbroken Army for a second.

Warb: It Is false! they come to side with us.

K: Ia: Retreat:
We shall not find them stones and walls to cope with.
Yet Duke of York, (for such thou say thou art,)
I Will try thy fortune to the height; to Surrey
By Marchmount, I will send a brave Defiance
For single Combat; once a King will venture
His person to an Earl; with Condition
Of spilling lesser blood, Surrey is bold
And James resolved.

Warb: O rather (gracious Sir,)
Create me to this glory; since my cause
Does interest this fair quarrel; valued least
I am his equal.

K: I: I will be the man;
March softly off, where Victory can reap
"A harvest crowned with triumph, toil is cheap.

Exeunt omn^^. Actus Quartus:
Scaena prima.
Enter Surrey, Durham, Soldiers, with Drums and Collors. Surrey: ARe all our
braving enemies shrunk back?
Hid in the fogges of their distempered climate,
Not daring to behold our Colors wave
In spite of this infected air? Can they
Look on the strength of Cundrestine defaced?
The glory of Heydonhall devasted? that
Of Edington cast down? the pile of Fulden
Orethrowne? And this the strongest of their Forts
Old Ayton Castle yielded, and demolished?
And yet not peep abroad? the Scots are bold,
Hardy in battle, but it seems the cause
They undertake considered, appears
Vnjoynted in the frame ont.

Dur: Noble Surrey,
Our Royal Masters wisdom is at all times
His fortunes Harbing^r; for when he draws
His sword to threaten war, his providence
Settles on peace, the crowning of an Empire. Trumpet.

Sur: Rank all in order, it is a Heralds sound,
Some message from King James, keep a fixed station.

Enter March-mount, and another Herald in their Coats. March: From Scotlands
awful Majesty, we come
Unto the English General;

Surrey. To me? Say on.

March: Thus then; the wast and prodigal
Effusion of so much guiltless blood,
As in two potent Armies, of necessity
Must glut the earths dry womb, his sweet compassion
Has studied to prevent; for which to thee
Great Earl of Surrey, in a single fight
He offers his own royal person; fayrely
Proposing these conditions only, that,
If Victory conclude our Masters right;
The Earl shall deliver for his ransom
The town of Barwicke to him, with the Fishgarths,
If Surrey shall prevail; the King will pay
A thousand pounds down present for his freedom,
And silence further Arms; so speaks King James.

Su^r: So speaks King James; so like a King a' spea^es.
Heralds, the English General returns,
A sensible Devotion from his heart,
His very soul, to this vnfellowed grace.
For let the King know (gentle Haralds) truly
How his descent from his great throne, to honor
A stranger subject with so high a title
As his Compeere in Arms, has conquered more
Then any sword could do: for which (my loyalty
Respected) I will serve his virtues ever
In all humility: but Barwicke say
Is none ^f mine to part with: In affairs
Of Princes^ Subjects cannot traffic rights
Inher^nt to the Crown. My life is mine,
That ^ dar^ ^reely ^^zard; and (with pardon
To some vn^^ib'd vainglory) if his Majesty
Shall ^aste a change of fa^e^ his liberty
Shall m^^^e no Articles. If I fall, falling
So braue^y, I refer me to his pleasure
Without condition; and for this dear favor,
Say (if not countermaunded) I will cease
Hostility, unless provokt.

March: This answer
We shall relate ^^partially.

Durh: With favor,
Pray have a little patience -- Sir, you find
By these gay-flourishes, how wearied travayle
Inclines to willing rest; heeres but a Prologue
Howeve^ confidently vtterd, meant
For some ensuing Acts of peace^ consider
The time of year, unseasonableness of weather,
Charge, barrenness of profit, and occasion
Presents it self for honorable treaty,
Which we may make good use of; I will back
As sent from you, in point of noble gratitude
Unto King James with these his Heralds; you
Shall shortly hear from me (my Lord) for order
Of breathing or proceeding; and King Henry
(Doubt not) will thank the service.

Surr: To your wisdom Lord Bishop I refer it.

Durh: Be it so then.

Surr: Haralds, accept this chain, and these few Crowns

March: Our Duty Noble General.

Dur. In part
Of retribution for such Princely love,
My Lord the General is pleased to show
The King your Master, his sincerest zeal
By further treaty, by no common man;
I will my self return with you.

Sur: Y'obliege
My faithfullest affections to you ((...) Bishop.)

March: All happiness attend your Lordship.

Surr: Come friends,
And Fellow Soldiers, we I ^oubt shall meet
No enemies, but woods and hills to fight with:
Then twere as good to feed, and sleep at home,
We may be free from danger, not secure. Exeunt omnes.

Enter Warbeck and Frion. Warb: Frion, o Frion! all my hopes of glory
Are at a stand! the Scottish King grows dull,
Frostie and wayward, since this Spanish Agent
Has mixed Discourses with him; they are private,
I am not called to counsel now; confusion
On all his crafty shrugges; I feel the fabric
Of my designs are tottering.

Frion. Henry's policies
Stir with too many engines.

Warb: Let his mines,
Shapt in the bowels of the earth, blow up
Works raisd for my defense, yet can they never
Toss into air the freedom of my birth,
Or disavow my blood, Plantaginetts!
I am my Fathers son still; but o Frion,
When I bring into count with my Disasters,
My Wifes compartnership, my Kates, my life's;
Then, then, my frailty feels an earthquake; mischief
Damb Henry's plotts, I will be Englands King,
Or let my Aunt of Burgundy report
My fall in the attempt, deserved our Ancestors?

Frion. You grow too wild in passion, if you will
Appear a Prince indeed, confine your will
To moderation^

Warb: What a saucie rudeness
Prompts this distrust? If, if I will appear?
Appear, a Prince? Death throttle such deceites
Even in their bir^h of utterance; cursed cozenage
O^ trust? Y'ee make me mad, twere best (it seems)
That I should turn Imposter to my self,
Be mine own counterfeite, belie the truth
Of my dear mothers womb, the sacred bed
Of a Prince murdered, and a living baffeld!

Frion. Nay, if you have no ^ares to hear, I have
No breath to spend in vain.

Warb. Sir, sir, take heed
Gold, and the promise of promotion, rarely
Fail in temptation.

Frion. Why to me this?

Warb. Nothing
Speak what you will; we are not suncke so low
But your advise, may piece again the heart
Which many cares have broken: you were wont
In all extremities to talk of comfort:
Have yee' none left now? I Will not interrupt yee'.
Good, bear with my distractions! if King James
Deny us dwelling here, next whither must I?
I preethee' be not angry.

Frion. Sir, I told yee'
Of Letters come from Ireland, how the Cornish
Stomach their last defeat, and humbly sue
That with such forces, as you could partake,
You would in person land in Cornwall, where
Thou^ands will entertain your title gladly.

Warb: Let me embrace thee, hug thee! thou have reviud
My comforts, if my cosen King will fail,
Our cause will never, welcome my tried friends.
Enter Major, Heron, Astley, Sketon. You keep your brains awake in our
defense:
Frion, advise with them of these affairs,
In which be wondrous secret; I will listen
What else concerns us here, be quick and wary. Ex^. Warbeck.

As^l: Ah sweet young Prince? Secretary, my fellow Counselors and I, have
con^ulted, and jumpe all in one opinion directly, that if this Scotch garboyles
do not fadge to our minds, we will pell mell run amongst the Cornish
Chaughes presently, and in a trice.


Sket: It Is but going to Sea, and leaping ashore, cut ten or twelve thousand
unnecessary throats, fire seven or eight towns, take ha^fe a dozen Cities,
get into the Market place, crown him RICHARD THE FOVRTH, and the business is
finished.


Major. I grant yee', quoth I, so far forth as men may do, no more then men
may do; for it is good to consider, when consideration may be to the purpose,
otherwise still you shall pardon me: Little said is soon amended.


Frion. Then you conclude the Cornish Action surest?


Heron. We do so. And doubt not but to thrive abundantly: Ho (my Masters) had
we known of the Commotion when we set sail out of Ireland, the Land had
been ours ere this time.


Sket: Pish, pish, it is but forbearing being an Earl or a Duke a month or two
longer; I say, and say it again, if the work go not on apace, let me never see
new fashion more, I warrant yee^ I warrant yee', we will have it so, and so it
shall be.


Ast: This is but a cold phlegmatic Country, not stirring enough for men of
spirit, give me the heart of England for my money.


Ske: A man may batten there in a week only with hot loaves and butter, and a
lusty cup of Muscadine and Sugar at breakfast, though he make never a meal
all the month after.


Major. Surely, when I bore office, I found by experience, that to be much
troublesome, was to be much wise and busy; I have observed, how filching and
bragging, has been the best service in these last wars, and therefore
conclude peremptorily on the Design in England; If things and things may fall
out; as who can tell what or how; but the end will show it.


Frion. Resolved like men of judgment, here to linger
More time, is but to loose it; cheer the Prince,
And have him on to this; on this depends,
Fame in success, or glory in our ^nds. Exeunt omnes.

Enter King James, Durham, and H^alas on eith^r side. Hi^las. F^ance, Spain
and Germany combine a League
Of amity with England^ n^thi^g wants
For ^et^ing peace through Ch^is^^^dom^, but lo^^
Betw^ene the British M^na^chs, James, and Henry.

Dur: The English Merchan^s (Si^,) hau^ ^^ene received
With g^nerall procession into Antw^rp^;
The Emperor confi^m^s the Com^inati^n.

Hialas. The King of Spain, ^^sol^^s a marriage
For Katherine his Daughter, with Prince Arthur.

Dur. France court's thi^, holy contract.

Hial. What can hinder a quietness in England?

Durh: But your ^uffrage
To such a silly creature (mighty Sir?)
As is but in effect an apparition,
A shadow, a mere trifle?

Hial. To this union
The good of both the Church and Commonwealth
Invite ee' --

Dur. To this unity, a mystery
Of providence points out a greater blessing
For both these Nations, then our humane reason
Can search into; King Henry has a Daughter
The Princess Margaret; I need not urge,
What honor, what felicity can follow
On such affinity twixt two Christian Kings,
In leagued by ties of blood; but sure I am,
If you Sir ratify the peace proposed,
I d^re both motion, an^ effect this marriage.
For weal^ of both the Kingdoms.

K: Ia. Dare ^hou Lord Bishop?

Dur. Put ^t to (...) James, by s^^ding
Some nob^^ (...) to the English Count
By way of (...). Hial, Part of the business,
Shall suite my mediation.

K. Ia. Well; what Heaven
Has poynted out to be, must be; you two
Are Ministers (I hope) of blessed fate.
But herein only I will stand acquitted,
No blood of I^nocents shall buy my peace.
For Warbecke as you ^icke him, came to me
Commended by the States of Christendom.
A Prince, though in distress^; his fair demeanor,
Lovely behavior, unappalled spirit,
Spoke him not base in blood, how ever clouded.
The brute beasts have both rocks and caves to fly to,
And men the Altars of the Church; to us
He came for refuge, Kings come near in nature
Unto the Gods in being touc^^ with pity.
Yet (nob^e friends) his mixture with our blood,
Even with our own, shall no way interrupt
A ge^erall peace; only I will dismiss him
From my protection, throughout my Dominions
In safe^ie, but not ever, to return.

Hialas. You are a just King.

Durh. Wise, and herein happy.

K. Ia. Nor will we dally in affairs of weight:
Huntley (Lord Bishop) shall with you to England
Ambassador from us; we will throw down
Our weapons; peace on all sides now, repair
Unto our Counsel, we will soon be with you.

Hial. Delay shall question no dispatch,
Heaven crown it. Exeunt Durham and Hialas.

K: Ia: A league with Ferdinand? a marriage
With English Margaret? a free release
From restitution for the late affronts?
Cessation from hostility and all
For Warbeck not delivered, but dismissed?
We could not wish it better, Daliell --

Dal: Here Sir. Enter Daliell^

K: Ia: Are Huntley and his Daughter sent for?

Dal: Sent for, and come (my Lord.)

K: Ia: Say to the English Prince,
We want his company.

Dal: He is at hand Sir.

Enter Warbeck, Katherine, Jane, Frion, Heron, Sketon, Major, Astley. K. Ia.
Cosen, our bounty, favors, gentleness,
Our benefits, the hazard of our pers^n,
Our peoples lives, our Land ha^h eviden^'t,
How much we have engaged on your b^halfe:
How trivial, and how dangerous our h^pes
Appear, how fruitless our attempts in wa^re,
How windy rather smokie your assurance
Of party shows, we might in vain r^peate^
But now obedience to the Mother Church,
A Fathers care upon his Countries weal,
The dignity of State directs our wisdom,
To seal an oath of peace through Christendom:
To which we are sworn already; it is you
Must only seek new fortunes in the world,
And find an harbor elsewhere: as I promisd
On your arrival, you have met no usage
Deserves repentance in your being here:
But yet I must live Master of mine own.
How ever, what is necessary for you
At your departure, I am well content
You be accommodated with; provided
Delay prove not my enemy.

Warb. It shall not
(Most glorious Prince.) the fame of my Designs,
Soars higher, then report of ease and sloth
Can aim at; I acknowledge all your favors
Boundless, and singular, am only wretched
In words as well as means, to thank the grace
That flowed so liberally. Two Empires firmly
You're Lord of, Scotland, and Duke Richards heart
My claim to mine inheritance shall sooner
Fail, then my life to serve you, best of Kings.
And witnes^e EDWARD'S blood in me, I am
More loath to part, with such a great example
Of virtue, then all other mere respects.
But Sir my last suite is, you will not force
From me what you have given, this chaste Lady,
Resolved on all extremes.

^^th: I am your wife,
No humane power, can or shall divorce
My faith from duty.

Warb: Such another treasure
The earth is Banckrout of.

K: Ia: ^ g^ue her (Cosen)
And must avowe the gift: will add withal
A furniture becoming her high birth
And vnsuspe^te^ co^stancie^ provide
For your attendance -- we will part good friends.

Exit King and Dalie^^. Warb: The Tudor has been cunning in his plotts:
His Fox of Durham would not fail at last.
But what? our cause and courage are our own:
Be men (my friends) and let our Cosen King,
See how we follow ^ate as willingly
As malice follows us. You Are all resolved
For the West parts of England?
Omnes^
Cornwall, Cornwall.

Frion. The Inhabitants expect you daily.

Warb: Chearefully
Draw all our ships out of the harbor (friends)
Our time of s^ay does seem too long, we must
Prevent Intelligence; about it suddenly.
Omnes.
A Prince, a Prince, a Prince. Exeunt Counselors.

Warb: Dearest; admit not into thy pure thoughts
The least of scruples, which may charge their softness
With burden of distrust. Should I prove wanting
To noblest courage now, here were the trial:
But I am perfect (sweet) I fear no change,
More then thy being partner in my sufferance.

Ka^h: My f^rtunes (Sir) have armd me to encounter
What chance so ^re they meet with -- Jane it is fit
Thou stay behind, for whither will thou wander?

Jane. Never till death, will I forsake my Mistress,
Nor then, in wishing to dye with ee' gladly.

Kath: Alas good soul.

Frion. Sir, to your Aunt of Burgundy
I will relate your present undertakings;
From her expect on all occasions, welcome.
You cannot ^inde me idle in your s^rvices.

Warb. Gee, Frion, g^e! wisemen know how to soothe
Adversity, not serve it: thou have waited
Too long on expe^tation; never yet
Was any Na^ion r^^d of, so besotted
In reason, as to adore the ^etting S^^ne.
Fly to the Archdukes Court; say to the Duchess,
Her Nephewe, with fair Katherine, his wife,
Are ^n their expe^tation to b^ginne
The ra^sing of an Empire. If they fail,
Yet the report will never: farewell Frion. Exit Frion.
This man Kate has been true, though now of late,
I f^are too much ^amiliar with the Fox.

Enter Huntley and Daliell. Hunt: I come to take my lea^e^ you need not doubt
My interest in this sometime-childe of mine.
Sh^es all yours now (good Sir) oh poor lost creature!
Heaven guard thee with much patience, is thou can
Forget thy title to old Huntleyes family;
As much of peace will settle in thy mind
As thou can wish to taste, (but in thy grave,)
Accept my tears yet, (preethee) they are tokens
Of charity, as true as of affection.

Kath: This is the cruelst farewell!

Hunt: Love (young Gentleman)
This model of my griefs; she calls you husband;
Then be not jealous of a parting kiss,
It is a Fathers not a Lovers offering;
Take it, may last, -- I am too much a child.
Exchange of passion is to little use,
So I should grow to foolish, -- goodness guide thee. Exit Hunt.

Kath: Most mi^erable Daughter! -- have you ought
To add (Sir) to our sorrows?

Daliell. I resolve
(Fair Lady) with your leave, to wait on all
Your fortunes in my person, if your Lord
Vouchsafe me entertainment.

Warb: We will be bosom friends, (most noble Daliell)
For I accept this tender of your love
Beyond ability of thanks to speak it.
Clear thy drowned eyes (my fairest) time and industry
Will show us better days, or end the worst. Exeunt omnes.

Enter Oxford and Dawbney. Oxf: No news from Scotland yet (my Lord!)

Daw: Not any
But what King Henry knows himself; I thought
Our Armies should have marched that way, his mind
It seems, is altered.

Oxf. Victory attends
His Standard every where.

Dawb: Wise Princes ( Oxford)
Fight not alone with forces. Providence
Directs and tutors strength; else Elephants,
And barbed Horses might as well prevail,
As the most subtle stratagems of war.

Oxf: The Scottish King showed more then common braverie,
In proffer of a Combatt hand to hand
With Surrey!

Dawb: And but showed it; Northern bloods
Are gallant being fired, but the cold climate
Without good store of fuel, quickly freeseth
The glowing flames.

Oxf: Surrey upon my life
Would not have shrunk an hayres breadth.

Dawb: May a' forfeite
The honor of an English name, and nature,
Who would not have embraced it with a greediness,
As violent as hunger ru^^es to food.
'Twas an addition, any worthy Spirit
Would covet next to immortality,
Above all joys of life: we all mist shares
In that great opportunity.

Enter King Henry, and Vrswicke whispering. Oxf: The King: see a' comes
smiling!

Dawb: O the game runs smooth
On his side then believe it, Cards well shuffeld
And dealt with c^nning, bring some gamester thrift,
But others must rise loosers.

K: H: ^he train takes?

Vrsw: Most prosperously.

K. H. I knew it should not miss.
He fondly angles who will hurl his bayte
Into the water, 'cause the Fish at first
Plays round about the line, and dares not bite.
Lords, we may reign your King yet, Dawbney, Oxford,
Vrwicke, must Perkin wear the Crown?

Dawb: A Slave.

Oxf: A Vagabond.

Vrsw: A Glow-worme.

K: H: Now if Frion,
His practisd politician wear ^ brain
Of proof, King Perkin will in progress ride
Through all his large Dominions; let us meet him,
And tender homage; Ha Si^^? Liegmen ought
To pay their fealty.

Dawb: Would the Rascal were
With all his ^abble, within ^wentie miles
Of Lo^^^n.

K: H: Farther ^ff is near enough
To Iodge him in hi^ home; he wager odds
Surrey and all his men are either idle,
Or hasting back, the^ have no^ work (I doubt)
To keep them busy.

Daw^: It Is a st^ange conceit Sir.

K: H: Such voluntary fa^^u^s as ^ur people
In duty aid us with, we never sca^^er'd
On Cobweb Parasites, or lavish't out
In riot, or a needless ho^pitalitie:
No v^deserving favorite does boast
His issues from our treasury; our charge
Flows through all Europe, prooving us but steward
Of every contribution, which provides
Against the creeping Can^ar of Disturbance.
Is it not rare then, in this toil of State
Wherein we are imbarkt, with breach of sleep,
Cares, and the noise of trouble, that our mercy^
Returns nor thanks, nor comfort? Still the West
Murmr and threaten innovation,
Whisper our government tyrannical,
Deny us wh^t is ours, nay, spurn their lives
Of which they are but owners by our gift.
It must not be.

Oxf: It must not, should not.

K: H: So then. To whom? Enter a Post.

Post. This packett to your sacred Majesti^.

K: H: Sir attend without.

Oxf: News from the North, upon my life.

Daw. Wise Henry
Devines aforehand of events: with him
Attempts and execution are one act.

K: H: Vrswicke thine ear; Frio^ (...) caugh^, the man
Of cunning is out-reacht: we must be safe:
Should reverend Morton our Archbishop move
To a translation higher yet, I ^^ll thee,
My Durham ownes a brain d^s^rues that S^e.
He Is nimble in his industry, and mounting:
Thou hear'st me?

Vrsw: And conceive your Highness fitly:

K. H. Dawbney, and Oxford; since our Army stands
Entire, it were a weakness to admit
The rust of laziness to eat amongst them:
Set forward toward Salisburie; the playnes
Are most commodious for their exercise.
Our self will take a Muster of them there:
And or disband them with reward, or else
Dispose as best concerns us.

Dawb: Salisburie?
Sir, (...) is peace at Salisburie.

K: H: Dear friend --
The ch^^g^ must be our own; we would a little
Pertak^ the pleasure with our Subjects ease.
Shall I entreat your Loves?

Oxf: command our Li^es.

K: H: You Are men know how ^o d^e^ not to forethinke:
My Bishop is a jewel tried, and perfect;
A jewel (Lords) the Post ^ho brought these Letters,
Must speed another to the Mayor of Exceter^
Vrswicke dismiss him not.

Vrs: He waits your pl^a^ure.

K: H: Perkin a King? a King?

Vrs: My gracious Lord.

K: H: Thoughts, busied in the sphere of Royalty,
Fix not on creeping worms, without their stings;
Mere excrements of earth. The use of time
Is thriving safety, and a wise prevention
Of ills expected. We Are resolved for Salisburie. Exe: omnes.

A general shout within. Enter Warbeck, Daliell, Katherine, and Jane. Warb:
After so many storms as wind and Seas,
Have threatened to our weather-beaten Ships,
At last (sweet fairest) we are safe arrived
On our dear mother earth, ungrateful only
To heaven and us, in yielding sustenance
To ^lie Usurpers of our throne and right.
These general acclamations, are an OMEN
Of happy process to their welcome Lord:
They flock in troops, and from all parts with wings
Of duty fly, to lay their hearts before us,
Vnequal'd pattern of a matchless wife,
How fares my dearest yet?

Kath: Confirmed in health:
By which I may the better undergo
The roughest face of change; but I shall learn
Patience to hope, since silence courts affliction
For comforts, to this truly noble Gentleman;
Rare unexampled pattern of a friend?
And my beloved Jane, the willing follower
Of all misfortunes.

Dal: Lady, I return
But barren cropps, of early protestations,
Frost-bitten in the spring of fruitless hopes.

Jane, I wait but as the shadow to the body,
For Madam without you let me be nothing.

Warb: None talk of sadness, we are on the way
Which leads to Victory: keep cowards thoughts
With desperate sullenness! the Lion faints not
Locked in a grate, but loose, disdaines all force
Which bars his prey; and we are Lyon-hearted,
Or else no King of beasts. Hark how they shout. Another shou^.
Triumphant in our cause? bo^de (...)
Marches on b^auely, cannot quake at (...)

Enter Sketon. Sket. Sa^e King Richard the fourth, (...) Ki^^ of ^earts? the
Cornish blades are men of metal, have (...) through Bodnam and the whole
County, my sweet (...) ^onarch of England, f^ure thou^a^d tall yeomen, with
(...) r^adie vow to live and dye at the foot o^ KING R^^HARD.


Enter Astley. Astley. The Mayor our fellow Co^^seller, i^ ^^rvant for ^n
Emperor. Ex^e^^r is appointed for the Re^d (...) and ^othi^g wants to victory
but courage, and resolution. ^igillatum and datum decimo Septembris, Anno Regui
Regis primo and (...); confirmatum est. All Is cock sure.


Warb: To Exceter, to Exceter, ma^ch on.
Commend us to our people; we in person
Will lend them double spirits, tell them so.

She: and Astl: King Richard, King Richard.

Warb: A thousand blessings guard our lawful Arms!
A thousand horrors pierce our enemies souls!
Pale fear vnedge their weapons sharpest points,
And when they draw their arrows to the head,
Numnesse shall strike their sinews; such advantage
Has Majesty in its pursuit of Justice,
That on the proppers up, of truths old throne,
It both enlightens couns^ll, and gives heart
To execution: whiles the throats of traitors
Lie bare before our mercy. O Divinity
Of royal birth? how it strikes dumb the tongues
Whose prodigallitie of breath is bribed
By traynes to greatness? Princes are but men,
Distinguished in the finenesse of their frailty.
Yet not so gross in beauty of the mind,
For there is a fire more sacred, purifies
The dross of mixture. Herein stands the odds
"Subjects are men, on earth Kings men and gods.

Exeunt omnes. Actus Quintus:
Scaena prima.
Enter Katherine, and Jane, in riding suits, with one servant. Kath: IT is
decreede; and we must yield to fate,
Whose angry Justice though it threaten ruin,
Contempt, and poverty, is all but trial
Of a weak woman's con^tancie in suffering.
Here in a strangers, and an enemies La^d
Forsaken, and unfurnished of all hopes,
(But such as wait on misery,) I range
To meet affliction where so ere I tread.
My train, and pomp of servants, is reduced
To one kind Gentlewoman, and this groom.
Sweet Jane, now whither must we?

Jane. To your Shippe^
Dear Lady: and turn home.

Kath: Home! I have none^
Fly thou to Scotland, thou have friends will weep
For joy to bid thee welcome; but o Jane
My Jane, my friends are desperate of comfort
As I must be of them; the common charity,
Good people salmes, and prayers of the gentle
Is the revenue must support my state.
As for my native Country, since it once
Saw me a Princess in the height of greatness
My birth allowed me; here I make a vow,
Scotland shall never see me, being fallen
Or lessened in my fortunes. Never Jane;
Never to Scotland more will I return.
Could I be Englands Queen (a glory Jane
I never fawned on) yet the King who gave me,
Has sent me with my husband from his presence:
Delivered us suspected to his Nation:
Renderd us spectacles to time, and pity.
And is it fit I should return to such
As only listen after our descent
From happiness enjoyd, to misery
Expected, though uncertain? Never, never;
Alas, why do thou weep? and that poor creature,
Wipe his wett chee^es to^? let me feel alone
Extremities, who know to give them harbor:
Nor thou, nor he, has cause. Y^u may live safely.

Jane. There is no safety whiles your dangers (Madam)
Are every way apparent.

Servant. Pardon Lady;
I cannot choose but show my honest heart;
You were ever my good Lady.

Kath: O dear souls!
Your shares in grief are too too much.

Enter Daliell. Daliell. I bring
(Fair Princess) news of further sadness yet,
Then your sweet youth, has been acquainted with.

Kath: Not more (my Lord) then I can welcome; speak it;
The worst, the worst, I look for.

Dal. All the Cornish,
At Exceter, were by the Citizens
Repulst, encountered by the Earl of Devonshire
And other worthy Gentlemen of the Country.
Your husband marched to Taunton, and was there
Affronted by King Henry's Chamberlayne.
The King himself in person, with his Army
Advancing nearer, to renew the fight
On all occasions. But the night before
The battayles were to join, your husband privately
Accompanied with some few horse, departed
From out the camp, and posted none knows whither.

Kath: Fled without battle given?

Dal: Fled, but followed
By Dawbney, all his parties left to taste
King Henry's mercy, for to that they yielded;
Victorious without bloodshed.

Kath: O my sorrows!
If both our lives had proved the sacrifice
To Henry's tyranny, we had fallen like Princes^
And robbed him, of the glory of his pride.

Dal: Impute it not to fainthesse, or to weakness
Of noble courage Lady, but foresight:
For by some secret friend he had intelligence
Of being bought and sold, by his base followers.
Worse yet remains untold.

Kath: No, no, it cannot.

Daliell. I fear you are betrayed. The Earl of Oxford
Runs hot in your pursuit.

Kath: A' shall not need,
We Will run as hot in resolution, gladly
To make the Earl our Iaylor.

Jane. Madam, Madam, they come, they come!

Enter Oxford, with followers. Daliell. Keep back, or he who dares
Rudely to violate the Law of honor,
Runs on my sword.

Kath: Most noble Sir, forbear!
What reason draws you hither (Gentlemen!)
Whom seek 'ee?

Oxf: All stand off; with favor Lady
From Henry, Englands King, I would present,
Unto the beauteous Princess, Katherine Gourdon,
The tender of a gracious entertainment.

Kath: We are that Princess, whom your master King
Pursues with reaching arms, to draw into
His power: let him use his tyranny,
We shall not be his Subjects.

Oxf: My Commission, extends no further (excellentest Lady)
Then to a service; it is King Henry's pleasure,
That you, and all, that have relation to you,
Be guarded as becomes your birth, and greatness.
For rest assured ( sweet Princess) that not ought
Of what you do call yours, shall find disturbance,
Or any welcome other, then what suits
Your high condition.

Kath: By what title (Sir)
May I acknowledge you?

Oxf: Your servant (Lady)
Descended from the Line of Oxfords Earls,
Inherits what his ancestors before him
Were owners of.

Kath: Your King is herein royal,
That by a Peer so ancient in desert
As well as blood, commands Us to his presence.

Oxf: Invites 'ee, Princess not commands.

Kath: Pray use
Your own phrase as you list; to your protection
Both I, and mine subm^t.

Oxf: There Is in your number
A Nobleman, whom fame has bravely spoken.
To him the King my Master bad me say
How willingly he courts his friendship. Far
From an enfo^cement, more then what in terms
Of courtesy, so great a Prince may hope for.

Daliell. My name is Daliell.

Oxf: It Is a name, has won
Both thanks, and wonder, from report; (my Lord)
The Court of England emulates your meritt,
And covetts to embrace 'ee.

Daliell. I must wait on
The Princess in her fortunes.

Oxf: Will you please,
(Great Lady) to set forward?

Kath: Being driven
By fate, it were in vain to strive with Heaven. Exeunt omnes.

Enter King Henry, Surrey, Vrswicke, and a guard of Soldiers. K: H: The
Counterfeit King Perkin is escaped,
Escape, so let him; he is heg'd too fast
Within the Circuit of our English pale,
To steal out of our Ports, or leap the walls
Which guarde our Land; the Seas are rough, and wider
Then his weak arms can tugge with; Surrey henceforth
Your King may reign in quiet: turmoyles past
Like some unquiet dream, have rather busied
Our fancy, then affrighted rest of State.
But Surrey, why in articling a peace
With James of Scotland, was not restitution
Of Losses, which our Subjects did sustain
By the Scotch inrodes, questioned?

Sur: Both demanded
And urged (my Lord,) to which the King replied
In modest merriment, but smiling earnest,
How that our Master Henry was much abler
To bear the detriments, then he repay them.

K: H: The young man I believe spoke honest truth,
'A studies to be wise betimes. Has Vrswicke,
Sir Rice ap Thomas, and Lord Brook our Steward,
Returned the western Gentlemen full thanks,
From Us, for their tried Loyalties?

Sur: They have:
Which as if health and life had reigned amongst eem',
With open hearts, they joyfully received.

K: H: Young Buckingham is a fair natured Prin^e,
L^uely in hopes, and worthy of his Father:
Attended by an hundred Knights and Squires,
Of special name, he tendered humble service,
Which we must n'ere forget: and Devonshires wounds
Though slight, shall find sound cure, in our respect.

Enter Dawbney, with Warbeck, Heron, John a Water, Astley, Sketon. Dawb: Life
to the King, and safety fix his throne:
I here pr^sent you (royal Sir) a shadow
Of Majesty, but in effect a substance
Of pity; a young man, in nothing grown
To ripen^sse, but the ambition of your mercy:
Perkin the Christian worlds strange wonder.

K: H: Dawbney, We observe no wonder; I behold (it is true)
An ornament of nature, fine, and pollisht,
A handsome youth indeed, but not admire him.
How came he to thy hands?

Dawb: From Sanctuary
At Beweley, near Southhampton, registered
With these few followers, for persons priviledg'd.

K: H: I must not thank you Sir! you were too blame
To infringe the Liberty of houses sacred:
Dare we be irreligious?

Dawb: Gracious Lord,
They voluntarily resigned themselves,
Without compulsion.

K: H: So? 'twas very well,
It Was very very well -- turn now thine eyes
(Young man) upon thy self, and thy past actions!
What revells in combustion through our Kingdom,
A frenzy of aspiring youth has daunc'd,
Till wanting breath, thy feet of pride have slipped
To break thy neck.

Warb: But not my heart; my heart
Will mount, till every drop of blood be frozen
By deaths perpetual Winter: If the Sun
Of Majesty be darkened, let the Sun
Of Life be hid from me, in an eclipse
Lasting, and universal. Sir, remember
There was a shooting in of light, when Richmond
(Not aiming at a crown) retired, and glad^y,
For comfort, to the Duke of Britains Court.
Richard who swayed the Scepter, was reputed
A tyrant then; yet then, a dawning glimmer'd
To some few wandering remn^nts, promis^^g day
When first they ventured, on a frightfull shore,
At Milford Haven.

Dawb: Whither speeds his boldness?
Check his rude tongue (great Sir!)

K: H: O let him range:
The player's on the stage still, it is his part;
A' does but act: what followed?

Warb: Bosworth field:
Where at an instant, to the worlds amazement,
A morn to Richmond, and a night to Richard
Appeared at once: the tale is soon applyde:
Fate which crowned these attempts when ^est assured,
Might have befriended others, like resolved.

K: H: A pretty gallant! thus, your Aunt of Burgundy,
Your Duchess Aunt enform'd her Nephew; so
The lesson prompted, and well conn'd, was molded
Into familiar Dialogue, often rehearsed,
Till learnt by heart, it is now, received ^or truth.

Warb: Truth in her pure simplicity wants art
To put a feigned blush on: scorn wears only
Such fashion, as commends to gazers eyes
Sad vlcerated Noveltie; far beneath
The sphere of Majesty: in such a Court,
Wisdom, and gravitie, are proper robes,
By which the Sovereign is best distinguisht',
From Zanyes to his Greatness.

K: H: Sir, shift
Your anticke Pageantrie, and now appear
In your own nature, or y'oule taste the danger
Of fooling out of season.

Warb: I expect
No less, then what severitie calls Justice,
And Politicians, safety; let such beg,
As feed on alms: but if there can be mercy
In a protested enemy, then may it
Descend to these poor creatures, whose engagements
To th'bettering of their fortunes, have incurred
A loss of all; to them, if any charity
Flow from some noble Orator, in death
I owe the fee of thankfulness.

K: H: So brave!
What a bold knave is this? which of these Rebels
Has been the Mayor of Cork?

Dawb: This wise formalitie:
Kneel to the King 'ee Rascals!

K: H: Can thou hope,
A Pardon, where thy guilt is so apparent?

Mayor. Under your good favors, as men, are men, they may err: for I
confess, respectively, in taking great parts, the one side prevailing, the
other side must go down: herein the point is clear, if the proverb hold,
that hanging goes by destiny, that it is to little purpose to say, this thing,
or that, shall be thus, or thus; for as the fates will have it, so it must be,
and who can help it.


Dawb: O block-head! thou a privy Counselor?
Beg life, and cry aloude, Heaven save King Henry.

Mayor. Every man knows what is best, as it happens: for my own part, I
believe it is true, if I be not deceived, that Kings must be Kings, and
Subjects, Subjects. But which is which; you shall pardon me for that; whether
we speak or hold our peace, all are mortal, no man knows his end.


K: H: We trifle time with follyes.

Omnes. Mercy, mercy.

K: H: Vrswicke, command the Dukeling, and these fellows,
To Digby, the Lieftenant of the Tower:
With safety let them be convay'd to London.
It is our pleasure, no uncivil outrage,
Taunts, or abuse be suffered to their persons;
They shall meet fayrer Law then they deserve.
Time may restore their wits, whom vain ambition
Has many years distracted.

Warb: Noble thoughts
Meet freedom in captivity; the Tower?
Our Childhoods dreadful nursery.

K: H. No more.

Vrs: Come, come, you shall have leisure to bethink 'ee.

Exit Vrsw: with Perkin and his. K: H: Was ever so much impudence in forgery?
The custom sure of being styled a King,
Has faste^d in his thought that HE IS SVCH.
But we shall teach the ladd, another language;
It Is good we have him fast.

Dawb: The Hangmans physic
Will purge this sa^cie humor.

K: H: Very likely:
Yet, we could, temper mercy, with extremity,
Being not too far provoked.

Enter Oxford, Katherine in her richest attire, Jane, and attendants. Oxf:
Great Sir, be pleased
With your accustomed grace, to e^^ertaine
The Princess Katherine Gourdon.

K^ H: Oxford, herei^
We must beshrew thy knowledge of our nature.
A Lady of her birth and virtues, could not
Have found Us so unfurnished of good manners,
As not on notice given, to have met her
Half way in point of Love. Excuse ( fay^e Cose^)
The oversight! o fie, you may not kneel:
It Is most unfitting; first, vouchsafe this welcome;
A welcome to your own, for you shall find Us
But guardian to your fortune, and your honors.

Kath: My fortunes, and mine honors, are weak champions,
As both are now befriended (Sir!) however
Both bow before your clemency.

K: H: Our arms
Shall circle them from malice -- 'A sweet Lady?
Beauty incomparable? Here lives Majesty
At league with Love.

Kath: O Sir, I have a husband.

K: H: We Will prove your father, husband, friend, and servant,
Prove what you wish to grant us, (Lords) be careful
A Pattent presently be drawn, for issuing
A thousand pounds from our Exchequer yearly,
During our Cosens life: our Queen shall be
Your chief companion, our own Court your Home,
Our Subjects, all your servants.

Kath: But my husband?

K: H: By all descriptions, you are noble Daliell,
Whose generou^ truth has famed a rare observance!
We thank 'ee, it is a goodness gives addition
To every title, boasted from your Auncestrie,
In all most worthy.

Daliell. Worthier then your praises,
Right princely Sir, I need not glory in.

K: H: Embrace him (Lords,) who ever calls you Mistress
Is lifted in our charge, -- a goodlier beauty
Mine eyes yet near incountred.

Kath: Cruel misery
Of fate, what rests to hope for?

K: H: Forward Lords
To London: (fair) ere long, I shall present 'ee Ex^unt omnes.
With a glad object, peace, and Hunleys blessing.

Enter Constable, and Officers, Warbeck, Vrswick, and Lambert Simnell, like a
Falconer. A pair of Stocks. Co^st: Make room there, keep off I require 'ee,
and none come within twelve foot of his Majesty's new Stocks, upon pain of
displeasure. Bring forward the Malefactors. Friend, you must to this geere, --
no remedy, -- open the hole, and in with his legs, just in the middle hole,
there, that hole; keep off, or I Will commit you all. Shall not a man in
authority be obeyed? So, so, there, it is as it should be: put on the padlocke,
and give me the key; off I say, keep off.


Vrsw: Yet Warbecke clear thy Conscience, thou have tasted
King Henry's mercy liberally; the Law
Has forfeited thy life, an equal Jury
Have doomed thee to the Gallows; twice, most wickedly,
Most desperately have thou escapt the Tower:
Inveighling to thy party with thy witchcraft,
Young Edward, Earl of Warwick, son to Clarence;
Whose head must pay the price of that attempt;
Poor Gentleman -- unhappy in his fate --
And ruined by thy cunning! so a Mungrell
May pluck the true Stagge down: yet, yet, confess
Thy parentage; for yet the King has mercy.

Lamb: You would be Dicke the fourth, very likely
Your ^edigree is pub^i^ht, you are known
For Osbecks son of Turney, a loose runnagate,
A Landloper: your Father was a Jew,
Turned Christian merely to repair his miseries.
Where Is now your Kingship?

Warb: Bayted to my death?
Intolerable cruelty! I laugh at
The Duke of Richmonds practice on my fortunes.
Possession of a Crown, never wanted Heralds.

Lamb: You will not know who I am!

Vrs: Lambert Simnell;
Your predecessor in a daungero^s vproare;
But on submission, not alone received
To grace, but by the King, vouchsaft his service.

Lamb: I would be Ear of Warwick, toyld and ruffled
Against my Master, leapt to catch the Moon,
Vaunted my name, Plantaginet, as you do:
An Earl forsooth! When as in truth I was,
As you are, a mere Rascal: yet, his Majesty,
(A Prince composed of sweetness! Heaven protect him)
Forgave me all my villainies, repriv'd
The sentence (...) a s^a^efull end, admitted
My surety of obedie^^^ to his service;
And I am now his ^alkoner, live plenteously;
Eat from the Kings purse, and enjoy the sweetness
Of liberty, and favor, sleep securely:
And is not this now better, then to buffett
The Hangmans clutches? or to brave the Cordage
Of a tough halter, which will break your neck?
So then the Gallant totters; preethee ( Perkin)
Let my example lead thee, be no longer
A Counterfeite, confess, and hope for pardon!

Warb: For pardon? hold my heartstrings, whiles contempt
Of injuries, in scorn, may bid defiance
To this base man's foul language: thou poor vermin^
How dare thou creep so near me? thou an Earl?
Why thou enjoyst as much of happiness,
As all the swinge of slight ambition flew at.
A dunghill was thy Cradle. So a puddle
By virtue of the Sun-b^ames, breathes a vapor
To infect the purer air, which drops again
Into the muddie womb that first exhaled it.
Bread, and a slavish ease, with some assurance
From the base Beadles whipp, crowned all thy hopes.
But (Sir) ran there in thy veins, one dropp
Of such a royal blood, as flows in mine;
Thou would not change condition, to be second
In Englands State without the Crown it self!
Course creatures are incapable of excellence.
But let the world, as all, to whom I am
This day a spectacle, to time, deliver,
And by tradition fix posterity,
Without another Chronicle then truth,
How constantly, my resolution suffered
A martyrdom of Majesty!

Lamb: He Is past
Recovery, a Bedlum cannot cure him.

Vrsw: Away, inform the King of his behavior.

Lamb: Perkin, beware the rope, the Hangman's coming.

Vrsw: If yet thou have no pity of thy bodie^
Pity thy soul! Exit Simnell.

Enter Katherine, Jane, Daliell, and Oxford. Jane. Dear Lady!

Oxf: Whither will 'ee
Without respect of shame?

Kath: Forbear me (Sir)
And trouble not the current of my duty!
Oh my Loved Lord! Can any scorn be yours,
In which I have no interest? some kind hand
Lend me assistance, that I may partake
Th'inflictio^ of this penance; my life's dearest
Forgive me, I have stayed too long, from tendering
Attendance on reproach, yet bid me welcome.

Warb: Great miracle of Constancy! my miseries,
Were never banckrout of their confidence
In worst afflictions, till this now, I feel them.
Re^ort, and thy Deserts, ( ^hou best of creatures)
Might to ^ternitie, have stood a pattern
For every v^rtuous wi^e, without this conquest.
Thou have outdone belief, yet, may their ruin
In after marriages, be never pitti^d,
To whom thy Story, shall appear a fable.
Why would tho^ prove so much unkind to greatness,
To glorify thy vows by such a servitude?
I cannot weep, but trust m^e ( Dear) my heart
Is liberal of passion; Harrie Richmond!
A woman's faith, has robbed thy fame of triumph.

Oxf: Sir, lea^e off your juggling, and tie up
The Devil, that raunges in your tongu^.

Vrs: Thus Witches,
Possessed, even their deat^s del^d^d, ^ay,
They have been wolves, and dogs, and I sayld in Eggshells
Over the Sea, and rid on fiery Dragons;
Past in ^^e air more then a thousand miles,
All in a night; the enemy of mankind
Is powerful, but falfe; and falsehood confident.

Oxf: Remember (Lady) who you are; come from
That impudent Imposter!

Kath: You abuse us:
For when the holy Churchman joynd our hands,
Our Vows were real then; the Ceremony
Was not in apparition, but in act.
Be what these people term Thee, I am certain
Thou art my husband, no Divorce in Heaven
Has been sued out between us; it is injustice
For any earthly power to devide us.
Or we will live, or let us dye together.
There is a cruel mercy.

Warb: Spite of tyranny
We reign in our affections, ( blessed Woman)
Read in my destiny, the wrack of honour^
Point out in my contempt of death, to memory
Some miserable happiness: since, herein,
Even when I fell, I stood, enthroned a Monarch
Of one chaste wif's troth, pure, and uncorrupted.
Fair Angel of perfection; immortality
Shall raise thy name up to an adoration;
Court every rich opi^ion of true merit;
And Saint it in the Calender of virtue,
When I am turned into the self same dust
Of which I was first formed.

Oxf: The Lord Ambassador,
Huntley, your Father (Madam) should a' look on
Your strange subjection, in a gaze so public,
Would blush on your behalf, and wish his Country
Vnleft, for entertainment to such sorrow.

Kath: Why art thou angry Oxford? I must be
More peremptory in my duty; -- (Sir)
Impute it not unto immodestie,
That I presume to press you to a Legacy,
Before we part for ever!

Warb: Let it be then
My heart, the rich remains, of all my fortunes.

Kath: Confi^me it with a kiss pray^

Warb: Oh, with that
I wish to breathe my last upon thy lips,
Those equal twins of comeliness, I seal
The testament of honorable Vows:
Who ever be that man, that shall vnkisse
This sacred print next, may he prove more thrifti^
In this worlds just applause, not more desertfull.

Kath: By this sweet pledge of both our souls, I swear
To dye a faithful widow to thy bed:
Not to be fore't, or won. o, never, never.

Enter Surrey, Dawbney, Huntley, and Crawford. Dawb: Free the condemned person,
quickly free him.
What has a yet confessed?

Vrsw: Nothing to purpose;
But still'a will be King.

Surr: Prepare your journey
To a new Kingdom then, (unhappy Madam)
Wilfully ^oolish! See my Lord Ambassador,
Your Lady Daughter will not leave the Counterfei^^
In this disgrace of fate.

Hunt: I never poynted
Thy marriage (girl) but yet being married,
Enjoy thy duty to a husband, freely:
The griefs are mine. I glory in thy constancy;
And must not say, I wish, that I had mist
Some partage in these trials of a patience.

Kath: You will forgive me noble Sir?

Hunt: Yes, yes^
In every duty of a wife, and daughter,
I dare not disavow thee, -- to your husband
(For such you are Sir) I impart a farewell
Of manly pity; what your life has past through,
The dangers of your end will make apparent?
And I can add, for comfort to your sufferance,
No Cordial, but the wonder of your trailtie,
Which keeps so firm a station. -- We are parted.

Warb: We are a crown of peace, renew thy age
Most honorable

Huntley: worthy Crawford?
We may embrace, I never thought thee injury.

Crawf: Nor was I ever guilty of neglect
Which might procure such thought. I take my leave (Sir.)

Warb: To you Lord Daliell: what? accept a sigh,
It Is hearty, and in earnest.

Daliell. I want utterance:
My silence is my farewell.

Kath: Oh -- oh, --

Jane: Sweet Madam,
What do you mean! -- my Lord, your hand.

Dal: Dear Lady,
Be pleased that I may wayt 'ee to your lodging.

Exeunt Daliell, Katherine, Jane. Enter Sheriff, and Officers, Sketon, Astley,
Heron, and Mayor with halters about their necks. Oxf: Look 'ee, behold your
followers, appointed
To wait on 'ee in death.

Warb: Why Peers of England,
We Will lead 'em on courageously. I read
A triumph over tyranny upon
Their several foreheads. Faint not in the moment
Of Victory! our end^, ^^d Warwick's head,
Innocent Warwick's head, (for we are Prologue
But to his tragedy) conclude the wonder
Of Henry's fears; and then the glorious race
Of fourteen Kings PLANTAGINETTS, determine^
In this last issue male, Heaven be obeyed.
Impoverish time of its amazement (friends)
And we will prove, as trusty in our payments,
As prodigal to nature in our debtes.
Death? pish, it is but a sound; a name of air;
A minutes storm; or not so much, to tumble
From bed to bed, be massacred alive
By some Physicians, for a month, or two,
In hope of freedom from a Fevers torments,
Might stagger manhood; here, the pain is past
Ere sen^ibly it is felt. Be men of spirit!
Spurn coward passion! so illustrious mention,
Shall blaze our names, and style us KINGS OVER DEATH.

Daw: Away-Impostor beyond president: Ex: all Officers and Prisoners.
No Chronicle records his fellow.

Hunt: I have
Not thoughts left, it is sufficient in such cases
Just Laws ought to proceed.

Enter King Henry, Durham, and Hialas. K: H: We are resolved:
Your business (noble Lords) shall find success,
Such as your King importunes.

Hunt: You are gracious.

K: H: Perkin, we are informed, is armed to dye:
In that we will honor him. Our Lords shall follow
To see the execution; and from hence
We gather this fit use: that public States,
As our particular bodies, taste most good
In health, when purged of corrupted blood.

Exeunt (...). FINIS.
Epilogue.
HEre has appeared, though in a several fashion,
The Threats of Majesty; the strength of passion;
Hopes of an Empire; change of fortunes; All
What can to Theater's o^ Greatness fall;
Proving their weak foundations: who will please
Amongst such several Sight's, to censure These
No birth's abortiue^ nor a bastard-brood
(Shame to a parentage, or fosterhood)
May warrant by their loves, all just excuses,
And often find a welcome to the Muses.
FINIS.

