THE RESTORER OF THE FRENCH ESTATE

Discovering the true causes of these vvarres in France and other countries,
and delivering the right course of restoring peace and quiet to all
Christendom:

Wherein are handled these principal questions touching Religion, Policy, and
Justice:

Whether it be lawful to swear, and keep promise to Heretics, or no.
Whether it be lawful to force men's consciences for religion sake, or no.
Whether it be lawful to live with, and dwell nigh Heretics, or no. Whether it
be lawful to break the order of Succession to the Crown because of Religion,
or no. Who be Schismatikes; and of the chief poincts of Religion. How we are
to judge of the Schism in Christendom at this day.
Lastly, the Conclusion containing notable admonitions to the Clergy, Nobles,
Magistrates, People, and King of France.

Translated out of French.

Ecclesiae and Reipub.

D.

ANCHORA SPEI.



Imprinted at London by Richard Field dwelling in the Blacke-Friers. 1589.

To the Reader.
THere came forth a Discourse on the praesent state of France in the year
last past, which surely did some good: now comes forth another written (as
appears) by the same Auctor, for restoring the state of France, which is
likely to do more good. The work being first conceived by an high wit, and
after shaped by ripe experience, seems sithence to have passed through some
rude and unclean hand. And yet, it is not so misshapen or defaced thereby, but
that the lineaments remaining do soon descry the first workman. and thus much
for the form. For the matter, it is no counterfeict stuff, but will abide the
touch of the safest maxims in policy, and the trial of the soundest
principles in religion. And as the discrete Reader (I know) will suspend his
judgment, till he perceive th'Auctors purpose: so let the saucy Censurer know,
that the height thereof surmounteth the reach of his carping conceit.
Farewell.

THE RESTORER OF THE FRENCH ESTATE.
THIS WHOLE DISCOVRSE IS made under the name of France.
IT seems that my calamities do call, follow, and one enterteine another,
not unlike the waves, surges and currants of waters: the end of foreign wars
has been to me th'entrance of civil wars, and cruil wars do cause to
reflow on me, like a violent stream of brimstone, the fury of all my
borderers. They say, that wars are to Estates and Commonweals, that which
medicines, bloudlettings, caustiks, and setons are to the body of man: By such
means the body is purged of bad and superfluous humors encroching either by
influence of the stars, or by distemper of seasons corrupting the air, or by
excess and abuse in this life, committed by our Fathers or our selves: wars
in like manner do cleanse Estates of wits that are restless and unruly,
mabitious, choleric, contentious, longing for invasions, and hungring after
other men's good and blood. This they say, but I feel the contrary. Howbeit the
case being so, I made an end of foreign wars too soon, it was no time to
give over the Physicion, to pay th'Apothecaries bill, to undo the rollers, to
take of the caustiks and setons, and to close up the wounds: somewhat remained
of the excess and conflict between the humors and their qualities, great store
of corrupt dregs and inflammation lurked yet within the blood and wounds, the
sword, torment and loss had not yet cleared all the passions of distempered
spirits. Nay rather, our great God was not appeazed of his wrath, nor we
reconciled to him, he had not revoked his hardening of our hearts, neither were
the phials of his fury emptied. Alas! I felt no evil but in the utmost
parts, in the inferior members subject in use to the principal, in the feet
and hands: but now the evil is got within, it has seized the vital parts,
the principal members, it is spread over all. It is now no more a Rheum, a
squincie, a particular down flux of humors: it is even an apoplexy, a
general taking, an universal corruption. War with its wast was no where but
in the frontiers, in Picardy, in Burgonie, or in Champaigne and Daulphiny: now
it is in the very midst of me, it is over all, not only within Provinces
and Gouernements, but even within towns and cities, within boroughs, villages
and castles; in houses particular, even in granges and solitary dwellings;
between the husband and wife the father and children, the brethren and
sisters; and which is yet more horrible each one of my children, at least the
more part, has war within his own conscience. So that for these 28. or 30.
years past, I have universally been filled with outcries, hurlyburlies, and
affray, with ashes, blood, and with rubbish of ruins; mine evil is become
mine habit, and to be ill disposed is my ordinary disposition. Now if any
discontinuance came between, it was but as of accidents lightnings before a
new fit, or playing of the pulse; it was to take cause, force and new
footing: it surceased not but only to take breath and rallie^t self, and so
to return with more assurance to the medley, to the charge, to the fight.
Further more the Pacifications have appeared in effect to have bin nothing
less then that they have signified. For I have seen more injustice and
violence, I have heard more plaints and groans in such peace, then in the
war: to be short the harder and more violent strokes of the war have
lighted on me during those Pacifications. Alas! has any one of my towns been
exempt from the ghastly blows of outrage? My sons are degenerated, they have
lien down like savage beasts, snared in the croswaies of every street, full
of the wrath and threatening of the Lord. Is there any member of mine not crased
thoroughout, or void of wounds and filthiness? My Churchmen are marred and
corrupt: they were wont to take tithe; now adays they are not only tithed
themselves, but also must forgo both fruit and gleebe; they have left
devotion and charity, to embrace hypocrisy and madness, to plot practices, and
contriue murders. Of my nobility remain none almost but widows and orphans;
their small relics suruiuing seem inclined rather to undermine abate and
turn my house vpside down, then to uphold, prop and defend the same. I see my
Justice no more, I can not discern my Iusticers by their long robe, gravity
and modesty; all the world is furious and armed: they have forsaken the
doctrine, the true honor and fear of God, they breath of naught else saving
worldly glory and gain. All my villages and champion soyles are converted
into sepulchers, monuments and churchyardes: my poor Villagers do resemble
goblins, ghoastes forepined of skin and bone, without flesh; so many Pesants,
so many Anatomies: they be laborers no more, they be all counselors of
Estate, they observe no longer the seasons of the year, the motions and
alterations of the air; and they have reason: since that they sow no more, the
imuries of the air can hurt them no more: but they are busy to mark the
motions and alterations that happen in the Estate and common wealth; for from
this quarter comes the tempest on that little which is left them: they are
inquisitiue, and hear speech of kings more commonly, then Governors of
Provinces did in ancient time. Finally, on what side soever I turn mine eyes,
I see nothing but deformity. Alas! I hoped during the last peace, that my
children after they knew the vanity of their conceits and desires, the
difficulty of their enterprises the small fruit, and that same evil, of
their actions, of their pains and travail, and consequently the curse of God
upon them, after they had by so long continuance of years endured and felt the
troubles, horror, and wearisome toils of war, after they had not got one
jot of another, but the ruin alone of their public weal, of me that am
their mother, and yet moreover each one his own particular ruin and
confusion: I dare assure my self, said I, that they will hold themselves to
this last peace: I supposed that lack of blood and sinews would not suffer
them to continue their furious stirs, that faintnes would enforce them to
remain peaceable, would yield and betake them to repose and sleep. And so
hoped I to repose my self, to recover by means of a peaceable sleep my first
natural beauty and disposition. I hoped in short time to recover my first
estate; to recall, settle again, and contain my children each one in his true
vocation; to render them the contentment they were wont to receive of me; to
reestablish and repair for them my ruins and wastes; to multiply, weed, and
trim for them my fruits; to moderate by the same mean their concupiscences,
to qualify their cholers, o rule their desires, to refine their wills, to
renew, accomplish and confirm their amities, to unite them together. The
purgations which I ministered in the mean season toward Picardie on the one
side, and toward Guien for Portugal on the other, strengthened my hope very
much: the effect it self and forwardnes of my reparations, confirmed me far
more, and kindled my natural heat, and diligent heed, upon promise of a full
enioyment. I saw mine old skin pill, fall of and vanish away; I perceived men's
spirits did clear; I perceived that out of their wills dreined hate, envy,
pride, ambition, and other like workers of enmity and discord: charity began
to warm the hearts of my children, and to move their bowels; diversity of
religion was made no more a different mark for persons, houses, and towns;
religion was no longer the object of good will and amity, of grudge and
enmity. But, good God, behold all my hopes dashed; the rash zeal of religion
was in deed mortified, but the other cause of my civil wars, to wit
ambition, was not. Behold me now fallen into a relapse worse than the former. I
know now, my children were not werie but in body, they reposed but their bodies
during the peace. For it appears at this day to me, that while peace lasted,
their travel ever lasted by gifts and promises, by honors and gratifyings, to
seek them partakers, amities, intelligences, favors and succors, not in this
Realm alone, but throughout all the dominions of Europe also. I see on the one
fide the more part of my children in arms and uproar, upon show of hope
offered, that France shall be like those fortunate Isles for the Clergy; that
no Gentleman so simple, but shall be glutted with honor and riches, but shall be
created incontinent a Governor, Earl, Vicount, or Baron; that all my Iusticers
shall be Chancelers or Counselors of estate; all my Towns shall be free,
peaceable, privileged, as those of the Empire, or of the Cantons. But this
sufficed not; they have distrusted their own force as unable to ruin me; they
have thought their own arms too faint and feeble to slay themselves, to foil
and pull me down on themselves; they must therefore wage strangers. On this
their party, I spy the Pope, who under assurance of reestablishing his
credit, first here, and thenelswhere, draws out both his blades, and makes a
lusty flourish. I see there the Spanish Tyrant, who gaping for a good share,
and specially thinking to hasten the sale of me which I perceive has been
made him, as also to avoid the ransacking of his usurpations, and to weaken
his neighbors, vnladeth his ships freighted with treasures within my havens. I
see there the Loraine and Sauoyen, who allot to themselves already the
Countries lying most commodious for them. Yet was not that party or side
strong enough, it sufficed them not to pass the mountains; they must trauerse
Italy over, and the sea, or else all along the gulf of Venice, to bring hither
Albanians, and so to reenforce this party. Above three years are past since
the auctors of this party appeared in arms in the midst of me, having for
their chief Standard for their white Cornet, the League, the conspiracy well
signed of all these partakers, of all these Potentates. The king (forsooth)
must enter into this league: that is, in good phrase and bad French, he
himself with all his power must rely on them; he must advance them aloft,
that they with more ease may take his crown off his head, or at least that
they may first seize on it after his death, be it natural, or procured; or else
he must determine to run the race of poor Childeric; he must take this
Aquafortis, this Aqua vitae, this confection of Alkermes, or else he must see
his own speedy death, he must see his own limbs fall of and forsake him.
His Lieutenants, Governors, and Towns awayted not (said they) but his refusal
to declare his mind: the Pope had an infinite sort of men in ambush amid the
mountains ready to ouerrun him presently upon his refusal: the sea was
covered with Spanish ships ready to invade and fill all the havens of France,
presently upon the signal given: there were also Almaines and Switzers. It
seemed that all people and Nations had forsaken their own business and homes
for to come force her, or run to her ruin, to her fall. Behold my king
surprised and forced in the heart of his Realm, in the greatest of his Cities,
in the greatest abundance of his Subjects, by his own foster children, by
them that had no good, nor honor, but through his favor, and his predecessors:
behold him forced to violate his faith, to swear and sign his own death, his
own end, and the end of me, and of all his brothers my children, the ruin
and wrack of his Realm, to pluck asunder the foundations, and the laws
whereon it is grounded: behold him forced to dispose his crown to the behoof
of strangers. Behold me presently more tumultuous then cuer before: no speech
but of banishments, publications and proscriptions of outlawrie, of troubles
and turmoiles. Ye may see many householders oppressed with years and sorrows,
laden with children on their shoulders and at their sides; their wives following
at their heels blubbered with tears, having their little infants lugging at
their breasts; abandoning their ancient and goodly patrimonies, their
purchases so agreeable, their houses so commodious, their mouables so costly:
winding them selves at length out of the arms of their kindred, friends, and
neighbors, after they had sustained the conflict with reasons and
considerations, had bedewed themselves with tears, their bowels yerning, and
hearts forespent with sighs and sobs; and albeit living, had deemed
themselves as dead one for the other; had recommended themselves to God: some
travailing toward Germany, others toward England, persuaded to find more
courtesy, charity, pity, mercy and succor amid the wild forrestes of
Almaine, amid the surges of the sea, among them that are reputed natural and
sworn foes of all Frenchmen, than in their own Realm, their native Soil, in
their own City, of their own king, of their own Countriemen, and fellow
Citizens. Every one curses his chance, yea, they rather that tarry, than they
that are gone, as bereft of the incredible comfort they received by the
company of their friends absent. The wife has lost her husband, the mother
her son, being her stay; the brother his brother, being his joy: the father
in law forgoing his son in law, must abide the charge of his daughters
maintenance, she neither married, nor in state to marry. Aliance and amities
are made void, families are confounded. At the same instant behold me
covered over with armies, in whom is found nor respect, nor mercy, nor law,
nor faith: nothing but insolence, but cruelty, but violence, and treachery;
being in deed naught else save a vacation, not from arms, but for arms. They
make war as though they never hoped for, nor ever would have peace; they
commit violences and injuries irreparable, they cause enmities irreco^cilable:
the Nobles know not one another, and as persons merely unacquainted do deem
themselves no longer neighbors: there is no house be it noble or mean that is
not shiuered in pieces, that is not betrayed, surprised, forced, and sacked:
find me him out, that is not streined and wringed as it were in a press to
extract from him his substance: the Cities are turmoiled for their pride; the
man, the Prince, the King desires to be letten into his City, and can not. It
seems I am at an end, rather dead then alive; they use me as if I were past
feeling; they make gashes in my skin on all parts, they make the scales leap
from my bones: they labor not but to bury the dead, and sink the living in
bottomless darkness; they build not, but to destroy other buildings: every where
are diches, trenches, mines, troops and bands. But all this is but one of the
acts of the Tragedy. Behold here the other party arising up, which begins
to appear, which is werie of retiring to bear of the blows; it is more
known and auowed with me then it was euernt consists of all my Princes what
countenance soever they make, and of a great number of my peaceabler children;
they want not friends both within and without the Realm, even more then is
supposed. They say, that all the Allemaignes, the Switzers, the English, and
Scotts are raised, armed, mustred, and coming for their cause, as if none
should rest behind of all these nations in a manner save old folk, women and
children. If they should bring as much evil will as power, without doubt I am
undone. Alas! I have not life enough to sustain so mighty an assault of
sickness. It behooves by remedies to prevent the fit, it behooves by good
counsel to remove from these Princes provoked all occasion that may egg them
on while they are yet not moved too much, nor banded together; hitherto they
have neither spoken nor done any thing, as more inclined to peace then war:
they restrain so much as they may the motions of their choler, and
the execution of their power. Let me entreat you my children not to plead our
cause by arms, not to hazard our selves on the doubtful events of battle.
Victories in civil war bring no commodity but to two or three; they undo
the rest, and specially the people. Otherwise how great soever the hap and
advantage of the victors be, they must always come to agreement in the end. Get
he the maistrie, that may, I am desolated for ever. I fear the victory as much
as confusion; be the issue what it will, the French shall be defeated. Come
hither my children, harken to me; we may not doubt but that the wrath of God
pursues us, seeing the stripes he gives us: the pestilence rages within, the
sword without, the famine throughout, and these are but threats in comparison
of more boystrous blows prepared by him for us yet: leave we our senceles
obstinacy, and bestow we our endeavor between the threat and stripe, and the
stripe shall not light; bestow we our endeavor between stroke and stroke, the
wounds shall cease and turn to blessings. Let us wittingly and in good
earnest know and feel our own evil, the cause thereof; let us be humbled and
search out the remedy. Do ye not understand; that in one month of war we
offend more the divine majesty, then in a whole age of peace? Understand ye
not that peace brings all good, war all evil? If ye doubt it, mark the
pictures and greetings of your ancesters, compare your discommodities with the
commodities of your fathers. Let us seek then this peace, and to that end
boldly and piece meal try and examine our evil and enmities and search the
remedy therefore: Let us suck out the sense, and swalow the wise sentence.

CHAP. 1. Whether faith may lawfully be given and holden to heretics.
YE have broken the peace so solemnly sworn (I speak to you my children,
that have been induced to begin this war) ye have falsed your faith, ye have
taken the name of God in vain: for that (say you) a man neither may nor should
promise nor keep faith toward heretics and Infidels, according to the
resolution taken and practiced in the Council of Constance Anno. 1414. and
again according to th'aduise and commandment executed by Pope Eugenius the
fourth to Vladislaus king of Hungary., about xxx. years afterward. Ye say,
this is a doctrine received so solemnly, confirmed by so many reasons and
auctorities, approved by so many acts, continued by so many years, that now
it is no time to doubt thereof. My children, this defense can not warrant you
from vices and infamous reproaches damnable before God and men. For if ye bring
in and so freely receive such distinctions in promises and oaths, ye open a gap
to all manner of miseries and co^fusions in all Estates but principally in this
Realm, where are few houses, families, towns, cities and gouernements, few
companies public or particular, that are not bound by such oaths, few or no
marriages, successions, felowships, and other couenantes, whose suit,
enterteinement, and assurance depend not on such oaths. For in all these things
they that we have called heretics be confusedly intermedled with the
Catholics. So that I may say with truth, there is no humane wit nor might,
which would not sooner melt and consume, then be able to preserve this Realm,
otherwise then by observing that has been been couenaunted and sworn.
Moreover, if ye be resolute to practice this doctrine, ye shall make all our
wars endelesse and immortal, as well civil and domestical for the reasons
before touched, as the wars we may have with the stranger be it the Switzer,
Almain, Fleming, English, Scot, Spaniard, Italian, or Turk: for in manner all
our neighbors do differ in religion from us, and consequently heretics or
Infidels in our opinion, and perhaps they also esteem us for such. Who then
will treat with you concerning peace knowing this your resolution? They will
rather choose to miscary, or make you miscary under the chargeable toil and
dangers of war, then be choked in the nets of your disloyalty. But how
will ye excuse your selves toward God? If it be evil done to promise faith to
the Reformed, wherefore have ye sworn to them so solemly by acts often
reiterated, and by long spaces of time distinguished* If ye allege, they
compelled you: ye can not auerre nor justify this compulsion: ye have always
been masters of the field, of the towns and governments, and which is to be
noted, the most part of the Pacifications have bin made in their greatest
weakness. If it were impiety to agree with them, ye should have sooner
suffered a thousand deaths, then done it. If ye say, it was done to make them
difarme, and afterward to surprise and destroy them, to th'aduancement and
exaltation of your religion, as many believe: ye are abominable persons so to
profane the oath, which God has ordained for a witness and assurance of the
truth, for an end of all variances, for renewing of charity offended, and
restablishment of peace and rest among men: ye make it a bait for lying, for
treason, and cruelty: ye shall not ascend into Gods holy hill, for ye swear
in deceit. The Romans in their ancient fashion of swearing and contracting
alliances, were wont to say, o Jupiter smite and with thy lightening blast him,
whosoever in this company shall have brought hither an intent to beguile his
companion: what? must Pagans with more holiness deal in a sacred oath then we?
Ye take not alone the name of God in vain, but ye also defile it so much as in
you lies, making it the auctor and protector of your murderous disloyalties:
ye think ye may sport with men's lives by your oaths; it is with God, with
his glorious and magnificent name, and with your own salvation that ye sport,
it is your own salvation that ye lose: imagining to draw men on to their
death, and make them fall on the point of your weapons lurking in the pit of
your treasons, ye draw on your own heads the curse of God, and plunge your
selves head long in the fearful dungion of darkness and eternal woe. No
evil ought to be done that good should come of it. The very Paynims could say,
that no religion is accomplished by mischievous wickedness: faithlesnesse is
an impe of impiety: impiety is directly opposite to religion: then monstrous
is their error that think to uphold and augment religion through impiety.
Ye condemn the judge that with his oath promises impunitie to malefactors,
provided that they confess and acknowledge the crimes they are accused of, ye
disanull all his process and reuerse it as erroneous: thus by your own
sentence ye incur condemnation, in that by oath ye have assured rest and
peace to the Reformed, to the end that having abandoned their defenses ye
might afterward murder them by surprise and with more advantage. Neither can
ye also pretend excuse by ignorance, as not knowing the nullitie of your oaths
at the time ye swear: for the doctrine and examples alleged by your selves,
are of a date far more ancient then the troubles and Pacifications of this
Realm. Moreover, after your goodly fearch for that wholesome doctrine, to
warrant you from shame and reproach, upon the breach that ye made of the former
Pacifications, ye have again notwithstanding treated and sworn peace with
them manifold times, and that with more banning if ye brake it, then ever
before. But the likelihood is great, that your violation of the peace comes not
through religion: more credible it is, that your unreconcilable enmities, and
greedy aspiring minds are the cause: so that ye speak for God in fraud, and
plead for him in iniquity: ye enterprise to make the holy Scripture stoop to
the winds of your will, and bend to the billows and tempests of your naughty
passions; ye force it to serve your commodities, and fit your purposes, to
execute your r^uenges, and satisfy your ambition and avarice. Let us see
notwithstanding if the doctrine ye propose is so necessary and certain as ye
make it. I grant you, and aduow it that every oath ought not to be observed,
specially when the same importes thereupon the performance of some heinous
sin, and does directly prejudice the free passage of Gods word, which we all
are bound to seek: but reserving these two inconveniences above, we may in all
things else give our faith undoubtedly to any whosoever, and being once given,
we ought to keep it. So that when we contend not directly against Gods glory
and our own salvation, faith must be observed. Now the covenants with Heretics
and Infidels, by letting them live in peace and quiet without attempting them
by material arms, do not hinder the hope of our salvation nor offend the
glory and commandments of God, when we are unable to cut them of by the
ordinary way and power of the magistrate, easily and without trouble and
detriment to the Church. For though it be commanded in the law, that the
Heretic be cut of, which imports a more strong reason forbidding to converse
or deal with an heretic: that ought to be understood, when we may
commodiously destroy or expel him, not disturbing the Church. It is more
tolerable, more reasonable, and agreeable to Gods pleasure, to suffer the
heretic and infidel to live, and dwell by him, then to make hauock in the
Church, and set a way wide open to a thousand and a thousand confusions,
impieties, and other mischievous villainies which wars brings with it, and
leaves beit, namely war Civil. This is that, which the Patriarch of
Constantinople named Atticus, said upon the like occasion: that we must
sometimes upon some necessity, hold us content with that which happens not to
our liking, that we must sometimes prefer utility before strict justice,
sometime incline to agreement, to the peace and tranquillity of the people:
preferring the peace of a Realm, the peace of all the world, before the
precise observation of the words, after the example of the Apostles, that
wisely dispensed with occasions and circumstances. Better it is then to
continue the ulcer open, than close it up to the hazard of the whole body.
Better it is to strike sail in the storm, than strive too gloriously against
it, and make shipwreck: we must hate the heretic, but yet our love to the
Church must excel our hatred toward him. Scipio, and after him the Emperor
Antonine the meek said, they had leifer save one Citizen, than slay a
thousand enemies: what? should my king, my princes and you, bear less
affection to your country, and to the Church, then they bare to their Country
alone? That which I tell you is confirmed by the doctrine of Jesus Christ, Mat.
13.
who forbids the rooting up of the tares and darnel growing among the good
corn, lest the good corn chance to be spoiled or plucked up withal. This
parable of our Savior rightly conceived, answers whatsoever ye can object.
If ye say, the liberty of Gods word and his glory seem to be lessened on
that part the heretics make and hold in an Estate: likewise ye may be told how
the grouth of the good corn is hindered, in that part of the field which the
darnell possesses; and consequently, the owners credit and profit: yet
nevertheless does Jesus Christ say, it must not be plucked up. It suffices
then to consider that otherwise it may not be, and that the glory of God will
be more obscured in the total hauok and confusion of the Church, than in a
small anoyance which the neerenes of heretics may bring to it: also that Gods
glory, and the power of his word will more brightlie shine amid our
discommodities, infirmities and dishabilities, then in our ease, and the force
of our flesh, of which he uses very little or none toward the building and
conservation of his Church. The politiks add, that the sovereign law, the
most equal rule of all, from which Magistrates and Counselors of estate ought
never to swerue, is to prefer the public safeguard before all other
commodities and considerations, that may be propounded for the greater
assurance of one of the members of the state. For as they say, all comes to
naught when the Commonweal goes to wrack. We read, that by recital of this
only law, the Consul Seruilius stayed the course of the most pernicious
sedition that ever came within the walls of Rome. They add also this
necessary doctrine of our Savior Christ, that every Realm divided in it
self shall be desolate. Behold, for what cause in the year 1561, it was
concluded at S. German, by the greatest wits, and wisest heads of this Realm,
that it was expedient, not only to quench the fires, and make the pursuites
commenced in the name of justice against the reformed, to cease; but also, that
peace might and ought to be made with them. Behold also, wherefore all the
sovereign Courts of this Realm, after they had ripely deliberated on this
difficult point, were resolved to approve the edict of January. True it is
that the Parliament of Paris made more difficulty then the other: howbeit they
also were resolved, after they had heard the holy, politik, and learned
declarations of the Chanceller Hospital, whose lack I cannot sufficiently
lament, waying what need I have at this day of such personages. For the self
same reasons have the Emperors of Germany concluded and sworn peace with the
Protestants their Subjects, and to this present have kept their faith to them.
We read also in the Ecclesiastical histories, that the Emperors, Valerian,
Maximian, Constantine, and many others, to compound the divisions between the
Christians and Ethnikes their Subjects; in whose power consisted the
maintenance or decay not only of the state, but of religion also, did permit
to the one and the other, the exercise of their religion. If this were a matter
so strange, as ye say, to enter into covenants with the reformed, and to give
them your faith, the Emperor Charles the fifth had not so often given and used
it as he did in his safeconducts to Luther, to Melancthon, to Bucer, and to
many others: it is hard to reckon how many times he received into his Courts
the Protestant Princes and their Doctors, to common and confer with the^; he
might have caused them to be murdered if he had listed, he wanted not advise
thereto, for there were Lords inow about him, that labored earnestly to draw
him to that treachery. Nay, what say you to this of greater efficacy? Even
the Council of Trent decreed concerning passe-ports and safeconducts for the
Protestants, of whom some appeared, and made their orations, and returned
safely. I find on every side plenty of examples that urge and condemn you
most apparently. The Catholic Switzers were not scrupulous to enter into league
with the Reformed Switzers, and which was more, with them of Geneua. Your
selves are confederate with all the Cantons of the Switzers, and ye solicit
them daily to enterteine this association. Ye are alied by couenantes sworn
with all the Princes of Germany as well Protestants as others: our kings
Francis the first and Henry the second have particularly sought th'alliance of
the Protestants, have sent to that end their Ambassadors into Germany to the
general Diets of the Protestants, Monsieur de Lange among others came for
that purpose by commandment of the said king Francis to the assembly at
Smalcalde: our kings with their armies have entered Germany against The Emperor
for the defense and protection of the Protestants. Ye are likewise alied with
the English, and with the Netherlanders, whose protection moreover against the
Spaniard your selves have undertaken. Examples should lead us thus farreforth;
if we would apply our minds to reuiew them we should not find any estate on
earth, where agreements have not been made with them of different Religion, and
consequently with or among heretics and infidels: for two diverse Religions
can not both be true. The Pope has often couenanted with the Turk and with
Jews, being both undoubted Infidels. The Venetian treats and ordinarily
swears peace with the Turk. The Spainard daily bargaineth with infidels as
well in Affrik, as in India and in the New found world. All antiquirie and the
Primitive Church do afford us also great store of like presidents, as those I
have mentioned of The Emperors Valerius, Maximian, and Constantius. Constantin
the great granted to th'archheretik Arius, his faith by oath, and kept it.
Assurances are given indifferently to all heretics for their appearance at
Councels: thither do they come, and from thence they return with security; of
such importance is the faith granted them by safeconduct. We read that eight
or ten Emperors after the great Constantine, only to keep the Church and
people in peace, did permit th'Arians to have Bishops and Temples, so that
every town almost had two Bishops, the one an Arian, the other a Catholic; now
had they an Arian Pope, and anon a Catholic Pope. But what need we repair to
writings of men (which being compiled by your Churchmen themselves, you may not
disaduow) seeing the holy Scriptures afford us store of like examples
auctorised by the commandments of God, favored by his blessings, and made
inviolable by his curses. The ten Tribes of Israel, against the express
ordinance of God, 3. Reg. 12.
revolted from Roboam their king the son of Solomon, the son of David, to
whom the Lord had given the land, and to his line after him: and not only they
revolted from their king, but also forsook the doctrine and temple of God,
built themselves profane altars nigh to the sacred altar, in so much that
undoubtedly they were heretics and schismatiks: nevertheless it was not
permitted to Roboam or his successors to bring these ten Tribes again to the
Temple of the Lord with arms and by force, or destroy and expel them the
land. Roboam having attempted it was let, and by the commandment of God
retired from th'enterprise; 2. Chron. 11
and whatsoever the heresy and schism of the ten Tribes was, yet were
the other two Tribes constreined to live with and nigh them in alliance and
confederacy. Behold how your doctrine is not so certain as you report, nor
yet prescribed by continual custom: And that prescription has no place, when
the question is of doctrine, of right, and of truth. But resolve we it further
by histories of the sacred Scripture. We learn in the same, that Abraham swear
aliance with many unbelieving Princes and peoples: with others then unbelievers
he could not contract, since he was the only elect from among all the families
and nations of the earth. Isaac gave and observed faith to Abimelek. Jacob
bargained with Laban th'Idolatre and with unbelieving Esau his own brother.
Jacob and his sons and specially Joseph were alied, and lived with
th'Aegiptians. Digest we perfectly the history of the Gabaonites, and that
alone will satisfy us with the truth upon every poinct of this question. The
Gabaonites a people of the Amorrheans amassed at the multitude, Ios. 9.
might, prosperous hap, exploictes, and resolution of Joshua and the children of
Israel, sent them Ambassadors having their garments and shoes old and
patched, their barils of wine broken and vnhooped, their bread dry and vinewed,
in rotten and torn sacks. These contrefeict Ambassadors declared, that they
were not of the land of Canaan, but came from far, so that in their long
voyage they had worn, spent and consumed their garments, victuals and vessels;
they offered and required alliance, it was received and granted; Joshua and the
people swear it in the name of God. Three days after, th'Israelits came into
the country of the Gabaonits, and the^ finding the deceit were greatly amassed
and provoked, considering first of all, that God had commanded them not to
leave alive any one of all the nations of Canaan, and namely th'Amorrhi:
howbeit afterward having consulted on this matter, they smote them not; they
durst not; saying, we have sworn to them by the name of the Lord God. About
four hundred years after that, the Israelites under the conduct of Saul, 2.
Reg. 21.
egged on with zele and devotion, made war on the Gabaonits and slew some of
them: God punished th'Israelites, visited them by famine: the Prophets
answered that God visited the people, for the finne they had committed, in
warring on them, Ios. 9.
for whom they were bound by oath: the famine continued three years and ceased
not till after submission, acknowledgement and satisfaction made by David to
the Gabaonites at their discretion: they demanded the Princes of the lignage
of Saul, David delivered them seven; they crucified them to the Lord; the
famine ceased. They, whom you term Huguenots, are no more Infidels or
heretics, then the Gabaonites that worshipped idols and the devil: you have not
so express commandment of God to destroy them, as the people of Israel had
to destroy the Gabaonites: they had by sudden advantage, lying and guile,
robbed and extorted the peace, alliance, and oath of th'Israelites: I do not see
that these me^ surprised, deceived, or ouerreached you, when you promised and
swore them the Peace. Again, Israel was punished for violating the oath made
by his ancestors, he infringed it not but four hundred years after the faith
was given, he might have imputed the fault to forgetfulness. How much more
worthy of punishment are ye, ye that have violated the oath, which your selves
have made, ye that have falsified it irreparably within three or four years
after; I dare say, that ye have not kept it one whole day: for as good it is to
make war, as prepare for war. What know ye, but that the curses which
threaten you, which hang over your heads, hem in and distress you at this
instant on every part, in your persons, in your houses and families and
without, are so many aduertisements sent from God, warning you to make him and
them amends for your disloy altic. If ye open your mouth to say that
th'Israelites had another reason besides th'oth not to break the aliance made
with the Gabaonites, ye belie the holy Ghost, who stops your mouth when he tells
you, how the Princes said: we may not touch them for that we have sworn to
them by the Lord God of Israel; and again where it is said; the Prophets
answered, that God visited the people, for their offense in making war on
them, to whom they were bound by oath. If ye say that the reason holds not
between a Prince and his subjects: besides that this stale subtlety is to be
laughed at, sauouring more of a courtly parasite, then of a teacher and
professor of the truth; Joshua. 9.
mark here that the Gabaonites were subjects to the people of Israel, and
served them in cutting wood and drawing water; they were, I say; their vassals
by a title most just, for God had given them to the Israelites from that day
where in he cursed all Canaan: nevertheless Saul their King and all Israel
were punished, for violating the faith given them. Again, this distinction
between oaths made by a Prince to his subjects, and oaths made to others, is
convinced by the examples of Emperors in the primitive Church before alleged,
in that they licensed at the self same time, in the self same towns, to
Pagans, Arians, and Christians the several exercises of their religions; and
yet further by the faith given and well kept of Constantine the great to Arius,
as also by the Pacifications sworn and duly observed of the Germane Emperors
to the Protestants. For in all these cases, the Prince promised and swore to
his subject. But return we to the examples of the sacred Scripture. We read
how the people of Israel against the general commandment of God, Joshua. 6.
preserved from fire, spoil, and sword the harlot Rahab and all her household;
so strict and dutiful was their obedience to the oath made by their spies. Bar.
2. 4. Reg. 25. 3. Reg. 22. Ier. 39.
We read that Sedechias for having falsed his faith to the King of Babylon, and
Achab to the king of Syria, were vanquished, the one miraculously slain, the
other consumed in horrible miseries and torments: Rahab was a Pagan, the kings
of Syria and Babylon were Pagans. Sedeehias and Achab were kings of Israel the
people of God. Thus have Gods people given faith to Pagans, and kept it, and
have been chastised of God for presuming to break it: there is as good reason
at least to keep faith to them that are reputed heretics; for the heretic
is not more abominable then the Pagan and Infidel: ad withal the histories
above cited, justifying the like observation of loyalty toward heretics
convict and deemed such. We swear, we hold up our hands to God: now since it
is to God that we swear and not to men, why then do we respect the quality
of men? Let us not therefore stay upon the quality of persons, even as our
selves desire of the Lord to perform us his promises, without regard to our
unworthiness: for the holy Ghost likewise in all the examples of promises well
kept, yeldeth this only reason for all; one or other has sworn. It becomes
us not rashly to slip aside from the charge of Gods commandments. We shall
enjoy more rest, honor, and liberty in serving God, than by shifting off our
shoulders the yoke of his laws. The commandment is manifest; Thou shall not
take the name of the Lord thy God in vain: it is noted, that this is a
principal commandment of the law, one of those two that have a threatening
penalty annexed, I will not hold him guiltless, says he, that takes my name
in vain. The religion of an oath has evermore, and every where been esteemed
to have such power over the consciences, honor and reputation of men, that
after an oath taken, none durst doubt of the truth of matters deposed or
sworn. An oath determines the whole variance, it is unchangeable, as says S.
Paul. Heb. 6.
By this only warrant strangers dare meet together without suspicion, and
become companions and friends: hereby neighbors and friends continue
neighborhood and friendship: hereby the enemy walks in security of life
amids the fury and weapons of his mortal foe: this is the only caveat and
prouiso required of Kings, Princes and Nations, of Governors, Bailiffes and
Stewardes, of Judges and Magistrates: this is the only mean to treat of
peace among arms, to conclude and maintain the same. He that swears by the
name of God, does assure others that his words are true, even as God himself
is the truth: he takes God for his witness and judge: he prays him to
confound and sink his soul to the bottomless pit of hell, if he does not keep
and make good his word so far as in him shall lie. Our forefathers in old
time showed by their ceremonies that they so conceived it. He that takes the
name of God in vain, either believes there is no God at al, or else accounts
him a lier void of might, and in effect defies him. Now men that are naturally
liars, and void of might, if they know themselves so reputed, o^ think that
others believe them not, they will rage and take on marueilouslie; they will
stir up the coals, fling the fire about, hazard their quiet, honor, goods,
this present life, and all th'unspeakeable joys to be hoped for in the life to
come, to have amends for such supposed injuries: God that is true and
almighty, and most ielous of his honor, what will he do trow ye? Perjured
persons are noted, hated and shunned, as well of them that feel the damage of
their faithlesnesse, as of them to whom profit comes by their perjury, if any
profit may come of perjury. The Egyptians, to declare how much they detested
faithless persons, digressed from their general rules, and ordinary justice:
for it was a ground in their law to punish each offender, in that part or
member, which was chief instrument of the offense: and so it should have
sufficed them only to plague the tongue of the perjured; nevertheless, they
put him to death, utterly excluding all ransom of his life for any price
whatsoever. If some lawmakers have not laid upon them any like penalty; it
was because they durst not: for albeit they reknowledged that the offense of
this crime might greatly touch both the society of men, and every particular
person thereof: yet they principally considered, how this sin directly
respects the divine majesty; that for so much as to God the oath and vow was
made, from him therefore being called to witness, they awaite for vengeance. Thus
you venture to persevere in a sin intolerable to God and man, the razer of
religion and humane fellowship. Hereupo^ ye will perhaps reply, that since the
pacifications, ye have sworn other contrary oaths, from which later oaths, by
a more strong reason ye may not depart: but I will reserve the assoyling of this
your objection, to the conclusion of this discourse. Mean while let us examine
the grounds, whereon the maine stay of your doctrine proposed does stand,
and we shall find them rotten and ruinous. Let us consider what befell the
king of Hungary, and al Christendom, for having too simply obeyed Pope
Eugenius. This king of Hungary had fought with, daunted, and vanquished the
Turk: had compelled him to make a peace honorable, beneficial,
aduantageable, and convenient for all Christendom: howbeit, by commandment
of the Pope, for the considerations aforesaid, he departed from that peace, he
violated his faith and promise given; he denounced war to Amurath, he
presented himself in field better assisted tha^ before; both with men and
with hope, they joined in fight; he lost the battle; 30. thousand of his
soldiers were devoured by the sword, himself there slain, his head carried on
a Lances point along all the Country: the Turk gave not arms over, till he
had wasted, and by conquest dismembered from Christendom the Empire of Greece,
Hungary, a portion of high Germany and sundry other Countries, the Popes
Legate being bringer of this gay doctrine, was strangely descried, and slain
when he deemed himself out of danger, having escaped the brunt of the battle.
Such events weighed and compared with the commandments of God, and the examples
here before produced, which certify us of his will, may make one judge
religiously enough, that God was displeased at their irreverent regard of his
name, and that thereby he would teach and make us understand, that faith should
be holden more dear of us than all worldly things. We have as good reason
after so many miseries heard, seen and felt, in religion and temporal
affairs throughout all Europe, as well in general as particular, to think
that they have happened in all or in part, because of the infidelity executed
with cruelty against them, who under the faith of the Potentats of
Christendom presented themselves at the Council of Constance, with intention
and hope not to cope with th'aduersarie or defend their cause but by the word
of God; and further sithence that time against an infinite number of Christians
that have disloyally been martyred in Germany, France, Spain, Italy, in
England, Scotland, Flanders and other countries. What know we whether the
misfortunes of war and other notable calamities that have be fallen certain
Lords of our time, are so many punishments of their desloyaltie? We see their
misfortunes, neither can we be ignorant of their treachery, and we know
elsewhere the wretched ends of the perjured, as of Lisander, Hannibal, Siphax,
Caracalla, and of Hebert The Earl of Vermandois, of th'Earles of Charolois and
Saint Paul, and of others innumerable. A Jew of this our age has imputed all
the miseries wherein those of his nation are wrapped, to their faithlesnes.
Unworthy is he the reputation of a faithful Christian, that will violate his
faith and makes no reckning of it: unworthy is he to receive faith of God, or
find faith among men, that knows not how to keep it. They say that sin is
known by its train, that sin is the penalty of sin: but chiefly that is
verified of faithlesnes. To this purpose do the Hebrews advise men above all to
beware of this vice: for having crept once into their acquaintance, by and by
it grows familiar, customary and domestical. We have observed that ever since
this doctrine was received in so great a Synod of Bishops, unfaithful
disloyalty has borne sway in all that has been done or treated among all the
Potentats of Christendom; and among all Christians welnigh: the Bishops are
the chief heads thereof, the evil from thence is descended to the members,
and so from member to member throughout the whole body. I shame to say, how
since ye have received and practiced this goodly distinction, ye have mortgaged
or rather forfeicted the honor and commendation of troth and fidelity
purchased so dearly and carefully among all nations by your predecessors. Ye
are at this day among all nations as a vessel wherein is no pleasure,
commodity, nor assurance. Ye retain the solemnity of oaths by custom, ye
leave the truth by malice. Shame will not suffer me to pursue this point any
further. Yet one thing will I add, that faithlesnesse justly bringes the
faithless person in suspect that he fayles in faith toward Jesus Christ: for
as one of the ancientes said none loses his faith, save he that had it not.
Then my children, ye that are Christians by the grace of God, give no place to
Paynims in virtuous acts, which nature, reason, law, custom, necessity, and
your sovereign Lord God do inioyne you so expressly: follow the examples
propounded by the holy Ghost to fortify you against the subtle quirks and
wisdom of the flesh: believe it not to be permitted which God forbids and
with indignation punishes: eschew not his commandments, but eschew his
wrath: frame not his word to your passions, to your reuenges, to your ambition,
but frame your selves to it, and by it rule your desires.

CHAP. II. Whether men's consciences ought to be compelled for Religion, and how
the Magistrate should be employed against heretics.
But ye will tell me perhaps, that ye are not moved to begin this war by
disloyalty, nor by desire of revenge, nor by other evil passion: but through
zele ye bear to the glory of God, to th'aduancement of the kingdom of his
son our Lord, to th'edificatio^ of his Church: through the charity ye bear
toward all men, whom ye feign would have to be all good Christians, who^ ye
would marshal in the Church under the obedience of God, or cut of the refusers;
to cease all blasphemies and abominations that they commit against his divine
Majesty, and to purchase assured tranquillity to all the faithful. The holy
Ghost foreseing (as it seems) your excuses says, that Saul assaied to
destroy the Gabaonits through a zele he bare to the children of Israel and
Judah: this his devotion was deemed sin against God; the Israelites and namely
the children of Saul incurred Gods displeasure for this sin, 2. Reg. 21.
as has been said. Moreover, the Jews persecuting the Christians, even then
when they crucified the Messiah, were inflamed with a most ardent affection
toward God and their Temple: by this their affection and the execution thereof
they deserved the wrath, estranging, curse, and punishment of God: S. Paul
speaking of them and of the evil they did to the faithful, says: Romans 10.
I will bear th'Israelites witness that they have the zele of God, but not
after knowledge: Ioh. 16.
Jesus Christ said to his Apostles the hour comes, that whosoever shall put
you to death, shall think he does God high service (...) suppose you that this
zele did excuse the murderers of the Apostles? 2 Reg. 6.
Likewise with very great zele did Oza stretch forth his had to uphold the Ark
of the Lord; howbeit he was punished. Zele then is so sclender an excuse of
sin, that it self is sin, if it be not directed by sound skill and
knowledge. Man is not licensed to seek the execution of whatsoever himself
conceiueth shall serve the glory of God. He must learn and know by Gods word
what he is to desire, whereto his endeavors must tend, what way he is to take,
and what means he must use. It is well done to covet and seek th'aduancement
of Gods kingdom, th'acco^plishment of his Church: it greatly concerns us to
behold the number of the faithful very soon fulfilled for the glory of God,
and our own sanctification and glorificatio^, but yet let it be done with
discretion. The holy Ghost is the chief workemaister in building the Church,
let him control us, let the means that he has taught conduct us: we can not
be ignorant if we but consider how he has proceeded ever since the creation of
the world to the building of the Church the house of God. He would never be
served with the violence of men, of fire, of sword, and of the halter to
compel men to enter into the Church. Adam, Seth, and Enos enforced not Cain to
return to God after he was plunged in despair, when he had forsaken God, his
country, and consequently the Church by reason of his sin. Noe used not
weapons to compel the people to turn to God, but prayers and preachings in
the name of the Lord, he labored to convert them by words and examples of
godliness, he manaced them not with his own wrath, or with his own arms, but
with the wrath and arms of The Almighty. Abraham longed with all his heart to
see the effect of Gods promises, he saw in spirit already the Church filled with
nations innumerable, he beheld about him great power, he fought, he overcame,
but yet he never attempted to bring men to God by arms. The children of Israel
fought, vanquished, conquered, and destroyed many nations: yet where can ye
find that they went about to constrain one only man of so many peoples to
suffer their circumcision, and become one of their Church? if they had
propounded to th'Ammonits, Moabites, Philistines, and to the Syrians which would
have yielded to all conditions of peace, for to live peaceably by them, thus:
we will leave you in peace in your houses and families among your wives and
children, we will leave you your goods, your towns and dominions; provided
that ye renounce your idolatry, and receive our law, the law of the Lord: if
not, we will continually pursue by arms your end and destruction: how many
Proselits think you had they made, what increase had they brought to the
Church? They know it, that do know what power has fear, conceit and peril
over worldly men, that know what multitudes have by the arms of th'Arabians,
Tartars, Persians, Mamalukes, and Turks, bin ranged to Mahomets religion. We
can not say that th'Israelites wanted affection to the glory of God, and
auauncement of his kingdom; for in other matters they sufficiently witnessed
their devotion. Again, we can not say that they wanted force; for God fought
for them almost visibly, there were men so valiant among them that their
matches were never found nor fained otherwhere, an hundred of theirs could
disco^fite ten thousand others, 4. Reg. 6.
one of them alone by prayer did confound an infinite army of Syrians; their
wars were wonders. But they knew that fear and force were not workmen of
the house of God. We can not doubt of the power of our Lord Jesus Christ; he is
God: we can not doubt of his tender love toward us and th'edification of his
Church, he humbled himself infinitely, being God he took upon him humane
nature, and submitted himself to the miseries of the flesh, except sin,
suffering reproaches, torments, and death, even the curse of God his father for
our salvation; he prayed, preached, and wrought miracles for th'edification of
the Church: with one twinkling of an eye, with one only word he might have
compelled or confounded all men, he might have fought with twelve legions of
Angels if it had been his pleasure, he might have done to all as he did to S.
Paul; he did it not. He forbad them that meant to use force, he lifted not up
his hand, he handled no sword nor warlike weapon, his will was not that arms
should intermeddle in the kingdom of the word. Thus we may not bring men to
the house of God but by means allowed by Jesus Christ, for none can go to God
but by him, he is the door of the house of God. The Apostles also have
witnessed to us their earnest desire, in that they abandoned the world and
themselves for our example, and to win us bare with our infirmities, objected
themselves to all dangers, drad not the assaults of the devil, the hate of the
world, the rigor of Magistrates, the storms of the sea, the pain, ignominy
and terror of punishments, no not the horror of Hell, for to edisie the house
of God: they prayed, preached, and interpreted, they wrote, they suffered, and
all to build the Church: as for carnal weapons, they refused, for so had
their master Christ enjoined: when he sent them to the conquest of peoples,
he commanded them to go alone without sundry garments, without money, without
bread, with a staff only in their hand, and not with the fear and force of
arms. Even so did the Lord rebuke his Apostles that craved leave of him to
pray for fire to fall down from heaven on such as would not receive them: ye
know not (quoth he) of what spirit ye are; for the son of man came not to
destroy souls, but to save them. Prayers therefore, preachings, prophecies,
interpretations, writings, miracles and sufferinges were the tools wherewith
The Apostles built the house of God. Yours are of a far other sort; they
humbled themselves, ye exalt your selves; they prayed, ye curse, and
command; they preached, expounded, and writ, ye say not a word, ye shut, ye
hide the book, ye write with the sword: they suffered, ye make others
suffer, they were murdered, ye are massacrers. Thus have ye forsaken the way
of our Savior and his Disciples. Take heed that it be not told you, that you
follow in this behalf the way of Mahumet. Mahumet said he was the greatest
Prophet sent of God to constrain by violence of arms all those that would not
submit themselves under the power of God by the preaching of his word, and to
that purpose God had sent him three keys, of Justice, of Prophecy, and of
Victory. Great is the appearance that this novelty of forcing men's consciences
is come out of Satan's shop. For besides the novelty thereof and slat
repugnance against the doctrine and histories of the Bible, it carries
th'infallible mark of Satan, th'executio^ belyeth the promise. Ye promise
your selves to compel men's consciences and so bring them to God, which can not
be. It is notorious that the material sword has no power over the soul. Ye
may constrain the body to be present at the Mass, to bow it self before your
inventions, your images and relikes, but ye can not enforce the conscience to
consent to these bowings and services. It is as if ye would weigh the fiery
flame. The more ye assay to compel and enthrall the conscience, the more free
it remains. The Martyrs that were violently forced to stand by the sacrifices
of Idols, were not Pagans therefore. So they that by compulsion become
Christians, are nothing less then Christians. But admit ye could force men's
consciences, suppose ye by this mean to bring them to God? Ye, whose might and
knowledge can not reach so far as to the will of man, yet do not accept a
friend feigned or forced, ye make no account in your houses and Lordships of
submissions or homages founded on dissimuled pretense or fearful co^straint:
God that will principally reign over our wills, and full well knows them,
that deserves and demands to be loved of us with all our heart, with all
our will, with all our strength, with all our soul and with all our
understanding, will he receive these forced souls which ye bring him?
Christian Religion consists in faith: nothing is more contrary to faith then
force: ye may compel me^ to do, or to speak, but to make them to believe ye
are never able. Whosoever believes not, can not be a Christian. 1. Pet. 5.
For which cause S. Peter commands saying, feed the flock, not as having
dominion over the Lords inheritance. Let us believe then that this is not the
manner whereby God draws and receives men into his house, whereby he
enlarges the limits of his empire. The force that he employeth is spiritual,
sweet, agreeable and healthful. First he possesses the will, after he
contenteth th'vnderstanding, he rules the reason, and so by degrees he becomes
master of such as he will and such as will him. The Empire of the consciences
is governed by means of the word, this is the scepter whereby Jesus Christ
reigns, whereby he destroys the powers, fortresses, counsels and all
highness that lifts it self against the knowledge of God, by the same all
understanding is enthralled to his obedience. God by his Prophets has so
promised and foretold. My word, says he, in Isay, shall not return to me in
vain, Isa. 11.55. 2. Cor. 10.
it shall do what I have willed. I will smite the earth with the rod of my
mouth, and will slay the wicked with the breath of my lips. Esdras reports in
his vision, 4. Esd. 13.
that our Lord seeing all nations arising against him, lifted not his hand, held
no sword nor warlike instrument, but cast out of his mouth as it were a flash
of fire, which finally consumed all nations. This is the stone cut without
hands, Dan. 2.
that must bruise the iron, the copper, the earth, Apoc 19.
the silver, and the gold. The sword that must confound heretics proceeds from
the mouth of God: Jesus Christ accepted this sword, rejected and forbad
the other. The Apostles neither had nor sought any other. 2. Pet. 3.
It is the word that made and preserves the world, as S. Peter says. The word
of grace is mighty to edify, 1. Cor. 4.
and has begotten the faithful to Jesus Christ by the Gospel, says S. Paul.
Our weapons (says he) are not carnal and material, 2. Cor. 10.
but spiritual. The Lord cleanses and washes his Church by his word. Ephesians.
5.
When he reckneth up the workmen and instruments of the Church and weapons of
Christen me^, he makes no mention of robbers, murderers, massacrers, men of
war, and their material arms; 1. Cor. 12.
but he remembers Apostles, Prophets, and Doctors, virtues, healings,
knowledge of tongs, administration of Sacraments, Ephesians. 6.
truth, justice, peace, faith, hope, charitic, salvation, the spirit, the word
of God, and prayer. When he speaks of the workmanship of the Church, he uses
these terms, to plant, 1. Cor. 3.
to water, to give increase, etc. Such words are in no wise suitable to warlike
violence. For so much then as we neither ought nor may build in the house of God
with arms, and that we must build with the word of God, which is all
sufficient, necessary and commanded: let us not dissobey th'auctoritie of the
sacred Scripture, the commandments of our sovereign God, the conduct of his
holy spirit; according to the example of of our Lord, of his Apostles and of
his Church: arm we our selves with the word of God, the sword of the spirit,
with humility, patience, and holiness of life: build we the Church every one of
us to th'vttermost extent of his ability with these instruments. And if any
gainstand this our trauail with intent to frustrate our hope and purpose, to
reuerse our work, or to build by us and not with us: let us pray, and continue
with increase of earnest desire. But now me thinks I hear you say: what need
more words? these two cases are now clear and undoubted; the one, that we
should not enterprise to force men's consciences; the other, that Clergy men
should not seek the preservation of the Church otherwise than by spiritual
arms: but by this discourse, or any other, I cannot conceive that the
Magistrate is prohibited to destroy the body of an heretic or schismatike: and
consequently, that our king is not permitted to employ his arms and armies
against the Reformed, which are reputed such. I grant you in some sort, that
the text of the Evangelist before cited to this purpose, seems more to bind
the Ecclesiastical person, than the Magistrate. But that which I have
discoursed to you, how the Church from Adam to Christ, never used the force of
flesh and blood, and of material arms, for to multiply and augment it self,
and for to ruin the infidels in detestation of their naughty religion, makes
directly as well against the Magistrate as the Churchman. For so much as Adam,
Seth, Enos, Noe, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, were not only Patriarchs, but also
were kings, Governors and Magistrates of peoples. Joshua, the Judges, and kings
of Israel, who absteyned from such violence in behalf of their borderers, had
the right of magistracy over them, as alredie has been noted.
Notwithstanding, it shall not be amiss to treat more particularly touching
this power of the Magistrate over heretics and infidels. But first I take it
for confessed, that our Ecclesiastical persons are guilty of great error and
enormitie at this instant, in that they manage and employ material arms,
inioyne and swear every one to put on armor for the ruin of the Reformed,
setting sorth and leading in their own persons the bands of men of war, yea
whole armies. About whose heads ye may commonly see their weapons flourish with
as much pride hatred and fury, as the most barbarous Seculars can show.
Proceed we then to the power of the Magistrate. First the reformed will answer
you (for their books and actions approve, that such is their doctrine and
discipline) how the Magistrate has a just and lawful vocation from God, to
condemn and put to death the heretic and schismatike; and that if he neglect
or refuse to execute this his duty, being able to perform the same, he then
misregardeth and offends the law of God and his own calling, and deserves
blame and punishment. But withal they affirm and maintain, that before the
magistrate proceeds to such executions, he must patiently hear them that are
suspected of heresy or schism, they must cause them to be convinced by the
word of God, in holy, assured, and free assemblies, persuade them, pray for
them, with patience awaite Gods pleasure for their conversion; and after, if
they persist still, then is it not only lawful, but also necessary, to
deliver them over to death: they affirm also, that as for themselves, they
were never called nor heard in a Counsel free and assured for them: they have
not been convinced by holy Scripture: that when ye called them, it was only to
hear their condemnation: the Judges to whom ye sent them were deaf, and
trusted rather to loud clamors, than sound arguments. Again, that when ye
have conferred with them, ye have made exception to th'authoritic of Gods word,
according to which word they have got the upper hand in all that has been
propounded: that ye have delayed and crossed the disputations and conferences, as
fearing to be utterly convinced, and being required ye would not return: it
seems, say they, that ye could not abide the light of the truth which was
set before your eyes: that therefore ye shrunk aside and hid your heads, not
daring to appear but with plain or privy force. All which allegations they
offer to verify by the impartial histories, and autentike records of this
time, concerning the affairs of religion, as well in Germany as in this Realm,
and elsewhere throughout Europe. Now for my part, touching this power of the
Magistrate, I pray you consider, that the Gospel commands not the death of
heretics and infidels so expressly as the law. According to the law they must
not be suffered to live til the morrow: but by the Gospel, patience and long
tarying is chiefly prescribed in such pursuites, as appears by the places
above cited, and specially by the answer of Jesus Christ to The Apostles S.
James and S. John, and by the doctrine of S. Paul. Luke. 9. 2. Tim. 2.
Ye shall hardly find in the Gospel one commandment to condemn the heretic
to death: but ye shall find there, as it were, qualifications and restraints
upon that commandment of the Law. It is written in S. Matthew, if he
hearkeneth not to thee, Mat. 18.
tell it the Church, and if he hearkeneth not to the Church, let him be to thee
as an Ethnik and Publican: it is not written, deliver him into the hands of the
Justice, or of th'Executioner it is less written, massacre him. S. Paul says,
in the times of heresies, watch, travail, do the work of an Evangelist: he
says not, make leagues and conspiracies, command and mustre armies, dispatch
al with th'edge of the sword. The number of perverse heretics was great in the
Apostles time, their writings are full of complaints against them. But what!
Did they therefore run to these extremities of raising powers to root them
out? No, they punished a few, to restrain the rest not by the sword which was
forbidden them, but by the wonderful power of the word. These extraordinary
acts are lessons for our ordinary Magistrates, whenever they meet with
multitudes infected with heresy: first to use lenity, leisure and labor, to
win them all if it may be, than to punish the Archheretikes by death, to the
terror of the residue, and evermore, to beware that he make no general
executions. For so shall he imitate The Apostles administration of justice in
cases of religion, nay he shall imitate his Lord God, who if he sometimes send
sudden ve^gea^ce on a few for their wickedness and misbeleef, yet does he long
time and patiently abide the conversion of innumerable others. Again how know
we the time of Gods calling; the election belongs not peculiarly now a days
to any certain nation, the gate lies open to all; he brings into his vineyard
some in the morning, others at noone, and some at night. If the people of God
had in old time destroyed all the Gentiles, they had withal destroyed so many
Churches, which since have been gathered of Gentiles. How know we, whether he
that is at this day an heretic or schismatike, shall be so an year hence? How
know we whether God will call his children, neuewes, or his neuewes children?
He that had consumed with fire the towns of Europe infected with Arianisme for
certain hundred years, how much had he hindered the kingdom of our Savior,
the fulfilling of the number of the faithful, seeing that out of those Towns
the Lord has taken and daily does take some to finish his account? If ye tell
me, that all lewd persons guilty and convict of other crimes may stand on those
pretenses, to avoid or make blunt the Magistrates sword: I will answer you,
that between heresy and other common crimes th'ods is very great. For the
heretic put to death without pause, seems to die in a hard case, and few
there are of them that make show of repentance while breath is in their body:
and no marvel. For their hearts are so hardened, that they had rather leave
their life then their opinion. And can ye persuade them to repent, who will
acknowledge no offense? As for other malefactors, their crimes are open to
their conscience their faults proceeded not of error in says, but of frailty
in flesh. That they acknowledge them, is one good step to repentance; that they
are sorry for them, is another as good; that they have faith, they profess in
words; that they die true Christians, charity wills us to presume, and
leave the rest to God. Behold therefore the cause why the greatest penalty
allotted heretics (except a very few) in the primitive Church, was banishment
till the time of pope Pelagius that fate in the Pontifical sea about the year
of grace 557: who was the first that ordained, they should from thenceforth be
punished with death: and till that time, though most heresies had already made
their inrodes and invasions, yet among them were few heretics condemned to
death. And to say the truth, this manner of dealing of the primitive Church well
weighed, shall appear founded on manifold reasons and auctorities, which I let
pass at this present. Now this discourse imports at least; that ye should
not proceed so hastily in such pursuites as ye are wont, and yet will not I
conclude that heretics must be left unpunished. But contrariwise do affirm
that the Magistrate ought with his sword to smite the heretic duly convinced.
Howbeit my former caveat must always be remembered, that the Magistrate is not
to attempt any such exemplary punishment when it may bring the Church and
Estate to confusion, hauok and ruin: in which occurrent our Saviors doctrine
is to be practiced; that is, to leave the darnell in the field till the day of
harvest, and not seek to root it out for fear of plucking up or spoiling the
good corn that grows among. And that conformably to the histories cited as
well of The Emperors Maximian, Galerius, Constantius, Constantine the great,
Iouinian, Valentinian, Valens and others; as of Charles the fifth, Maximilian,
and Rodolph now reigning; conformably also to the proceedings of the most part
of our neighbors: agreeably moreover to the maturest and most deliberate
Arrestes of all our sovereign courts, given in the beginning of these civil
wars; all which histories I need not repeat. It were good that the Church and
Magistrate agree to judge and repress heretics, it is true: but it behoues
the word of God to be received into their company and be president among them,
as being chief of the three Crowns that are in the world, and to judge
according to the same, for so much as to it only belongs to decide all
differences of religion: for since it is the service of God and his glory which
in true religion is sought, we must be directed by his commandment, and not
by man's, where they be contrary. Most seemly it is that Justice should
mainteyne the Church, that Moses and Aaron should be brethren: but yet Justice
must not unjustly favor the Church, Exodus 32.
Moses must not blush to rebuke his brother Aaron sharply if he forsakes Gods
commandments to assist th'importunities of men's fancies: it must not be, that
through their mutual support evil counterpeized, the one of them should
overthrow the other, and the whole commonwealth with all: it is expedient,
that Moses and Aaron, viz. Justice and the Church should link themselves
against heretics in such wise, that the Church incur no danger. For in case
of evident peril men must attend the extraordinary hand of God: Number. 16.
as they did in behalf of the great multitude which favored the strife about
the Priesthood. For had they indiscreetly put hand to weapon, they should have
greatly troubled and hazarded the whole body of the Church, they had buried
many of the faithful under the heaps of the other, and therefore they
addressed their prayers to the Lord, and committed the cause to him. To be
short, our love to the Church (as is said before) must excel our hatred to
heretics. 3. Reg. 12. 2. Chr. 11.
Even so the Prophet Semeia forbad Roboam to make war on the ten Tribes of
Israel that had revolted with schism and heresy from his government, and
from the doctrine and temple of the Lord: because this war, as may well be
presumed, would have set the whole people of Israel in a most vehement flame
and confusion. We read to this purpose, in th'Ecclesiasticall history, a
narration most worthy the marking, of Iustine The Emperor syrnamed The Elder.
This Emperor hating heretics, and specially Arians, who at his coming to the
Crown were in great number and credit, made an Edict, whereby he forbad
th'execise of th'Arian Religion: as soon as th'Arians were certified of this
Edict, they went about to procure the like against the true Christians, in
places where they had greater power, and got of Theodorik king of Italy,
though a vassal and subject of The Empire, the like prohibitions throughout
Italy for th'exercise of none beside th'Arian Religion: whereupon Pope John the
first of that name, who then was at Rome, seeing himself with all the faithful
not permitted the use of their Religion, by th'aduise of all the good Bishops
and Magistrates of Italy, assisted with the Bishop of Rauenna and certain
Senators and Consuls of Rome, passed over to Constantinople with speed to
The Emperor, to cause him to cease his interdiction of th'Arian Religion, for
that otherwise no means in Italy was left to exercise the true Religion: he
showed with tears and groans that better it were to let the heretics line,
then to put the true Church in ieoperdy, and to smoother it with new
persecutions. To be short he prevailed so, that The Emperor restored th'Arians
and left them in peace. Thus ye see the Pope himself practice the doctrine I
propound. Have ye not now a days as great reason and as great need to cease
the pursuites and persecutions that are made against the Reformed, and to
restore them the liberty of their Religion and inioyment of their goods, to
the end they may render to the Catholics abiding in the countries possessed by
them, both their goods and th'exercise of their Religion, and again that they
may assure all the towns and Catholic countries of France, where-into hap
and force of arms may bring the Reformed: and specially to assure so many
Catholics dwelling in small towns, boroughs and villages locked in among their
forts, whom they have not hitherto disquieted: for it is not to be doubted, but
that in such measure as they shall feel their own discommodities, and
despair of reconcilement, their egrenes to revenge will increase, albeit we
must needs commend hitherto their moderation therein. Besides it appears that
Constantine the great (whose actions are ordinarily, and for the most part set
forth as a rule to direct all Princes in their affairs) attributed so much to
this doctrine as he might not possibly more. For to stop and prevent the
tumultes and commotions which the first and smaller multitudes of Arians might
have made in th'estat and Church, he did not only suffer the^ in rest, in
th'enioyment of their goods, in the liberty of their consciences and exercise
of their Religion; but also the better to contain them, to content and take
from them all occasion of running to arms, he showed rigor sometimes to the
faithful at their instance. We read that to contain and satisfy th'Arians he
banished that good man Athanasius, most spitefully and unjustly pursued by
them: for they were ready by arms to seek his death amid the embrasements,
weapons and defense of the faithful: Constantine himself, by his letters that
he writ to the people of the Catholic Church of Alexandria, testifies that
for the consideration aforesaid, he had condemned Athanasius. See here how good
Emperors and good Magistrates have cuer preferred the quiet of the Church, the
peace of the people, before the rooting out of heresies: assuring themselves
that order, peace, and the word of God can do more in such matters then war
with its confusions and outrages. And it is to be noted that when we enforced
our selves to war on infidels and heretics with material arms, God for the
most part withdrew his blessings from our works and enterprises: nothing have
we done, but wast and confound the Church. Christians have often attempted to
chase the miscreant Pagans out of the holy land; nothing have they achieved,
but the sharpning of The East Churches persecution, wherein they did so much
that they are in a manner lost. The Turk has gotten and encroched so far on
Christendom since we began to war with him, that it passes credit,
considering we have so often, and with so great affection and power sought
against them. If God favored not our armies, when by vow and unfeigned devotion
thinking to attain Paradise, thinking to advance his kingdom, we employed our
lives and goods to fight with the Turks his enemies, and the enemies of our
faith, whom then we need not fear seeing the distance of their country from
ours; and if it be permitted us to conclude of the will and blessing of God
after the good or bad success of the war, as sometimes it falls out: it
may be said, that if he blessed not such armies, with great reason will he curse
th'armies which we employ against them that demanded not as they say, but
liberty to call upon God by one only Jesus Christ, according to the contents
of the holy Scripture, and under the conduct of the holy Ghost; which we employ
against our neighbors, against our brethren and countrymen, who have ought,
or may have goods, estates and dignities, that would be very commodious for
us, and this last poinct makes our devotion shrewdly suspected. Again, what
have we done in our civil wars that so many years have set all the
dominions of Europe on fire, that have whetted and armed all Christians the one
against the other? We have pulled up, so much as in us lay; that small deal of
good corn which grows within the Lords field; we have made wast both within
and without, we have caused insinite souls to swerve, that otherwise were in a
way good enough: we have made so many hypocrites, so many dissemblers in the
faith, and Atheistes, that I tremble and grudge to think of it: we have so
ruined both the state and the Church that the devil and the stranger sinde
breaches on all sides to come trample and destroy us utterly. We are not
excusable, God has foretold us, that thinking to weed his field or Church,
we should pluck up the good corn, we should spoil or root out the faithful.
The Experience of these eight and twenty or thirty years past, has made
evident to us, how much the narrow search and pursuit made against the
Reformed, endangereth the Church and whole estate of this Realm. Let us
therefore leave them in peace, that we also may be in peace; and let us laud
the Lord peaceably and without ceasing; let us preserve our selves with them,
since we can not destroy them without destroying our selves. It is said that the
duty of the Magistrate, and of every private person, but principally of the
magistrate, is above all to tender the preservation of the state. It is said
also, that the Magistrate is bound not to respect alone that which is just and
good simply, but withal discreetly to compare the just with the just, good
with good, law with law, and the same wisely to apply to present occasions,
staying himself on that which is better and more equal: to compare besides
th'uniust with th'uniust, evil with evil, and according to the necessity of
the time, and importance of the affairs, to stay himself on that is less
unjust or evil. Now the injustice is less, to let the heretik, or the
suspected of heresy live in peace, than disturb the Church. There is more
justice and holiness in the conservation of the Church, and of a whole estate to
the comfort of a whole people, the maintenance of justice and policy in
general and particular, than in the dissolution of the Church and of a Realm,
and in th'annihilating and general suppression of Religion and justice. For so
much then as we are not able to order the Reformed after our will, or destroy
them without putting the whole Christen Church, justice, and all the people in
hazard of an headlong downfall and utter subversion, let us accept, how late
soever, Act. 5.
the counsel of Gamaliel recited by S. Luke, as the most tolerable we ca^
take in this cause: let us not meddle with these me^, but leave them; if their
council or their work be of men it shall be overthrown, but if it be of God,
we cannot overthrow it. And albeit our power fails, or that we enterprise not
to cut of heretics: let us not think therefore, that the glory of God can be
abased, or the Church rumed by by them: for the word of God shall vanquish and
consume, how long soever it lingereth, the word and imagination of men, it can
full well work what God wills, as in Isay is written: Isai. 55.
nothing is more strong nor more durable than the Church. May we think to love
the Church better than he that made, and still maintains it? is it not Gods
inheritance? Cast we that care on him: Mat. 15.
he knows well how to root them out that are not of his election. Every
plant, says he, which my heavenly Father has not planted, shall be plucked up
by the roots: it will come well enough to pass, though we toil nor spoil
our selves among arms by the fury and licentiousness of war. Jointly
therewith, it is easy to observe in histories, that those heresies which the
faithful have assailed to repress by war, endured notwithstanding longer
than the rest. In the mean season comfort we our selves in our zele and
patience with the histories of the holy Scripture, considering how he has
destroyed the most part of heretics and Schismatikes. Nadab and Abihu were by
fire miraculously consumed for having used strange fire. Leuit. 10.
Corah, Dathan and Abiron, and their accomplices, were wonderfully devoured by
the earth and fire, Number. 16.
for having contended about the Priesthood. Act. 5.
Ananias and Saphira were miraculously slain at the word pronounced by S.
Peter, for having misdoubted of the power of the holy Ghost. So S. Paul, by
virtue of the word, made Elimas the sorcerer blind. Act. 13.
The Ecclesiastical history is stored no less with such miraculous
destructions of heretics; among which, that of Arius is notable: for eue^ when
he thought him self most assured and as it were to have set his foot on the
throat of that good Pastor Alexander his enemy, he strangely burst in sunder
at the same Alexanders prayer. In so much that the Lord proceeding by this
supernatural means against heretics, lessoneth us, that from him all
punishments and vengeance, lying without the reach of man's power, are to be
looked for, that from him the hewing down of huge heresies must be looked for.
In fine, let us beware that rash zele carry us not too far, let us restrain
and rule it after the doctrine and examples of the holy Scripture, and the
imitation as well of the Primitive Church, as of our neighbors. Away with these
arms forbidden, accursed, and most pernicious to the Church, purge we the
Church; seek we the Churches repose by means allowed, blessed and commanded
of God, by the word of God, and the fruits thereof. Leave we the Magistrates
sword, since it will not serve our turn without hazarding all, the Church,
Magistrate and people. Let us acknowledge then, that we have failed, what zele
soever we pretend: but much more, if our private and worldly passions, and not
devotion, have provoked us to this war. Whether it be so or no, ye know; ye
may cast a mist before men's eyes, but not before the Lord; he created men's
hearts, he knows the^. And if it be so that ye have drawn over your faces
the mask of devotion to conceal the hatred, envy, ambition and the avarice
that eggs you on in deed to kindle these wars, ye may well be deemed the most
execrable persecutors that ever were. For the Heathen in their persecutions
against the faithful were for the most part carried on with devotion they bare
to their Gods. And therefore in the conscience and true feeling of your great
excess, be the more displeased therewith. Shield not your fault with this
blind excuse, that the reformed have taken arms for their defense, which (say
ye) the faithful never did; for in using that pretense ye auow them for
faithful and your selves persecutors: if they do amiss ye are the original;
ye are answerable to God for their sins and your own: ye force them to
arms; for otherwise they should be guilty of their own death, and of tempting
the Lord, if they being able would not seek to avoid it. Iwis they arm not
themselves to build their Church by arms, but to defend their countries,
towns, families, goods, repose, and lives: they come not to assail you with
sword and fire, for to restrain you of your religion: they require nothing
but peace and the preaching of Gods word for to build their Church: ye mistrust
the truth and power of your religion, denying their demand. Over and above, it
is no new thing nor reproved to see the Church of God armed for its defense.
The Israelites defended themselves against the Syrians, Egyptians, Assyrians,
Medes, and Persians, the almighty by ayding them has showen how well he allowed
that their defense: he fought for them with hayle and thunder, he stayed the
course of the Sun, that light might suffice them for th'vtter discomfiture of
their enemies, he has assisted them with his Angels to confound their armies.
We read also that God has oftentimes favored the defense of Christian
churches, and specially those of The East under the protection of Constantine
the great, against Licinius Emperor of the East, and by consequence their
Emperor and souerargne Magistrate, so far forth that Licinius was put to
flight: which is an history that locketh their lips, who boast so much of this
maxim, that whole provinces may not stand in defense of their religion against
their Prince. For Licinius was lawful Emperor of The East without all
controversy, even when Constantine made war on him to cause him to surcease
his persecutions against his Christian subjects: and Constantine was not
Emperor then but of Italy, Afrike, France, and Spain. Moreover, most
certain it is that Licinius was Emperor of The East long before Constantine
was declared Emperor of the West: nevertheless he undertook this war
against Licinius at th'instance of The East Churches, and was blessed of God. We
read again to this same purpose, how the Christians of Persia oppressed with
intolerable afflictions by their king, had recourse to the Romans craving
succor of them, and praying the^ to pity their extreme necessity; the Bishop
of Constantinople labored so to Theodosius The Emperor that he undertook their
protection: Theodosius made war on the king of Persia, obtained many
miraculous victories, and in fine compelled him to entreat his Christen
subjects more gently. The Reformed pretend to have at this day as good reason
to appeal to the king of Navarre, th'Almains and other their neighbors for
protection and defense. And although hitherto ye have surmounted them in number
of victories, yet that justifies your quarrel never the more. Apoc. 13.
For it is written of Antichrist, that for a time he shall have th'vpperhand
over the elect. But rather mark the success: if ye have got some victories,
they have had victories also, they are come nearer their end and purpose, then
you. The right of the cause is not always auowed by the victory. The
Beniamites mainteining a most unrighteous quarrel remained in two battles
masters of the field; Iud. 20.
in the third they were quite defeicted. Th'Israelits overcame, and were
ouercomen: Heb. 11.
the Scripture teaches; they overcame through the justice of their quarrel,
assisted with faith and assurance of Gods favor; again they were overcome
more often through the desert of their sins making them unworthy of Gods
favor, then th'iniustice of their cause. How know we, whether th'enterchaunged
course of our victories, and mishap of the Reformed have not come to pass
rather by reason of their sins, then by any unrighteous quarrel they
maintained in this war?

CHAP. III. Whether it be lawful with good conscience to live with heretics
or nigh them.
Peradventure ye will tell me, that my counsel is a snare of sin: because
ye gather by my discourse that a man may converse with heretics, which is
prohibited in many places of the Gospel. My children, if ye will yield as
much to reason as ye do to your passions, ye will upon this doubt stand
contented with those arguments and examples by me already proposed, when I
proved that we might lawfully grant and keep faith to heretics: there I have
sufficiently taught, that in France it is impossible to sequester the Reformed
from the Catholics without destruction of France: there also have I recited
the reasons for which we have determined sometimes to live in peace with them,
and wherefore likewise all our neighbors have taken the self same resolution
and continue still therein, and do find it better for them to keep it, then we
to have left it. Neuthereles, to make it plain, that I am no less earnest to
desire and seek your conversion, and safety, then your selves are earnest to
retain and recall the causes of your confusion and wrack: and also to make
good, that my substantial reasons do in number and weight exceed those empty
shadows that make a great muster in your passionat conceits, I am content for
your sakes to handle again more particularly this question, to wit: whether we
may with good conscience converse with heretics or nigh them. I reknowledge
that it is written: Take heed least any men seduce you: go not, be not
partakers with them, take heed that none overtake you: avoid an heretic after
the first and second admonition: who so disobeyeth the Church let him be to
thee as an Heathen person and Publican. Mat. 24. Ephesians. 5. Col. 2. Tit. 3. Mat.
18.
This is in sum the whole doctrine of the Gospel in this behalf. Now so it
is, that by these words we are commanded only to beware of seducers, of
their philosophy and humane reasons, of their traditions and fables, not to be
astonished and overcome at their false miracles, not to consent nor partake
with them in their doctrine and ceremonies, and not to admit them into our more
private and familiar communications, conference and alliances: howbeit these
places import no prohibition whereby Christians are forbidden to dwell or
soiourne with infidels, heretics, or schismatikes in the same realm, in the
same commonwealth, in the same country, in the same town: otherwise we must
also affirm that the Church of God has continually disobeyed this
prohibition, and that our Lord and his Apostles lived not consormably to their
doctrine, which were blasphemy to think, much more to say. Abel lived with
Cain the reprobate. Seth and Enos men of God, dwelt confusedly among other
children of Adam that lived in a manner all without reason, law and religion as
there appetite lead them like bruit beasts made gyddy with the stroke of Gods
curse. Noe dwelt with and continually preached to the old world, whose
execrable impieties opened the windows of heaven, and abominable
transgressions brought the seas to transgress their bounds, the rivers their
banks, the fountains their brinkes conspiring against nature to ouerwhelme
their cursed carcasses with an universal sloud. Ahraham the father of the
chosen of the Lord out of many as one grape of the cluster and a plant out of
great people, 4 Esd 9.
did live, frequent, converse and traffik with many misbeleeuing nations. Isaac
did eat, make and swear alliance with th'infidell Abimelek. Jacob abode with
the idolater Laban, served him, married his daughters: he visited his brother
Esau rejected by God, he gratified him with offers and presents, he called him
his Lord. The Israelits dwelt and lived among th'Aegyptiens, Canaanits,
Syrians, Assirians, Medes and Persians: they concluded leagues with the Greeks
and Romans: they I say, that were forbidden more expressly then we, they
erected Synagogues in all regions: they were not able to withstand the manifold
changes in their Religion, even within their principal City, within the
shadow of their temple: they were defiled with idolatries, heresies, and
schisms: they saw themselves sundred into many sects of Pharisees, Saduces
and Essens. The Prophets haunted the Palaces of the kings of Judah and Israel
though they had clean forsaken the Lords way: Samuel conuersed with Saul,
Ahias and other Prophets frequented Jeroboam the son of Nabat and patron of
Idolatry, revolt and ingratitude against God and his sovereign, he that made
Israel to sin. Micheas and Elias accompanied Achab and Ochosiah both
Idolaters. Our Savior Christ visited the countries of the Jews, and soiourned
among them, even when they were most corrupt, and swarmed with sects and
heresies as is said: he communed with Saduces that denied the Resurrection, he
eat and disputed with Pharisees: he lived with Publicanes, he gratified and
honored the Gentiles with his presence, preaching, and miracles. The Apostles
bestowed most part of their care, pain, power and knowledge to confer and
communicate with the Gentiles: they built and founded Churches among the
Gentiles: they left the faithful in the same country, the same town, the
same house with the Gentiles: they permitted to the Christen woman, the marriage
already made, 1. Cor. 7.
to abide with her infidel husband, saying, what know thou o woman, whether
thou shall save thy husband, or what know o husband whether thou shall save
thy wife. Shall we be so hardy as to pronounce that all these holy examples,
be so many faults, which we ought not to follow? shall we so arroga^tly ouerweene
our selves, after so many holy precede^ts as to force the sacred Scripture to
speak that which it does not, and deliver us a doctrine not only
contradictorie to it self, but also contrary to possibility. For if it
teaches, that we ought not abide in the same country and town with Pagans
and heretics, the holy Scripture binds us to a condition impossible. Into
what parcel of the world may we go, where are not Pagans and insidels,
heretics and schismatikes? The East and South swarm with Heathnish Idolaters:
the West and North have so many sects as families. In what town, in what
company shall we hope to find one common, uniform and assured consent of the
truth, seeing among the twelve Apostles visibly taught by our Lord, by words,
miracles, conversation and example of life, one was found that durst doubt of
the Gospel, and attempt the abolishing and overthrow thereof, that banded
himself against the truth, bounty, and power of God, endeavoring not only to
gainstand God, like the Geants, but also to put him to death? How shall a man
sort him self with a company well assured in truth and rightnes of doctrine
and faith, since he can not discover nor discern the knowledge, wills and
belief of men, because of their hypocrisy and false semblant at this day in
all dealings, but principally in case of Religion; Mar. 13. 2. Cor. 10.
we live in the time, that wolves disguise themselves in sheep clothing, and
Satan trasformes himself into an Angel of light: false Prophets borrow the
cognizance of good and true Disciples, they that know the truth and dare not
speak and confess it are constrained to sta^mer with the common sort. Behold,
how none but the holy Ghost can touch to the quick or truly reprove the^ of
sin, John. 16.
that believe not in God, as S. John writes: and therefore it passes ma^s
power to discern the faithful from the infidel. The Lord does not say, that
at his coming he shall find all his elect gathered in one company, but that
he will gather them from all parts of the earth, Luke. 17.
that two shall be in one bed, the one taken, the other refused; two shall be
grinding in a mill, the one taken, the other refused. Morcouer, the holy
Scripture assures us that the Lords field can not be without darnell, that
the visible Church ca^ not be without corruption and schisms without enemies
within and without: that while she is in this world she ca^ not enjoy the title
of Triumphant; that she is named Milita^t, and so she is in deed; for she has
continually to sight against innumerable enemies domestical and foreign. So
says Jesus Christ, that his doctrine shall bring a great confusion of
misco^ceiuing, Mat. 10.
enmities and co^trarieties between Pote^tats and dominions; Mark 13.
between the nearest kindred and friends, Luke 12.
within private houses and families, for religion sake. S. Paul says: 1 Cor. 11.
there must be heresies amongst us, to the end that they, which are approved,
may be made manifest. Let us the^ leave these delicacies and dainty tenderness
for another world, and in the mean while apply and submit our selves to the
necessity of the prophesies, whose acco^plishme^t cannot be avoided: let the
example of the whole church comfort us, and let us resolve our selves on that,
which cannot be otherwise during the tune we shall inhabit this earth. Let this
counsel of S. 2. Tim. 4.
Paul to Timothy sound in our ears evermore: They shall after their own
lusts get them an heap of teachers, and shall turn their ears from the
truth, and shall be given unto fables: but watch thou in all things; suffer
adversity, do the work of an Evangelist: and elsewhere, hold not the
disobedient person as an enemy, but admonish him as a brother. He says not,
despair of him; leave the Church, she, abandon all; but watch and travail,
admonish him brotherly, to the end the let be not in thee that the work is
imperfect. Although the enemy has forced our tre^ches and baricados, so that he
is with us pell mell, that he is come to cope hand to hand; we must not fly,
we must determine on the combat, we must r'ally and stand strong to the Corpse
du guard, hard by our chiefetaine, within the shadow of our colors. Seeing then
we cannot choose but be intermedled with heretics; we must watch, ward and
travail for our own defense against them; we must give th'onset with
spiritual arms; their presence must stir up and whet our carefulnes. Seeing
the Church is militant, it must not give ground, but abide where the enemy is.
Who so flies from his enemy, and has withdrawn himself so far, that he
can not smite, hear nor see him, may not be termed militant, or one that
makes war. We must keep so close to our enemies, that they see our fires,
hear the sound of our drums and trumpets, that they see, hear and feel the
glittering, the noise and weight of our weapons. Even so the Church milita^t
ought to approach nigh the heretics, namely by charity, that they hear and
understand the sound of Gods word, that they feel the virtue thereof to their
confusion, condemnation, or conversion. If we should not draw nigh to infidels
and heretics after some sort or other, God would not call so many as he does
daihe by the efficacy of his word, which he makes them understand publikly by
exhortations, sermons and services; and privately by particular studies and
conferences. Let us not be afraid of them; the spirit of God is not a spirit
of fear; 2. Tim 1.
the word of God is mightier than all things; the primitive Church required not
to have the Pagans banished, but only to be heard of them; the virtue of the
Gospel was not enfeebled by their speaking, dealing and dwelling among them:
otherwise, the combat is not appointed for the decay of the elect, but for
their manifestation and glory, and for th'aduauncement of the spiritual
kingdom. We have a captain that cannot be put to the worse, if he lets the
enemy approach, it is not to the hazard of being vanquished and we with him;
it is for to try the valor of his soldiers, to discern the faithful from
others. Let us not doubt if we belong to him, he will never lose us.
Notwithstanding, it is good for every one to try and sound him self, and as
he feels in his heart the assurance and motion of Gods spirit, so to go
forward to the medley. If the Apostles, Bishops and Ministers of the Church,
had been so delicate and tender as we would be, both Afrik and Europ had not
yet been washed from the steine of Arianisme: we had never heard the sound of
the Gospel, we should not have been so nigh as we are, to the accomplishment of
our Saviors Prophecy, Mar. 13.
that all nations must hear the noise of his voice; there should be no
Christen Church, neither should any have been: for all these things could not
have come to pass without communicating with Pagans and Insidels, as has been
said. Physicians do visit the sick so should they that are able, succor
persons spiritually diseased howbeit discreetly and wisely, according to the
doctrine of S. Paul, to haunt them for their soule-health, for th'aduancement
of Christ his kingdom, measuring their haunt according to th'assura^ce,
knowledge and ability that God has given them. lomtly, there is no occasion to
despair of the recouerse and conversion of them of this time: for God has
rescued and healed souls more desperately sick than they. Finally, let us
ponder, how Popes in this doctrine have been contrary to themselves, which
makes us doubt that sometimes they apply their doctrines to their passions,
and to their commodity, as soon as to the verity. Councels, Popes,
Emperors, Kings of France, and the greater part of other Kings and Lords of
Europe, have permitted the Jews to dwell in Cities of Christendom, to erect
them Sinagogues, and exercise their religion; there are of them moreover at
Rome where the Pope holds his See, they have been received and comprised
within Christen Commonwealths, they have been admitted to the power and
part-taking of general and particular policies, the Emperors by their laws
and ordinances approved of the Pope, have called them to public charges,
honors and dignities with Christians, and over them. Furthermore, Popes have
not only received into Christendom the enemies of the Gospel, but have also
licensed Christians to seek them, dwell and traffike with them, and for that
end to trauerse all the compass of the world, to adventure all the dangers of
the earth the sea, the air, of men and of beasts. So the Portugals with
th'allowance of Pope Alexander the sixth, traffikt with the Affricans, the
Sauadges and the India^s, built dwelling towers and forts among them. Away then
with your opinion; it gainsayeth the letter and sense of the holy Scripture, it
gainestandeth the actions of our Lord, of his Prophets, Apostles, and of
the old Church, it is contrary to the power of the Church, it is impossible to
be performed in this world, it is contrary to it self, and is condemned by
their contrary acts that were th'auctors. Admit that it were best and most
profitable for the Church, if the number were fulfilled, and if it delayed not
her glory that she were quite separated from infidels and heretics: yet since
this fulness of contentment, and triumph is kept in store for another world, we
must acknowledge that where we are commanded to separate our selves from them,
it is chiefly meant of Ecclesiastical separation, to the end they may have the
mark of enemies, and not the separation civil and politik. Lo here again, how
the Lord instructs us, wherein to communicate with them, and wherein to divide
our selves from them. Love (says he) your enemies, Mat. 5.
that ye may be the children of your father which is in heaven: for he makes
his sun to arise upon the evil and the good, and sends rain on the just
and unjust. Then, as the Lord denies them not things common to all men, the
air, the earth, the light, and the water, but denies them his holy spirit,
which he reserueth for his chosen: so let us not reject those their societies
that concern but this world, and are necessary to all men as they are men,
though not as the elect of God: specially considering that we can not
commodiously, and without putting the Church in peril of ruin, drive them
wholly out from us. God has left them to the world, tarying for their
conversion: let us leave them by the Church, tarying for their repentance, and
Gods grace to bring them in. Mean while let us with spiritual weapons, with
watchings, and labors, hinder th'executio^ of their attempts. Let us make a
rampar round about the Church of holiness of life, joined with earnest prayers
and godly exhortations.

CHAP. IIII. Whether the order established in successions, and namely of the
Crown, ought to be broken because of Religion.
I Know that there yet remains dissension in your soul, and that ye are not
resolute. Lo here your doubt: well, say ye, be it that we must live nigh
heretics and infidels, seeing otherwise it may not be, and that it seems
necessary for th'aduancement of the kingdom of Christ, yet must we travail,
as Saint Paul appoints, and do the work of Evangelists, to let them from
plucking down the building of the Church, yea to let them from building in the
house of God, if it were possible. Perhaps it is tolerable to live with them
under one politic government, provided that we have at the least equal power
with them: but it is intolerable to be commanded by them, by cause that
seems prejudicial to th'aduancement of the sovereign authority of Gods
word. For the most part of men conform themselves to the man^r and Religion of
their Princes. By common observation, all peoples require in their Emperors,
Kings and governors, not to vary from them in Religion. Th'AEgyptians approved
not their king, till he had learned and assented to the Religion of their
Priests: likewise the Persians, Indians and every nation welnigh. Ye allege
surther, that the bond of Religion between kings and their subjects, being
rent in sunder and taken away, there is nothing but confusion, there is no more
will and consent, it is naught else save force and tyranny: that Religion above
all things does persuade and contain subjects in obedience, as appears by
most Empires, Monarchies, and common wealths, begun, enlarged and maintained
rather by Religion then by justice and arms, that in consideration hereof
kings submitted them selves to the heads and Princes of their Religion, or else
were entitled them selves, Princes of Priests and Sacrificers. So did the
Spartan and Romain kings call themselves sovereign sacrificers. Mahumet and
his successors the Caliphes and Sultans, the Sophies of Persia, the kings of
Calicut, and of AEthiopia called themselves sovereign rulers of their Religio
in all lands under their obedience: the Othomans also defer the same honor
wholly to their Muphtis the examples of our Christians, and among the^ our
domestical presidents to this purpose come fast enough into your memory.
Whereupon ye concluded that since it pleases not God to favor your king and
you also with a successor descended from his loins, and for that ye see the
next heirs to whom by order of succession the Crown does apperteine,
according to your laws and customs, not to be of like Religion to yours, ye
therefore by good right do provide in good time not to admit their dominion, to
the end ye forgo not your Religion. I acknowledge that all these considerations
have some weight, but yet they must yield to causes of more weight, they must
give place to truth. I auow that the will of subjects toward their Princes,
and Princes power over their subjects, whereof proceed the hope of commodity,
favor, honor and dignity, and the fear of their contraries, do astonish
men, and make them stark blind, and do imperiously command their consciences:
I wot well that most men follow rather the Religion of fortune, then that of
God: we know it too well. But with the faithful it has no place, to whom
nothing is more dear then the Church of God, who confess with S. Act. 4.5.
Peter that they ought to hear and obey rather God then men: who know it to be
requisite, that by such visitations the chosen should be confirmed and made
manifest, as also the Church rid and disburdened of men that are in it, but not
of it. You stay besides upon observations of Heathen people estranged from the
faith, iwis it is not there that the Christian must seek and six his eye, to
find out and take view of his Vrsaminor, his Pole star, to direct, guide,
and assure his course according to the same, it is against his duty to order
his resolutions and actions publik or private by their laws or customs: there
is light enough in the house of God to illuminate and lead us; out of the same
house we should not seek light: all sulnes of truth and knowledge is in the
holy Scripture; the spring of understanding the fountain of sapie^ce, and the
flood of science issue fro the same, which not withstanding are as vanities to
vain minds, and full of fruict to souls full of grace. The likehhood is
great in that where as religions have been so mighty among Infidels, have
mounted aloft, and bin seated on the Thrones of kings, ruling over them with so
much pomp, authority and credit; that it was an enchantme^r and sorcery that
Satan wrought and works yet, to continue and renew the first malady and
corruption of the Gentiles and miscreants. He knows that true Christen
religion should come and abide in all poverty, humility, lowliness, and
obedience: he filled the hearts of men with vanity, he put into their heads
and persuaded them, how the greatness and assurance of mighty states depended
on religion, how the bliss and felicity of this world are children or
vndiuideable companions of religion, he inured them to a religion of gold, of
silver, and velvet, to make them more hard to be won by the Gospel. At this
have the Jews, and so many nations byside, taken offense, it irked them
greatly, to resign the commandments, powers and riches, the glory, ease and
contentment of this world, to make profession of subjection and every other
misery preached and promised by Jesus Christ to his folowers, against their
expectation. Ye suppose then, that the estates, favors and commodities of this
world agree with true religion, that they favor and exalt it, that without
them it can not be planted, it can not increase and stand: on this opinion your
doubt and the motives thereof be grounded. Believe me this opinion springs
from Satan. For the Church of God has its root in heaven, there it takes
beginning, thence it gets grouth, perfection and euerlastingnes. Satan,
worldly men and the flesh are enemies of the same. It is a mark of false, and
fantastical religion, when this world with the vanities, lusts, and delights
thereof, when scepters, and crowns, and their pomp do kiss and embrace it,
making it their foundation and main-stay. So began Zoroastres The Empire of the
Bactrians and Persians by the supposed religion of Horosmadis: Trismegistus
that of th'Aegyptians, by the religion of Mercury: Zamolsis of the Scithians,
by that of Vesta: Charondas of the Calcidians by that of Saturn: Allinos of
the Cretians, by that of Jupiter: Numa by the fained and imagined superstition
of Nymph Egeria, sustained th'infancie of the Roman Empire, which staggered,
and had quite fallen at the rising thereof, but that he assured and augmented
it; he prepared the storehouse of their wills and forces, which furnished all
those wars that advanced the Empire to the loftiest degree of highness.
Th'abominable religion of Mahumet founded, exalted, and established the great
Turkish and Persian empires. The religion of Changuis, and fond devotion to his
dreams began the greatness of The Empire of Cathay. To be short the world and
false religion agree too well, they lend one another the shoulder; but it
fares not so with the Church of God. By this ye know, that ye are my
Disciples, John 15.
says our Savior when the world shall persecute you, if ye were of the world
the world would not hate you, if ye were of the world, the world would love
his own: now since ye are not of the world, but I have chosen you out of the
world, therefore the world hates you. Ye shall be hated of all for my names
sake, Math. 10.
ye shall be brought before Princes and Kings, Mar. 13.
ye shall be scourged in their assemblies. Ye shall be beaten and brought before
governors and kings for my sake. The friends of the Church are not of this
world, her enemies are: the crown and glory of the church are not in this
world, she passes by this world, to go receive them in the other: the Church
being here on earth, is not in her own country, she ought not to set by
earthly commandments, why should she demand here that which is due to her
elsewhere? her kingdom is endless and incorruptible, the commandments of
this world are temporary, corruptible, Math. 20.
and changeable, it is to Kings and Lords temporal to whom this dominion and
authority do rather belong. And therefore true religion never raised any
Empire, and Gods will was not that she should sway any scepter of the mighty
monarchies of Assyria, Media, Persia, Greece or Italy: contrariwise the Church
has almost cuer been tributary, or capture, or in war, been driven to borow
her harbor and living as a stranger on earth, Hebr. 11.
posted from country to country, at the pleasure (it seems) of Monarchs of
the earth. So was Abraham posted from Assyria to Mesopotamia, from Mesopotamia
to Canaan, from Canaan to Egypt, from Egypt to Canaan. The people of Israel
were deteyned in hard thraldom by The Egyptians, worn and welnigh consumed by
the wilderness, fought with by nations, fubdued by th'Assyrians, kept out of
their country by the Medes, sent home by the Persians; they hired their
freedom of the Greeks, were maistred and finally scattred of the Romans.
The Christian Church began in an Estate most defaced then of all the world, in
Jury, under the tyranny of Priests and their partakers, under the tyranny of
Kings of that country, of Deputie-Consuls and Lieutenants of the Romain
Emperors. In fine, th'Arabians, Tartares, and Turks chased the Church out of
Jury: she entered other Provinces of Asia in all humility and sufferance; there
she was oppressed by the governors and people, and from thence expelled by the
Turks: she is come into Europe, where she has found no fewer enemies, then
elsewhere. It is so far of, that the Church has founded Empyres, that rather
she has ruined them, not of her set purpose; but because the inhabitants of the
earth could not endure her, they smote themselves against her, and so are
sheeuered in pieces; the Church has always been as a cup of poison to all the
peoples round about her, Zach. 12.
and as an heavy stone to them; whosoever has assaied to lift it up, has been
torn asunder: kingdoms have been eclypsed, dismembered, and suddamly come to
naught, how great, mighty, and rich soever they were: but the Church
notwithstanding has maintained her self from the beginning of the world, she
has ever yet continued, and for ever will continue, what so ever her weakness
and poverty is here below: she has never been but an ha^dfull of lowly
creatures, and vnmiglitie, and yet has God preserved her maugre the huge
multitude, force and victories of those peoples that poured out their whole
power upon her, to crush her quite: they perished, she has escaped: a douzen
or thirteen mean persons, without weapons and help of hand, have new-built
her amid men's fury, arms and torments: Nations had no other care but to
hinder them; their scepters and swords were broken and blunted with bidding and
striking; they have wrought their own ruin, the Church has passed on her
way, she has atteyned the port and land, she has been preserved as pleased
God. Learn we therefore in no wise to mingle the cause of temporal
governments with the cause of the Church; learn we that true religion soloweth
not fortune, nor scepters, ne leans on them; but contrarily, that scepters
shun and reject it: that she takes not her increase of them, but contrariwise
is proyned by them: that God knows well to maintain and augment her, as he
judges expedient, all crossing and gain-strise of worldly powers
notwithstanding. I will not say, that the crowns of this world and religion
meet not; God permits it sometime for to refresh his people afflicted, and
with fighting against their miseries tired: and to show that he is well able, if
he will, to give them the contentments of this world: but by and by (remembering
the frailty of the flesh, apt to corrupt, if it be not exercised) he sundereth
them. to certify her also, that she lay hold on contentation elsewhere than
here below: the histories of the Bible are our lessons for all these things.
Then let not religion be to us any more a cloked pretense to work
unrighteousness, to pervert the order of successions, in denying to Princes
and Lords that which is their due. If we have sound it reasonable in justice
which concerns private persons, not to deprive the son brother, neuew,
cosen or other kinsman reformed, of the inheritance and whole succession of
his father, or other of his kin being Papist: why practice we not the very same
justice in the succession of the Crown? the reason of both is all one, the
greatness of the person, fee, or land causes not difference in justice.
Th'angle or corner is the reason of the whole Figure; as then th'angle point of
the greater square is equal to the'angle point of the less: even so in like
difficulty the same reason holds between the great and the small. But
consider we yet your opinion on another side. Doubtless all power is ordained
of God, as S. Paul says. Romans 13.
It is God that geues and translates the scepter from person to person, from
family to family, and from nation to nation. He takes kings away, and
establishes kings, as says Daniel. Dan. 2.
By him are advanced Emperors, Kings, Princes Governors and Magistrates that is
his servants, though most commonly they live not agreeably to him, but he uses
them as swords that see not what they cut. He stirred up th'Assyrian kings to
chastise the Israchtes; the Medes to punish the Assyrians; the Persians to
deliver his people. He stirred up good Princes to refresh, chearish and favor
his Church; the cruel and persecuting, to correct and cleanse, proine and pare
away her pride, riot, couetise, ambition and false semblant. In his secret
counsel are made the particion of Provinces on earth: he sent Tamberlane into
Asia; Attila into Europe; and the Visigothes into Afrike. Since kings are given
and sent by him, they are to be obeyed, without enquiring what they be: chiefly
when they come by order accustomed, for them we may not doubt of his will; good
and faithful Subjects do never refuse to obey a Governor sent them by their
king: they take notice but of the letters and commission of their king: by
greater reason are we bound to receive them that God has sent us, without
inquiry of their worthiness or desert. For kings both may, and often enough do
mistake in their clections, and miss of their expectation and intents: but
with God it is not so, he cannot be deceived. Even he that absolutely
commands us by his Apostles to obey them for conscience sake, be it to
suffer vexation and wrong, only because they be ordained by him. Romans 13.
Let every one (says S. Paul) submit himself to superior powers. For there is
no power, but of God; all powers that are, be ordained of God, and therefore he
that resists power, resists the ordinance of God, and they that resist,
Tit. 3.
do procure their own damnation. And again: warn them that they be subject
to principalities and powers. S. Peter says, submit your selves to al order of
me^, 1. Pet. 3.
even to suffer trouble and injustice for the name of God. Obey Princes and
Lords (say they) for Gods, for conscience sake. It is not then for their
religions sake that we must obey them, it is for our religions sake, it is for
our conscience sake, it is for Gods sake, who has commanded it. The holy
Scripture affoordeth us examples so express of the obedience of the Church to
all kings and Governors, infidels, persecutors, tyrants, and others, that it
may seem the holy Ghost registered them expressly to resolve us in this
difficulty. The Israelites Gods people were inioined by the Lord to avoid all
societies and alliances with infidels and Idolaters; they had no commandment
as had the Christians, to communicate their religion to all nations; also they
ought to have been, and so were, of all people most ielous of the purity of
their religion, and preservation thereof: nevertheless, when their kings and
successors forsook the way of God, for to sacrifice in the lugh places,
betaking themselves to idol-worship, and serving of strange Gods, they stouped
under the mightichand of God, and received such kings as God would grant them,
and therefore they never went about to expel their kings, nor made exception or
resista^ce to their successors for religions sake: they endured the government
of Jeroboam, Achab, Ioram, Ochosias, Achas, Manasses, Amo^, and many mo endued
with nothing but ungodliness. They impeached not the succession of that most
wicked and idolatrous Iora^, to the very devout and meek Iosaphat. So succeeded
Ochosias to Ioram, Achas to Ioatham, Manasses to Ezekias, Amon to Manasses, and
Ioacham to Josias. Now we Christians are much more bound to the obedience of all
Magistrates either faithful or misbeleeuers. For our true profession is of
humility, subjection and obedience, as the Apostles in many places above cited
and directed to us, have prescribed. But besides that, has Jesus Christ by his
commandments and actions stopped our mouth, and overthrown whatsoever may be
proponed to excuse you or maintain your opinion. He being God, Math. 17. Mar.
12.
and able easily to reuerse all power, acknowledged Tiberius for Emperor, an
idolater if ever any were, he paid him Tribute, and commanded it to be paid
him, he bad that honor, obedience, and service due to Emperors should be
yielded him. Are we greater and more honorable then Jesus Christ, that we
should pervert the order of successions, the laws and estate of the Realm to
choose us as a king? Jesus enquired not, he stood not upon the Emperors
religion and other qualities; he is God, we be men, we be what him pleases we
be, we have no being, nor quality belonging, but by him: he might by right
have excused himself, after the laws of the world, of paying tribute, as
himself says, howbeit to the end he should not offend the majesty of kings,
he paid it: but we not only offend our Princes, but also rather than
acknowledge them, we will seek the overthrow of the estate and any part
thereof. The Apostles acknowledged kings, Lieutenants, and Magistrates, though
insidels, and rendered them obedience: S. Paul submitted himself to the
government and jurisdiction of the Emperors of Italy, and their Lieutenants,
he sought out their privileges, allowed their laws and used them for his aid,
he appeared before them and underwent their jurisdiction, and according to the
order of the same yielded himself at the Emperors feet, whither to he had
appealed. And sithence then, have Christen Churches continued their duty of
obedience to Princes of the Countries they were in, being Pagans and their
persecutors. We are bound not only to obey, but furthermore to pray for them,
1. Tim. 2.
thus S. Paul commands; I warn that before all things, requests, prayers,
supplications, and thank esgiuing be made for all men, for kings, and all them
that are set in authority: to wit; though they be Idolaters, though they
persecute and imprison us, as has been said. So the children of Israel having
been vanquished, spoiled and led into captivity in the city of Babylon, the
seat of all Idolatry, see how God commands them by his prophet leremie:
Iorem. 29.
crave for the peace of the city into which I have caused you to be
translated, and pray to the Lord for it. Nay moreover the Lord takes part
against them that disobey their superiors; he deemeth it an injury done to
himself, for good reason it is, since he sent them, that he should conceive
displeasure at the disobedience showen them: and therefore he threatens the
disobedient: they shall procure themselves damnation, says S. Paul. Admit
though the kings were not our natural and lawful kings but by usurpation, by
violence, by title of conquest alone, yet he threatens, and pardons not if
we disobey them. Even so the Lord by way of reproach says to his people by the
prophet Baruch: Bar. 2.
Bow your shoulder, and your neck, and serve the king of Babylon, and you
shall be seated in the land, which I gave unto your fathers: but if ye do it not,
and if ye hearken not to the voice of the Lord your God, to serve the king of
Babylon, I will bring to pass that ye shall no more be in the cities of Judah,
nor come out of the city of lerusalem, I will take from you the voice of
mirth, the voice of joy, the voice of the bridegroom, the voice of the spouse,
and all the land shall be without any sign, and they that inhabit the same.
Behold how he witnesses his will, that his people obey the idolatrous king
Nabuchodonosor, and threatens fearful penalties, if they obey him not. But
threats alone sufficed him not: it fortuned his people to revolt against
Nabuchodonosor, he made them feel the effect of all his threatenings and curses;
Jerusalem because of this revolt was taken by force and sacked, 4. Reg. 25.
most of the Israelites put to the sword; the rest enchained like captives were
led to Babylon, where they endured a very long time intolerable slavery; their
king Sedekias was taken, his eyes plucked out, and after ended his days in most
vile bondage. Finally, one consideration among the rest should make all
Christians abhor the disturbers of Estates upon earth, and such as rise
against their Princes to impeach their authority or force them to sly, and
should warn them carefully to beware that they forte not themselves with such.
That is, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 2. Pet. 2. Iud. 1.
our Lord Jesus Christ and his Apostles have left written in many places, that
to rise against powers, to consound, trouble, and go about to dispose them, is
a token of Antichrist. Advise your selves (my children) how ye may remove from
your Church the suspicion hereof. Let us not say, it is the Resormed that
trouble our state, that disobey the king, his Lieutenants and Magistrates,
because they will not go to the Mass, and make their profession. For it is
none of that, wherein God wills us to obey earthly powers. He imparteth kings
this honor, to take them for his Lieutenants in government of the world, but
not in all government, he has reserved to himself one part, which he will
not have them meddle with, namely the governance of the highest part of the
soul, of the conscience, and religion: he has given hereupon his laws and
commandments, which he wills to be preferred before the commandments of
men, he likes not that men should enterprise ought over them: he is above the
kings of the earth, he is their Creator, it is good reason that his
commandments should overrule theirs. For so S. Peter, and S. John, being in
all things else most obedient to Magistrates, answered them that forbad them to
preach the Gospel: Act. 4.5.
Whether it be right in the sight of God, to obey you rather then God, judge
ye; and again, we ought rather to obey God, then men. We have showed before,
that th'Israelits were punished for sequestring themselves out of the dominion
of Nabuchodonosor, for having disobeyed him: nevertheless it is recorded how
Ananias, Asarias and Misael th'Israelits were blessed of God, and protected
from raging violence of the devouring fire, and glorified for not obeying
Nabuchodonosor. These disagreeme^ts cannot be reconciled but by the foresaid
distinction: that kings must be obeyed in that which concerns their power
alone, without doing injury to God, who requires our obedience principally
and above all, according as the aunsweres of S. Peter and S. John above cited
do import: no other doctrine the^ this our Savior Christ taught in these
words; Mar. 12.
Give unto Caesar that which is Caesar's, and to God that which is Gods. When
the people of Israel revolted, Nabuchodonosor had not usurped over Gods
commandments nor bound th'Israelites but to an ordinary allegiance of
subjects toward their kings for service of body and goods, and therefore
their disobedience was an inexcusable sin: but he abused and exceeded the
limits of his right and power, by cause he would have made the three children
worship his Idol, and so presumed over Gods commandment; thou shall worship
the Lord thy God and him only shall thou serve, and therefore the disobedience
of Ananias, Asarias and Misael was just: and with such disobediences the sacred
history is well stored. Likewise the Reformed do pretend, that what you
command them, is contrary to the word and commandments of God, and also they
protest, that their conscience saved, they are ready to yield all obedience and
service to their superiors and namely to his Majesty: we shall examine that
matter anon. Mean while let us determine upon so many reasons and examples,
upon th'actions and commandments of our Lord, of his Apostles, and all his
Church. Let us affirm that the true Church presumes not to take away, nor
give the Crowns and Scepters of this world, but submits her self to
the order established in that behalf from all time, by the will of God. Let us
believe that kings are ordained by God, that he will not have any and namely
his Church to refuse them, or their successors for any impiety in them: that
he will have such executions reserved to himself, which he can well bring to
pass by other means and pretenses then by his Church: Let us confess his
will to be that we love and honor them, and also pray for them, that he
threateneth and plagueth such, as trouble and disobey them. Ye that are
Christians then, and boast to be his children, whose duty therefore is to hear
and know his voice, and to serve him with more obedience then all other people;
ye that ought to belecue that whatsoever ye do or suffer in obeying him, the
same can not turn to your harm or prejudice, considering his bountiful
affection, his promises and almightines: do not presume to disobey your God in
a matter so expressly enjoined you; if ye have presumed, repent your selves,
cease your pursuit, prefer not your false opinions, and vain fears before
his commandments, before the truth and assurance of his promises: receive the
Kings and Princes that he sends you; since he created them to be of his degree,
the likewise sent them; receive them for his love and fear; for conscience
sake: and so will he auow you for his children, and betake you to the guiding
of his good spirit; so shall he bless, and give you the peace spoken of by
Jeremy; and lastly, so shall ye not incur his displeasure, Ierem. 29.
nor feel the weight of his provoked hand. The same reason, or one more strong
then yours, did Sedekias allege: he said, he would not subject himself to an
idolatrous king: ye say, ye will not receive a king of a Religion contrary to
yours. Good it is to avoid tentations, so much as may be: but they must be
avoided by means allowed of God. God sound no such zele, affection and deeds
in Sedekias to be good; he accursed it, he grievously did punish it: he will
nothing more allow yours, being far less tolerable, as by this discourse
hereafter shall be verified: nay, I greatly fear, least the plague be at the
door. On the other side, consider that ye open a gate to the continuance of
wars, which ye shall not shut and dain up when ye would, ye rear a ladder
for clymbing heads, and all such as will attempt the catching of your Crown,
which ye shall not pluck down when ye would: they that shall envy at the
Crown will think themselves well enough armed with excuse and pretense, not to
blush in your presence nor before strangers, as also preserve their honor, and
save their memory from decay before the posterity, if only they shall say
that the king, or the natural and lawful successor to the Crown is an
heretic. Your predecessors made the Crown inheritable by succession,
purposely to prevent dissensions that grow by elections, and in the end bring
Estates to confusion: they are deceived of their hope and we of the profit of
their foresights, by your tractablenes and indiscretion: for this colored
pretense which you accept now a days, will draw after it all those troubles
and inconveniences which elections are wont to bring. But for conclusion, what
need had ye to begin this war so soon? suppose it were lawful; yet were the
time rath enough to commence, revive and debate this question after our kings
decease. The course is not ordinary to dispute of successions before they
fall. It may appear that ye repine at the repose of your king, and fear least
he should be free from the greeues, which we see and feel at this day.
Peradventure ye raise war for that matter, which never shall come to pass.
Our King and Queen are strong and lusty enough to have heirs of their body
begotten, they are not past the age of procreation; th'arme of the Lord and his
mercy are not shortened and restreined to give a son to him, and a peaceable
king to us: it may fall out that ye, or your Princes will change your purposes.

CHAP. V. Whether the Reformed be heretics and schismatikes, or no.
HItherto (my children) I have been unwilling to sound your cuill to the
bottom, as being loath to grieve you too much, or alter your patience: I have
winked at your malady, to acquaint you with my medicines; I durst not assail
it with violent remedies, doubting its force, least being provoked it would
have rejected al physike: I have framed my self to your vowed opinions, and to
your light frenzy, lest it should turn into raging madness: I have borne with
your error to win at your hands some little patience; I have not stood on
those qualities, which ye say are the very kindlers of your choler, and
motioners of your co^motions; I was afraid to anger you overmuch at the
beginning of my discourse. I have examined your actions as if they wholly aimed
at heretics. It is time to wink no more, nor to conceal my meaning, the salues
have mortified the inflammation of the wound, your hot and co^tentious humors
begin to cool and qualify; ye begin to know your malady, that fury reigned
in your zele and among your determinations being not leueled by the word and
commandments of God; that the same zele of yours was without warrant, in
danger of reproose, curse and punishment: the knowledge of your own cuill, and
lessening thereof, should have purchased in you an hope of recovery, and
extreme longing to attain thereto by any pains what so ever.
Th'acknowledgement of your errors ought to have brought withal your trust and
desire of repentance, and your will ready to yield to severe aduertisements
requisite for that end. Ouerrule therefore your passionate minds and listen to
me. Let us search your wounds thoroughly, let us encounter your disease with
medicines of true contrariety and fight with it to the vttrance; let us
proceed to the soundations of your errors and see whether they be well
grounded. Examine we frankly whether the Reformed be heretics and schismatiks,
either one or other, without pausing on formalitie, or proceedings to be had
against them, for of such matters enough is spoken asore, and therein the
judgments of truth are not most often found. Ye maintain that they are
heretics and schismatikes, for so much as they allow not the doctrine of the
Catholic, Apostolik and Roman Church, and will not become of the body, and
yield to the discipline of that Church. They say, they are of the Catholic or
universal Church, do believe in the doctrine of Jesus Christ, of his Apostles
and of the whole Primitive Church, and do yield to the government and order of
the same. They repute the Roman Church at this day most abominable. We will
limit your controversy and say frankly that ye suppose the^ heretics and
schismatikes because they auow not the Pope and his doctrine, nor will bow
under his authority, nor enter into his Church. For it shall appear by the
conclusion of this treatise more clearly, that herein consists the
controversy. Forbear me a little while to discourse with you, as if I were a
Reformed, and to declare in brief the reasons why the Reformed will none of
the Pope nor his doctrine. And be not offended if now and then I use their
terms and manner of speech: for since the question in this behalf leads us
to speak for them, we must speak like them.

The Prophesies (say they) were not written for nothing the holy Ghost is
truth it self, there shall not one only word of all that he has endited
remain unperformed; heaven and earth shall fail, Mat. 24. Mark 13. Luke 21.
but the words of the Lord shall not fail. Now so it is, that himself has
forewarned us, how there should happen a great oppression in the Church, a
seducing almost general, and an abomination most great. The same is likewise
foretold by the Prophets, Dan. 7. 4 Esd. 11. Apo. 13.17.
and chiesly by Daniel, Esdras and S. John in his Revelation, that immediately
after the first coming of the Lord a certain power should arise, that should
bruise and spoil the Lord Saints; thinking to change the times and the law,
and which should reign with great tyranny. This is that great beast which
speaks high things and blasphemies against the Lord, which should maintain
battle against the faithful, and vanquish them, and should seduce or misleade
by words, fables, false miracles and favors of this world, and should with
arms subdue many Nations. This is that stru^pet so proud in attire, in
precious ornaments of gold and stone, in painted show, in word and in power;
full of abomination, with who^ the kings and dwellers upon earth have
committed whoredom, and have made themselves drunk with the wine of her
leacherous dissolutenes in her cup of abomination, Of her have The Apostles
advertised us, 2. Pet. 2. 2. These. 2. 1. John 2.4. Jude.
chiesly S. Peter, S. Paul, S. John and S. Jude, who have spoken so manifestly
of Antichrist, that they conceal naught save the name, they have described the
Apostasy or revolt, the son of perdition, his original, the cause of his
perdition, his pride, his power, the departing, his manifestation or revealing,
his fall. Let us then believe that there has been, and now is an Antichrist,
which oppresses this long time the truth, the Church and the faithful, which
has cut of Christ, and taken all from him, as Daniel faith.

It is written by Daniel and Esdras, Dan. 9.7. 4. Esd. 11.10.
how Antichrist should spring out of the fourth Monarchy, and should, as it
were, contemn and set up the same again: no man doubts that the fourth
Monarchy is that of Italy or Rome: the dream of Nabuchodonosor expounded by
Daniel makes it undoubted. Daniel. 2.
The Pope was advanced at Rome first by Phocas the murderer of his Prince;
the Emperors succeeding, some of their own will, others by his cunning
fetches, and the rest through plain force, left him Italy, and the city of
Rome where he stablished his court; these Emperors made themselves and their
Empire subject to the Pope, together withal the Kings, I ords, and people of
Christendom: he calls himself neither Emperor, nor King, but claymeth a
soueraingtie over Emperors and kings: and this is proved by infinite histories,
apparent by the Bull sent from Pope Boniface to Philip the Fair, as also by
Pope Clements proud answer to th'Embassadours of Lewis of Bauaria the
Emperor. Behold the greatness of Rome and the sourth Monarchy thus renewed and
replanted, behold also the Prophecy, Apoc. 17.
that Antichrist should be set above kings, accomplished.

It is written by S. John, and S. Peter, 1. John 2. 2. Pet. 2.
that out of the Church Antichrist should arise, that he should be a successor
of The Apostles: speaking of Antichrist and his retinue, they say: they are gone
forth from us, but they were not of us, for if they had been of ours, they
would have tarried with us. Verily, if they, after they have escaped from the
filthiness of the world, thorough the acknowledging of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ, are yet tangled again therein and are overcome, their later end
is worse with them than the beginning. For better had it been for them not to
have acknowledged the way of righteousness, then after they have acknowleged it,
to turn from the holy commandment given to them. But it is come to them
according to the true proverb: The dog is returned to his own vomit, and the
sow that was washed to the wallowing in the mire. The Pope is borne and
descended of the Church and of the Apostles; of the Church of Rome built by the
Apostles, he has exalted himself in the order and personal succession of
Bishops, succeeding The Apostles, he has retained the name of Christian; and
yet nevertheless is returned and also turns those that are his to the vomit
and filthiness of the Gentiles.

It is written by Daniel, S. Matthew and S. Paul, Dan. 9. Math. 24.2. These. 2.
that Antichrist shall sit in the holy place, in the temple and Church of God:
the Pope holds his See in the heart of Christendom, in the Church prepared by
The Apostles, he is Lord, and President over all Christendom, which is the
temple of God.

It is written in Daniell, Dan. 9.
that the Lord shortly after his coming shall be slain and shall have nothing:
4. Es. 5.6.
in Esdras, that the places which were sown shall soudainely appear as they
were not sown, the way of truth shall be hidden, and the region shall be barren of
faith, and unrighteousness shall be multiplied on that country thou see and
on that which at other times thou have heard of; unrighteousness with
fornication shall be multiplied in the land. Luke. 21.
Jesus Christ says that after his visible conversation with men, the time of
Antichrist should draw near, that his end should not come so soon. 2 Thessalonians.
2.
It is written by S. Paul that even in his time Satan wrought the mystery of
iniquity, the beginnings of Antichrist: by S. John, 1. John. 2.
that there are many Antichrists already, and which from thence forth should be
to the last times. Also from the age of The Apostles there was covertly brought
into the Church the doctrine and glory of men, and a little while after their
decease the Bishop of Rome began openly to pretend, claim, and plead for the
Primacie, Presidencie, and power over all other Bishops; not long after he
obtained, usurped; and declared himself chief of the Church: and for to
manifest, publish, settle, maintain, and augment his power, he made many
decrees prejudicial and contrary to the Gospel, to the doctrine and policy
of the primitive Church: and for to cause his power and doctrine to appear and
prevail every where, he smothered and abolished on earth the power and
doctrine of the Lord, he withdrew the keys of knowledge, and like as he would
not enter himself, so he forbad them to enter that would. Thus is
understanding sled away, ignorance and vice come in place, having regained the
dominion over us. Behold again, how it is no strange thing that the Pope has
reigned so long; since Antichrist ought to begin shortly after the first coming
of our Lord, and endure long, till a time and many times, and half a time,
Dan. 7.2. These. 2.
as Daniel says.

It is written, that Antichrist the son of perdition shall list himself
above all that which is called God, or is worshipped, so far as to sit in the
temple of God, as God; showing himself that he is God. The Pope does name
himself God in earth only, but in effect does behave himself as God over
all: he gives, alters; and repealeth laws; he gives privileges, goods,
estats, favors, he gives good seasons and bad, by his power; by his blessings
and cursings he threateneth kings, punishes, summoneth, changes, and
supplanteth them; and (that which belongs to God the king of kings) he will be
adored on earth: and so is he God in earth. He says, he has power over the
devil, he can take souls out of hell, out of the company and dominion of the
devil, which can not apperteine but to Jesus Christ: and so is he God in hell.
He assures us, that he can send souls into Paradise, whatsoever infidelity
is in them, whatsoever sin they committed in this world, by his great
Iubiles, by certain beadrols of prayers and ceremonies, by money; and
therefore names himself ghostly Father of souls. It is God that is our
father, who by his grace, exceeding bounty and mercy, has called and chosen
us to be in his Paradise, it is our Lord Jesus, who by the great love he
bears us, by his death and passion, has purchased for us, opened us the
gate, guides and brings us thither, through the faith we have in him and
which he gives us by his holy spirit. Thus the Pope is God in Paradise, is
God over all. He sits in the Temple of God as we have said, for that he
rules over all Christendom being the Temple of God. He aduaunceth himself
above all that is called God, above Judges and Magistrates which are called Gods
in Scripture: they can not be Judges without undertaking his mark, allowing and
well testifying of it, and without swearing fealty to him: laws and
Judgments depend on him. Kings and Emperors are likewise called Gods in
Scripture: yet he exalts himself above them; the manner is to kiss the Kings
hand, The Emperors knee, and the Popes foot: he crowns and blesses them; he
maks them promise and swear fealty, that they will yield him all reverence,
obedience and service. Jews of Bauaria The Emperor was excommunicated for
having taken on him the governance of The Empire, before he had performed
th'othe of subjection, or as some history writers say, for not having auowed
the Pope for sovereign Judge of the variance touching The Empire between him
and Frederik of Austrich: Frederik the second was excommunicated, for presuming
to journey into Asia without taking leave of the Pope. And to knit up all in a
word, there are no Kings nor Emperors but by him for he delivers their
Realms in pray at his pleasure, he depriueth and restores them their subjects
at his lust. He exalts him self above Angels, he commands them peremptorily.
He exalts him self above The Apostles and other Saints in Paradise; at his
bidding they must run, trot and solicit even as he will, as though their
Saincting, honor and salvation depended on him. He racketh, gloseth,
interprets, changes, choppeth and defaceth the word of God, as best fitteth
his fancy; he repealeth the law, he disguiseth, corrects, enlarges and
despenceth against the laws and commandments of God: God must not be obeyed,
but as pleases the Pope. He abolisheth the Gospel; the merit of our Lords
death and passion he ascribes to the works of men, and to the obedience they
bear him and his foolish inventions and ceremonies. Th'election of the
faithful belongs to God no more, the Pope has usurped and limited the same.
He Saincteth whom he please; he has arrogated to himself the office of
sanctifier above the holy Ghost. He makes or thinks to make the like stirs
and alterations in Heaven as he does here below; he carries at his girdle the
seven keys and seven seals of the seven Churches; saying, it is his ofsice to
shut and open the Churches. Lo, how he lifts up himself above all that is
called God. Thus the marks which (as S. Paul teaches) should be in
Antichrist, 4. Esdr. 8.
are found in the Pope. See here also the Prophecy of Esdras verisied, that
the miseries of the last times should happen by occasion of great pride.

It is written in Daniel, Dan. 7.
that Antichrist shall think he may change times and laws. Who so heedfully
marketh the doctrine, policy, and service of the Roman Church, shall not find
there any consormitie or agreablenes with the Gospel, but contrariety almost
throughout all: the Gospel speaks neither of Mass, Purgatory, calling upon
Saints, nor of Prayers for the dead, Images, or Holy water, nor of wax tapers,
or processions, pilgrimages, nor of Munkeries, of the Altar, or Priestly
ornaments; the word, baptism, and holy supper are not administered in the
Roman Church according to the commandments, ordmances and usage of our Lord,
of his Apostles and Primitine Church. The Gospel preaches nothing but grace
and free-guift; the Pope commands nothing but merit, and money. The Gospel
requires not of men but faith to receive salvation, and good works to give
witness of their election, justification, new birth, fanctification, and love
toward God: the Pope knows not what this Faith means, it brings him no
advantage; he therefore speaks but of works. The Gospel preaches not but
the word, and commands not but the commandments of God; and forbids
the Traditions of men by name: the Pope commands not but the Traditions of
men, nay he conceleth, yea sometimes forbids the commandments of God. It
is not much above threescore years ago that in the Church of God, there was no
talk of God; in the Churches of Christ, no talk was of Christ: to the flock
of Jesus Christ, the voice of the Lord, of their great Shepherd was not
declared, nor read, nor heard, nor understood; the Bishops and Doctors that
gave themselves to study, mused on nothing else save profane learning and
philosophy, on vanities, fained inventions, fantasies and subtilties of the
flesh: all prayers, diuine-worships, masses and Church-seruices were made to
the dead, and them alone who were in the Popes good grace, but in chief to
those that had in their life time most travailed to extol and advance his
sacred See by violences, lies, fables, false miracles and other deceiptfull
trumperies. The Apostles baptized with pure water in the name of the Father, of
the Son, and holy Ghost: the Pope has intermingled therewith his cream,
salt, spittle, and so many idle ceremonies besides, that the Baptism of the
Apostles may seem welnigh lost. The holy Supper likewise is so disguised, that
the simple Gospeller can discern therein nothing that comes of God. The Pope
also has altered the years, months, and days, applying the histories of the
Gospel to th'obseruations of Astronomers, and motions of the Moon and Sun.
Behold how the Pope has gone about to change times and laws, both that of
Moses and this of our Lord Jesus Christ, even the Gospel and the accomplishment
thereof; wherein th'vnderstanding of the Prophecy does chiefly consist.

It is written, that the Spirit speaks evidently, 1. Tim. 4.
that in the

or read of an enmity pursued with more devilish malice than that of Gregory
the seventh against Henry the sourth? Only because this Emperor would preserve
the rights and prerogative of The Empire against his atte^pts; he excommunicated
him, he stirred up all the Lords and Bishops against him; compelling every one
with threats to become his sworn enemy; and commanding against him manifold
treasons: at last through his threats, assayes and enterprises he enforced him
to come woolward and barefoot, to fall down at his feet, and with great
scornfulnes and disgrace made him endure th'miurie of the wether and reproaches
of men; and yet these submissions and suffrances notwithstanding, he continued
his pursuites more furiously than before. For, after he had out-weried many
Lords and brought them to their end in making war on him, he incited his own
son Henry the fifth, and with his superstitions, commandments and
threatenings he so hampered and bewitched the wit and judgment of this youth,
that he durst war on his own father; besiege, betray and take him; dispoyle
him of his Imperial diguitie, and make him end his days in great sorrow and
captivity: which moved a learned personage of that time to cry out, the son
has betrayed, dispoyled and done his father to death, not by the commandment
of any barbarous tyrant, of any Phalares, but by the counsel of the most holy
father of Rome: adding; rejoice ye, o Caligula and Nero, for the Pope of Rome
plays such prankes, that there shall be no more remembrance of your cruelty.
The hatred of Gregory the ninth against the Emperor Frederik the second passed
likewise al comparison in stifnes and frowardnes of stomach; he preached the
Croissado against the Emperor, promising glory and eternal life to them that
would rise in arms against him; he excommunicated him oftentimes: the Princes
and Bishops of Germany were a whole year in praying him to mollify his mind
and receive Frederik to favor; he rejected them all with their petition so
holy, so carefully and humbly offered and sued; they never had come to an end,
had they not given for that purpose, sixescore thousand pounds of gold. The
Popes egged on with a vehement lust of revenge, mounted to this step of fury
and ungodliness, that they empoysoned the host or Sacrament of th, altar,
whereby they brought one Emperor to his bane. Pope John the thirteenth caused
one Cardinals nose to be cut off, and another hand; for having purposed in the
Consistory to give him some admonitions touching his whordome; he spent the
most part of his life in minding and committing all sorts of such uncleanness,
and ended his life in adultery: for he was taken with the manner, and slain in
the very act. The whoredoms adulteries, incests, and sodomies of Pope Iulio
the third are known: th'Italians printed and published them in Rome in every
corner of the streets. Nothing ever came to the Pope amiss, provided he might
draw profit out of i^ When Robert had invaded the lands of his nephew and ward
the County of Puglia and Calabria an Orphan, the Pope excommunicated and
further threatened him with his material sword; this Robert knowing the force,
credit, natural property and intent of Popes came to him, and gave him
Beneuent and Troy a portion of his booty: the Pope thereupon revoked his
thundering sentence, honored him with his amity and blessing, and judged
th'vsurpation made by the uncle upon the neuew his ward and an Orphan, to be an
action holy and full of devotion. It has ever been an heresy to be the Popes
neighbor, for any that had land in his good Grace and liking, and had no power
to defend it: for then must other Lords war on such an heretik, and not leave
him so long as a foot of land were left him, as they tendered his holiness good
Grace. The proof may easily be made by histories, that Popes have usurped and
encroched on all the Seigneuries of Christendom, at least on the greater part.
Thus the Popes palace is full of robberies, pray and spoils, which he has
raked by no other titles then impiety, injustice and violence, nevertheless
he calls it, his rights, S. Peter's patrimony and Gods demain. As for Popes,
most of them have clymbed up to the holy See by lies, hypocrisy, guiles and
deceit, by money, arms, massacres, sackings, poysonings and Magical arts.
There is no kind of impiety, Atheism, idolatry, enchauntements, heresy and
schism but ye shall commonly read it in their stories. View the the life of
Siluestre the second, (...) Misnia; and after the death of Hebert being still
wedded to his own self will and stubborn opinion against God, (who brought
all these Emperors being the Popes creatures, to confusion) he gave the Empire
to Henry the fifth, the son of Henry the fourth, who was yet living, allowed
and acknowledged of all men for Emperor, except the Pope and his adherents.
Histories are full of such contempts; we learn by them that Emperors during
four hundred years and upward, were tossed and troubled by th'iniuries and
oppressions of the Pope; and that such storms and tempests never took end
till after th'Emperors had quitt to the Popes the greater part of their
possessions and rights, and had subjected to them their persons and dignities.
The Pope took the Crown from Childerik, gave it to Pepin; took it from Lewis
the meek, gave it to his son; which is a story as lamentable as that of
The Emperor Henry the fourth: there was no let in him, that he disposed not our
Crown more often: Boniface, when he had excommunicated Philip the Fair, gave
the Realm to Albert king of the Romans: it passes all account to tell how
many times he has excommunicated our kings, has exposed our kingdom in pray,
has adjudged it to him that first could seize on it, and by dispensation has
discharged the Subjects of their oath, to turn them from their fidelity and
allegiance. How often and how long he has put and held the Realm of England in
interdiction, is known. By this gate of injustice has the Spanish tvra^t
invaded the kingdom of Navarre; this is all the just and lawful title he has
there to. It is known how the Pope has played with the Realm of Naples and
Sicile. He took it from the Germans, to give it the French; and after from
the French, to give it the Spaniardes: a very long time has he made fair show
to these two Nations, crossing or favoring the hopes now of the one and then of
the other: he let it be taken from Conradin; he opposed himself against
Maufred, and made war on him, calling this war holy, which touched the estate of
Religion in nothing, but only the ease, security, profit, envy and grudge of
his holiness: he called thither the Earl of Aniou, he condemned and put to
death Conradm by the hand of the hangman, and a douzen or fiftene great Lords
with him, for no other cause than his own private hatred: after that, he
favored the Earl of Aniou against the house of Arragon a great while, but at
last in favor of the house of Arragon, he took from Charles of Aniou and his
successors that which he had given them. Briefly, there has been no quarrel
nor iar between the Lords of Christendom, which has not been kindled by him,
whereof he has not taken intelligence, and wherein he has not demanded the
obedience of both parties. He has stirred up the French against the Greeks and
Lombards, the German against the French, the French against the German, the
Italia^ against the Germain, the French against the Italian the Italian against
the French, and again the Spaniard against the French, all Christen dome
against the English, the French against th'Arrogomans, the Spaniard against the
Nauarreans. He hatched the division of th'Vrsins and Columnas, of the Guelfs
and Ghibelins, and the war betwixt the Genoans and Venetians. It is
impossible to discourse of al these in particular, I cannot abide to stand upon
them, their remembrance is so grievous. In like manner the divisions that Popes
have made in the Church, the schisms of two or three Popes at once, the sects
of Monks, Friars and Nuns require so long a process, that I may not
undertake to recite them at this present. But what is said suffices to show
that the Pope despises governments and makes divisions.

It is written, that Antichrist shall be an adversary; 2. These. 2.
the true signification of this word Antichrist is as much to say, as against
or contrary to Christ: now let us compare the least actions and doctrine of
Popes, to that of Jesus Christ and his Apostles, and ye will judge that nothing
is more contrary.

Our Savior had no place where he might rest his head: Math. 8. Luke 9.
Popes and Bishops do possess the most delightful and rich places upon earth.

Our Lord Jesus Christ refused to judge and divide an inheritance between two
brethren, Luke 12.
and whereas one of them prayed him to do it, he sent him away saying; who has
made me a judge or a diuider over you? The Pope has usurped secular
jurisdiction of all things among all persons, without speaking of the
spiritual, whereof he makes none partakers. In so much that in the reign of
Philip Valois, the court of Parliament and other judges royal were enforced to
complain to the King. They declared to him how all the jurisdiction belonging
to the Judges Royal flowed away from the kings Benches to th'Ecclesiastical
courts; and that far mo profane or civil causes were judged by Bishops, their
Officials and other Officers of the Church, then by the kings Judges; that he
which for the least occasion would not obey and abide the censures and
sentences of the Ecclesiastical, should forthwith be excommunicated and
deprived of the Sacraments; and that there power and auctority was come to this
pass, that for a simple debt a man unable to pay was interdicted: that they
had usurped, the imprisoning and deteyning of all malefactors, with the notice
and trial of their crimes. Poor de Cugneres was diffamed for having too truly
pleaded on this declaration. And yet at this day ye retain the proceedings
which ye call the Chicanerie of the Popes court; he did you that good while he
abode at Auimon. Ye judge the most part of your processes by the Popes
ordinances. There is no company of judges where the Pope has not brought in
his Lieutenants: the courts where your goods, your life and honor are judged
even the courts of Parliament do partly consist of persons Ecclesiastical,
Chanons, Abbats, Bishops, and Archbishops: the great and goodlier processes,
the affairs of the Royal revenues, Eschequer and Estate are judged and
determined by them in the great counsel, in the privy counsel, in the
counsel of the Finances, in the counsel of Estate, and in the most Secret
counsel: they are Peers and sovereign Judges of this Realm, and are Princes
therein. The Imperial dignity is adjudged and given by the Popes after the
judgment and election of Bishops and Archbishops, which also judge all the
affairs of the Empire. Over and besides this, the Pope chalengeth and
reserueth from all others privately to himself, the judgment of variances
concerning great Signories, Realms, and th'Empyre. We observe in histories,
that he made himself judge between the Flemings and French, the Flemings and
their Earls; between* Childerik and Pipin, Lewys and his children; between
Edward; the first and Philip the Fair, between Edward the second and Philip de
Valois, between Edward the third and John; between Richard and Charles the
fifth, surnamed the Wise; between Henry, the sixth and Charles the seventh;
between The Emperors Henry the fourth and Rodolph, between the same Henry and
his Son, between Otho and Frederik, between Lewis of Bauari^ and Frederik
of Austrich, and as many others; he has attempted to adiudge the realm of
Arrago^. And thus therewanteth no contrariety in this behalf between Jesus
Christ and the Pope.

Jesus Christ fled, doubting least the people would make him king: the Pope
pestreth the air and hell with bruites, and the earth with coursings up and
down, to atteyne the sovereign throne and be over kings; and to this end
seeks out and employeth men and devils; gold, silver and iron; hypocrisy and
lies; poison and force.

Jesus Christ hued in all obedience, submitted himself to Governors, Kings
and Emperors, paid them tribute; was content to be judged by them:
The Apostles likewise have bowed under their commandments and iurisdictio^s.
The Popes live in all power, and not only disobey, but also unjustly command
Kings and Emperors, judging them as we have said, and wringing tribut from
them and their subjects: and Boniface the eight by name made a Decree against
all Christen Kings and Princes excommunicating them for ever, that should levy
any exactions upon Clergymen.

Jesus Christ said to his Apostles: ye know that they which rule over the
people have dominion over them, and their Princes have authority over them.
But it shall not be so among you, but whosoever among you will be the greatest
shall be your servant, and whosoever will be the first among you shall be servant
to al. For so the son of man is not come to be served, but to serve, and give
his life for the redeeming of many. The Pope rules both over people and
Princes, and also over all Bishops which claim to be likewise The Apostles
successors. Nevertheless he names himself servant of the servants of God,
he thinks that God is without judgment as are his Idols, he makes a mockery
of God, he takes the name, and does the contrary to that it signifies: since
that men feel themselves more highly displeased with offenses done them by
doltish driftes then by open disobedience; how should God concerue think ye,
and be moved at this blasphemy so gross, to call himself the servant of
servants, and nevertheless to play the tyrant over Bishops, people, Kings,
Emperors, the Church, and the word?

Jesus Christ sent forth his Apostles saying to them: Preach that the kingdom
of heaven is at hand: Matthew. 10. Mar. 6. Luke 10.
heal the sick; cleanse the lepers; raise up the dead; cast out the devils:
freely ye have received, freely give: possess not gold, nor silver nor money
in your girdles or purses, nor a scrip for the journey, neither two coats,
neither shoes, nor a staf: for the workman is worthy of his meat: and into
whatsoever City or town ye shall come enquire who is worthy in it, and there
abide till ye go thence: and when ye come into an house, salute the same: and
if the house be worthy, let your peace come upon it; but if it be not worthy,
let your peace return to you: and whosocuer shall not receive you, nor hear
your words, when ye depart out of that house or that City, shake of the dust
of your feet: truly I say unto, it shall be easier for them of the land of Sodom
and Gomorrha in the day of Judgment, then for that City. Behold I send you as
sheep in the mids of the wolves: be ye therefore wise as serpents and
innocent as doves: but beware of men, for they will deliver you up to the
Councels, and will scourge you in their Sinagogues: and ye shall be brought to
the governors and kings for my sake. And ye shall be hated of al men for my
names sake. The Pope and his Bishops preach not, they have their gromes to do
it, they be greater Lords then Jesus Christ and his Apostles: in steed of
healing the sick and cleansing leapers they infect the world with diseases and
leaprie spiritual: in steed of raising the dead, they kill the living: in
steed of casting devils out, they bring them into the Church of God, they serve
their turns with devils, yea serve them and adore the^: they make sale of al
both the spiritual and the temporal: they enjoy great Signories or dominions,
and huge heaps of treasures: true it is that gray Frieres, Capuchins, and some
sort of Mo^ks carry not (say they) money in their girdles, gold nor silver in
their purses, which I can hardly believe, but am rather persuaded that in this
case they help themselves with some gay subteltie of their divinity: for they
know well enough both to ask and take: the Pope and his Bishops have need of
an infinite number of horse and wagons to carry their stuff and baggage: they
bear no staf with them but they bring armies: no house-holder has sufficient
means to defray their charges for one days enterteinement: they only are
worthy to receive them, which are most favored of the world: how should they
abide in one house, whom the largest towns suffice to lodge with much ado?
they are frank, ceremonial and superstitious in their falutations, knowing
that it is a thing of small cost: if men hear them not, they do not shake of
the dust of their shoes, for they are so proud that they will not walk a foot
in the dust, but they will with arms make them selves be heard: they want
patience to tarry till the Lord sends his Judgment either egall or more
rigorous then that of Sodom and Gomorrha, they in all have bring fire, sword
and sacking, as did the Greeks to Troy: they go and demean them selves like
wolves in the mids of sheep: they are guilefull and wary in working their
malice as the serpent: they have no need to take heed of men, men love and
deem them fortunes derlings: they need not be afraid of kings and their
assemblies: for at their command kings come to them, at their beck do bow to
them, and at their discretion suffer chastisement: kings are but the Popes
ministers and grooms, they are but executours of his will.

Jesus Christ said to his Apostles: be not ye called masters: Mat. 23.
for one is your master, to wit Christ, and all ye are brethren: and call no
man your father, for there is but one, your father which is in heaven and be
not called Doctors, for one is your Doctor, even Christ: now mark how the Pope
and his champions have taken to them these forbidden titles and qualities, and
will not otherwise be named. It was Gods pleasure to have it so, to the end
they might declare themselves such as they are in deed, and make us so much the
more without excuse before his justice, if we embrace their opinions; for they
bear the mark of dissalowance in their names and actions. To call the Pope
otherwise

the truth is, that the wonderful virtue and power of God who conuerteth
the evil of man into good, and uses it for his justice, punishing sin by sin,
may not be judged by the constitutions of man and namely by the above said; as
also that we must discern, choose, and prove Christian doctrine among so many
errors not by humane reasons, but by the holy Scripture. Which holy Scripture
teaches us, that God is almighty and brings all things to pass, the good
and evil; that al actions are good in God, and take the quality of being
evil from the devil and from sin that have enthralled the nature of man: in
such wise that although God makes or does all good and evil things, yet is
he goodness it self, Lam. 3.
there is no evil in him. It is written in Jeremy: Who is he that says, it
comes to pass, and the Lord commands it not? out of the mouth of the most
high proceeds not evil and good? Amos. 3.
In Amos: shall any evil be in the city which the Lord has not brought to
pass? Isay. 44.
God faith in Isay: I am the Lord that do all things: I alone spread out the
heavens, and stretched out the earth by my self; I destroy the tokens of the
soothsayers, and make them that conjecture fools, and turn the wisemen
backward, Isay. 45.
and make their knowledge foolishnes. I am the Lord, and there is none other: I
form the light and create darkness, Job. 12.
I make peace, and create evil; I the Lord do all these things. Job says of
God thus: he that is deceived and he that deceyueth, are his; he causes the
counselors to go as spoiled, and makes the Judges fools. All the evils,
violences, murders, burnings, sackings, robberies, and wastes, which Cyrus king
of Persia with his armies did commit upon the Egyptians, Aethiopians, Sabeans,
and upon all the kings and peoples of Asia; the Lord allows them. He says
that himself did them in these words: Isay. 45.
Thus says the Lord unto Cyrus his anointed, whose right hand I have holden
to subdue nations before him: therefore will I weaken the loins of kings and
open the door before him, and the gates shall not be shut: I will go before
thee and make the crooked ways straight; I will break the brazen doors and
burst the iron bars: and I will give the treasures of darkness and the
things hid in secret places; that thou may know that I am the Lord. And
afterward in the same chapter: thus says the Lord, the labor of Egypt, and
the merchandise of Aethiopia, and of the Sabeans men of great stature shall
come unto thee, and they shall be thine: they shall follow thee and shall go in
chains, and shall fall down before thee, and make supplication unto thee.
Exodus 9.10.
In Exodus the Lord acknowledges that himself handened the heart of Pharao,
and made him rebelliously withstand his commandments. Again, the Lord says:
Deuteronomy. 32.
I will spend plagues upon them, I will bestow mine arrows upon them: and a
little after he adds: I have said I would scatter them abroad; I would make
their remembrance to cease from among men; save that I feared the furte of
the enemy, least their adversaries should wax proud, and least they should sny,
our high hand, and not the Lord has done all this. Furthermore, the greatest
evils and sins in the world, are done by persecutors of the Church; and yet
is it not the Lord that causes all this evils, that lifts up a sign unto
the nations a far, Isay. 5.
and hisseth to them from the ends of the earth, to persecute his Church? that
says also: o Ashur the rod of my wrath! Isay. 10.
and the staff in his hand is mine indignation: I will send him to a
dissembling nation, and I will give him a charge against the people of my wrath
(he means his people of Israel) to take the spoil and to take the pray: that
gave his Son to Pilate to be crucified, as we are taught by his answer to
Pilate thus: John. 14.
thou could have no power at all against me, except it were given thee from
above. 4. Esd. 15. Ezech. 18. Deuteronomy. 28.
It is the Lord that provoke strangers against his people, that stirs up
kings and peoples, the kings of the North, and the nations of Gog and Magog
against his Church, that rayseth up enemies and gives to them his people with
victory, oppression and reproach, in hunger, thirst and nakedness: Judge. 2.
it is God that delivers his Church into the hands of robbers and spoylers.
To be short, when the holy Ghost rehearses the evils and persecutions endured
by the Church, he never forgets to tell that the Lord sent and caused them.
Do ye suppose your felues to be of greater counsel and understanding or more
ielous of Gods honor than the holy Ghost? Deuteronomy. 18.
It is God, that smites with madness, blindness, and astonishment of heart; he
it is, Romans 1.
that delivers the unfaithful to a reprobate sense; that gives us over to
vile affections, 3. Reg. 22.
and all manner of sins. He it is, that deceives, that sends lying spirits
into the mouth of Prophets purposely to deceive, as of Sedechias and his
companions is written. 1. Cor. 1.
He has besotted or made foolish the wisdom of this world: he destroys the
wisdom of the wise, and casts away the understanding of the prudent says S.
Paul: Romans 2. Isay. 6.
He made the heart of the Jews fat, made their ears heavy, and shut their
eyes; least they see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and
understand with their hearts and convert and he heal them. Again, he made
them err from his ways, and hardened their heart from his fear, Isay. 63.
Psalm. 69.
says Isay. David makes his prayer to the Lord, saying: let their table be a
snare before them, and their prosperity their ruin; let their eyes be blinded
that they see not, and make their loins always to tremble: and a little
after; say iniquity upon their iniquity, and let them not come into thy
righteousness: shall we say that in this prayer is impiety? It is God that
before of old ordained Antichrist to damnation, Iud.
as S. Jude has written. It is God that has sent to Antichrist and his
partakers, strong delusion that they should believe lies, says S. 2 Thessalonians. 2.
Paul. It is God that has put into the hearts of kings to do that which should
please Antichrist, and to give their kingdoms to the beast, until that the
words of God should be accomplished, as is foretold in the Revelation. Thus
the Lord does all things, the good and th'euil, but those things that we call
evil and are evil in us, are good in him. All actions considered in God are
most just and most good, they come from on high most pure and most clean; they
corrupt and defile themselves here below under the Sun amid the malice of men
and of Satan. According to this, Isay. 10.
after God in Isay had said, that Senacherib should serve him to chastise his
Church, he adds: but he thinks not so, neither does his heart esteem it
so; but he imagines to destroy and cut of not a few nations; for he says: are
not my Princes altogether kings? and a few lines after; shall not I, as I have
done to Samaria and to the idols thereof, so do to Jerusalem and to the idols
thereof? but when the Lord has accomplished all his work upon mount Sion and
Jerusalem, I will visit the fruict of the proud heart of the king of Assure, and
his glorious and proud looks. Likewise, though th'actions of Cyrus were evil,
considering he made war for his own ambitions sake, and spoiled nations of
that whereto he had no right, yet were those actions good in God. For those
peoples had well deserved this punishment, through their wicked life, and above
all, their Idolatry; and namely the Medes, who had entreated his people so
roughly, and therefore he delivered them out of captivity by such actions of
Cyrus, which is another reason of the goodness in them: Isay. 45.
I have raised him up (says the Lord) in righteousness. The actions of
Pharao, in that he rebelled so often against the ordinance of God were most
evil: but if we consider them as coming from God, they are most good, most
just, and profitable to th'edifying of the Church. Exodus 9.10.11.
For by these means the Lord plagued Pharao for the wrongful oppression done
to his people; he multiplied his wonders in the land of Egypt, he showed his
power to his Church, and his love toward the same: he made his power known
in Pharao, that his name might be declared throughout the world; In like
sort, Romans 9. Genesis 27.
Joseph was sold by his brethren provoked thereto with envy they bare him: but
God by this their sin brought Joseph into Egypt, preserved Jacob and his
whole Church from the dearth, Genesis 45.
and saved their lives by an excellent deliverance. This deed was most lewd in
the brethren of Joseph: but most good in God, profitable and necessary to his
Church: this is that which Joseph faith to his brethren: when ye purposed evil
against me, God disposed it to good. The evils and miseries which God sends
to his Church, to his Elect, being considered in the will and intention of the
persecutors are actions most evil: but if we weigh them by the justice and
bounty of God, they are just and profitable. For by the same are The Elect
admonished of their faults, and instructed that they can not stand without Gods
grace, and that the effect of their hopes is reserved them in an other world: in
the mean while they are by those afflictions stayed in the obedience of God,
their fear is renewed, and their love and devotion made more earnest, then
before. The children of God do mark and epsy in all the sins and
imperfections of men, as it were through the clouds, certain beams of justice
and bountic coming from God, which make them affirm that all comes from
God. 2. Cor. 12.
So S. Paul says, that God had given him a prick in the flesh, the messenger
of Satan to buffet him: and that it was to the end he should not glorify
himself above measure, and that the power of Christ might be made perfect in
his infirmity. Romans 11.
Whereunto that has relation which he says: that the Lord has enclosed all
in vnbeliese, to the end he might have mercy upon all. So, the stubbernesse of
the Jews in them is most bad; in God it is good; and necessary for us being
Gentiles. By the fall of the Jews (says S. Paul) salvation comes unto the
Gentiles. This is (says he) a great secret, that partly blindness of heart is
come to Israel, until the fullness of the Gentiles be come in. So, the
condemnation and passion of Christ is our justification and soule-health.
Antichrist and his doctors by their seducings commit most detestable sins,
and yet do such seducings serve to the glory of God. 2 Thessalonians 2.
S. Paul writes that God will send a strong power of delusion to the doctrine
of Antichrist, that all might be damned which believed not the truth. Then let
us acknowledge with the Scripture, that whatsocuer is done, God does it, and
that both the good and the evil are done for his justice. This is that great
secret of the Apostle Paul, which has not been communicated to the Pope. This
is that which David speaks of: Psalm. 76.
that the rage of man shall turn to the praise of God. But albeit cuill actions
do turn to Gods justice, let us not for all that be the less careful to
eschew them. For men cease not to be culpable of the evil in their actions;
seeing that in the deed doing they are not moved thereto by the true zele of
Gods justice; but by the devil, by sin, by their concupiscences and wicked
desires. They serve God, not thinking of his service at al, as has been noted
of Senacherib: for our selves, let us serve him in deed and in will, of set
purpose, and not at adventure and as though we thought not of it; let us betake
our hearts and hands to the moving and guyding of his holy spirit; let us obey
his word and we shall do well: Iud. 1. Whether man may do that which is good,
and how.
let us serve him as Judah, and not as Adonibezec.

The Pope teaches us that man of himself may do that which is good. Thus it
sufficed him not impiouslie to abridge the power of God by the former
partition, he proceeds yet to another abridgement thereof by this doctrine.
Whereas he affirmed before, that all good actions come from God: now he
learneth us, that man may also do them of himself. But the holy Scripture
teaches us quite contrary, that man neither can nor does bring any good
thing to pass; that he is the servant of sin; that it is God which works
the good that is in us and that comes from us; that by the sin of Adam we
have been made subject to sin; that sin and Gods curse have so corrupted
our nature, that it neither knows, nor can, nor does any thing cls, save
sin: but that God by his grace, by his holy spirit gives unto those that
are his a certain light of understanding, which strives against sin;
howbeit sin most often overcomes this light; that God will have it so, to
the end his power may be perfected in our infirmity, and that we glorify our
selves in him and his grace, and not in our selves and our own works. The
Lord says: Ioh. 15. Iac. 1.
we cannot bear good fruit of our selves. S. James warns: err not my dear
brethren; every good giving, and every perfect gift is from above. S. Paul
says: Romans 8. Col. 1. Romans 6.
that to sin, is to walk after the manner of men, that he does not the good
thing which he would, but the evil which he would not; that it is sin
which dwells in him; that in his flesh dwells no goodness; that they which
are carnal or in the flesh cannot please God; that they are in the flesh which
have not the spirit of Christ; that we know not our selves what we ought to
pray for; that the concupiscence of the flesh is enmity against God; that we
are servants of sin. David says, Psalm. 14.40.18.
that none does good, no not one; that what men do in the presumption of their
heart and in their counsels, is sin. Thus we may not attribute any good
deeds to our own nature; but it is God that works in us that which is good.
Math. 14.
If the Lord had not taken S. Peter by the hand, he had perished in the Sea: in
like fort if God vpholdeth us not, we should sink into the bottomless sea of
our concupiscences, into the sea of our sins, into the sea of our froward and
defiled nature: if God should not call us, as he did Adam, we should fly from
him, and do nothing else but depart from him so far as we could. I am the
light of the world, Ioh. 8.15.
says our Savior, he that follows me, walks not in darkness: if ye bide
not in me, as the branches in the vine-stock, ye can bring forth no fruit. 2.
Cor. 3.
S. Paul says, that every good thought is of God; that the holy spirit prays
for us, because we know not what we ought to pray for; Romans 8.
that without this spirit we are enemies to God in thought and in evil
works; that with this spirit he fights against the law of his members; Col.
1.
this is that understanding which makes the inward man, Romans 7.
wherewith he serves God; that God gives the will and the performance; that he
it is which gives the holy spirit and works his virtues in us; that
whatsoever he did, was done by the grace of God. Iac. 4.
And S. James bids us limit all our affairs, even the most common, with
this condition; if the Lord will. And this does the Hebrews ordinarily
admonish, by the parable of a Bridegroom, who said absolutely: I will sleep
with my spouse this night: and when one of their wisemen advised him to say, if
God will, he wilfully replied: that is in my will and power, will he or will he
not, it shall be done: but they were scarce in bed together when they both died:
from whence they have this Proverb among them: the Bridegroom gets himself
to bed, and wots not what may him bestead. Moreover, they teach, how the duty
of him that prays is to refer the issue of his request expressly to the will
of God, and never to make his prayer peremptory without exception; which is to
be understood when it is not evident that the holy Ghost has endited our
prayer: but hereby appears their opinion, that man knows not what he ought
to crave, and therefore is bound to refer not his actions alone, Psalon. 51.
Psalm. 119.
but his petitions also and wishes to the will of God. So David craves of God
a clean heart and to have a right spirit renewed within him; he craves his
holy spirit, that he may praise the Lord, and that his prayer may be acceptable
to him. The faithful have evermore confessed that all their good came from
God: the same is most common in the Scripture; Psalm. 118.
it is the voice of the righteous, says David. Virtuous and holy men have
always in the Church been named men of God, specially among the Hebrews, who
called them likewise, men of mercy, as if they would have said, God bestowed on
them more grace and mercy than on others: contrariwise it is the voice of
Antichrist to glorify the flesh, to glorify man, as says S. Peter; as it is
the voice of true Christians, 2 Pet. 2.
that our good comes from above; it is not in us, it is not of us, it is none
of ours. Finally, we learn in the Scripture that the Lords will is not to
grant us full and perfect victory over sin in this world, least we should
proudly brag of the merit of works. He gives us his holy spirit, and
sometimes also true victory over sin, to encourage us against despair in
our continual battle: but the principal end is that having felt our own
feebleforce, and acknowledged our want of power, we might with our whole heart
repair to him, and finding how vain it is to repose trust in any else, we
should of necessity be driven to confess that we can not be saved but by him:
which would lead us with S. Paul to this depth of contemplation; Romans 7.
who shall deliver us from the body of this death? For so S. Paul confessed
that although he was endued with the holy spirit, nevertheless for the most
part he did not that which he would; and whereas he imputes the same to sin
that dwelt in him, he confesses himself a sinner. So does the Scripture
report to us the sins of holy persons, Prophets and Apostles enriched with
the holy spirit. And S. Paul says; that God gave him a prick in the flesh, 2.
Cor. 1.
the messenger of Satan to buffet him, because he should not be exalted out of
measure: and therefore was his prayer excluded which he made for his
deliverance unto God, thus: I be sought the Lord thrice, that it might depart
from me: and he said unto me; my grace is sufficient for thee for my power is
made perfect through weakness: and therefore the Apostle became resolute to
rejoice in his infirmities. Let us come to S. John, who writes: if we say, we
have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us; we make God a
lier and his word is not in us. 1. Cor. 1.
It is written also that the Lord has chosen the weak and vile things of this
world, to the end that he which glorifieth himself, should glorify himself to
the Lord. Romans 8. 2. Cor. 5.
And in that regard does the Apostle call the holy spirit given in this world
by God to his elect, the earnest penny or first fruicts of the spirit. And in
very truth, if we were willing and able to give assured judgment of our
selves, if we were not unwilling to bring to light things that are hidden, and
the counsels of our hearts: we should perceive and judge, that what resista^ce
by the grace of God soever we make, we quail and yield not withstanding for
the most part. There streameth daily amids our wills and our zele, I wot not
what sensuality, concupiscence, envy, and infidelity that steyneth our
works. So that if all our actions should be examined by the word of God, not
one of them should be found able to stand before his justice. But if we judge
not nor confess them now, delay of time will not amend, or abolish their guilt;
the presence of the Lord, how late soever he comes, will force us to
confess, for he can well discover and judge them. Hereupon we may conclude,
that in our nature is no goodness; that the understanding and good we have
descends from on high and is brought by the holy spirit; that the measure of
the same spirit which we enjoy in this world, is as nothing in comparison of
that we hope for, is but a skantling, a glimse, a surface or smattring, and as
it were a smacke, to make us seek, hope, and ardently long for that fullness
of perfection which abides us in the world to come.

It suffices not the Pope to teach that man of himself may do some good
thing; Whether a man by his works may merit ought at Gods hand.
but he will have us further to believe that man may do good works inow, to
save himself, to satisfy the justice of God, to repair and wipe away the
sins and steines of his soul, of his flesh and of his predecessors, and to
merit not only for himself, but also for many mo that vnmeafureable bliss and
glory everlasting, which the wit of ma is unable to copreliend. Lo here a
flat contrarietic of the Pope to Christ; lo here a doctrine bearing the right
stamp of Antichrist; lo here the divinity that brings the traffike of
Churchmen in request: who keep shop for open sale of men's salvation, and make
merchandise of their souls through covetousness by feigned words, as S. 2. Pes.
2.
Peter has foreshewed. We did sufficiently deface this doctrine, when we
proved before, that man could do no good; that for the little good which
comes from man, it is God that does it in him and by him. Howbeit, the holy
Scripture informs us how God gave his law to men, not for to give life,
justify and save them by the same, Gal. 2.3.
but to make them know the unableness, frailtic and corruption of their nature,
and to force them to acknowledge it impossible for man to perform his
obedience to the majesty of God, to satisfy his debt to the justice of God,
and to escape eternal death: which should compel them with all humblenes to
cry and crave forgeuenes, grace and mercy. Obedience to the law was enjoined
upon pain of death; Iac. 2.
and it is said, that whosoever shall keep the whole law, and yet fails in
one point, he is guilty of all. Now there is not one man found, be he Prophet
or Apostle, Gal. 3.
which has not disobeyed many commandments of the law: and therefore
The Apostle says, that the Scripture has shut up all under sin, that the
promise by faith in Christ Jesus might be given to them that believe. There is
none just, no not one, all are under sin: Romans 3. 1. John. 1. Isay. 43.
we deceive our selves, we make God a liar if we say we have no sin. Let us
be judged together (says the Lord in Isay,) count thou that thou may be
justified: thy first father has sinned, and thy teachers have transgressed
against me or bettayed my cause. The Prophets and Apostles have all frankly
acknowledged themselves sinners, they could neither accomplish the law nor be
saved thereby. This acknowledgement of himself, his corruption, sin and
weakness has provoked and enforced man to cry for mercy to the Lord, and say
with David and Paul: Psalm. 32. Romans 4.
blessed are they whose iniquities are forgeuen, and wose sins are covered:
blessed is the man to whom the Lord imputes not sin. Again: have mercy on
me, have mercy on me; Psalm. 52.
for my soul trusts in thee: and with Esdras: there is no man among them that
be borne but he has done wickedly, 4. Esd. 8.
nor any that does confess thee, which has not done amiss: for in this (o
Lord) thy righteousness and thy goodness shall be praised if thou be merciful
vntothem, which have not the substance of good works: 4. Esd. 7.
and elsewhere: if God were not abundant in his mercies the world could not
contime, nor they that have the possession thereof. No man can humble himself
enough before God, no man can too basely esteem himself before his most
glorious majesty: pride did put the Pharifee far from God; humility brought
the Publican near him: pride carried our first Father out of the most
honorable subjection of the Lord. Pride is the original and cause of
Antichrist and of backsliding, as says Esdras. 6. Esd. 8.
Our Lord God has fought so openly and with so great care against this opinion
of merit by works, that I am astonished with wonder that men who say they are
Christians, durst think, decree, publish and receive the same. He has
advertised us, that if we should accomplish the whole law, yet could we not
merit any thing at his hand. After he had declared in S. Luke, Luc. 17.
that the master will not thank that servant, nor think himself beholding to
him, because he did that which was commanded him, he adds: so likewise ye,
when ye have done all those things which are commanded you, say, we are
unprofitable scruants, we have done that which was our ductie to do. Luc. 18.
What made the Pharisie rejected, but the confidence he had in his works? The
most praise-worthie and allowable works are martyrdomes and sufferings: Romans 8.
now The Apostle teaches us, that those sufferings are not worthy of the
glory to come: Gal. 2. Gal. 5.
again, that no flesh shall be justified by the works of the law: that whosoever
will be justified by the law, are abolished from Christ, and are fallen from
grace: that they despise the spirit of grace: Heb. 10.
that if righteousness is by the law, Jesus Christ died in vain. Gal. 2.
He seems angry with a most vehement zele against the Galatians, who busied
their minds about merits of works; he calls them foolish, in that they
would leave the spirit to walk after the flesh; he urges them; he threateneth
them; by infinite arguments he concludes that no man is justified toward God
by works. This is the doctrine published also with so great earnestnes in all
th'epistle to the Hebrews. Then let us condemn this doctrine of the Pope, it
exalts the flesh; it places the power of flesh and blood in place where God
should be; it disanulleth and makes void the love, the coming the word, the
death and passion and merit thereof, the grace and mercy of Christ Jesus. It
is scornefully to abase and spitefully to defy the election and councels, the
justice and mercy of the Lord; it is to despise the spirit of grace; it is to
go about to assail and break in upon the Lord in his own Paradise; 2. Pet. 2.
it is to deny the Lord that has bought us, as says S. Peter: that to bring
into the Church the merit of works, is (according to the same S. Peter's saying)
to tempt God, Acts 15.
to lay a yoke on the Disciples necks which neither our fathers nor we were
able to bear: it is to overthrow the counsel holden by the Apostles in the
City of Jerusalem, wherein was concluded that salvation depended not of
works, but only of the grace of the Lord. Let us refuse this pride of the
flesh, least we be abolished of Christ and fall from grace. Leave we these
marks of Antichrist to the Pope, leave we him with all the wicked to awayte for
the merit of their works; while we with all the faithful awayte for the grace
and mercy of God. Let us not deceive our selves, but confess that all are shut
up in unbelief, that Jesus Christ might show mercy upon all. Then let us fly
unto him both willingly and for necessity sake. And as we triumph with S. Paul
in our infirmity, and in the glory and mercy of Christ Jesus: so let us
notwithstanding bid our flesh battle and continually fight against it with
the first fruicts of the spirit, to the increase of our sanctification, so
far as our power will extend. And let us meditate with understanding these
words of Esdras: let not the sinner say that he has not sinned: 4. Esd. 16.
for coals of fire shall burn upon his head which says, I have not sinned
before the Lord God and his glory. But learn we by the holy Scripture the
order and cause of our salvation: first, how Paradise is open to them only,
whom God has called, chosen and predestined to salvation: that salvation is
freely given to men; that Jesus has purchased it for the elect by his
suffering and death: that the holy Ghost inableth the elect to receive the
merit of our Saulours death and passion by faith. Finally, learn we to what
end good works are commended and commanded to man.

Jesus Christ says in S. John: all that the Father gives me, Of Election and
Praedestination. John 6.
shall come to me, and him that comes to me, I cast not aways none can come
to me, except my Father which has sent ^e draws him; none can come to me,
except it be given unto him of my Father; John 1.
the faithful are not borne of blood nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the
will of man; but are borns of God; again: glorify thy son, that he may give
everlasting life to all them, whom thou have given him: I have made thy name
manifest to men, whom thou have given me of the world; I pray not for the
world, but for them whom thou have given me: Ioh. 13.
ye are happy, says he to his Apostles; I speak not of ye all, Math. 11. Mat.
20.22
I know whom I have chosen: and in Matthew: I give thee thanks, for that thou
have hidden these things from the wise, and have reveled them to little-ones:
moreover, many are called, but few are chosen: when S. Peter confessed him to
be the Christ the son of the living God, Math. 16.
he says; blessed art thou Simon the son of Jonas, for flesh and blood has
not reveled it to thee, but my Father which is in heaven. It is written by S.
Paul; 1. Cor. 1.2. Cor. 5. 2 Thessalonians. 2. Romans 8.
that we are in Jesus Christ: that it is God which has set us apart to
salvation: that God has chosen us from the beginning to salvation: that whom
he knew before, them has he praedestinated to be made like to the image of his
son: that God did choose the children before they were borne, Romans 9.
and having not as yet done good or evil; that the purpose of God might abide
according to th'election, not by works, but by him that calls; that there is
a remnant (he means of Israelites) through th'election of grace: Romans 11.
that which Israel sought for he obtained not, but th'election obtained it.
Isai. 43.
I, even I am the Lord, and beside me there is no Savior; I have declared, and
I have saved, and I have showed: I, even I am he that puts away thine
iniquities for mine own sake. It is God that works in us the will and the
deed after his good pleasure. But (notwithstanding this truth so evident) the
Papists say that there is no such election and predestination: for that it
would follow, that God should be unjust in choosing some rather then others; and
that he should lay the evil to their charge, whom he made to do it, and who
neither could nor can withstand his will. I am amazed to behold among men any
so arrogantly ouer-seene as to plead and protest in this sort against God, to
make him just after their manner, and to imagine that his word is contrary to
his justice. How dare we suppose and propose these doubts, seeing the Lord,
the Apostles and Prophets did specially foresee and condemn them by name
together with the very same inconveniences and reasons which the Popish Doctors
allege. Mat. 20.
The parable of the day-labourers was propounded by our Savior to this end:
your complaint is less to be admitted then that of the day-labourers. They
complained to their master that those which came not till the evening carried
away as great reward as they who had borne the burden of the day, the heat of
the Sun: the master answered to one of them; my friend, I do thee no wrong;
did thou not covenant with me for a penny? take that which thine is, and
go thy way: I will give as much to this last as to thee; is it not lawful for
me to do what I will with mine own goods? is thine eye evil because I am
good? the last shall be first, and the first shall be last: for many are called,
but few are chosen. Thus, since we all deserve eternal death, what wrong does
the Lord to them whom he leaves therein? if men had any right to Paradise,
there should be some show of reason for that which ye say: but since they have
no right thereto, and that the whole right belongs to God; wherefore will ye
prye into his liberality, and control him in the bestowing of his own, him
that is allgood, all-iust, and all-mighty? Romans 9.
After that S. Paul had been very long in declaring and proving election and
predestination; how God had-chosen men yer they were borne, and when they had
done neither good nor evil, that the purpose of God might remain according to
election, he adds: what shall we say then? is there unrighteousness with God?
God forbid: for he says to Moses, I will have mercy on him to whom I will show
mercy; and I will have compassion on him on whom I will have compassion: so
then it is not in him that wills, nor in him that runs, but in God that
shows mercy: for the Scripture says to Pharao, I have raised thee up to this
only end, that I might show my power in thee, and that my name might be
declared throughout all the earth: he therefore has mercy on whom he will, and
whom he will he hardneth: thou will say then to me: why does he yet complain?
for who is he that can resist his will? (behold the very same inconuemences
which ye allege) he answers: but o man who art thou which pleadest against
God? shall the thing formed say to him that formed it, why have thou made me
thus? has not the potter power of the clay to make of the same lump one
vessel to honor and another to dishonor? what and if God would to show his
wrath and to make his power known suffer with long patience the vessels of
wrath prepared to destruction, and that he might declare the riches of his
glory upon the vessels of mercy, which he has prepared to glory? Isay
alleging most of these reasons to prove this doctrine, stops your mouth
much more roughly with words that might make them tremble and sink with
ghastly fear and terror, who stand on such nice poincts and quiddities. Isay.
45.
Woe be unto him, says he, that strives with his maker, the pot shard with the
potshards of the earth; shall the clay say to him that fashioneth it, what
make thou? Let us therefore hold for certain, that the faithful are elect
and predestinate of God to salvation; that salvation is by election and not by
works: and let us consider that this doctrine brings most steadfast assurance
and comfort to the faithful against the storms and perils of this world,
knowing that their salvation is fastened and grounded on so sure a rock as is
the election of God, and not on the sliding sand of good works.

Jesus Christ says: There is no salvation, but by Jesus Christ. John. 14.10.1.
1. Ioh 2. 1. Ioh. 1. Tit. 3.
I am the way, the truth and the life; none can come to my Father, but by me: I
am the door; if any enters by me, he shall be saved: our Lord Jesus is the lamb
of God, that takes away the sins of the world: that is the atonement for
our sins: his blood cleanses us from all sins: he that has the son of
God, has life; he that has not the son of God, has not life. Also in other
places it is written, that God saved us not by the works of righteousness which
we had done, but according to his mercy, by the washing of the new birth, and
the renewing of the holy Ghost, which he shed on us abundantly through Jesus
Christ our Savior; that we being justified by his grace should be made heirs
according to the hope of eternal life: 2. Tim. 1.
that the grace of salvation was given us through Jesus Christ before all
times: Romans 3.
that God has justified us freely by his grace, by the redemption which is in
Jesus Christ: that he died for our sins, and arose again for our
justification. This is a true saying, 1. Tim. 1.
says S. Paul, and by all means worthy to be received, that Jesus Christ came
into the world to save sinners, of whom I am chiese. Finally, to deny that our
salvation is not freely and wholly purchased for us by the death and passion of
our Lord Jesus to deny the law, prophets and evangelists, the old and new
testament, th'infallible truth of God; yea, it is so much as in us lies to
tread under foot the son of God, Heb. 10.
and count the blood of the now Testament wherewith we are sanctified, an
unholy thing.

It is written that Jesus Christ is the end of the law in righteousness to all
believers: that Meses said; We receive salvation by faith.
he that shall do these things, shall live by the same: but at this day the
word of faith is; if thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and
shall believe in thy heart, that God raised him up from the dead, thou shall be
saved; Gal. 5.
for with the heart man believes to righteousness, and with the mouth man
confesses to salvation: again; there is no Circumcision nor incircumcision,
but faith working by charity: also; Romans 1.
the Gospel is the power of God unto salvation to every one that believes:
further; Jesus Christ is our propitiatory sacrifice through faith: further
more, Romans 4.
God justifies only them, that are of the faith of Jesus. Moreover, to him
that works not but believes in him that justifies the ungodly, his faith is
counted for righteousness: also, the promise was made to faith: again it is
written; Ioh. 3.
that he which believes in the son shall see eternal life; he that believes
not in the son of God, shall not see eternal life, but the wrath of God
abides on him: that the inst shall live by faith; Heb. 10. Heb. 11. 1. Pet. 1.
but if any with draw him self, my soul shall have no pleasure in him: that
without faith it is impossible to please God: that we are kept by the power of
God through faith unto salvation which is prepared to be showed in the last
time: 1. Pet. 2.
that Jesus Christ is precious to them that believe; and a stone to stumble at
and a rock of offense to them that stumble at the word. Ioh. 14.
In sum this is that which the Lord does principally, yea singularly require
at their hands, who ensue him, and sue for his grace and succor this is that
which he said to his Apostles after his resurrection; Mar. 16.
go ye into all the world and preach the Gospel to every crenture, he that
shall believe and be baptized shall be saved; but he that will not believe,
shall be damued: Luc. 23.
the one thief which belecued at the poinct of death, he received into Paradise,
the other which believed not, he refused: this is the Gospel, to believe in God
and in him, Ioh. 20.
who^ he has sent for our salvation. The Gospel is written, that we might
believe, that Jesus is the Christ the son of God, and that in belecuing we
might have life through his name. Before S. Philip baptized th'Eunuch of Queen
Candace he said, it is lawful to baptize thee, if thou beleeuest with all thy
heart.

It is written else where, That faith comes of God.
that none can say Jesus Christ is the Lord, but by the holy Ghost: that God
has give us understanding that we might know him which is true: that faith is
not of our selves, 1. Cor. 2. 1. John. 5. Mat. 16. John. 3. Tit. 3. Act. 16.
but is the gift of God: that the faithful are borne of God: that S. Peter
received his faith of God, and not of flesh and blood: that men must be
regenerat of the holy Ghost, to become faithful. So it is writ, that the
Lord opened the heart of Lydia the seller of purple to attend to the things
which S. Paul spoke. They then that have ears to hear and understand, can not
but acknowledge without doubting, that faith is the mouth of the soul, by
which we receive faluatio^, and the merit of the Lords death and passion, that
faith is the only gift of God: and therefore whofocuer glorifieth himself,
Psalm. 27.
let him glorify in the Lord, and say with David; the Lord is my light and my
salvation.

But some do argue against the word of God in these terms: Faith does not
abolis^ works.
Seeing that grace abolisheth merit, works are abolished likewise: and so the
Gospel abolisheth works and the law by faith. S. Paul did foresee this
objection, and answered thereto so carefully, that none except the ignorant
or enemies of the Gospel, can make account thereof. Nevertheless the Pope
stands on it so stiffly, and esteems it so highly, that in consideration and
under color of it and his avarice together he has brought in this goodly
doctrine of the merit of works contrary to the Gospel, as by the premises
here-aboue appears. Romans 3.4.
After Saint Paul had set down this objection, he proves more manifestly than
before, that by faith we are saueck and stays firmly on this argument; that
Abraham received the promise of salvation by faith, before the circumcision,
and long time yer the law was given, so that the promise (says he) belongs
to the faithful and not to the workers of the law: which law was given only
to the successors of Abraham, after faith and the promises: and so he leaves
us to conclude, that as the law was given to the successors of Abraham after
the promises made to Abraham because of his faith: even so the faithful ought
to receive the law, not making it the cause of the promises and hand-fast of
their salvation; but showing by their obedience thereto that the promises
belong to them as being successors of them to whom the promises were made, as
being successors of Abraham, yea children of the heavenly father, whose voice
they ought to know and understand, yelding them selves willingly to be guyded
and governed by his holy spirit, to the obedience of his commandments. The
son is a son before he obeys his father, but he shows by his obedience,
that he is the truesonne: so the faithful and elect, before works, before their
obedience appears, be the children of God. Works cannot bring them this title
or quality, it is the gift of God and comes not of works, says S. Paul:
Ephesa.
but by works they show themselves to be faithful in deed; and by the
obedience they yield to God when he has certified them of his will, they show
themselves to be the true and faithful children of God. S. Romans 6.
Paul is not content herewith, but pursues yet more evidently the overthrow of
this objection. For having proved before, that we are saved by grace and not by
works, it follows: what shall we say then? shall we continue still in sin,
that grace may abound? God forbid, how shall we, that are dead to sin, live
yet therein? know ye not that all we which have been baptized into Jesus
Christ, have been baptized into his death? we are buried then with him by
baptism into his death, that like as Christ was raised up from the dead by the
glory of the father, so we also should walk in newness of life, and in the
same Chapter: what then? shall we sin, because we are not under the law, but
under grace? God forbid: know ye not that to whomsother ye give your selves as
servants to obey, his servants ye are to whoth ye obey: and a little after; but
now being freed from sinue, and made servants unto God ye have your fruit in
holmes, and the end everlasting life. Thus ye see that faith destroys not
works. Contrariwise, the Scripture commands us that we oboy God to show
forth the glory and holiness of his house, to show and confirm our own and
our neighbors faith; to show that we fear, love and honor God; that we belong
to him, are regenerated by him, are his children and servants: and this ought
we to seek in works, and not our salvation. Works go not before election;
they follow it: they follow adoption, they follow faith, they follow the sure
trust of salvation. The commaundeme^ts of God are directed to them that are of
his house and not to strangers: so that we must be of his house before we may
understand or do them. The commandments are not they that make the children,
but they are the children that do the commandments of their father. But now
behold how we learn what is the end of good works. 1 Pes. 2.
It is written that it is the will of God, that by well doing we may put to
silence the ignorance of foolish men, as free and not as having the liberty
for a cloak of maliciousnes but as the servants of God. 2. Pet. 1.
Again, give even all diligence thereunto, join more over virtue with your
faith, and with virtue, knowledge; and with knowledge temperance; and with
temperance, patience, and with patience, godliness; and with godliness, brotherly
kindness; and with brotherly kindness, charity. Saint John says: hereby we are
sure that we know him, if we keep his commandments; he that says I know him
and keeps not his commandments, is a lier, and the truth is not in him: he
that says, he remains in him ought even so to walk, as he has walked. 1.
Ioh. 4. 1. Ioh. 5.
If any man say, I love God, and hate his brother, he is a liar. We know that
whosoever is borne of God, sins not; but he that is begotten of God, keeps
himself. the faithful should live no more after the concupiscences of men, 1.
Pet. 2.
but according to the will of God. They must have their conversation honest,
that they which speak evil of them as of evil doers, may by their good
works, which they shall see glorify God in the day of the visitation. True it
is that the scripture seems in some places to ascribe salvation to works for
the holy Ghost sometimes uses indifferently all these terms, election, grace,
faith, works, and accepts the one for the other, expressly to show us that
th'election, grace, faith and works are inseparable: and as it is written that
works done without faith avail nothing; so true works bring with them faith,
consequently th'election and grace purchased by the passion of our Savior.
Sometimes also the holy Ghost speaks in this manner to rebuke them that abuse
faith, running after a bastard, vain and idle faith, leaving the lawful, true
and working faith. At other times hespeaketh so, applying himself to nouices
and children in the faith. For so S. James highly extolled works; Iac. 2.
but that was upon occasion, to confound them that abused faith, and thought
they should continue unprofitable and idle in faith. As also S. Paul opposing
himself against them, which said, they needed not keep themselves from
sinning, Romans 6.
since they were under grace, and not under the law, proceeds thus far,
that he says: being made free from sin, ye are made servant to
righteousness: now to avouch these words; that works instifie us, is to make
the spirit contrary to it self, the Gospel to the Gospel, S. Paul to S.
Paul, S. James to S. James, which were no better then blasphemy against the
spirit. For as often as the purpose is to lay the groundwork of the Gospel,
then the spirit says specially and namely that it is by grace, and not by
merit at all: it is hard to recke^ how often this is affirmed in the gospel, and
in S. Paul chiefly. There is no likelihood that two or three places forced and
racked should balance or weigh down infinite others, specially considering the
caueats above written, least we mistake the meaning of those words and not
forgetting that S. Paul having used those terms, says, I speak after the
manner of men for the infirmitle of your flesh: and S. James, who in the end
concludes, that faith is perfected by works; and expressly teaches us, that we
ca^ not be saved by works, saying in the same chapter that whosoever shall keep
all the law, and shall fail in one poinct, he shall be guil^y of all Now there i^
no man so holy, that fails not in some poinct of the law, and which
consequently is not guilty of all. And thus no hope of salvation may be built
on works. Conclude we then, that works of themselves (...) nothing to
salvation, but do stre^gthe^, accomplish and witness faith by which we receive
salvation. Whether the body of Jesus Christ be really in the bread of the holy
supper.


The Pope commands to believe, that the body and blood of Jesus Christ are
really and in deed, in the bread and wine of the supper. He commands that
the bread of the supper be adored as God. I marvel that he makes not the wine
be likewise adored, for the reason of both is all one. He has ordained a daily
sacrifice of this body, and for to commend this sacrifice the more, he has
provided it a service of the church, altar, sacrificers, priests, and other
officers, priestly omaments, oeremonies and superstitions in words and
gestures, in water, fire and otherthings; being in-deed a mingle mangle of all
religions that ever were. He grou^deth his opinion of the real and corporal
presence of the body and blood, and of the substantial turning or change of
the truth of the bread and wine into the substance and truth of the body and
blood of the Lord, Math. 26.
upon these words of S. Matthew saying: Jesus took bread, and after he had
given thanks he brake it, and gave it to his disciples, and said: take, eat,
this is my body: and having taken the cup, and given thanks, he gave it them,
saying: drink ye all of it; for this is my blood of the new testament which is
shed for many, for the remission of sins. Now they may easily judge, who peruse
the holy scripture wholly with an open heart, the eyes of whose understanding
are not dym, that this doctrine of the Pope took his beginning and being in
the fantasy of man, rather then in the Scripture. For if we gather and
compare together whatsoever the Scripture does contain touching the Lords
supper, we shall find that the body is not in the bread, but is at the right
hand of God; and yet the faithful do eat and drink spiritually and by faith
the body and blood of our Savior, receiving therewith the merit of his death
and passion, and are nourished spiritually by his grace; and that the bread and
wine are set forth for signs of the Sacrament, to signify to us that as bread
and wine nourish us for our temporal life, so the body and blood of the Lord
do nourish us for the life everlasting; and as there is an union and meeting
together of many bodies in the bread and in the wine, eue^ so should there be
an union and agreement among the faithful in communicating of the body and
blood of the Lord. When Jesus Chirst had said, this is my body, Math. 16. Mar.
14.
this is my blood of the new testament, he adds: I say unto you I will not
drink henceforth of this fruict of the vine; [I will not drink more of the
fruict of the vine] until that day, when I shall drink it new with you in my
fathers kingdom. These words taken either spiritually or after the letter do
sufficiently declare that the wine is not turned into the blood of our Savior
for he calls it still the fruict of the vine. And in Saint Luke to discover
unto us more clearly that this, Luke. 22.
speech is figurative, he says: this is my body; do this in remembrance of me:
this cup is the new testament in my blood which is shed for you: he says not
the cup is my blood; but it is the new testament in my blood: that is to say,
it is a representation, a sign of my blood, a testament, a title and contract
of new alliance in my blood. This sense and understanding is not beside the
purpose: for he celebrated that same day with his disciples the ancient
Sacrament of the passe-ouer lamb, which represented the lamb of God, that
should come to make us through his death and passion to pass out of this
tra^sitory world full of miseries and bondage into the other would full of
surpassing joy and liberty. And for that this ancient Sacrament of the
passe-ouer lamb was to take an end forthwith by his death, he instituted the
new sacrament of the new testament, of the new league or alliance: be gave them
bread and wine for signs of the spiritual nourishment which they were
necessarily to receive in the body and blood of our Savior. And as in the old
alliance or testament the lamb was not Christ, but only represented the
Christ: so the bread and wine of the new testament are not the body and blood,
but signify and represent the body and blood of Christ. This interpretation is
confirmed moreover by these words; do this in remembrance of me: it is
ordinary to commend by signs and resemblances the memory of things absent, and
not of things present on the other side if we are to take the words in S. Luke
literally without admitting any exposition beside the letter, the wine is no
more the blood, it is now the cup, it must then be confessed that these words
are figurative and subject to another interpretation then the natural
fignification of the letter will bearens there be any figure in S. Luke, there
may be also the like in S. Matthew. It is written in S. Paul: the cup of
blessing, which we bless, 1. Cor. 10.
is it not the communion of the body of Christ* the bread which we breaked is
it not the communion of the body of Christ and for we that are many are one
bread and one body because we all are partakers of one bread. He says not,
that the bread and wine are the body and blood, but that they are the communion
of the body and blood: these words can none otherwise be interpreted, but that
the bread and wine signify the communion of the body and blood; seeing that the
bread and wine can not be the communion; for the communion is a thing
spiritual, and has no being but in the spirit and consideration of man;
which can not agree with the bread. Again, if we must ground this doctrine on
the letter, the wine is not the communion of the blood, that which is the blood
(as you say) is the chalice. The same Apostle says in another place: I have
received of the Lord that which I also have delivered to you; to wit: that the
Lord Jesus in the same night that he was betrayed took bread; and when he had
given thanks, he brake it, and said: take, eat, this is my body, which is
broken for you, this do ye in remembrance of me. After the same manner also he
took the cup when he had supped, saying: this cup is the new Testament in my
blood; this do, as often as ye drink it, in remembrance of me; for as often as
ye shall eat this bread and drink this cup, ye show the Lords death til he
come. Wherefore, whosoever shall eat this bread, and drink the cup of the
Lord unworthily, shall be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord. Let a man
therefore examine himself and so let him eat of this bread, and drink of
this cup: for he that eats and drinks unworthily eats and drinks his
own damnation, because he discerns not the Lords body. See here again, how
the Lord commands by The Apostle, that the holy supper be made in remembrance
of him; likewise he says not, wine, he says, the cup. See here also, how the
cup or the wine is not the blood, but the new Testament in the blood of the
Lord. Further, the bread and the cup are there named still the bread and the
cup, before and after the blessing, distributing, eating and drinking: which
shows us, that albeit the bread and wine signify the body and blood of our
Savior, they remayn notwithstanding in their true and natural substance, they
remain bread and wine, hallowed nevertheless for the use sake, but no way varied
and altered for the substance. Had they been transubsta^tiated into the body and
blood, The Apostle after the celebration, after the participating, had not said,
as often as ye shall eat this bread and drink this cup; whosoever shall eat
this bread and drink this cup: he would have said; as often as ye shall eat
this body and drink this blood; whosoever shall eat this body and drink this
blood. True it is that he says; he that shall eat and drink unworthily,
shall be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord: but that is to show, how this
eating and drinking is holy and sacred, representing to us the death and
passion of the Lord, th'oblation and suffering of the body, the sheading of the
blood of Jesus Christ, the nourishment of the soul. This teaches us our
duty, to take this bread and this wine with an holy and religious reverence;
for the question in this sacrament stands upon the body and blood of our
Savior, and not so much on bread and wine, which are not but signs. And here
behold why the holy Ghost says freely, that bread and wine are the body and
blood of the Lord. But now comes a place very notable and vnanswereable, a
most express and pregnant place to them which are acquainted with the Lords
voice. In S. John ye may read, John. 6.
how Jesus Christ preching in the synagogue at Capernau^, and having said, I am
the living bread, and the bread that I will give, is my flesh; then the Jews
strove amongst themselves, saying: how can this man give us his flesh to eat?
then Jesus said unto the^: except ye eat the flesh of the son of man, and
drink his blood ye have no life in you: whosoever eats my flesh and drinks
my blood, has life everlasting, and I will raise him up at the last day: for
my flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is drink indeed: many therefore of his
disciples (when they heard this) said, this is an hard saying; who can hear
it. But Jesus knowing within himself that his disciples murmured at this, said
unto the^: does this offend you? what if ye shall see the Son of man ascend
where he was before? it is the spirit that quickneth, the flesh profits
nothing: the words that I speak to you are spirit and life: but there are
some among you, which believe not. Thus we can not doubt but that this manner
of speaking, to eat and drink the body and blood of the Lord, is spiritual,
seeing the Lord does ascertaine it by name. Ye are astonished, says he, at
this saying of mine, ye must eat and drink my body and my blood: ye will find
these words much more strange, when I shall ascend into heaven with my body:
for then will it seem to you a great deal harder to eat my body being so
far distant from you. Ye must not conceive my words so: it is not my body
that ye must eat, it is the merit of the death and passion of my body, it is my
justifying grace that ye must eat and receive by faith and spiritually, John. 6.
wherewith ye must be quickened. My words are spirit and life; it is the spirit
that quickens, the flesh profits nothing. We may moreover out of this place
draw many other arguments to establish our belief, that the words of eating
and drinking the body and blood of Jesus Christ ought not to be taken but
spiritually, were it needful to confirm that, which himself has so clearly
expounded. he says, if ye eat not the flesh of the Son of man and drink
his blood, ye shall have no life in you. now to stay on the letter of these
terms and not take them spiritually, would cause a great blasphemy to ensue.
for how many men are there in the world which never eat the body of Jesus
Christ, and yet have life in them? but our Savior in plain terms says they
have no life: choose then, either to give him the lie which were blasphemous, or
else confess that he speaks spiritually, and that, by life, he means
spiritual life. Which being so, why do we not also acknowledge that these
words of eating and drinking the body and blood of the Lord are spiritual,
and ought to be understood of th'eating and drinking which the soul does by
faith: specially seeing he interprets himself both for the one and the other
according to this sense. for after he had spoken simply of life, he adds: he
that eats my flesh and drinks my blood, has life everlasting: likewise
after he had said fimplie, that we must eat and drink his flesh and his
blood, he adds: ye shall not eat my body, being the bread descended from
heaven, as your fathers did eat Manna: that is to say, ye shall not eat it with
carnal teeth, as your fathers did eat Manna, for they did eat that carnally,
but ye shall eat this spiritually. Moreover, to show that this speech is
spiritual, and that his body and blood should be taken spiritually and by
faith, he says: I am the bread of life, he that comes to me shall have no
hunger, and he that believes in me shall have no thirst: for there he speaks
of spiritual hunger and thirst, and refers all to faith. On the other side,
if we take the body and blood of our Savior carnally and with the mouth, it
should follow, that S. Paul is contrary to Christ. For he says, 2. Cor. 7.
that by eating and drinking we profit nothing to Christ, that meat makes us
not acceptable to God; if we eat, says he, it aduantageth us not, and if we
do not eat, we have never the less: and yet in S. John, Christ says, John.
6.
that if we eat not his flesh, we shall not have life everlasting. In like
sort S. Paul says, 1. Cor. 11.
that whosoever shall eat unworthily the bread of the supper, he shall be
guilty of the Lords body: and yet Christ teaches us. that whatsoever enters
by the mouth, Math. 15.
defiles not the man. We cannot agree S. Paul with Christ, the holy Ghost with
himself, if we affirm not that the Lord and S. Paul do speak in the one
place, to wit, concerning the supper, of spiritual eating; and in the other,
of corporal eating. In such wise, that S. Paul's doctrine remains true,
where he says, that by eating and drinking we profit nothing toward Christ,
albeit that we must eat and drink the body and blood of our Savior, as
himself says, for it is spiritually that we must eat and drink, of which
manner of eating and drinking the Apostle purposed not to speak at all in this
place: the doctrine of Christ also abides sure, that whatsoever enters by the
mouth, defiles not the soul; albeit The Apostle says, that whosoever
receives the bread of the supper unworthily, makes himself guilty of the
Lords body: for the abuse which is committed in receiving the bread of the
supper, is principally considered in the soul, conscience and faith. Lo, this
speech of the holy supper, is like to that of Jesus to Nicodemus: John. 3.
truly I say to thee, that he which is not borne again cannot see the kingdom
of God. How may a man, says Nicodernus, be born when he is old? can he enter
again into his mothers womb and be borne? Jesus answers, truly, truly I
say unto thee, that whosoever is not borne of water and of the spirit, he
cannot enter into the kingdom of God: that which is borne of flesh, is flesh,
and that which is borne of the spirit, is spirit. Marvel not at that which I
have told thee, we must be borne from above: the wind blows where it will,
and thou hear the voice, but know not from whence it comes, nor whither
it goes: even so is every man that is borne of the spirit. We all agree, that
this manner of being borne again is spiritual, for otherwise it should be
against nature. Now, so it is, that we have many mo reasons and considerations;
which enforce us to believe, that this manner of eating and drinking the body
and blood of Jesus Christ, is spiritual. For besides that the holy Ghost has
declared the one and the other form of speech to be spiritual: it is
altogether impossible in nature, that one body should be turned into another
diverse in kind, by words and in a moment. This cannot be in nature that a
living body should become of the substance of any other body without death or
corruption, it cannot have change from substance into substance without
corruption, without being not that which it was before; Ioh. 12.
the Lord himself says, it is a thing impossible. The Pope says not, that by
this transubstantiation the body of Christ dies and corrupts; that were to
heap up too many blasphemies and heresies one upon another; and were it so,
Christ were to die and suffer infinite times, Heb. 9.10.
which is flat against the scripture. For it is written, that he died once for
all; that he made one only oblation of his body; that there remains no more
sacrifice for sin; that he lives for ever at the right hand of God. His body
is glorified, it is no more subject to suffering and corruption. Again, we see
not the bread corrupt, it appears after the breaking and blessing, as fair
and vnaltred bread, as before. On the other part, it is impossible in nature,
that a body, such as we ought to believe that of Jesus Christ has been and is,
to wit, a true body, can at the self same time be in diverse places. If the
body of Christ is in the bread of the supper, it is in places innumerable at
the same time; it is in heaven, it is in earth in sundry and infinite parts
thereof. This properly is to deny Jesus Christ to become in the flesh, 2. Ioh.
4.
which is a mark of Antichrist, as says S. John. Is there any thing more
contrary to sense, to reason, to charity, to godliness, to the fear, honor
and love which we by duty must bear toward God? is there any thing more
impossible, tha to break, chew and swalow the body of our Lord, his glorified
body, to break, tear and rend it in pieces, to make him die whom the Apostles
assure us eternally does live at the right hand of God? the curse of God has
been and yet is on them that did put him once to death; and think ye, Ioh. 19.
that put him to death every day so much as in you lies, to escape the curse
of God? If Christ his body is in the bread the prophecy cited by S. John, ye
shall not break a bone of him, is in great ieoperdie: for the Priests
indiscreetly break the bread, without looking where the bones be. It appears
of old that in the law of Moses, Leuis. 4.5.
they did not eat of the beast, which was sacrificed for sin; to foreshew,
that the true sacrifice for sin should be made by Jesus Christ, of whose body
we should not eat: hereupon S. Paul, Heb. 13.
after the recital of this ancient sacrifice, says; we have an altar,
whereof they may not eat, which serve in the tabernacle. Let us consider
withal, that the corporal presence of Jesus Christ in the bread and wine of
the holy supper here below, is contrary to th'articles of the faith, for we
believe that Jesus Christ is ascended into heaven; that he sits on the right
hand of the father; Act. 3.
that he shall come to judge the quick and the dead. Let us confider how S.
Peter says, that the heaven must contain Jesus Christ until the time that
all things be restored. S. Paul says: Col. 3.
seek the things that are on high where Jesus Christ sits at the hand of
God: for himself had said to his Apostles, John. 16.
I go to my father, and ye shall see me no more; yet a little while, and ye
shall see me for I go to my father: and elsewhere; Math. 23.
I say unto you that from henceforth ye shall not see me, until ye say,
blessed is he that comes in the name of the Lord: Acts. 1.
and in another place; this Jesus which is taken up from you into heaven shall
so come, as ye have seen him go into heaven. if the Lord is corporally present
in the bread and wine of the supper if he is here below within the Priests
pixe, or between their hands; why believe we that he is at the right hand of
the father? why do we look for his coming from heaven to judge the quick and
dead? why say The Apostles, that heaven must contain Jesus Christ until the
time that all things be restored, why say they, that he is sitting at the right
hand of God? if he appears continually, why should they affirm, that the
second time of his appearing shall be for judgment? why does he say himself;
yet a little while and you shall see me no more, for I go to the father? when is
that time among the Papists, wherein they see him not? why do the Angels say;
this Jesus, which is taken up from you to heaven, shall come even so as ye have
seen him go up to heaven? who has seen him come down from heaven, to shut
himself within the bread, as he was seen go up to heaven? The Pope puts his
only trust in this answer: the Lord (says he) can make his body be in the
bread, ergo he is there. Behold a very proper mean to prove readily all kinds
of heresies, fantasies, and mockeries: and in deed, if we were sure that his
will is to have his body here below in the bread in places innumerable, and
above at his fathets right hand, and so to have his body to be spiritual; we
would not doubt of his power to perform it: but we can find nowhere this will
of his: contrari-wise he teaches us, that his body is in heaven, that in the
supper we must lift up our souls on high to the right hand of God, there to
eat spiritually and by faith, as has benesaid: he teaches us, that his body
is a true body: 2. John. 4.
every spirit (says S. John) which confesses not, that Jesus Christ is come
in the flesh, is not of God; such a spirit is the spirit of Antichrist: thus
let us ensue his will without enquiring of his power. Furthermore if we might
certeinely see the body, or the'effects of the presence of the body and blood
of our Lord in the holy supper, in the bread and wine thereof, we would not
argue at all either of his power or of his will, but we see nothing save bread,
like to bread both within and without, in and throughout every part, in color
and other qualities, of nature nourishable and corruptible: the host of the
Mass nourishes man, nourishes worms, as bread does; corrupts and
putrifieth, as bread; which we may not believe of our Saviors glorified body.
Withal, if the body of the Lord were in the bread, so many miracles should
daily and hourly ensue, Luke. 8.
as would make it past doubt: they, that touched his garments only, felt his
wonderful virtue: with far more likelihood should they, that touch his body,
feel it: but we can see no such effects. the Popes, Bishops and Priests have
assayed to derive from it oracles and miracles, but still they found it nothing
else save bread, they have chafed thereat so farre-forth as to cast the host
into the fire. Finally, I see no such necessity for the celebration of the
supper, that the body should be here below really within the bread, no more
then in old time Christ was in the labe, or at this day the blood of Christ is
in the water of baptism. The faithful do effectually receive in baptism the
washing of the blood of Christ by faith, although nothing but water be
administered in the name of the father, of the son and of the holy Ghost: even
so the faithful may partake in the grace, justification, death and passion, in
the body and blood of the Lord by spiritual eating, through faith; as well,
yea more co^modiously then by the real eating of the body. For in this behalf
it behooves the Spirit by his miraculous operation, not only to
transubstantiate the body, and make it present at the same time in places
infinite, but also to turn this corporal food into spirit for the spiritual
sustenance of the spirit of man; which is the principal end of the supper, of
the death and passion of the Lord. It is more agreeable to the order established
by God in the nature of all things and more consonant to his counsels reveled
in his word to lift up our souls by faith, to nourish them with his body and
blood, to fill them with his grace, and merit of his death and passion, and to
notify such inward actions by the outward signs of bread and wine, then to
confound the properties of both natures, to make him a body euerywhere present,
which to be only pertains to his divinity, to abase his glorious body, and
subject it to a world of fantasies, profanations and injuries, to have it
broken and torn, chewed and swalowed, and further to change that body into
spirit for the nourishment of the spirit. Behold here how the Pope with
too-much boldness, and no necessity aduentureth to commit idolatry himself,
and to make them gross idolaters which follow him in his doctrine, in that he
adoreth the bread of the supper even as the body of Jesus Christ. More safe it
is to adore it at the right hand of God, seeing the Scripture assures us most
certainly that he is there. Idolatry is a sin too horrible, that any man
should so freely give over himself to the same. In such ventrous cases, when
there is any suspicion of idolatry, fear to sin ought above all to
overrule our worldly wisdom. Away then with this doctrine of the Pope so
contrary to th'articles of the Christian belief and all the holy Scripture,
away with this doctrine that destroys the verity of our Lords body, and is
suspected, ye convinced of Idolatry.

The Pope wills us to have images of Angels, Whether we ought to have images
for devotion sake.
Saints, and of God himself within our Churches, upon our altars, within our
chapels and private closets for prayer. He wills us to honor and serve these
images with such devotion and ceremonies, as in effect differs not from
adoration or diuine-honour. We find no jot in the Scripture conformable to
this doctrine; but we find there commandments ynow most flatly forbidding us
to receive it. Leuit. 26.
It is written, ye shall make you no idols, nor graven image, neither rear you
up any pillar, neither shall ye set any image of stone in your land to bow
down to it: for I am the Lord your God: again, thou shall not rear thee up an
idol, for the Lord hates it. In the table given to Moses it was written: thou
shall make thee no graven image, neither any likeness of things that are in
heaven above, neither that are in the earth beneath, nor that are in the water
under the earth; thou shall not bow down to them, nor serve them. For I am the
Lord thy God, a jealous God, visiting th'iniquitie of the fathers upon the
children. This commandment does so sharply urge the auctors and favorers of
images, that they may in no wise excuse or color their disobedience. the Lord
says in express terms, thou shall not bow down to them nor serve them, to
stop their mouths that bring in a distinction of adorations: it is a smaller
matter to bow our self before images and serve them, then it is to solemnise
and sing masses in their honor, to salute them, kneel before them, offer them
candles, make prayers, vows, pilgrimages and processions to them, with like,
nay with more affection, humility, worship and hope then is done to God
himself, they fast in their honor, they prepare themselves before they will
touch them, with more devotion and care then when they go to receive the
sacrament; they come not nigh them but barefoot, and in their shirt alone. The
smallest lets and discommodities do turn you back from the house of God: but
all the annoyances and injuries of th'ayer and of men; of cold, heat, wind, and
rain; throng of people and blows can not stay you from crouding, creeping,
and approaching to them, for to enjoy this bliss, this contentment in your
soul, in your devotions only to touch or cause them to be touched with some
thing ye have about you; and thenceforth vee think your devotions more perfect
and accomplished, then if an Angel of heaven were come to witness it to you,
as was to Tobie. Ye offer to them that which they see not; ye ask them that
which they understand not: ye look at their hands for that, which God alone
can do and give. if all these humilities, devout and religious affections
deserve not the name of adoration, I wot not what we may call adoration. When
the Israelites went up into the temple to adore the Lord, they did not so much
as ye do before your images. It appears in the Acts and Revelation, Act. 10.
Apoc. 19.22.
that to adore is to kneel before any thing with religious devotion. Now at
least if in your deed be no adoration, yet is there bowing and service which
are th'expresse terms of Gods commandment. There is another word in this
commandment thoroughly to be considered of us, he forbids images with bowing
and serving of them; for (says he) I am thy ielous God. It is not for naught
that he uses this term ielous; jealousy admits no excuse; jealousy is
strong as the grave; where jealousy is, ye can not show so few courtesies to
others, but ye shall show too many. Your fathers, masters and doctors tell
you that images are permitted in your Church only for remembrance sake, that
none but the simpler sort do give their minds to reverence them, bow before
them, and serve them, thus they condemn your actions, your devotions and their
own, they deem you and them selves also idolaters: for they make the greater
press, they go before, they gather up the profits of the offerings they lay
the other offerings to pledge as the dolphin lays other fishes to pledge in
the whales belly, they take up the rest of the candels. But were it, that they
withheld themselves, yet cease they not to be guilty of the offense committed
about these images, Math. 18. Luc. 17.
for in the Gospel a curse and woe is pronounced against him by whom offense
comes to the Church, and which makes the least of the Church to take
offense; that better it were for him to have a millstone hanging at his neck and
to be cast into the sea. Now so it is, that images bring a mighty offense to
the Church, causing the poor people to sin a sin beyond all measure
sinful: and they which have brought them in, and do maintain them still in
the Church; with them that set in the peoples way this stumbling stone are most
wretched and guilty before God. But how will your Doctors answer wise
Solomon, Sap. 14.
who foreseing their cloak and excuse of remembrance, most largely declares,
how this remembrance only has brought in idolatry among men? 4 Reg. 18.
what will they say to the fact of Ezechias, so greatly praised, who caused the
brazen serpent to be destroyed, having been set up by the commandment of God,
and retained so long in the Church, because the people fell to idolatry by
occasion of this serpent, which is a story for this purpose very notable.
The Apostles carried no images, crucifixes, crosses or relikes in their sleeves,
as your preachers are wont, the rather to persuade the people: they carried not
Christ but in memory, mouth, and example of lif. Romans 10.
S. Paul speaking of faith says; ring, and hearing by the word of God: he
says not by sight, nor by service of images. Deuteronomy. 17.4.
Moreover, it is written, cursed be the man that shall make a graven or molten
image. And Moses repeting the commandments of God to the children of Israel
tells them: ye have heard the voice of his words, and have not seen any
image saving the voice (which is a thing that cannot be painted says Esdras)
take good heed to your souls therefore, for ye saw no image in the day that
the Lord spoke to you out of the mids of the fire in Horeb, that ye corrupt
not your selves and make you a graven image or representation of any figure:
whether it be like any male or female, etc. Thus the Scripture teaches us that
it is sin to make images only for Religion sake, without mentioning any
bowing of the body or service; but principally to grave, karue or peinct
the image of God. And yet are ye so rash, as that ye durst peinct and make a
graven image of God, who is an essence invisible, infinite, inco^prehe^sible. if
the word of God had borne any sway or credit with you, if ye had but known it,
the chesill and pensill had fallen out of your fingers so often as ye went about
to resemble him. Is it possible that the words of Isay and S. Paul were not
power-full enough to bring you to some sense of your sin? when Isay had
discoursed to th'uttermost exte^t of understanding whatsoever he could of the
most glorious and incomprehe^sible Majesty of God, Isay. 40.
he cries out; to whom will ye liken God? or what similitude will ye set up
unto him, again; to whom now will ye liken me, that I I should be like him,
says the holy one? we ought not to think, says S. Paul, that the Godhead is
like unto gold, Act. 17.
or silver or stone graven by art and the invention of man. It is high time
than for us to give over all these images, and content our selves with the Word
which is the true image of God: it is in vain to look for any lively show or
feeling at the dead works of men's hands: it is the holy Ghost that imprinteth
in our minds all right knowledge, and from whom we feel all true comfort: let
us crave it of him and leave crouching to images. Let us not make our selves
more wise the^ The Apostles to seek for means to persuade, which they have
neither sought nor commanded: there is yet among us great likelihood of
idolatry, the fear of sin therefore ought to overrule our wisdom. Let that
suffice us, which the word does teach. Col. 3.
Let our conversation be in heaven, says Saint Paul: let not our souls lie
groueling on earthly things. The true knowledge and adoration of the the
faithful is in spirit as David, and Jesus Christ say: Psalm. 51. John. 4.
and take we heed of provoking the jealousy of God, lest we feel the effect of
his threatenings: let us condemn images, which offend God, and make the silly
people hainously to sin: let us take this sclander and offense quite out of
the Church, and say with Isay; images shall be broken all to pieces.

The Pope wills us to call upon Angels and Saints as mediators and
intercessors; Whether we ought to pray to, or call upon Angels and Saints.
and for that end to direct to them our prayers with himnes, praises and all
other kinds of devotion. We find no such matter in the holy Scripture; but
do find the scripture against it both in substance of sense and form of
words. The Israelites under the law were not yet so assured of the bounty,
grace and familiarity of God toward men, as we are at this day since the
coming of our Savior. They durst not come nigh the mountain, they durst not
touch the Arc of the covenant, they durst not enter into the Oratorie, into
the sanctum sanctorum the most holy place, fearing to be swallowed up of death,
according to the threatenings made, and experiences seen of them: they had
heard no speech in a manner but of the severity and justice of God; all that
they had seen and heard of the Lord was but terror, astonishment and
trembling, as says S. Paul. Heb. 12.
They had most worthy and famous persons, by whom many miracles were done in
their sight, of whom it seemed they held their religion, the knowledge of God,
the law, honor, life, rest, and goods; as, Moses, Joshua, Gedeon, David,
Solomon, Elias, Eliseus, and many others. But above all they had Moses, who had
by the power of God miraculously brought them out of the bondage of Egypt,
that made them on dry foot pass woonderfullie through the red sea, that
provided them bread, flesh and drink in the wilderness, delivered them the law
of the Lord, with whom they saw him familiarly talk, that brought them to the
land of promise: and many times, while he lived, called on God for them and
appeased him, what great power, virtue, and high degree of knowledge the
Israelites attributed to Moses above all others, except the Messiah, is known.
Howbeit we find not that after his death they directed any prayers to him, they
made neither to him nor to others any bowing or service, that I speak not of
divine worships which ye show every day to an infinite multitude of Saints.
The Israelites sought him after his death neither in heaven or earth, they
called not on him as their Mediator or intercessor; they made no images of him
to whom they might bring candles, make prayers and sing hymns with crowching
and devotion, but here-against, the holy Ghost aduertiseth us that he was
buried in the valley of Nebo in the land of Moab, Deuteronomy. 34.
and that none knew his Sepulcher to this day, least the people should fall
into idolatry toward him, because of the miracles which the Lord did by him.
Th'Israelites called not on Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, for whose sake the Lord
chose them for his people. And we that are Christians by the grace of God, that
are come to the hill of Sion, Heb. 12.
as says S. Paul, and to the heavenly Jerusalem the City of the living God to
the company of many millions of Angels, to the congregation of the first borne
which are written in heaven, and to God who is judge of all, and to the spirits
of the just sanctified, and to Jesus Christ the Mediator of the new Testament,
that cannot doubt of the goodness, gentleness and familiarity of our God, of our
Mediator; that know his office and his will, as having lived and conuersed with
him in this world, as having heard and touched him: yet notwithstanding do
call upon Saints and Angels, we leave the Lord, to run after them; we adore
the sepulchers, bones and garments of Saints; we shrine them in silver and
gold; we enrich them with precious stones; we preach and commend them more
than Christ; we run after stocks, stones and metal; we carry them more
solemnly than that which we think to be the Lords body; we salute them; and
we kneel on the ground before all these things. Thus we beseech the Angels and
Saints to make request for us; and honor them in spirit and in flesh, in dust
and rottennesr there above in heaven, and here beneath on earth, in their
bones, sepulchers and garments, in as devout manner as we are able. We receive
nor hold it of the Israelites, nor of the old Testament, neither hold we it of
the new, nor yet of the Apostles or Primitive Church, whereunto we should have
chief regard to rule our devotions by. It is written, Act. 3.
that after S. Peter and S. John had healed him that was a creeple from his
birth, the people amazed thereat did run to them, and that S. Peter beholding
the same said to the people: ye men of Israel why marvel ye at this, or why
look ye so steadfastly on us, as though by our own power or holiness we had
made this man to walk: the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, the God of our
fathers has glorified his son Jesus; and a little after: his name has made
this man sound whom ye see and know, through faith in his name, and the faith
which is by him has given to this man perfect health: it is written, Act. 10.
that Saint Peter being entered into the house of Cornelius the Centurion,
Gornelius cast himself down at his feet to adore or worship him, but Saint
Peter took him up, saying; arise, I also my self am a man. Act. 17.
Saint Paul and Barnabas having healed a creeple in Listra being a City of the
country of Lycaonia; the people ran to them to have sacrificed to them:
The Apostles rent their garments and leaped into the mids of the people
crying and saying; o men, why do ye these things? we are even men subject to
the like passions that ye be. Apoc. 19.22.
It is written, that th'Angell said twice to S. John as he was kneeling twice
before him to have worshipped him; see thou do it not; I am thy fellow servant
and one of thy brethren, which have the testimony of Jesus: worship God. Now,
if The Apostles have reproved such as looked on them with admiration, meaning to
give them ever so little honor for that which they did; as of S. Peter and S.
John is noted: how should they allow them that kneel before their images,
bones, sepulchers and garments, before their souls that be in heaven, not
only to look on them with wonder, but to do them the same worships and
services, prayers and praises which belong to none but the God of glory. If
they have groaned, wept, cried, and rent their garments, because some would
have sacrificed to them; if Angels and Apostles have stayed and letten them
that would have kneeled before them: how may it be concluded that the honor
done at this day in the popish Church to Saints and Angels is holy and
agreeable to God? if they have condemned and refused such worshippings while
they were in this world; at this day being in heaven they will condemn it more
earnestly: for now they are more ielous of the honor of their Master, then
they could be during their abode in this life. How may they be pleased then
with so many worshippings not devout alone, but superstitious with all, as are
made to the^, their bones, ashes and garments? They are so far from favoring
us because of these honors, that contrariwise they disalow them, and have
cause as in S. John is written to blame us in Gods presence for all these
abuses, John. 5.
in that we believed not their words, whereby they forbade us al these
will-worships. 1. Cor. 1.
S. Paul rebukes the Corinthians very sharply for allotting themselves patrons
after their own fancies: one said I am of Paul; and I of Apollo, said another,
1. Cor. 3.
the third of Cephas, the fourth of Christ. Are ye not carnal, says he? what
is Paul then, and what is Apollo but servants by whom ye believed? 1. Cor. 1.
is Christ divided? was Paul crucified for you? it is of God that ye are in
Jesus Christ, and not of men. He shows them further, that it is not man whom
they must regard but Christ, that they must not boast themselves in men; that
they must ascribe nothing to men; that God does all, and in the end
concludes: whether it be Paul, or Apollo, or Cephas, or the world, or life, or
death, whether they be things present, or things to come, even all are yours,
and ye Christ's, and Christ Gods. Is not that which ye do now adays in your
Church the self same sin of the Corinthians? There is no realm, no
country, no town, no parish, no mystery, vocation, fraternity, society, no
family, no man, that has not chosen some particular Saint for his Patron,
whom he most minds. And by such patronages ye make more streict divisions
among you, then did the Corinthians; ye go on even to arms, even to murders
and seditions, for each of you to maintain the honor and greater might (as ye
suppose) of your Saint and patron; striving who may feign most fables and
follies of their miracles: I am of S. Denis, says one, and I of S. Peter says
another; another is of S. Martin; another of S. Mark; another of S. Austin;
another of S. Bernard; another of S. Francis; another of S. James; another of
S. Antony; another of Jesus. In sum, each order of religion has his patron:
it is ordinary to hear every order vaunt that there is no holiness and might
but in their saint, there is no salvation but in him; all the others be
deceivers; all men are deceived, save they: if these Patrons have the same zele
which The Apostles had, they will be so far from succouring you, that they
will accuse you before God of all these follies and superstitions; they will
utterly disauow all these impieties, which you intrude upon them without their
will or warrant. But yet, why call we on Saints and Angels as mediators and
intercessors? who taught us it? The Lord forgate not to teach, how we should
pray; he never did put us in remembrance to call on Angels and Saints: he bad
us direct our prayers to God, and call him our father; he assured us to obtain
whatsoever we should ask in his own name; he made no mention of the name of
Angels and Saints. the Prophets and Apostles treated in like sort of prayer in
many places; yet they never remembered this calling on Saints. shall we think
then, that the holy Ghost did forget or envy us a thing (as ye say) so
necessary to our salvation? we were better to believe that this calling on
Saints is not necessary. It stands not so with Gods commandments, as with
the commandments of men, men know one another; men oftentimes in their
commandments do swerve from reason, and from that which may and should be; and
therefore their commandments may be altered, amended, or enlarged: but we may
not presume so much on the commandments of God: the justice and holiness of
them is above us all: and therefore has he told us, that he will be served
according to his word, and not after our traditions. why seek we then Angels
and Saints to bring us to God, seeing he has not commanded it? why should we
use these ceremonies of the Courts of this world; as though we might not have
access to the King of kings without the mediation of some, whom we suppose to
be highly in his favor? why should the Pope drive us into the danger of
idolatry and disobedience to Gods word, upon a wrong supposall, that our
petitions to God are to be followed like our suites to earthly Princes? But it
suffices us, say ye, to find in the Scripture that saints and Angels pray for
us; and seeing they pray for us, it is to be presumed, that it is not evil done
to solicit them, to continue in this good office, and to that end to show our
thankfulness toward them so far as we are able. Thus being emboldened upon
this presumption alone, ye will do and know more then is appointed you; ye
venture beyond and against the commandments of God; ye add by your worldly
wisdom and fleshly reasons to the wisdom of God; hazarding rather to be
idolaters then be content therewith: this would require a longer discourse;
notwithstanding it shall suffice me at this time to tell you that your words
would carry some show of reason, if we found not in the Scripture any charge
given us, not to call on, reverence, and pray to Saints and Angels: but we
read, how The Apostles and Angels forbad men to direct their prayers to them, to
fall on their knees before them. Furthermore, the Scripture in express terms
inioyneth us not to call on any other name then that of the Lord, nor to seek
any mediator, but Christ. Fear not, Isay. 43.
says the Lord in Isay to his people, for I have redeemed thee, I have called
thee by my name, thou art mine: and in the same chapter; I, even I am the Lord,
and beside me there is no Savior: I have declared, and I have saved, and I
have showed: and a little after; I am, and there is none that can deliver out of
my hands; I will do it, and who shall let it? Mark here how the Lord rebukes
their fond fear that durst not call on him, but went to others, how he
cheareth them to come boldly to him, and seek none others. And S. Peter says,
Acts. 4.
there is no salvation in any other: for among men there is give none other
name under heaven, whereby we must be saved, but that of Jesus Christ. S. Paul
says: Col. 3.
whatsoever ye shall do in word or deed, do all in the name of the Lord
Jesus, giving thanks to God eue^ the father by him. again: I will that ye know,
1. Cor. 11.
that Christ is the head of every man. Ephesians. 2. Col. 1.
again through him we both have an entrace unto the father by one Spirit. and
elsewhere: it pleased the Father, that in him should all fullness dwell, and
through peace by that blood of that his Cross, to reconcile to himself
through him, through him (I say) all things, both which are in earth and which
are in heaven. and in another place: for there is one God, and one Mediator
between God and man, which is the man Christ Jesus. Finally S. John says: 1.
Ioh. 2.
if any man sin, we have an Aduocat to the father, Christ Jesus the just; and
he is the reco^ciliatio^ for our sins, and not for our sins only, but also
for the sins of the whole world. Why should we linger or be loath to repair
to Jesus Christ at our first entrance to prayer, seeing The Apostles teach us,
that we must call on none other name but his; that he is our true mediator;
that besides him there is none other? Mat. 11. John. 14.10.
Moreover Jesus Christ himself calls us, and says, that none other saving
himself can make intercession for us to God his father. No man (says he)
knows the father, but the son, and he to whom the son will reuele him:
Come unto me all ye, that are weary and laden, and I will ease you: also, I am
that way, that truth, and that life; no man comes unto the Father but by me:
again, I am that door, by me if any man enter in, he shall be saved. seeing he
is the door, seeing he calls us, we ought to seek none other, that might
bring us into his presence to speak to him: he that finds the master at the
gate bidding him to declare his suite; and yet will look for a more commodious
mean, might be deemed a very simple body. Let us take heed of despising him
that looks for us, Heb. 12.7.
that bids us speak boldly: let us not despise the mediator of the new
Testament, that speaks for us, says S. Paul. it is written, 1. John. ^.
that he lives ever, making intercession for us; that he is our Aduocat: so
that, the difference between mediator and intercessor imagined by your
Masters and Doctors is vain. There is no color of truth to make us believe,
that he who came down from heaven for our sakes, took upon him our flesh
yelding to the miseries thereof, sin except; who honored us with his familiar
conversation, and suffered death and the curse of God his father for the love of
us; who undertook the office of Mediator and intercessor according to his
kindness to us ward; we can not believe, I say, that now he should disdain to
hear us, to receive our prayers and supplications, and to offer them up to God
his father; since himself says that it is his office; since himself bids us
come; since himself abides for us in the gate: thus to resort to any other, is
to do injury to him, to suppose th'exercise of his estate needless, to have
him in contempt, to assign others part of the honor due to him alone: no, no;
he is ielous of his honor; he will have all or none; he cad abide no partener.
Let us know with S. Paul that none but the Lord Jesus can execute this charge
of mediatorship between God and men, 1. Tim. 2.
for there is one God one mediator between God and man, which is the man
Christ Jesus. again: he is able perfectly to save them that come unto God by
him, Heb. 7.
seeing he ever lives to make intercession for them: and in Esdras: 4. Esd. 13.
he by himself will deliver his creature. Behold here, one mediator; and no
mo: who ever makes intercession; and never needs a solicitor; who also
perfectly saves and by him self delivers his creature. Let us therefore be
assured on the word of the Prophets, Apostles, and of Jesus Christ, and go
boldly to him, and say, our father; let us not lose this familiarity and
liberty which he has given us by his grace; let us pray in the name of Jesus
Christ, seeing there is none other name given to men: let us practice toward
the world the manners, ciuilities and courtesies of the world; but let us do to
God his services, according to his commandments. it is not against manners to
be an importunate suitor to God, as appears by the parable of the unjust
judge: nor against manners to press unto him at all times, and in all places
without the mediation of any, except his son. we have no cause to doubt, that
such a mediator should forget our suites, as knows our thoughts. as for
Angels and Saints let us esteem them most blessed by the grace of God; but
yet let us beware, as themselves have warned, that we impart not to them of the
honor that only belongs to God.

The Pope enioyneth us to believe that there is a Purgatory, Whether there is
any Purgatory after or out of this life: and concerning the deceased.
a place full of fire, where the souls of the deceased are condemned to abide
in great torment: some for so many ages, others for so many years, according
to the number and quality of the sins they committed in this world: that
prayers, alms, pilgrimages and other devotions that are made and given for
those souls, does greatly comfort and refresh them. Moreover, he chalengeth to
himself power to take souls out of Purgatory at his pleasure, the judgments
and decrees of God notwithstanding: the mouth of his preachers, and their
books are stuffed with fables feyned to prove this fiction. But these things
are come to pass to fulfill the prophecy, that Antichrist should take heed to
fables and vanities. If it be true that a fire is in Purgatory, and souls
must pass through the same, tarying therein a certain time to suffer the
torments of spiritual frying for satisfaction of their sins: it should then
follow that there is no Savior; or else the satisfaction of our Savior God and
man is imperfect and of no power. Now so it is, that we learn in the
Scripture, how Jesus is the Savior; that the father gave his son to be
Savior of the world: this is the subject, this is the mark whereat the
Prophets aimed; this is the Gospel, this have the Apostles witnessed by
words, writings, miracles and sufferings: how that we are ransomed by his
death and passion; that the purging and remission of our sins is made by his
blood, that the satisfaction he has made for us is whole and perfect, Meb. 7.
yea ouer-abounding and exceeding the debt: he is able perfectly to save them,
says S. Paul, that come unto God by him, for it pleased the father that in him
should all fulness dwell. Col. 1.
and he is the reconciliation for our sins, and not for ours only, but also
for the sins of the whole world. If he be the reconciliation for the sins
of all the world, with greater reason is he the reconciliation for the sins
of his chosen; for many are called, but few are chosen. On the other side,
seeing Jesus Christ is God, we may not doubt of the perfection of his deeds:
and thereupon we know the satisfaction he made for us is complete and
performed. Furthermore, the holy Scripture to remove all imagination of the
pains and torments of purgatory after this life, warranteth us that there is
no accuser against the faithful, nor any accusation, judgment nor
condemnation against the chosen. Isay. 50.
He is near that justifies me; who will contend with me? the Lord God will
help me; who is he that can condemn me, Apoc. 12.
says Isay? Th'accuser of our brethren, which accused them before our God day
and night, is cast down, says S. John. And S. Paul asks, Row. 8.
who shall bring any accusation against Gods chosen? it is God that justifies,
who shall condemn? it is Christ which is dead, yea, or rather, which is risen
again, who is also at the right hand of God, and makes request also for us:
is it possible to hear or read a word more comfortable, and more express to
deliver us from the fear of Purgatory? But mark yet further, how the Lord
himself by oath assures us, that after this life there is no pain of
Purgatory: verily, verily I say unto you, he that hears my word and
believes in him that has sent me, John. 5.
has life everlasting, and shall not come to condemnation, but has passed
from death unto life: and other where, he that believes in me is not
condemned, but he that believes not, is condemned already. If there be no
accuser, no accusation nor condemnation against them that are in Christ: and if
we pass immediately from death to life, why do we imagine the pains and
torments of Purgatory fire? David assuring himself that the Lord judges not
his elect, prays ordinarily that he enter not into judgment with him: and so
pray woe daily that he grant us his peace: and that he enter not into
judgment with us: as it is written, Col. 1.
that the good pleasure of God was to reconcile all things to him by the blood
of Jesus Christ, pacifying by himself the things that are as well in earth as
in heaven: that being justified by faith, we have peace with God by our Lord
Jesus Christ: and in another place, Romans 5.
God sets out his love toward us, seeing that while we were yet sinners,
Christ died for us; much more then being now justified by his blood, we shall be
saved from wrath through him, If God is reconciled and pacified, if we have
peace with him, if he is not provoked against us; why fear we the condemnation
of Purgatory? Romans 10.
He that believes in Christ shall not be confounded; the Lord redeemeth the
souls of all his servants; and all such as hope in him, Psalm. 32.
shall not be confounded. Since there is no more confusion for them that believe
in God; why will we believe and dread the comdemnation of Purgatory? where no
confusion is, no comdemnation by justice can be, S. Paul assures us, Romans 5.
that by the justifying of one (he means Christ) the benefit abounded toward
all men to the justification of life: but after justification follows no
comdemnation. Again he says, that forgeuenes of sins is purchased for us by
the blood of Jesus Christ; that where forgeuenes is, there is no more oblatio^
for sin, if there is no more oblation for sin, it follows that sin is
imputed no more: else we should be for ever in sin, and so for ever excluded
out of our masters joy, out of his paradise, seeing no oblation for sin should
remain, which utterly co^trarieth the purpose of The Apostle: but if sin is
imputed no more, as the scripture in this text and many mo teaches most
evidently; why should the Lord co^de^ne us in any penalty and satisfaction. In
the gospel is declared, that the souls of the damned incontinent after their
departure from this world, do pass into hell; as the souls of the justified
in Christ are incontinent borne into Paradise. Even so, Luke. 16.
the Evangelist rehearses how the soul of the wicked Richman was cast
headlong into hell by and by after his death, and that of poor Lazarus carried
up to Paradise into Abraham's bosom. Luke 23.
And so said our Lord to the thief that hung on the Cross by him: I tell thee
verily, this day shall thou be with me in Paradisetifthere be a Purgatory
indeed out of this world, through which all souls must pass perferce for
satisfaction of sins; the likelihood is great that this Thief of evil life
condemned to die for his sins, who had not believed in the Lord but for a
moment before he gave up the ghost, ought to have passed and tarried there for a
while, and yet the self same day was received into Paradise. It behooves us
heedfully to consider wherefore the Lord says: Mar. 13. Luke. 12. Math. 24.
watch and pray while ye are in this world waiting for the masters coming, the
coming of the Lord: he shall come as a thief in the night; the hour of his
coming is uncertain; Math. 25.
ye know not when the Bride-grome should come; have always your lamps in a
readiness: for when the Bride-grome is passed by and gone into his chamber, ye
may enter in by no mean. All these words are spoken to instruct us not only
touching the manner of the second coming of our Lord, but principally that
repentance after departure out of this life is all too late; and because the
hour is uncertain, we must always keep us in readiness: and verily this our
calling out of the world, is like our Lords coming to us; Isay. 8.55.
and as that which Isay says: should not a people enquire of their God from
the living to the dead? and again: Seek ye the Lord while he may be found;
call ye upon him, while he is near: Esd 9.
and in Esdras it is plainly concluded that after this life it is too late to
repent, and also we are forbidden to inquire how the ungodly shall be punished.
For So Much then as our souls are judged immediately after our death with
judgment irreuocable and beyond appeal, and are at that very time where they
must be and abide for evermore; then there is no fire of Purgatory: and so by
the same reason we pray for the deceased in vain. Also, were those prayers so
good, health-full, and for the Deceased needful, as ye say; Jesus Christ and
his Apostles had not forgotten to command and commend them to us. Luke 11.
when Jesus Christ was required by his Apostles to teach them how to pray, he
gave them a prayer containing whatsoever man may and ought to crave of God; and
yet we can not gather out of the same any meaning or mention of the Deceased.
When S. Paul instructs Timothy concerning the form of prayer which the
Church ought to observe; 1. Tine 2.
he bids him not to pray for the Deceased. Iam. 5.
S. James most largely declaring those things, for which we are to pray to God:
remembers not the Deceased. 3. Reg. 8.
Solomon having built the Temple of God makes a general prayer to God,
beseeching him to hear all the prayers which should be made to him in the same
Temple; he rehearses particularly the things for which they should pray to
him; for the sin of the people, and of euery-one, for the solemnity of oaths,
for peace and other benefits; for war, famine, drought, barennes, pestilence
and other sicknesses; for captivity, in-rode and invasion of strangers: he
makes no mention of prayer for the Deceased: it ought not to have bin omitted,
had it been of such importance, as the Pope says. The Scripture forgets not
to recite how Abraham mourned and wept for his Dead, how all Israel mourned for
Aaron, Moses and many others: but it says not, that Abraham and the people of
Israel prayed for Sara, for Aaron, for Moses and the rest. David did bitterly
and solemnly weep for Saul, Jonathan, Abner and Absalom, the Scripture
rehearses the solemnities: nevertheless it appears not at all that he
prayed for them, who seemed notwithstanding to have great need thereof.
Conclude we therefore this matter and acknowledge we, that there is no
purgatory but in the blood of Jesus Christ; and that presently after our
departure out of this world our souls are condemned, or justified in Christ
for evermore; and therefore let us refuse all prayers for the Deceased as vain
and unprofitable, issued from the shop of Satan, from traditions of men, and
not from God, considering he makes no mention of the same in the holy
Scripture, Let us be charitable toward the living, toward the poor and other
miserable persons, as God has commanded; and not toward the Dead, that have
no need thereof or good thereby, and toward whom God has not commanded us to
be charitable. And let us say, that seeing there is no Purgatory, we need not
dispute, whether the Pope ca^ take souls out of it, or no: so it is, that in
the same he exalts himself above God, promising to deliver souls out of the
prisons, hands and power of God: promising to make void the judgments and
condemnations, to avoid or deminish the pains ordained by God: such actions
are th'actions of superiors toward their inferiors. We will not stay to
confute many other blasphemies beside, which necessarily follow the doctrine of
Purgatory; as, that there is a satisfaction for sins elsewhere then in Jesus
Christ; that there is salvation by another mean then by Christ; that man
through sufferance of torments may content the justice of God and deserve
salvation. For, since Purgatory is abolished, whatsoever depends thereon can
not stand; and so are all these blasphemies sufficiently convinced by the
arguments aforesaid, our sufferings (says S. Paul) are not worthy of the glory
to come. Romans 8.


The Pope will not have the Bible to be translated into French our vulgar and
mother tongue, Whether we ought to have the Bible in the mother tog.
for that (says he) the Bible is too hard, it is of too high meditation to be
made common to the common people: but this is rather to hide the truth, and
publish and auctorise lies without any gainsaying. I well wot, that the holy
Scripture in its force and signification reaches beyond the power of man's
understanding. But the Pope deceives himself greatly, if he supposes men to
be more or less capable to read, receive and understand, according as they are
more or less acquainted, and have proceeded in humane learnings, and worldly
affairs. for experience teaches us, that the more learned, the more
fine-witted, the more cunning, and the greater ones after the world, are less
worthy, less able to conceive, and less called to the knowledge of the secret
of Gods word. The history of the Church shows, that these are the Pharisees,
the Doctors and Glossers of the law, the Philosophers and Magistrates, that
could not conceive this easy difficulty, and this high humility and
simplicity of the Gospel: but strove and banded themselves against it with
force and exceeding fury. it is not the power and ability of man that
obteineth to man the knowledge and understanding of the word of God; it is the
spirit of God working and dwelling in him that does it, as it is written, 1.
Cor. 2.
no man knows the things of God, but the Spirit of God. Now this Spirit has
no respect nor makes acceptance of persons; he dwells more ordinarily within
the lowly, within litle-ones, within them that are not puffed up with their
knowledge, wisdom, experience and dignity. so does Jesus Christ thank his
Father, for that he had declared his Gospel to the little ones, and not to the
great after the world: 1. Cor. 2.
so say The Apostles that the Gospel, word and wisdom of God, are folishnesse
and offense to the wise of the world: Act. 26.
and so was Paul reputed mad by Festus the governor. We note in all the New
testament, that they who first heard, received and kept with more readiness and
stedfastnes the word of Jesus Christ, were the meanest of the people, were
women, poor folk, those whom ye call clownes, fishers, handicraftes-men,
toll-takers, and others of like condition; the Apostles and all Jesus Christ
his Disciples welnigh were of that degree: we note likewise that the simpler
sort of the people were the readiest to receive and conceive the words of
The Apostles, the knowledge of the Gospel, the mystery, secret and simplicity
of the faith. 1. Cor. 1.
And so does S. Paul advertise the Corinthians: brethren (says he) ye see your
calling, how that not many wise men after the flesh, not many mighty, not many
noble are called: but God has chosen the foolish things of the world to
confound the wise, and God has chosen the weak things of the world to
confound the mighty things; and vile things of the world and things that are
despised has God chosen, and things which are not, to bring to naught things
that are, that no flesh should rejoice in his presence. According hereunto, the
ordinary reproach of the persecutors to Christians was, that they had none
except the poor, except women, children, simple men without cunning and
knowledge, which made profession of the Gospel. it is written, John. 7.
how the Pharisees said to the officers that durst not lay hold on Jesus: does
any of the Rulers or of the Pharisees believe in him? but this people, which
know not the law, are cursed. The profane histories of the Greeks and Romans
are full of such reproaches and tawnts against the Christians. Now on
th'otherside, if we consider the word of God, the whole Bible in it self,
setting apart the darknings or inlightnings, which come from above and
accompany Gods calling and election; it will appear that we may read nothing
more plain, or easy to be conceived of the vulgar sort, then the Bible is.
The holy history contained in most part of of the Old testament is set down in
very popular and common terms, and so is the law: the Prophets are somewhat
hard to understand, but they are difficult to none save those that think by
their high wits to find out their difficulties: for the Prophecy is like a
garden that brings forth fruits for all manner of stomachs, the fruits
thereof are easy enough to be digested of them that are content with the first
and natural sense of the letter: grosser witted men, women and children can use
it so far forth as to reap profit of it: but withal it has meditations most
deep, most high, excelling all other learning by degrees, for the sharper sort
of wits, and such as feel themselves advanced to the like contemplations. As
for the Gospel and Epistles of The Apostles, nothing is more easy, nor more
apt of it self to be conceived: if some things hard to be understood be in
th'Epistles of S. Paul, it is hard to none but to them that wrest the same and
all other Scriptures, 2. Pet. 3.
as S. Peter affirms. It is certain that the holy Scripture, inlightneth it,
self and stoupeth low before the lowly soul; darkneth it self and mounteth
aloft out of sight before the lofty and presumptuous soul: it is certain that
it frames it self to our beginnings and proceedings in knowledge, it soreth
upward and waxes subtle, in such measure as our wits are cleared: each one
finds there his repast, and the more he feeds the greater is his appetite.
Finally, having first of all called on the holy Ghost as our duty is, let us
with patience and humility use ordinary reading of the Bible from the
beginning to the end, and not by gobbets, here a snatch and there a snatch with
no good courage, and rather for pastime, or search of doubts and controversies
therein, then to instruct and stablish our minds; and then every of us, great
and small, learned and ignorant, rich and poor, men, women and children shall
judge that no book is more easy to understand, then the Bible. And in deed,
the history, the law, the Prophets, the Gospel and th'Epistles are no other
then speeches, sermons, familiar letters and aduertisements of Jesus Christ, of
the Prophets and Apostles to the people of their times, to persons of all
sorts, and most commonly to the common sort only: thus did our Savior preach
in villages, and fields, in wildernesses, on the sea shore, and within the
temple: thus did the Prophets proclaim their message on house-tops, in
streets, in the temple: thus did The Apostles preach, from village to village,
from vp-landtowne to vplandtowne, from City to City, indifferently to all.
The Gospel is nothing else but an history and report in writing of all these
preachings; it is the speech of Jesus Christ and his Apostles set down with
the pen on parchmine or paper. Now, that which the holy Ghost has judged easy
enough for the people, to be pronounced to them by lively voice, we may not
with reason judge it ouer-hard for the people, to be published to them by
writing, for further stay may be made on the words written, which abide and as
it were tarry for the later thought of the reader, then on the words uttered
with the lively voice, which slide away and tarry not, nor yet return. The
Jews have ever had (unless captivity let them) the Bible in their most
usual language and writing they never refused to make every one partakers of
the Bible, even to children of five year old: at eightteen year old they had
read the law through-out, and had perused leaf by leaf the Commentaries of
their Rabins or Doctors: the Greeks have had the New Testament in their mother
tongue, and the Latins in theirs, and likewise the Syrians: in sum, all
Christen nations have had it each in their most common manner of speech and
writing. So that they offer injury to the common people of France to esteem
them incapable of reading those books, which th'Israelits imparted to their
children of five years old: they offer injury to all Frenchmen vnlatined, to
esteem them more rude and blockish then Syrians, Greeks, Latins and other
peoples: nay, which is worse, they offer injury to God, to shut us his book,
to hold his word (as it were) in ward, and keep his secret close; Tob. 12.
it is good (says th'Angell to Tobie) to keep close the kings secret, but it
is honorable to reuele the works of God. Again, if the Gospel or glad
tidings ought not to have been given and declared to each people after their
several manner of speech and understanding, if the Gospel should have been
declared but in one tongue, to what and then were those manifold tongues given
to The Apostles? But mark how the Pope has withholden the keys of knowledge
and hidden the^; mark how he has hidden the way of truth; mark how the Pope
has drawn again the veil over the face of peoples to lead them blindfold as
him lust; mark how he has exalted the mountains of ignorance and
superstition which Jesus Christ had made low, Isay. 40.
has made the ways crooked which our Lord Jesus had made straight, has
locked up the gate of salvation, which our Savior had opened; mark how the
Pope has destroyed the hearing of the truth, following that which was
foreshewed of Antichrist. 2. Tim. 4.
This is that superstition of tongue which has favored and greatly furthered
the Pope to conceive and bring forth his lies, to bring them up, and bring the^
in credit, and to father the^ on the authority, which belongs only to the
verity. We must believe, that if it had been in the Popes power to cause all
the books of Gods word to be burned, he had done it without doubt, upon the
self same reason that moved the Senate of Rome to burn certain Greek books
found within the tumbe of Numa Pompilius: for the Senate feared least these
books treating of true wisdom, would have disclosed th'abuses of their
Religion, and crakt the credit which the Romain people gave to it, and thereby
shrewdly disioint their state: even so it stood the Pope in hand to fear lest
the making of the holy Scripture manifest and common, should pull down and
bring to naught his doctrine, his authority and state: and and this is the
true cause why he can abide in no wise, but strives with might and mayn against
publishing of the holy Scripture. Then let the books be lest open and in our
common language, let them be written that all persons without exception may see
and search the^, as the Prophets foretold should be in the time under Christ:
let us utter and show the Lords secret abroad: let us further the accomplishment
of the Prophecy of Jeremy cited by S. Paul; Ierem. 31. Heb. 8.
that in the time under Christ all shall know the Lord from the least to the
greatest; Isay.
and that of Isay, saying all the earth shall be filled with the knowledge of the
Lord.

Now again, Whether we ought to pray, and praise God in a tongue which we
understand not.
the Pope wills that Priests, Chanons, Munkes and other officers of the
Church shall do their Church services in the Latin tongue, shall say and sing
Mass, Lauds, and Prayers in the Latin tongue, even in a strange tongue which
most Frenchmen understand not. But the Scripture wills the contrary. 1. Cor.
14.
The Apostle says, that they which speak in the Church in a strange tongue
and unknown, are barbarians to them whom they speak to; that they speak in
the air; that they are unprofitable; that they ought to hold their peace: if
the trumpet (says he) give an uncertain sound, who shall prepare himself to
battle? So likewise you, by the tongue, except ye utter words that have
signification, how shall it be understood what is spoken? If I pray (says
The Apostle) in a strange tongue, my spirit prays, but mine understanding is
without fruict. What is it then? I will pray with the spirit, but I will pray
with th'understanding also: else, when thou blessest with the spirit, how shall
he that occupies the room of th'unlearned, say Amen at thy giving of thanks,
seeing he knows not what thou say: for thou verily geuest thanks well, but
the other is not edified. These words are so carefully spoken, that no doubt is
left, but that we ought to pray, and praise God in the Church only in a tongue
which all do understand. We find in Saint Mark and Saint James, Mar. 11.
that prayer without faith is vnfruictfull and sin before God: and elsewhere,
Iac. 1.
that there can be no faith without knowledge. they then that pray in Latin,
not understanding what they pray, pray without faith, for they pray without
knowledge: Romans 10.
and thus their prayer is vnfruictfull, yea it is sinful. Let us not
unadvisedly forgo the fruict, which prayer affoordeth them that use it as they
ought: let us not mar this mean, nor misuse this duty so necessary to a
Christian: and let us pray, and praise God in our known and common tongue,
with spirit, understanding and faith.

The Pope forbids marriage to persons innumerable, Whether marriage ought to
be forbidden to Priests, Clergymen and other religious persons.
men and women, and to them namely that serve at the altar, as also to them
that enter into any religious order: there is no commandment of God so
straightly kept as this countermaund of the Pope is. The holy Scripture
permits marriage to all men and women, and namely to Sacrificers and
Levites, to priests and Bishops. We find it written, that to marry is no
sin, that marriage is honorable among all. After S. 1 Cor. 7.
Paul had commended virginity, to wit, chastity, which ye term Celibat, Heb.
13.
or single life; he presently adds: 1. Cor. 7.
and this I speak for your own commodity, not to tangle you in a snare; but
that ye follow that which is honest. In the same Chapter he bids all
persons to marry, that cannot abstain; for (says he) it is better to marry
the^ to burn. And again, to take away all scruple, he warranteth every man,
that if he marry he sins not, and every virgin, that if she marry she
sins not. 1 Timothy 5.
And in another place he passes further, not permitting, but bidding young
widows to marry, that they give no occasion to the adversary to speak evil.
It is known how great cleanness was required in Priests and Leuits in the
old Testament, and chiefly in the high Priest: God permitted them to marry
nevertheless, and for their marriage ordained certain laws. ^euit. 21.
The Levites (says God) shall not take to wife an whore, or one polluted,
neither shall they marry a woman divorced from her husband. and elsewhere, the
high Priest shall take to wife a virgin, and shall not take a widow, neither
one divorced, neither a whore, nor one polluted, but he shall take to wife a
virgin of his people. In the new Testament is written, 1. Tim. 3.
that a Bishop must be unreprovable, the husband of one wife, one that can
rule his own house honestly, having children under obedience with all
honesty: for if any cannot rule his own house, how shall he care for the
Church of God? These later words do plainly confute them that durst wrest the
former, to wit [the husband of one wife] as if the Apostle had meant [the
Bishop must be Bishop of one Church] in which gloss is no color, but
evidently corrupts the text, and is contrary to their own practice: for the
place conteyneth a rehearsal of qualities, whereby a man meet to be a Bishop
may be discerned from one unmeet: and among the rest, this is put as
principal, namely, his care and discretion to govern well his wife, family and
children; for (says The Apostle) if he cannot rule his own house well, how
shall he care for the Church of God? It is also contrary to their own practice.
For if it be true (as their gloss imports) that a Bishop must be Bishop of
one Church, then are they not Apostolic Bishops, that will be Bishops of many
Churches; much less the Pope, that will be Bishop of all Churches, better it
were then for them to cast away their gloss, then change their practice.
Moreover, S. Paul admonishes Titus his disciple, to ordeine Priests or Elders
in every City, as he appointed him, and then he adds: if any be
unreprovable, the husband of one wife, having faithful children, which are not
slaundered of riot, neither are disobedient: for a Bishop must be
unreprovable. As for the Apostles, that they were married we may not doubt,
unless we will doubt of the truth. Have we not power (says S. Paul) to lead
about a wife being a sister, as well as the rest of the Apostles, and as the
brethren of the Lord and Cephas. I will not say that it is not good to counsel
Priests and all other the faithful to absteme from marriage so long as they
shall feel that they have this power over themselves to be able to abstain,
1. Cor. 7.
so long as they find in themselves the gift of chastity: for (as S. Paul
aduertiseth) marriage charge man and wife greatly with the cares of this
world. But then it were good to keep our selves within terms of counselling,
and not fall to flat forbidding to marry, and to fortify it with threatenings
of pains corporal and spiritual, temporal and perpetual: it were good to
keep within the bounds of The Apostle, who speaking twice or thrice of
chastity, shows that he speaks but by counsel, that to enjoin persons
not to marry, were to tangle their consciences in a snare; that the gift of
chastity is not in man's power, but comes from God. Behold then how himself
affirms, that forbidding of marriage is a mark of Antichrist, saying: now the
spirit speaks evidently, 1. Tim. 4.
that in the later times some shall depart from the faith, forbidding to marry;
as it follows in the text. The boldness is strange, that the Pope durst
attempt to take from men the remedy, which God had given them against
whoredom, leaving the^ to burn in their lewd lusts, and in adultery and
other filthiness, and endangering them to the judgment and wrath of God. Heb.
13.
Marriage (says S. Paul) is honorable among all men, but whoremo^gers and
adulterers God will judge. I permit (says the Pope) keeping of Concubines,
whoredoms, adulteries, that I speak not of incests and Sodomie; but them that
will be married, I will judge and condemn. What can the devil speak more
contrary to the doctrine of God, than this?

The Pope makes a difference of meat and days: it is written: Whether
distinction of days and meats ought to be made through or for religions sake.
that which enters into the mouth defiles not the man, but that which comes
forth. Meat (says S. Paul) makes us not acceptable to God, for, neither if
we eat have we the more, neither if we cate not, have we the less. Whatsoever
(says he) is sold in the shambles, eat ye, and ask no question for
conscience sake: for the earth is the Lords, and all that therein is. Math. 15.
1. Cor. 8. 1. Cor. 20. 1. Tim. 4. 1. Cor. 10.
again he says; nothing ought to be refused, if it be received with
thanks-geuing. and again; whatsoever is set before you, eat, as king no
question for conscience sake, so that no offense be given, as he warns them
afterward. Now by the same Apostle are we taught elsewhere, that true Christians
well instructed in the faith, never take offense about meat: as also he
calls the commanding of abstinence from meats, 1. Tim. 4.
a doctrine of devils. As for making difference of times, we find it written to
the Galatians thus: Gal. 4.
ye observe days and months, and times and years: I am in fear of you,
least I have bestowed on you labor in vain.

But concerning these matters, let us conclude with these words of S. Col. 2.
Paul to the Colossians: let no man therefore condemn you in meat and drink,
or in respect of an holy day, or of the new moon, or of the Sabbath days;
which are but a shadow of things to come: but the body is Christ: let no man at
his pleasure bear rule over you by humblenes of mind, and worshipping of
Angels, advancing himself in those things which he never saw, rashly puffed up
with his fleshly mind, and holds not the head, whereof all the body,
furnished and knit together by joints and bands, increases with the increasing
of God: wherefore, if ye be dead with Christ from the ordinances of this world;
why, as though ye hued in the world, are ye burdened with traditions? as, Touch
not, Taste not, Handle not: which all perish with the using, and are after the
commandments and doctrines of men. Which things have in deed a show of
wisdom in voluntary Religion and humbleness of mind, and in not sparing the
body; which are things of no value, since they perteine to the filling of the
flesh. Col. 3.
If ye the^ be risen with Christ, seek those things which are above, where
Christ sits at the right hand of God. Set your affections on things which
are above, and not on things which are on the earth.

CHAP. VI. How we should be resolved to judge of the Schism in Christendom at
this day; and namely whether the Reformed be Schismatiks.
But he that would discourse on all differences, disagreements and
contrarieties between the Pope with his favorers, and Jesus Christ with his
Apostles and followers professing his Gospel, as well in life, proceedings and
actions, as in doctrine and belief, should never have done. Not that the matter
were hard to prove: for among them that reverence and read the holy Scriptures,
there is no man so meanly exercised in the same, and so slenderly acquainted
with the state of your Church, but can easily justify every contrariety.
Howbeit, their number is so great, that the memory, age, travail and
instruments of one man can not serve to set down the full reckening of all.
But yet, me thinks I have spoken enough to make you know and acknowledge, that
the Reformed do not without reason condemn the Pope and his doctrine: I have
said enough to instruct and cause you to confess the Pope to be that great
Antichrist, foretold by our Savior, his Prophets and Apostles, and whom they
threatened and assured us should come. Ye see all the Prophecies touching
Antichrist brought to pass in the Pope and by the Pope: which can not be
verified in any other persecutor of the Church whatsoever. The Arabians,
Tartars, Scithians and Parthians; the Hunnes, Vandals and so many other nations
of the North and East; Attila, Mahumet, Tamberlan, and the Turks the successors
of Mahumet have mightily persecuted, and yet do persecute the Gospel: but many
Antichrists were to come, according to their several prophesies apart by
themselves. 4. Esd. 15.
Hereupon is it said that the East in the end of the world shall bring many
miseries: these be the Dragons of Arabia; the clouds coming from the East and
North, full of wrath and storm, which should cause so great fearfulnes and
trembling, and spil so much blood, as in Esdras is fore-shewed. Let it suffice
you, that Attila, Mahumet and all their successors with the Monarchs and
peoples aforenamed came not out of the fourth Monarchy, as the Pope did: Dan.
7.4. Esar. 11.12.
which was foretold of the principal Antichrist by Daniel and Esdras. They
were neither borne within the Church nor yet went out of it: for they never had
entered into it. But Antichrist was to be borne in the Church, Marc. 13. Dan 9.
These. 4. Pet. 2. 1. Ioh. 2.
was there to abide and reign according to the prophesies of Jesus Christ, of
Daniel, S. Paul, S. Peter, and S. John. The Pope was borne there, went out from
thence, and yet abides and reigns there with great power, pomp, and
tyranny. The first weapons of Antichrist should be seducings and spiritual
poysonings, as the Apocalypse warns, under the name of the Whore and her
enticements: which can not he applied to them, that planted their false
religion and performed all by fire, sword, and fury. But the Pope has laid
the groundwork and mayn-stay of his first and principal greatness and power,
on will-worships, on the show of counterfeit holiness, on false miracles,
seducing and bewitching peoples and nations with words and deeds well pleasing
flesh and blood, as also with promises and presents of goods and honors. Other
ring leaders of heresy, as Arrius, Maniche, Pelagius, and such like, reigned
not, as Antichrist was to reign, in the temple of God with all excess of
power and glory; they never exalted themselves above kings, above all which is
called God; their seducings and oppressions were never so general and
continual, as the great Antichrist should bring to pass. Take the pain your
self, for you ought, it is as much as your salvation is worth, to consider
more heedfully the prophesies of Antichrist, and compare the Gospel, with that
which they teach and practice in your Church: and ye will find that I tarry not
on every poinct, but do ouerpasse far more matters then I touch. your ghostly
Fathers and Doctors, like very Pharisees and hypocrites as they be for the most
part, do set up against all these truths, the defense of the Pharisees against
Jesus Christ. How can it be, say your Doctors, that so many holy fathers, so
many learned clerks, so many men, so many peoples and countries have consented
to the doctrine of the Pope for so many hundred years, if it were against God,
and against Holy-writ, specially seeing our Savior has said: behold, I am with
you until the end of the world? This defense pleases flesh and blood passing
well: the flesh fancieth them too well, who teach, that it is not ordinary for
a man to wander out of the way, to sin, and to go on in his wandering and
sin. Under the warrant of this defense infinite souls do stay, wax
sluggish, and are luld asleep, barking at such as would wake them out of this
drousie disease. But the wisdom of this world is foolishness with God: 1.
Cor. 3. 1. Cor. 2.
and the natural man perceyueth not the things of the spirit of God, says
Saint Paul; flesh and blood are blind and can not discern these mysteries:
then let us not consult herein with worldly wisdom, or with flesh and blood,
but with the spirit of God. By this spirit in the holy history we are
taught, that Adam after his fall by sin was somewhat relieved and reformed by
the Lord, that God by his Angels visibly did warn him and his children from
time to time to walk and live according to his commandments, with promise to
restore and repair the decay of mankind: notwithstanding, in less then two or
three generations they forsook the voice and way of God, and were corrupted
after the imaginations and devises of the flesh; and this corruption lasted
above sixteen hundred years. Then the merciful Lord willing to show his
favor toward mankind, repaired his Church, renewed his commandments to Noe
and his children: but again, within less then four generatio^s the people
went astray, and forgot God and his commandments. A long time after that
going astray, the Lord called Abraham, and restored his Church by him, leaving
the rest of all mankind in their corruption, who remained therein till the
coming of Christ, for two thousand years and upward. The holy Ghost mereouer
teaches, how after the Church was restored in Abraham, and confirmed in Moses
and in all the children of Israel, there followed many reuoltes in the Church
of Israel, even as general as the former above rehearsed, for they seemed all
to have forsaken the right way, insomuch as the faithful appeared nowhere:
these apostasies or backslidings endured, some for two hundred years, some
more, some less, though the Lord in the mean while awaked them and called
them again by his Prophets. Ye know further how the Greeks for the most part
swarued, ye count them for heretics or infidels in manner al. Now so it is;
that th'Israelites and Greeks may as well, or better then you, prevail with
these words of Christ, [I will be with you until the end of the world] for as
large and more express promises then that, had been made to th'Iraelits: and
this promise pertained as well to the Greeks as to you: because they were
instructed in the Gospel before ye were, and that more carefully and by mo
Apostles then ye were: and yet for all this both th'Israelites and Greeks are
gone astray from the faith these many hundred years past; which also has
befallen the Churches of Affrik, who may challenge to themselves the assurance of
those promises with as great reason, as you may. Besides that, your own
Churches have been defiled and ouergrowe with heresies, namely when the
barbarous nations of the North, and enemies of our faith left no face of a
Church almost throughout Europe. We must acknowledge therefore, that such
promises of God do never pass without this condition, if ye abide in me; in
the obedience of my word, according to the doctrine of Moses. Leuit. 26. Deuteronomy.
8. Isay 29.
Else why should the Lord say in Isay to the children of Israel? because this
people come near unto me with their mouth and honor me with their lips, but
have removed their heart far from me, and their fear toward me was taught
by the precept of men, therefore behold, I will again do a marvelous work in
this people, even a marvelous work and a wonder: for the wisdom of their
wisemen shall perish, and the understanding of their prudent men shall be hid. 30.
and again in the next chapter; the Lord shows why they are plagued
notwithstanding his promises: because (says he) you have cast of this word and
trust in violence and wickedness, and stay thereupon; therefore this iniquity
shall be unto you, as a breach that falls, or a swelling in an hye wall, whose
breaking comes soundainly and in a moment. 59.
and in another place: your iniquities have separated between you and your
God, and your sins have hid his face from you, Ose. 4.
that he will not hear. and in Osea: seeing thou have forgotten the law of thy
God, I will also forget thy children. John. 8.
Also Jesus Christ says: if ye continue in my word, ye are verily my
Disciples. Now let us gather of all these histories and sayings that universal
and long-lasting corruptions and reuoltes are ordinary in the Church; that when
the Church forsakes the word of God, then God withdraws from her his holy
spirit, that when God has called from her his holy spirit, the more she
hastes forward, the further she wandreth from the right path, and the more
increases her corruption; that in her self no mean may be found to repair
her ruins, or return her into the right way, if the Lord takes her not by the
had and guides her aright to the forsaken way by his spirit and word. We learn
also, that after the Lord has long co^celed from men the time of their
corruption and ignorance, he has given the^ over to the vanity of their
minds, which boast and brave it with the bare titles of his Church and
Religion: renewing his Church in the mean season nevertheless in miraculous
sort by his immediate and extraordinary callings, as those of Noe, Abraham,
Moses, Ezechias, Josias and others. We learn again, that Gods promises are
tied neither to persons nor places, but only to his elect, and the same does
Jesus Christ most plainly teach in S. Matthew by the similitudes of the
husbandmen to whom the householder did let out his vineyard; Math. 21.
and them that were bidden to the marriage. seeing therefore your fathers and ye
forsook the humility of true Christians, to puff up your selves with pride of
the flesh; seeing ye gave over the glorifying of the Lord in his word, power and
mercy, to glorify your selves in your carnal inventions, by your freewill and
meritorious works; let it not seem strange to you that God has left your
fathers and you in the miseries of ignorance. 4. Esd. 8.
For Esdras prophesies that many miseries and calamities remain for them that
shall live in the later times, because they shall walk in great pride; ye run
after man's traditions, ye bring nothing forth but wild grapes, your hands are
full of blood, you have trodden down the righteous, all your devises are
against God to provoke the eyes of his Majesty; ye put bitter for sweet; ye
have no fear of God but through the commandment received of men; ye leave
the doctrine of God which ye have heard from the beginning; ye demand more of
him then he has appointed; ye have left the faith; ye fulfill the measure of
your fathers sins, ye teach all things rather then the word of God; ye can
not abide to be ruled thereby; ye gaze and spend the time on fables and vain
toys; ye are wed to your own insolent wills; ye blame the way of truth, and
in covetousness ye make merchandise of men's souls with feyned words: then
leave to think it strange that the curse of God pursues you, by blindness of
heart, Leuit. 26.
ignorance and errors. In the like case to yours, Moses threatened the children
of Israel, that God would forsake the^. On like occasion prophesied Isay, Isay.
1.5.8.28.
that the Lord would curse his Church, and oppress it with the spirit of
sleep, would shut her eyes, would cover the Prophets, and the chief of the
seers, would make her to stumble against his word; would shut and darke^ the
book; would make the wisdom to perish from the wise, and understanding from
the prudent; would hyde his eyes, and would not hear; would take away the
hedge from about his vineyard; would break the wall thereof and it should be
trode^ down. Math. 23. Luke. 3.4. Esdr. 5.7.
This was the reason that Jesus Christ gave the Jews, wherefore they were
refused. Likewise in Esdras we are certified that in the later times the land
shall be barren from faith; that wit shall hide it self, and understanding
depart into his secret chamber, it shall be songht of many and yet not be found;
that men shall obtain nothing; because (says he) men have taken to them the
thoughts of vanity, and have purposed in themselves the deceits and traynes of
sin, and touching these things have said to the Lord, that he was not. In
like manner S. Peter treating of th'instruments of Antichrist which forsake the
way of the Lord, 2. Pet. 2.
says, that they should privily bring into the Church damnable heresies, and
calls them wells without water, and clouds carred about with a tempest, to
whom the black darkness is reserved for ever. How then could they keep the
right way, that had no other guides? S. John says: 1. John. 2.
if that which we have heard from the beginning shall remain in us, we shall
also continue in the Son and in the Father. 2. Tim. 6.
If any man (says S. Paul) teaches otherwise and co^senteth not to the
wholesome words of our Lord, and to the doctrine which is according to
godliness, he is puffed up and knows nothing, but doteth about questions and
strife of words: and a little after, he calls them men of corrupt minds and
destitute of the truth, which think that gain is godliness: to this purpose I
will say by the way that cleare-sighted persons can quickly discern, that the
decrees and diverse doctrines of your Church are for the most part founded upon
gain. In sum, since ye have despised the waters of Siloe, marueil not that ye
are fallen and welnigh drowned in the flood and bottomless gulf of men's
traditions: ye have left the pillar and prop of the Lord; your iniquity is
like a swelling in an high wall, whose breaking comes suddenly, ye have set
naught by the hallowed fire of God, to seek out another of your own kindling,
marueil not that ye walk not in the light but stumble in the dark: and since
ye draw nigh to the devil, and draw back from God, marueil not that the
devil draws nigh to you, and God draws back from you. Finally, for that ye
have abused Gods promises, presuming to take him at his word without caring
for the condition, wherewith he gave his word, and thinking him tied by his
promise to be with you, and you not bound by the condition to obey him,
therefore has that presumption entangled your souls within the cords of
vanity, and hampred you in those iniquities and curses which we daily see. But
all these inducements and considerations are yet too low for matters so high.
The secret cause of th'estrangings from God, of your reuolts of the Church are
past the reach of man's reason, it is the bottomless sea of Gods counsel; and
therefore must be treated of in another sort. Why should we ask how it may
come to pass, which we see is come to pass? why should we ask, how it could
be, that the Church lost her way so long time, since our Lord, the Prophets and
Apostles assured us that so it should be? such questioning does utter the
mistrust of Gods prophesies lurking in our unbelieving hearts. Jesus Christ
foretold us, Matthew. 24. Marc. 13. Luke. 21.
many false Prophets should come and seduce many, that iniquity should abound,
that charity should be cold, that th'abomination of desolation should be set
in the holy place, that all nations should band themselves against his elect,
that there should be wars and noise of wars, nation should rise against
nation, kingdom against kingdom, the brother should deliver his brother to
death, and the father the child, and children should rise against their
parents, and should cause them to die, the elect should be hated of all men,
great earthquakes should be in many places, dearth, and pestilence, and great
fear, and that the seducing and tribulation should be so great that if it were
possible the elect should be deceived and except those days should be
shortened, there shall no flesh be saved, such things (says he) must needs be,
but the end shall not be yet. Dan. 7.9.
Antichrist (says Daniel) shall speak words against the most High, and shall
consume the Saints of the most High, and shall think that he may change times
and laws, and they shall be given into his hand, until a time and times and the
dividing of time. This is that which is written in Esdras, 4. Esdras. 5.
that the way of truth shall be hid and the land shall be barren from faith: and
iniquity shall be increased more then thou have seen now, or have heard in
times past; and all friends shall fight one against another: then shall wit
hide it self, and understanding depart into his secret chamber; it shall be
sought of many, and yet not be found, then shall unrighteousness and
voluptuousnes have the upper hand upon the earth: one land also shall ask
another, and say, is righteous justice gone through thee? and it shall say, no:
at the same time shall men hope but not obtain; 4. Esd. 16.
they shall labor, but their enterprises shall not prosper: they shall be like
mad men, they shall spare none, they shall spoil and wast such as yet fear the
Lord; for they then shall wast and spoil their goods, and cast them out of
their houses; then shall the trial of my chosen appear, as the gold is tried
by the fire. Hear, o ye my beloved, says the Lord, behold thy days of
trouble are at hand, but I will deliver you from them, be not ye afraid; doubt
not; Apoc. 13.17.18. etc.
for God is your captain. This is the chief matter contained in th'Apocalips;
for there is described the great and long-continuing Revolt of the later times,
how all the world shall wonder at the great Beast and worship him, how this
beast shall blaspheme against God, how he shall allure and retain on his side
kings and peoples, how he shall make war on the Saints, and overcome them,
how he shall have power over all kindreds, and peoples, over all tongues and
nations, that this beast shall put to death them that will not worship him,
that he shall have power to work false miracles, that he shall cause all both
small and great, rich and poor, free and bond, to bear his mark: again; the
kings and inhabitants of the earth shall kiss the great Whore that sits on
the great Beast, they shall commit fornication with her, and shall be drunk
with the wine of her fornication, and the Merchants of the earth shall be
enriched with the pomp and riot of her and of her city of Babylon: God shall
put in the hearts of kings to do the pleasure and will of this great Beast, and
to give him their rule and power until the word of the Lord be fulfilled. The
man of sin [or Antichrist] says S. Paul, shall come with all power and signs
and lying wonders, 2. These. 2.
and in all deceiueablenes of unrighteousness among them that perish, because
they received not the love of the truth, that they might be saved: and
therefore God shall send them strong delusion, that they should believe lies.
and further in that chapter he shows that there must be a departure from the
faith before the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ; and because the same
departure was to happen shortly after, he warns them that the mystery of
iniquity did then already work. He foretells also that in the last days
shall come perilous times, 2. Tim. 3.
wherein men of corrupt minds and reprobates concerning the faith shall resist
the truth: but they shall prevail no longer, says he, for their madness
shall be evident to all men. and after that he says: the time will come, 2. Tim.
4.
when they will not suffer wholesome doctrine: but having their ears itching
shall after their own lusts get them an heap of teachers: and shall turn
their ears from the truth and shall be given unto fables. It is written in S.
Peter: there shall be false teachers among you, 2. Pet. 2.
which privily shall bring in damnable heresies, even denying the Lord, 1.
John. 2.
that has bought them: and in S. John; as ye have heard that Antichrist shall
come, even now (says he) are there many Antichrists. Leave then to demand
how that may come to pass, which ye see is come to pass, and which is
agreeable to man's natural corruption, and to the ordinary condition of the
Church, and which must needs come to pass, as the Prophecies must needs be
true. But judge now, if it be granted you from above, whether we live in the
time of all these prophecies, or no. See whether the branch of the fig tree is
tender, and the leaves come forth. Weigh whether ye breathe out any words but
the words of men, who seek the ransom of your souls elsewhere than in Christ,
who are not learned nor devout but in your fancies and desires: for your
munkeries, doctrines and devotions are only founded on the desire of man.
judge whether ye that enjoy this world at pleasure, and do persecute, are of
the crew of Antichrist; or else the Reformed whom ye pill, spoil and sack,
whom ye cast out of their houses, whom ye chase out of the world, who suffer at
your hands endless vexation, and who breathe out nothing but the word of God.
My children, let us do as Ezechias, Josias and other good kings of Israel did:
when they went about to set the Church in order, they ouerskipped all men's
traditions received and practiced in the Church, and searched out the word of
God, that lay before buried in darkness; and according to that word alone
reformed the Church: let us look back on the stone from whence we were cut of;
let us bring our mother back to her former husband; let us return together to
the water of Siloe, to wit, Jesus Christ and his word. Saint John bids us
not to stand fast in the traditions and commandments which we shall find in
the Church, but in that which we have heard from the beginning: that which we
have heard from the beginning is the word of God. Let us hie fast and stand to
it: prescription of time or contrary custom cannot abate one jot of
th'auctoritie, truth and power thereof; it cannot deceive us; we shall never
want excuse before God, if we rule our selves by it; for by this only rule
has he commanded us to serve him, and has forbidden us to add thereto, or
take ought therefro. Now so it is, that to the same word the Reformed submit
and order themselves in their devotions and actions, so much as they are able.
Then let us freely conclude the appearance to be greater that ye are
th'heretikes and schismatikes, rather then they. They may tell you, as Elias
told Achab: we are not they that trouble Israel, that trouble the Church; but
ye and your fathers house, which have forsaken the commandments of God and
followed Baalim, Antichrist, men's commandments and traditions, fables, lies
and vanities: but above all, the schism which you would cast on them,
reboundeth on your selves: for this is a ruled case, that he which seperateth
himself is not the schismatike, but he only that geues the occasion. And that
is your corruption and your confusion, which occasioneth them to sever
themselves from you: withal, your seducings, and chiefly your persecutions be
so great, that they cannot endure to tarry with you. Apoc. 18.
The Lord also commands them to go out of your Church, your Babylon. Go
out of her, my people, lest ye be partakers of her plagues. The Reformed are as
the woman desolated upon the loss of her son, that is fled into the fields,
that is fled into the desert. And yet although they detest and fly your
errors, they are willing nevertheless to tarry by you and among you, to bring
you by the word of God, to the truth of the word of God: they are ready to
preach in your Churches, if ye will. But how should they tarry with you? ye
chase them, ye bannish them; ye rifle them; ye beat them; ye massacre them;
and martyr them: and therefore ye have slender reason (God wot) to call them
schismatikes.

CHAP. VII. Here follows the Conclusion, and the application of all this
discourse, with the admonitions or aduertisements.
THen, forasmuch as before when I was content to wink with you, and when I
treated touching the Reformed, as if they had been schismatikes, yet it fell
out upon proof that ye were in fault, for violating and breaking the peace ye
made with the^, the faith ye gave to them, and the oath ye swear to God: and
also for intending and indeuouring to destroy them by force and material
sword, or compel them by the same sword to leave their religion and take
yours: which fault ye have redoubled with sin upon sin, in going about to
confound the state of the Church, the state of the Crown, the laws of the
Realm, the order of successions, the common wealth, the common peace, and the
wealth and peace of every one, rather then ye will live nigh the Reformed or be
governed by any of the^: Know now, how much your evil is greater, your nature
frowarder, and your sin horribler then ye think. They are no longer
heretics, to whom ye deny the interest and benefit of the law of all nations
under heaven, to whom ye have unrighteously violated your faith, whom ye
persecute in their goods and persons, whom ye compel against their
consciences, whom ye put to death: they are the people of God, the true
professors of his holy Gospel. They be no heretics, though ye assay by
violence to bring them back into the right way, as ye say: they be true and
faithful Christians, whom ye seek to bring out of the right way. They are no
heretics, whose company and government ye seek to shun, with so costly an
adventure, as your country lives and souls are worth: they are Gospellers
(though ye profanely deride the name) and hold a right opinion of the
Catholic faith; who demand nothing but reason and right, even for the
comfort, quiet, profit and salvation of all, and cuery one. It comes to my
remembrance, that about the beginning of this discourse, when I showed you how
needful it was that oaths should be made and kept, and told you how it was
impossible to excuse you of perjury and reproof before God and men after ye
had violated the pacifications of this Realm so solemnly sworn; I promised
you then to resolve you of a doubt which ye might make, to wit, that since the
breach of the peace ye have made many others and protestations against that
peace, so that by the same necessary and religious regard of oths, it seems
impossible to you to return again to observe the peace broken. Behold a
doubtful knot, which may be losed with very small ado. For since it appears,
that the Reformed are true Christians, and do demand only the free and open
passage of Gods word, that the kingdom of Christ may reign in men's hearts, ye
must confess that your oaths and protestations made before or after the peace,
to hinder the exercise of their Religion and destroy them, are quite contrary
to justice, to Gods glory, the freedom of his word, and the kingdom of his
son: so that these later oaths and their like, and not those which you made
for preserving of peace, are to be condemned and utterly retected. It stands
not so with vows and oaths which are thought to be made to God, as it does
with testaments and some other acts among men whereof the later do make the
former void: for even as God is immovable and never changes his will, even
so his pleasure is, that what soever is done with him, and me^ promise him
should be immovable: a vow or oath then being forcibly and lawfully made, all
other oaths, execrations, and protestations which can be made in prejudice of
the same may not nor ought be counted as oaths but as periuries and mere
ungodliness. It is a monstrous abuse and profaning of faith to make it a
warrant for treachery impiety, trouble, confusion, and ruin of a state and
Church. This is but to strengthen sin with sin, to establish and make
faithlesnesse necessary by oaths, and namely by oaths that can not otherwise
stand nor be auowed before Gods justice. Away then with these last oths and
their like, show your disalowance of them by your repentance: otherwise (to
return to my purpose) ye must confess that ye will retain them in despite of
God and his Church, of reason, of justice, of the weal publik, and in the end
of your selves. Now since the case so stands, I tell you not that the Reformed
are more in number and value, that they have Cities not to be won by assault,
that they have societies, amities, alliances, and aid within and without the
Realm: but I tell you, that they have many mo millions of Angels for them,
that the truth of God is vnvanquishable, that God is for them, that God shall be
the master, that the lamb shall overcome, that his holy Word and Chosen shall
remain, and the traditions of men, men them selves, and the world shall
perish: I tell you, that the people of God, as Isay says, how few soever they
be, Isay. 18.27.
is a terrible people and unconquerable, for the Lord gardeth them day and
night: I tell you, that you fret and fume to no end and imagine vain things,
ye conceive chaff, and bring forth stubble; your counsels shall devour you as
fire: God shall come forth as a geant, and shall lift up his wrath as a man of
war, and shall triumph; he shall scatter you abroad, and devour you; he shall
make you eat your own flesh, and make you dronken with your own blood; he
shall take the cup of rage from their hand, and make you drink the dregs; he
shall leave your name in execration to the chosen; he shall break your stafe,
and persecute you without ceasing, he shall sweep you with a broom that
destroys, the earth shall swallow up your pursuings, the end thereof shall
turn to joy and gladness for the faithful; to everlasting condemnation,
tears, gnashing of teeth, and horrible torments, for the persecutors, and for
you, if ye continue your evil beginnings. I judge you not, I leave you to the
judgment of the Lord by his Prophets, and by wise Solomon, Sap. 17.
who says thus: when the unrighteous thought to have thine holy people in
subjection, they were bound with the bands of darkness and long night; and
being shut up under the roof, did lie there to escape the everlasting
providence: there does the wiseman declare that the faithful do not but taste
of miseries in comparison of the persecutours, that are made drunken therewith:
if then ye esteem their misery great, judge with trembling fear, how much
greater misery abides you. 2. These. 1.
S. Paul also judges you, when he says, that it is a righteous thing with
God, to recompense tribulation to them that trouble the faithful, and to them
that are troubled, rest with the Apostles, when God shall show himself from
heaven with his mighty Angels, in flaming fire, rendering vengeance unto them
that do not know God, and which obey not unto the Gospel of Jesus Christ, which
shall be punished with everlasting perdition, from the presence, and from the
glory of his power. Likewise, Luke. 7.
our Savior himself judges you with these thundering words: shall not God
avenge his elect, which cry day and night unto him, yea, though he suffer long
for the^? I tell you, he will avenge them quickly. 4. Esd. 15.
Neither is the saying in Esdras to be omitted: behold my people is lead as a
flock to the slaughter: as they do yet this day unto my chosen, so will I do
also, and recompense them in their bosom: thus (says the Lord God) my right
hand shall not spare the sinners, neither shall the sword cease from them that
shed innocent blood upon earth. To be short, heil awayteth for the great beast,
and them that war for her: the bottomless pit gapeth for great Babylon, as
in the Reuclation is declared at large. The zele of the Lord of hosts shall
bring these things to pass. Come forth then from her also ye other children
of mine, least ye be partakers of her plagues, and swallowed up with her. Set
your selves by the lambs side, that ye may be partakers of his glory: and
rather follow truth than shadows, shows and lies. Behold the time of the
Lord that comes, his fury burns, and is too heavy to bear; his lips are
filled with indignation, and his tongue is like a devouring fire: his judgment
comes on you, small time and occasion is left you to repent. In stead of
continuing your raging persecutions, do as S. Paul did: Act. 9.
he had received a commission to destroy the faithful that were at Damascus;
he armed himself, and was accompanied with armed and violent men: he iourneyed
to perform his enterprise; and lo, he comes to Damascus to search the
faithful out, not to persecute, but to love them, to confer and be
instructed with them, being inflamed with love toward that doctrine, that had
before inflamed him with hatred toward them. And thus seek ye the death and
destruction of the Reformed no longer, shun not their company any more, but
seek them forth, and draw nigh to them, that ye may live and be instructed
with them in the purity of the Gospel. ye persecute the self same Christ,
the self same Gospel which S. Paul did; and so may ye be called, as he was, if
ye be of Gods chosen. And seeing it is not the pleasure of God to give our king
a son, in stead of raging as hitherto ye have done, because the Princes
nighest the crown are Reformed, are Gospellers: rejoice ye, hoping that
peradventure God will use this mean to advance the kingdom of his word. And
be not afraid for that some Princes are wont to bring fire, sword, and the
halter, to enlarge their religion and make it prevail: for if they would do
so, they should hurt their religion, they should sin against God and his
word, according to which only they rule their zele. The word forbids them,
as heretofore we largely declared, to employ violence on the consciences: the
word teaches them, that it is strong enough to bring to God those that
perteine to his election: that the kingdom and conquest of consciences is
reserved to the word and the holy Ghost, and not to carnal weapons: that the
duty of men herein, is to inuit men to God mildly by preachings and
admonitions; by examples of good life and gentle behavior, and leave the rest
to the holy Ghost. They know it not but too well, what a displeasure it is to
any to have his conscience compelled, and that such compulsion is unprofitable,
yea, brings forth effects clean contrary to their hope that use it. For this
cause, in the lands under their obedience, in their armies, in their houses,
they let their Subjects and servants live in liberty of their consciences and
exercise of their religion, and do receive indifferently both the one and the
other, the Catholic and Reformed, making virtue the only difference, whereby
they choose or refuse. Again, why should you fear to be hardly used by them,
that are your natural and lawful Princes? he that comes to any possession
lawfully, does always set before his eves in his enioyment the preservation of
that which he lawfully enjoys, ye know the goodness of their nature even in
war: the truth of their deserts has been so great and mighty, as has forced
their very enemies to confess it, and which is more, to make it known to the
world. Adversity is the true scholemaister of virtue: nothing in this world
teaches a man better how to use his prosperity, the^ his knowledge and
experience of the contrary: ye know how long time they have bin under this
master; ye know by their actions, by the voice of the people, by the witness of
all their enemies, how much they have profited in this discipline and namely
the king of Navarre. I may speak it with th'acknowledgement of your
consciences, with the truth, that he excels in all the parts required in a
good Prince the choice and wishes of men. He bears so prince-like a port in
his person, and is so praiseworthy in his actions, as any man living. He
reigns over himself and his subjects after an heavenly manner, being
abundantly replenished with the Divine spirit, and not after the ordinary manner
of men. There is the wit, that is the most quick and lively, most stayed and
steadfast, that may be desired: a wit whose liberty was never enthralled by any
cause of contentment, nor yet grauelled by any soudaine chance or displeasure
that might happen. He has always surmounted accidents of greatest difficulty
and highest enterprise. His reason commands his conceit with such power, and
fills his mind so abundantly, that no place is left for unbridled affection,
to enter or abide. Never was there man of his estate, so like himself at all
times, as he is. He is a great warrier, if ever were any; in all the toils of
warfare, he takes such part, as the soldier does, not differing in anything
from his men of arms, but in matchless conduct and worthiness; he is wary
and happy in war, and, if it may be spoken, he is worthy of his good hap:
never Prince being so unwilling to war as he, has done so many exploicts of
war, as he. The strength of man brings no such wonders to pass, but the
reason, experience and judgment of men that betake their soul to the
counsel and government of Gods good spirit. He minds his affairs; he will
see, hear and know all: which brings to his subjects exceeding comfort, and
is the only or most sure mean to continue his officers in their duty. He is
popular, courteous in speech, mild in manners, and merciful in heart: and yet
no Prince has more majesty, or whose presence is more awful, or whose
auctority conteyneth every one better in his duty, or who preserves justice
more carefully then he, to the well-liking of all. He knows not cruelty,
injustice, prodigal wast and oppression, being thing quite contrary to his
studies and purposes: it was ne^^^ heard that he killed, massacred, or
murdered any one of his subjects, or servants within the verge of his Court or
elsewhere. It is not known that he wrongfully withholds any other man's
goods; his Palaces and Courts are not built or enriched with the ruin and
spoil of towns of the people or any (...); he spends according to the rate
of his reuen^w^s; he thinks the means he has to spend by, do rather belong
to his subjects, then the means they have to live by, do belong to him, he
gives upon good cause, and to good end, he robs not one to give to another;
he gives in such sort that he has friends and servants enough, he gives in
such sort, that there rests to himself enough to supply the need of his
affairs, without being constrained to help himself with harming and
oppressing others. The credit of this truth is not cracked by the oppressions,
which many endure at this day through the armies and men of war of the king
of Navarre. For these harmies and losses are as grievous to him, as they are to
those that feel and suffer them be ^estifieth this truth abundantly with the
(...) of (...) with his ordinary complaints, with the careful pursuit, he has
made for peace, with the daily courtesies he bestows on them that come to
crave his pity and goodness: there is no let in him but that he is as mild and
gracious in war as in peace, he cutteth of so much as he may the just
seuerities of the war, but yet, though he does what he can war will still
be war. If he had sufficient means to pay and enterteyne his gentlemen and
soldiers, and be are out the burden of war against his enemies, ye might easily
conceive what he is most willing to do, and that matters should pass calmely
that ye should be harmed little or nothing at al by any of his, according to the
desire he has to relieve and comfort you al. But the performace of this good
will he bears toward you is yet impossible for him: because the most part of
his goods and possessions are seized on and carried away by his enemies; all
they that follow him, Lords, Gentlemen, and others are wrongfully banished out
of their country, driven out of their houses, put from th'enioyment of their
goods, and put besides the exercise of their offices. They must needs live they
must needs maintain themselves, and seeing they cannot with their own goods,
which their enemies do unrightfully lay hold on, they must serve their turns,
with that, which they can find of the goods of their enemies. Thus, it is not
the king of Navarre that ye should complain of, it is the war, it is the
auctours of these wars, which he began not, but rather is wonderfully
displeased that it ends not; he neither demands nor purposes to have good
or rest for himself, but with the good and rest of you all. He can well enough
abstain from the favors of your Court, he could forthwith find in his heart
to renounce your Crown, if there went with it nothing save his own, but there
goes with it more of yours, then of his; there goes away with it of your
goods and lands, your honor and dignities, your name and credit, your life and
liberty, liberty I say, which has ever been to all men a benefit
inestimable, but above them all to your ancestors: so that his duty and
degree, his calling and the good will he bears you, permit him not to forsake
and leave you to the peril wherein ye are; and therefore he either will save
you from destruction and bondage, or will perish for you, or will perish with
you. open your eyes then; accept of the right, the desert, and good meaning of
the Prince: and beware ye refuse not such a Prince. Prepare your schues to
receive him in the degree and quality wherein God does and will (I hope) offer
him to you, not that ye should desire the decease of your king whom ye have at
this present and is blaced over you by God. Turn your eyes toward the king of
Navarre with a loving regard, seeing he is such a one, that if leave were
granted you to look for a king according to your own choice and wish, ye
could not choose nor wish one more worthy: Believe me, ye shall receive more
profit, commodity, and content by his reign, then he shall: he may better
forge such subjects, then ye may such a Prince. Cease then your conspiracies
against him; nay cease to conspire against your own selves, against God
himself. It is high time for you to leave to look, desire, and seek for
strangers, yet at the last call to mind that frank and true heart of your
ancestors, wherewith they bought their own liberty and yours so dearly,
freed themselves from the subjection of strangers so valiantly, and recovered
their freedom from the English so nobly. They not only hated the rule of
foreign kings; but also would not be ruled by their natural kings after a
foreign manner. Charlemaine was borne king of France, he descrued and obtained
The Empire; he would have governed this Realm with th'Impetiall laws, and have
enclosed France within The Empire: your forefathers, as Frenchmen in deed,
justly ielous of their name, franchise, and liberty, could not abide it, and
though he was one of the most redoubted kings that ever were, yet they stood
against it most freely. One of my children stepped up boldly and used such
speeches to The Emperor Charlemaigne their king in the mids of his army. As
thou appointest us, o sacred Mareshe, we will follow thine ensigns in what part
soever they are borne, for there is no monster nor thing so fearful that can
keep us back. Thou beganst at Rome to be Emperor of other nations; but thou
art borne Prince and King of the Frenchmen, whose valiance, I wot not with what
destiny al strangers do envy, thinking our freedom to be the cause of their
servitude, although that before thy reign not one only part of the land could
call it self free. Thou have power to give the Hungarians a king; the Greeks
demand of thee but amity; thou commaundest in all Europe: for the fear that
Astrike has of thee, and the alliance thou have in Asia, thou hold all the
earth in peace, and men in safety. Thou causest religion to be observed. And
yet thou undertake one care, wherewith all the world may be troubled. We that
are Frenchmen, though we see thee so great, demand nothing of thee but to
continue Fre^chme^, as before. If thou employest us not in thy wars, we shall
think our selves above all others most unhappy and infamous. Why the^ will thou, that thy soldiers, thy realm and thy France should fall into the
subjection of The Empire? O French me^, are ye bastards are ye degenerated? are
ye chaungelings? what? have ye not one spark left of this brave and courageous
jealousy of your Ancestors? is there less heart in you, then was in the
Burguinions, that rejected the rule of Conrad The Emperor, for this only
cause, that he was a stranger to them? Frenchmen! since when came ye out of
kind, to become cowards and bondmen? ye sell one another; ye sell your selves;
ye sell me also. Doubtless ye will consume in these wars the price of my
sale, and with it whatsoever ye have else, and in the end, if your misfortune be
so great, as to deliver your selves and me also to the Buyer, ye must afterward
repay to him that which he gave you; and whatsoever poverty ye allege, yet
must ye restore to him the price of my sale with excessive usury besides, and
ye must disburse all the charges. Ye seek the ruledome of strangers; if ye
be so wretched as to find it, ye shall know what a stranger may, and is wont
to do in a country won by conquest: he will not understand your language, he
will not hear your complaints; in fine devouring fire to your destruction will
come from him. Determine to resign the honor of governments and judgments,
to yield your triumphant swords and stately robes to strangers. Determine to
loute under the Lordly look, under the threatenings and stripes of the cruel
Spaniard. Begin by times to harden your tender hands with all toils,
handy-crafts, and day-labour: determine to deliver all the fruicts of your
lands and hands into the grype of the greedy Spaniard, and then to wayt without
daring to open your mouth till he takes pity on you, and shares you out a
poor pittance to live by Leave to strangers the ancient seat, the commodious
site and stately building of your castles, gotten with so great travail,
possessed with so great honor and co^tentation, stored and enriched with
stories, arms, and statues of your worthy sorefathers. Dream no longer of
degree, of place, of nobility. Take ye the carke and care of housekeping, and
leave the profit and pleasure to them. Stoop like drudges, and give account
to them like underlings of your day-works with trembling at their stern
looks, and enduring their master full demeanor. Abandon your faithful
feeres, your dear and delicate daughters to ferue and please them in all their
abominable lusts. Let your sons be pages and lackeyes to stern and
lord-like strangers. None shall be seen within your houses, castles, palaces, and
towns, within the Courts of Princes, and courts of Justice (if any justice be)
but strangers: they will carry all the swinge, and then Jack will be a Gentleman
if he can speak Spanish. Think not, that the Courts Royal and those of
Justice will have any other speech, but how to keep you under, to vex and
torment you more and more, to ouer-burden you with new taskes and tallages: and
though ye be fleesed and flayed, yet if ye venture to come near them to
complain, ye shall be set back with store of blows. It were a folly to hope
that all these miseries, yea worse then these shall not fall on your heads.
Such curses and scourges of God ye ca^ not escape; in cases like to these, they
are ordinary and unavoidable, yet further, the Lord will lay his hand on you
more heavily by odds, then on them which carried away through impatience alone,
seek the Rule of strangers. Because the hatred you bear to him and to the
purity of his word and Gospel, pricks you on to run after strangers. The
Lords of the houses of Loraine and of Guise trim you up this banqueting dish,
and lay before you this poisoned bait, they are the brokers of these your
miseries: nevertheless ye say, they bear a marvelous loving heart toward me
and toward you, and are honest and virtuous. Believe me; they love you, like
strangers as they are; that is, for profit and advancement that they hope to
reap of you. Their vnpacified malice, their unsatisfied avarice, and gaping
ambition is that which they pursue, and not your cause, quiet, contentment, and
profit. This is the truth of their commodities, which they only seek under the
name, visour, and lying counterfeit of your commodity. For what are their
propositions, but vain shows and empty shadows? If they have been well
affectioned and honestly minded toward you, they have fairly left them both:
whatsoever good affection or mind they had, it gave up the ghost at least when
this goodly enterprise of the league began. If it be not permitted them from
above to show no other kindness, then hitherto they have done, God save me and
mine from it, and grant by his grace that the fear may issue from you, and
devour them. Come on let us teach them that the noble heart of Frenchmen is not
quayled, nor the jealousy of their name quenched, that the love, charity and
zele of Frenchmen toward their country and Princes, are not yet vanished
away. Let us teach them, that such a realm as this can not be sold, nor paid
for: that that is not surely bought of some particular persons, which belongs
to so many brave, courageous and valiant Princes, Lords and Gentlemen; to so
many wise personages, to so many good and faithful subjects. If ye do it not,
God will do it, and his fury will devour you with them, if ye continue in
their cursed enterprises with them. Be not like to violent floods, which never
cease to carle, wear, and break away, till they have spent all their water,
and be quite dried up. When your power shall be altogether spent, or seized on by
others, then your courage shall nothing avail, but to increase your sorrows
and troubles. Seek the physician, take counsel, and follow it while love
natural heat remains in you; while there is some hope of recovery from your
malady long time has the Lord come to you to seek for fruit, and finds it
not, and yet he tarrieth, digging the ground round about your root and dunging
it: long time has he tarried for your conversion, warning you by his ordinary
messengers the pestilence, war, and famine. Do not abuse his
long-sufferance. For if he speaks the word once, his wrath shall come, and in
a moment shall destroy you: he has not yet pronounced it, but has conceived
it; he opens his mouth to prononnce it: make have then to amend your selves.
I see no way but one for you to recover your health so far out of course, by
which ye may return to God. And that way is, speedily to reenter and each of
you to keep himself within the bounds of his calling, opening your cares and
souls to the word of God with zele and liberty: and whatsoever is besides,
leave it to God, to nature and the law (his ordinary means) touching the
succession of the crown: seeing that which ye now do and attempt, is against
God, and brings the Church, the Realm, the King and his subjects to wrack
and confusion.

Ye then, my Clergi-men, Admonition, to the Clergy.
who are said to be the firebrandes of this civil flame, who are as hot as the
oven, and cate up the Judges, return unfeignedly to the care of spiritual
things; let your diligence and study be contained within the Churches, within
the margines of the holy Bible: the care of the Crown is not committed to you.
Ye fear (as ye say) a change in your estate: this is a color without matter
ye shall be warranted from all changes, except those that the word of God shall
make. If such changes befall, they shall be agreeable to you, ye shall be the
first that will consent to them: they cannot, nor ought to be hateful to you,
unless ye resemble the Gadarenits, Math. 8. Luke 8.
who esteemed their swine more than the Gospel, and thinking to save their
swine, drove Christ away. Now, the fear that ye have to lose your worldly
commodities, ought not to make you continue in these your resolutions so
pernicious. For ye shall be inexcusable before God, as has been said. On the
other side, your fear is vain: none can, none ought, none will attempt to
touch you in your persons, dignities, goods, franchises and liberties. But mark
how ye fall into th'inconueniences which ye fly, and think to prevent or
avoid with vain fear and false alarm ye are afraid of your fall in vain
by this fear ye further your fall in effect. How much have ye disbursed? how
much have ye lost to avoid the effects of this fear? your most sworn foes
would have been satisfied with the hundredth part thereof: ye might with it have
bought peace of a very Turk: and yet ye are but in the beginning; ye are never
the near to the end; ye have more to do, and more to fear, than at the first
ye had. Mark how three or four of the greatest of your estate and calling
give you this false alarm, to make ye run to arms, or to your purses, to
help them: they put you in conceit of sickness, to make you be let blood,
because they have to do with your blood. They make you lose and wast away your
consciences, your souls, your wits, your bodies and your goods, in pursuit of
their affections and particular quarrels. He needs not complain, that may come
out of his miseries and will not: ye may have peace and quiet if ye list; ye
have no pain, loss, nor grief, but that which ye bring on your selves. Hold
your selves content with th'exercises of your functions and estates, with
th'enioyme^t of your houses, privileges and franchises, with the receiving of
your rights: there is none that demaundes any thing of you: assurance shall be
guen with oath so far as shall be needful, that none shall meddle with you, or
any thing that concerns you. But ye need no greater assurance than this, to
wit, the religion of your reputed enemies is quite contrary to that, which ye
fear at their hands, namely, to be forced by them. Forbear then to set this
Realm on fire; forbear these commotions contrary to your vocation, forbidden
of God to all persons, and specially to you. Leave the disposing of the Crown
to him, whom it belongs to dispose, to your sovereign God and his ordinary
means, to nature and the law.

And you my Nobles, To the Nobility.
why are ye come out of the franchise and liberty of your ancestors, to become
servants and pensioners to strangers, to take pay and pension of the League?
what mean ye to do? mean ye to set the Crown on the head of the Lorraine or
Spaniard? That cannot be, your Princes have God, reason and right on their
sides: and so neither friends nor fortunate success ca^ fail them in these
affairs. All that ye can do (so far as the wit of man can foresee) is but
to prepare an everlasting war in this Realm, ruinous to you and yours while
the world endures. For there be branches inow shooting out of the stocks of
your Princes, there is courage and force mough on their part, to maintain the
war for ever. The most and the worst ye may do, is to aid the Lorraines and
Spaniardes to ouer-turne this state on them, on you, and on your brethren. I
can see no other good coming to you by your league, your conspiracy, and
subversion of this state. When the Princes shall be brought to ruin, the curse
of the Egyptians, rehearsed by Isay, abides you: every one shall make
battle against his brother; every one against his friend; City against
City. The Guisians that shall remain, will run one at the other like Rams
in rutting time; the governors will think to get th'vpper hand; so many
governors, so many butchers and peti-tyrannes: thus shall you continue still
betwixt the hammer and the anuill. For if your Country (as God forfend) should
become a pray for so many catchers, do ye not see already in what plight your
selves shall stand between them? Think ye to be more honored, or maintained
in your glorious titles by strangers, envying your glory and greatness, than by
Frenchmen that part-take as brethren in the shining beams of your renown?
Fear ye to be worse entreated in religion and other causes, by your natural
Princes, that cannot see you suffer, but they suffer also with you, by force of
the natural compassion that should be between you, as members of the same
body, then by strangers, whose natural property is to rejoice in your
greeuances, according to the natural grudge between you and them? Fear ye to
be worse entreated in religion, of your own Countrymen, who have still
required to have the conquest of consciences left to God and his word; than of
strangers, who have still made religion plie and bow after their appetites, to
serve them for a cloak in the execution of their enmities, ambition and
couetise: the liking of your dignities, your wives and houses, shall condemn
you of heresy. Set before your eyes a mad bedlem body, trotting in and out,
and carrying with toil and much adoo, fuel and fire into the heart and every
corner of his house, for to burn his family, his wife, children and
servant, his goods, his house, and himself. Compare your actions, with that
Bedlem bodies, and ye shall find the^ to agree iump: ye bring and lay your
goods, your peines and trauail, your life and honor, at the Lorraines feet,
to aid them to burn this Realm, wherein are your wives, children and
servant, your kins-folke and friends, your goods and your selves. Believe me,
the hopes they feed you with, are vain. After that by your mean they shall
become masters and Lords of France, they will fear none but you; Frenchmen
shall be their only enemies, and principally the Nobles: they will think
themselves never assured in their usurpation, until they have quite
overthrown and destroyed you. Thus, there is no good to be hoped for by the
trauail ye take, and hurliburlyes ye make; but on the contrary side account
must be made, that from them will issue the ruin of this state and your
selves. Behold, how for a mess of Lentil pottage, like a sort of Esaus, for a
sinall portion of that which is your own, which belongs rather to you, then
them that give it; ye sell your birthright, your natural freedom, the honor
of your ancestors and your selves, your liberty, your repose, your goods and
country; and which passes all, ye band your selves against God, against the
course of kind, against the laws; so, that shame, loss, confusion, and
eternal damnation must needs awayt you. Abandon therefore this accursed
League, and reenter into the franchise and Gentleman-like courage of the French
your predecessors: and like nothing more then the air and French name, then
the enterteinement of your natural Princes. Turn your eyes toward them; and
ye shall find in them whatsoever a frank minded Nobility may desire. If ye
will live in quiet, with honor, reknowledgement, and recompense at the hands
of one Prince: go to them, ye shall find them agreeable, courteous, affable,
honorable, magnificent and bountiful; furnished and given to all exercises of
true nobleness; and such as can well judge, remember, and gratify the merit
of Gentlemen. And if a more stout courage pricks you on to desire the recovery
of that, which has been usurped by your neighbors on your liuelihood and
honor: who can better assist and conduct you in such enterprises, then your
Princes, who have the same interest in the like that you have, and the same
desire too peradventure; who are incomparable in all perfections required in
Generals of an army? It is against strangers, against the enemies of your
Princes, that ye must arm and conspire together; which would undermine, pluck
down and overthrow this Crown: it is your part to uphold it, it belongs to
your state and charge, it is that which your fathers and you have so solemnly
and so often sworn. Apply your selves and obey to the will of God, to the
order of nature, to the constitutions of the law: considering all these do
favor you, and present to you the most accomplished Princes that ye may
desire. Range your felues on their side. Only, arm not your selves, but abide
quietly in your houses, and the war shall end anon by a good peace, or some
other mean: God and men will can you thank, and your king chiefly, who will
hold his liberty of you: ye know it well enough; ye may no longer dissemble.

And ye, my Iusticers and Counselors of Estate, To Magistrates.
why swerve ye from the duty of your charge? why set ye at naught the oath
ye made to God, to Justice, to the Crown, and to the King? why hyde ye the
talent, that God gave you? why destroy ye godliness, mercy, Justice, and law
the foundations and assurance of the Crown? why shut ye your mouth in the
kings presence? why dissemble ye with him, that which imports his rest, his
honor; the presernation of his Crown, of his Estate, of his Realm, of
public peace; the comfort of his poor subjects, and your own preservation?
ye resemble the fig tree spoken of in the Gospel, ye bear a green leaf,
but ye bear no fruict: it was oursed of the Lord; fear ye the like curse. Ye
be officers of Justice, and yet do concele that which is Justice. ye are
Counselors to the king and yet ye counsel him not: ye are in deed but
Counselors for your selves, for that which seems gainefull to your selves,
and for strangers against him. If his Majesty command any thing, that is
prejudicial ever so little to you and the companies linked with you, ye say
that such commandments are extorted from him against his will or witting; ye
can then use very free admonitions, and declare to him what is Justice; ye be
free, hardy, and mighty enough to oppose your selves against such
commandments. But if his life, repofe, and honor, with the ruin or
preservation of the wealepublike stand upon it, although ye see that he is
forced, that for fear (a word that may make all Frenchmen blush) even for
fear he is feign to allow that for good, which he detesteth in his foul; ye
dare not speak, ye maintain him in his fear, in his captivity; your selves
captive him (for if he were well assured to find in you that which ought to be,
he would take another course to quench this civil flame) your selves, I say,
first made bondmen through false fears, vamechopes, poisoned and pestilent
gifts. This is the price for which ye sell your goods, wives, children, your
honor and conscience, the public honor and liberty, your country and your
king. Ye give your sclues over, so to be won and possessed by strangers, that
ye have no other rule in your judgments and counsels, save their will. If your
king make any motion to take advise of you; ye first look them in the face,
before ye will speak, ye first take direction of them, what answer to make.
Consider the pouerties, deformities, confusions and corruptions, which this
League whom ye favor has brought as well in your estate, as all other estates
of this Realm. Acknowledge that the League, with the foundations,
propositions, practices and pursuites, the pretense, the true purpose and
effects thereof, are most mischievous and deadly; that the fears and hopes
thereof are false and vain. Shake of then your bondages, visours and
dissimulations: take again to you the liberty and freedom that justice and
God have granted. For of God and of justice ye hold your honors in chief, and
not of men: ye dishonor it as much as in you lies, with dastardly cowardice;
ye are in Weales-publike and Monarchies, that which reason is in man: if reason
has lost her liberty, if she be enchained, man does nothing but build and
hasten on his own loss and ignominy. Seeing then ye are fountains, from
whom the reason is drawn, wherewith this realm is governed; keep your souls
clear and free, under the command of reason and justice only; which is true
liberty in deed, and according to the same condemn the League, and all the
Leagued. And since that happy wisdom, which foreseeth and preuenteth perils,
could not obtain it at your hands, let unfortunate afterwit obtain it. For ye
begin to see, to feel, and to be oppressed with the miserable effects of the
League, and of your winking thereat. Condemn it then freely; even as it is
contrary to the commandments of God, to the laws of nature and nations, to
the laws, customs and vsages of this land: the intent of it is to overthrow
and confound all: a Country wasted (say they of the League) is better then a
Country lost; thinking that lost, which they cannot catch. I do not say;
decree and command that armies be sent against it: but only I say condemn
it, and so leave it: be resolved on peace; give this counsel to our king; and
leave to God, to the order of nature and to the law, the event of the succession
of the crown: color the League no longer with your dissimulatio^s; it will
then remain so naked, filthy and stinking, that none will make account of it,
each one will reject it: and so shall we all live in peace, and so shall ye
perceive the restablishing of all estates in their former beauty and
brightness, with the restoring of your greatness, authority and credit in this
Realm: the king and all true Frenchmen will acknowledge themselves to hold
their liberty, name and safety from God and you. And keep your selves within
the limits of civil justice. Assay not to confound your power with Gods; to
encroch upon the rights belonging to the Lord: or else he will discover your
shame, he will take from you, grace, judgment, favor and means: he will take
from you all. Learn not to exceed the bounds of your auctority, of the
Roman Judge, who is mentioned in the Acts: the Jews brought before him S.
Paul, saying, Acts. 18.
this fellow persuades men to worship God otherwise than the law appoints:
and as S. Paul was about to open his mouth, Gallio (for so was the Roman Judge
called) said to the Jews, if it were a matter of wrong, or an evil deed, I
would, according to reason, maintain you: but if it be a question of words and
names, and of your law, look ye to it your selves: for I will be no Judge of
those things, and he drove them from the judgment seat. I cite not this
example of Gallio, as though ye should be careless to know the truth in
religion, as he was; but that ye should proceed with indifferency between
both parties, in cases not thoroughly known to you as he did. And whereas he
refused to hear, that which belonged not to him to judge, although the party
accused was present, much less ought ye to condemn that cause, which ye may
not define, or those persons whom ye never heard speak in their own defense.
Likewise, as he drove those importunate accusers from the judgment seat, so
ought ye to drive these imperious. Leaguers from your seats of Justice, from
your tables of counsel, when they go about to drive you to trespass the
bounds of your duty, and invade the king dome of the word, which in all causes
of Religion should judge now, as it shall judge at the latter day. Leave then
to the word of God alone that which pertayneth to the jurisdiction thereof, and
must be reserved thereto, according to Gods commandments. And if ye proceed
to take knowledge of religion, let the word of God only be the rule and squire
of your proceedings. On the other side account them not condemned, nor heretics
convict, nor justly delivered to your secular arm, who are not condemned but
by their adversaries, by their sworn enemies against the order and manner of
judgments. Favor no more, with hazard to be ioinct persecutors, them that
trouble the Church and this Realm, for no cause but their appetites, reuenges,
and ambition, and not for weeding of the Church, as they pretend, and yet that
is not permitted them. Use no more the service of butcherly executioners, of
principal massacrers, robbers and riflers, for the execution of the wrongs and
oppressions of the League, of th'excommunications and condemnations of the
Clergy pronounced upon no cause but fury; and ye shall find the blessing of
God, the favor of your king; the wishes, applauses, and praises of the people
shall assist you in so doing, rather then otherwise.

And ye (my poor People) murmur no more, To the People.
mutter nor mutine no more within your Cities, Boroughs, and Villages, to
favor with your outcries, your wishes, your trauail, your arms and your life,
this damnable co^spiracie of the Leagued. Ye feel to the quick, how vain and
deceivable their propositions are. They promised you discharge, comfort,
liberty, abundance, case, and quiet. They said, they would deal between the
king and you, to obtain of his Majesty the reformation of all things to your
contentment, and chiefly to the abolishment or diminishing of taxes. And now
see, how their armies have spoiled you of al your goods, have deprived you of
the fruit of your labors, have gnawen you to the very boanes, have taken the
bread and water out of your hands. They have, and yet do constrain your king
to increase the taxes, to draw blood from you till the last drop, to urge you
with all rigors, wherewith he is extremely aggreeued. Furthermore, ye know and
feel by the pestilence and famine, which outragiously range among you, that
God allows not such conspiracies. Believe me, no other thing can come to you
of the League, except a most great and unrecoverable desolation. For this is
ordinary, that divisions among great men, whatsoever pretense they make, work
no other effect then wast of the country, turmoyle, loss and ruin of the
people: the people always play the principal part in the tragedies of Civil
wars, they serve in steed of the Chorus or Quier to bewail their misfortune
without ceasing: great men consume them as fuel to maintain the fire of
their division, the fire of their ambition. Behold th'ordinary fruit and
success of enterprises, which people undertake or favor against God, his
word, and Justice. So long as the League shall endure, matters shall go from
bad to worse. ye have the pay and wages, whereof ye are but too sure. For
besides the retyring, estranging and despair to atchieue those hopes which the
League fed you with all, ye have, as I told you, plague and famine, surplus of
taxes, torment, wast, violences and riots of men of war. Give it over then,
lend it no longer your ears, your wills or favors. Return each of you to your
houses, to the exercise of your callings: keep your thoughts, your desires and
labors within the clofure of your fields and shops. Crave for peace of God and
the king. Crave it of God with earnest prayers, and with submission and
obedience a good successor of your king. And go not on still to draw
destruction wholly on your heads, upon a false fear of that thing which can not
come on you in any wise, and when it shall come it can not bring with it so
great harm to you in your whole lives, as one year alone of war brings.
Ye shall no sooner have forsaken the League, but peace shall be at your walls,
it shall be published and maintained in your town and Cities. ye shall no sooner
have forsaken it, but that prosperity and other blessings of God shall lodge
in your town, houses and families; shall appear in your persons, and on the
labor of your hands, shall fatten your fields and multiply your fruicts:
war, pestilence, and famine shall vanish away: peace, and Gods grace shall
shine again on you.

And you (my King) lift up your self about the dissimulation of your
Counselors, To the King
who for the most part (to the mishap of you and of all this State) are won
already by strangers, or parties sworn too far in the differences of
Religion; they are auctours or part-takers in all these tumultes. Sir discern
them: seek not for truth or faithfulness, where passion rules: take counsel
above all of God and your soul. Hear the one and the other before ye ordeine,
and cause your Edicts to be published and executed. They, against whom these
men provoke you, make no profession but of the Gospel, of the word of God:
enquire whether they falsely attribute to themselves this profession, or no:
itstands you greatly upon to do so. For if the saying of the Reformed is true,
doubtless ye band your self against God, against the kingdom of his word,
against the purity of his Gospel, against the Reformation of his Church: ye
auctorise men against God; you prefer your commandments before his, you
enter your name among the persecutours of the Church. And thereupon you cast
your self headlong into danger of the curses of God: you give your self over
to the punishments. plagues and torments which the histories and word of God
teach us to be provided as well in this world as in the world to come, for
persecutors of the Church. You know, how God sent most dreadful plagues on
Antiochus, Herod and many mo for their entreprises presumed and done against
him and his Church. The same God, that reigned then, reigns yet still, and is
as much to be feared as ever he was, and also mighty to do miracles, as then he
was. He reproves even kings for his peoples sake, Psalm. 105.
faith David: he reproves them with plagues as he did Pharao and the king of
Gerar that vexed his chosen. Let God then reign over you, Genesis 12.20.
leave to him and his word the kingdom of men's consciences; let it suffice you
that he commands so. Man cau not judge nor force the conscience. for
experience proves it to be impossible. Your ancestors being kings have left
you examples of this obedience. They permitted their Princes, and other
subjects, to tell them freely that God was to be obeyed rather then they. This
appears in the requests presented to Charles the sixth by the Duke of
Burgoine and of Lembourg, and by the Earl of Neuers; were allowed by the king
and his Counsel. We read also that the Duke of Britain being required to
acknowledge Pope Clement, by one of your predecessors, said to him in presence
of his Princes and all his Counsel; that for his dignity of being Duke of
Britain he was bound to do fealty and homage to his Majesty, but in behalf
of Religion and his conscience, he ought no duty but to God alone: his
answer was found reasonable; there was no more spoken to him: no army was
sent into his country to compel him to believe in Pope Clement. And in deed,
in force and violence is no religion, as has amply been discoursed: it is but
a most damnable pretense. Return then quickly out of this evil way that
leads to perdition. Judge not the controversies of religion, but with and
after the word, all things being faithfully, lawfully and surely handled and
debated. Let not man, covetousness, enure and ambition overrule any more in
such affairs. Let not th'abominable pretense of the League arm you any more
against your humblest and faithfullest subjects, against the Princes of your
blood, to the loss of your salvation and honor, and to the subuersio^ of this
realm. Have some pity (Sir) of your soul: for God is highly displeased at
such pursuits full of miustice and impiety. Have pity of your honor and of the
honor of your Counselors, of your Lieutenants and Magistrates that depends
on yours. Take heed, that it be not spoken of you, now and so long as the world
shall endure, that you are and have been one of the persecutors of Gods Church!
what dishonor shall it bring to you and your memory when Historians shall
reckon you in the same Role with Herod. Nero, Caracalla, Maximus, Dioclesian,
and other persecutors of the Gospel? Take heed also, least it be said of you,
that you have corrupted the laws of France; that you defacefro^ among
Frenchmen the name of Frenchmen; that you have overthrown and trampled under
feet the liberty and honor of this Realm, that you have brought it to utter
ruin; that ye have given it in pray, first to civil wars, after to the
tyranny of strangers. Sir, take compassion and pity on your poor people; they
can do no more: Ieaue of to torment them, and your self also, at the pleasure
of strangers enemies of your quiet and your peoples. What injury have your
Princes and your cousins done you, that you are so moved against them, saving
that they stepped back like faithful vassals, when you would have smitten
them at the instigation of strangers? they have in as modest manner as natural
defense would permit them put of the blows of your armies guided and set on by
strangers their enemies, and (to say the truth) yours also, though they were
infinitely vexed in their persons, possessions and goods under the authority
or rather abuse of your name: they have left of arms forthwith even when you
commanded them: they have gone toward you and retired from you even when it
pleased your Majesty. Behold the only occasions that you have to wish them
evil. And yet you are told that they disturb your quiet, and your Realms.
Let deeds and not words witness the truth therein. Judge you who be
th'auctors of the civil wars: whether they, that after sundry excuses, by
force and constrainct take arms, only for defense of their persons, goods, and
liberty of their consciences; or cls they that take arms for to break and
disanull your Edicts, your faith and the faith public given by oath, to give
onset to your Crown, upon the Princes of your blood, to come nigh to it by
their recoylings, to mount up to it by their abbasings, to get into their hands
the rights of your Princes, to fatte^ themselves with the blood of your people:
that know they have no other way to grow great, nor mean to maintain their
new increases of greatness, to diue into your treasures and revenues, then by
war, and during war. Consider also, that the Princes, whom you pursue, are
most worthy to be auowed of you for kinsime^, to be named your successors,
until it shall please God to give you a son to be your successor. Look on
the other side how the Leagued dispoile your self of the greatest part of your
rights, and of the honor belonging to your, so that (as seems) they lack
nothing but your name; how they have shared with you in your kingdom, usurping
all the power and honor, and leaving you the bare title: they presume within
your towns and over your Nobility with more soueraignety then your self; they
cause most preachers throughout France, and persons suborned in all assemblies
and meetings to publish their valor, their affection, their victories, which in
deed are yours and none of theirs. Reenter then, Sir, into the true
possession, liberty, and limits of your power. It is the honor of a Prince to
let limite his sovereign power by the word of God, and by reason, whatsoever
the flatterers of the Court, the corrupters of Kings and Princes, chat to the
contrary. But, command you that, which God and reason commands you. Fear
God, and let men fear you. Believe them not, nor fear them any more, that set
before your eyes the great intelligences and powers of the League: you know now
the weakness of the Leagued, the vanity of their promises, hopes and
threatenings by their acts and executions: their intelligences and forces are
assured in none, but in you. The Italian is too much divided; the Spaniard has
too much to do, for to enterprise against you: most of your Frenchmen favor
the^ not, but for their respect to your Name, which th'Edicts bear in their
forehead: revoke the^; return to th'obseruatio^ of your oths. Doubt not of
your subjects obedience; speak your will frankly, and see who dare disobey?
what if some storm and stir, whom fear, fury, and despair of pardon drive
on, who being unworthy will be as unwilling to make trial of your grace? let
the^ run on like mad beasts till they have gored themselves. The body of your
state will be the better, when a meany of such biles are launced. Only, give
peace to your self and your people: make account that none shall be able to
hinder so holy a purpose, and in so doing you ca^ not do amiss. Peace shall
further your zele toward the Church, and your affection toward your Subjects.
For in one year of peace, th'exercise of religion well and duly performed on
the one side and the other, shall bring again more souls to the right way, then
all the forces in the world may, that rather wast then weed the Lords field,
and confound rather then convert consciences. The word of God demands not
warlike arms, but willing ears to hear it, to prevail against the word of
me^. The ancient Christians of the primitive Church did not by arms hinder
the sacrificing and preaching in honor of Idols; but only required that
themselves might be permitted to speak also. And certainly, no man can oppose
himself more directly against the kingdom of God, or more openly destroy and
confound consciences, then if he trouble the Church of God with arms. For
during war, vice reigns, Gods word has no sound, is not heard, is not
received, is not kept. And so, you can not in better sort show your affection
toward your people, then in giving the^ a good and lasting peace: for without
it, all the directions and ordinances which you may make, can not stand. It is
impossible to stay the abuses, enterprises and violences of Governors; to
restore the Church and Justice; to order the officers; to pacify the Cities;
to relieve the people; and bring them to their duty again, during the war.
It is impossible for a king to be a good king, or for a subject to be a good
subject, during civil war. To be short, the Scripture teaches us, that
peace and rest are the foundation and assurance of the Church, of Justice, of
kings, and of subjects. I will say further, by your good leave, that civil
wars take away with them always some part of the Princes honor. Call to
remembrance the saying of the Emperor Martian; to wit, that it is not honest
nor honorable for a Prince to take arms; so long as he may live in tolerable
peace. Enjoy therefore your Realm peaceably. Toil not your self for that
thing which stands you in no stead, which tends not but to make you bury
your France with your conscience and honor. Leave to God the success of your
succession; it belongs to him: chiefly seeing that without drsturbance and
confusion of the Church, and without ruining your subjects and your Realm, you
can not perform that which the Leagued do propound you. Sir, pull down your
own will, and the counsels of men, to set up the will and commandments of
God; and God shall pull down the will of your enemies, to set up your will.

Finally (my children) ye see how God condemns your actions, and fights
against them by all kind of calamities, with pestilences and other dease,
blind and strange diseases, unknown to your Physicians: by wars, fammes,
and ghastly fears, which stoop nor yield at all to your wisdom and travail:
God condemns your conspiracies by the wretchedness and vanity of their
effects, by the conspiracy of the air and seasons, which band themselves
against you, which mar themselves to mar you, which arm themselves to
execute on you the justice of Gods curses and vengeance. If you harden your
hearts against this speech which your sovereign God uses, if ye understand it
not; he will speak to you yet more aloude, more plainly more roughly. Be
converted then. Go (my children) crave mercy of the Lord, cry still to him
till he repair and set his Church for his praise in the land: yield your
selves guilty, and seek his face, till he come and make his mercy and
rightcousnes to rain on you, till he be the plague of the plague, the
destruction of the grave, the dearth of famine, and the sword of the sword.

FINIS.

