(...) ASSOCIATION OF THE PRINCES OF FRANCE, With the Protestations and
Declarations of their Allegiance to the KING.

Also A DISCOVRSE UPON THE SVRRENDRY OF THE SEALS INTO THE KINGS hands by M.
du VAIZ.

LONDON Printed for William Barret. 1617.

THE ASSOCIATION OF THE PRINCES OF FRANCE.
WE underwritten, weighing the miserable estate whereto this Kingdom is now
reduced, with the confusion which threatens an inevitable separation, and
justly dreading that the Enemies of the same, as well Domestique, as Strangers,
will make their use by preuayling through the ruin thereof, if good and speedy
order be not taken, have thought, that during the Kings minority, and the
keeping prisoner of the first Prince of the Blood, there was no remedy more
proper, to prevent, and stop so great an evil, then to unite our selves most
strictly together, under these Articles which follow.

FIRST, We protest to continue constant, and never to depart from that loyal
Obedience, and most humble Submission which we owe as true and natural
Subjects of this Crown, to the King our Prince and Sovereign Lord.

And because it is well known, that Strangers and such as favor them, have
seized on the sacred Person of the King, and on the whole Administration and
absolute Government of the Kingdom, which they do most unjustly usurp, and
exercise, with great Tyranny and Oppression, and do violently detayne the
Prince of Conde prisoner, for no offense or lawful cause, against the public
faith of the Treaty of Loudun, it is most apparent that they have no other
end, then to destroy the house of Bourbon, which now only remains of all the
Royal Houses, and do aim at the death of our Princes, and in it, the change
and subversion of the State: For these causes we do faithfully promise to
employ with one mind all our power, goods, and lives for the conservation
thereof, and to hinder the miserable effects of so pernicious dessignes; and to
take the public Authority from them who usurp the same, to restore the King
unto the dignity of his Crown, to keep and maintain it in all sincerity, and
integrity; to withdraw his Majesty from their wicked purposes, and to keep him
out of their hands; to set the Prince of Conde at liberty, to repair the wrong
done him, by punishing the Authors of this violence, to revoke all those
Offices and Dignities which have been bestowed since the withholding of them
from those to whom of right they belong: And to reduce the State into a due
form, to establish under the Sovereign Authority of the King, the lawful
Counsel of the Princes of his blood, of other Princes, and Officers of his
Crown, and of those ancient Counselors of State, who have gone through many
great and important charges, and such likewise as are descended from Noble
houses, and Families of great antiquity, who by natural affection and
particular interest do affect the preservation of the State, to whom during the
minority of our Kings, or by reason of their indisposition, the Administration,
Government, and Direction of public affairs ought to be referred, by the
ancient and fundamental Laws of the Kingdom, by which, both Women and
Strangers are debarred from it. And if it should so happen (from which GOD in
his mercy keep us) that the King should depart this life, we do by these
declare, that we acknowledge after his decease for our King and Sovereign
Lord, my Lord the Duke of Aniou, which is the true and lawful Heir and
Successor of this Crown, and during his minority, my Lord the Prince of Conde
to be lawful Regent and Guardian of the Kingdom, to whom as first Prince of the
blood this preeminence does belong, with the Council before mentioned for the
common direction and administration of the affairs of the Kingdom, and not to
suffer any other to be admitted unto the Regency, no not the Kings Mother, to
the prejudice of the Laws of this State. And if it should so happen that these
Usurpers, who are most expert in limitting the term of life, and in plotting
the death of those who serve for obstacles to their dessignes, and enterprises,
who ordinarily in such cases do use Knives, and Poison, to hasten their
Deuillish ends, should attempt (by these most detestable means) to take away
the Kings life, or the Prince of Conde's, we protest before the Almighty, both
to seek, and prosequute the just vengeance thereof, by all lawful means to
the uttermost of our powers, not only upon themselves who are the chief
Actors, but upon their Adherents also, domestique Servants, and Strangers, that
in their persons we may leave a memorable example unto succeeding ages, as well
of the fidelity and affection of true Subjects, as of the just punishment of so
abominable disloyalty and impiety.

And to this purpose we will employ both our Revenues, and Lives, even as long
as one drop of blood remains in our bodies, and will advise our posterity to
do the like after us. And that we may provide for such an accident, and for
the safety of the Kingdom against the plots of Strangers, and for the
Government, and Administration of the same; in case we want a Prince of the
blood, we will call a Parliament to be assembled in a free place, whither we
may have sure access, to the end we may proceed with that order which is
convenient and necessary.

We do faithfully promise to execute exactly, and observe inuiolably the Laws
of this Kingdom; and in particular the Treaty of Loudun, for the common good
of all the orders of the State, and for the security of all the good and
faithful Subjects of the King.

We will maintain, and continue the ancient Alliances, Treaties, and
Confederations, renewed by the deceased King, with foreign Princes,
Potentates, and Co^mon-wealths, Friends, Allies, and Confederates, who are in
the protection of the Crown, that we may reestablish in the conduct of the
affairs of State the ancient maxims of the late King, which he so happily
used during his reign, for the security of his State, and the public peace
of Christendom, the which many men have left since his death.

We do further promise, that we will oppose under the Kings authority, by all
means possible, and namely by our just Arms, and with the succors of all the
Allies, and Confederates of this Crown, all those who would hinder the effect
of this our Union, wherein we have no further end, then to preserve the Kings
Royal authority, and the dignity of his Crown, to establish his Scepter in his
hand, and in the hands of his lawful Successors; And to maintain under the
common liberty of Frenchmen, our Lives, Goods, Honors, and Dignities, against
the disloyalty, and perfidiousnesse of those who have conspired not only our
ruin, but the ruin of the Kings house, and of the whole Kingdom.

And that we may with the more security prosequute so laudable and necessary a
dessigne, for the common defense of the State, the observation of the public,
and private Laws thereof.

And for the destruction of those who are Enemies both to the King and
Kingdom, and by a firm connection entertayne a true and perpetual concord, and
live together as true members of one, and the same body, under the head which
shall be elected by us; and following the rules which by us hereafter shall be
made, we do all of us promise, and each of us give his hand one to other,
whereof God is a witness between us, to keep this Union faithfully, and to
perform all those things which shall thereon depend, by common counsel, and
agreement, and by a mutual correspondency, and communication, to maintain,
support, and succor each other, against all men.

And to this purpose, we do renounce all particular interests, respects,
dangers, and considerations, which may be propounded to us to the contrary,
that we may jointly hasten to assist him or them who shall be assaulted, or
encountered in hatred of the said Union, or in consequence thereof directly, or
indirectly, by what way, or by whomsoever, to do our parts, and faithfully to
contribute our defense in common, and of every of us in particular all the power
wherewith God shall enable us, without excuse, delays, or other shifts, and
not to leave the present Union and Association, nor lay aside our Arms, until
the things before mentioned be provided for, nor hearken unto any accord, or
treaty of peace, unless it be by common consent.

This Union and Association shall be both for us and our children, whom we
mean to be comprised herein, and unto whom, if any of us should chance to
depart this life, or that for any necessary cause he were allieged, to go out
of this Kingdom: We promise in this case to give the same succors and
assistance, as it already said.

And to avoid all divisions, and discontents which may happen amongst us for
any occasion whatsoever, we do submit our selves to the judgment of our
Associates, or to the greater part of them in an equal number: to whose
determination we will be liable to conform our selves, and not take pretext to
wax cold in that which concerns this Association. This present writing shall
be kept secret amongst us, and not manifested, unless at such time as by
common advice it shall be judged profitable.

And for conclusion, protesting before GOD to keep inuiolably the Articles
already set down, we beseech the same GOD to indue us with his grace, and to
be pleased to bless us in all our good intentions, to guide them and cause them
to succeed, to the establishment of the Crown, and the good, and conservation
of our Country.

A DISCOVRSE UPON THE SVRRENDRY OF THE SEALS INTO THE KINGS HANDS by M. du
Vaiz.
SIR, I willingly render into your hands, the charge which it pleased your
Majesty to honor me withal; and with the same countenance that I received
it without demanding, I redeliuer without any grief at all. The laws had
sufficiently instructed me, what obedience I owe to your Majesty; so that you
needed not send the Captains of your Guard with twenty Archers to fetch me.
Violence ought to be used but against such as resist, and not against me that
know how to obey my Prince, and have ever thought this honor rather to be an
heavy burden, then a Dignity, which nevertheless I did accept for the good of
your service, because every virtuous man does owe his care and time to the
public good, and it had been a shame to have refused to die with the Stern
in my hand, being able either to hinder, or at the least to keep off awhile
the storm that threatens us. God grant, Sir, that I be the Man that suffers
most by this disfavor, and that your Majesty and the State be least
interessed. I am not taken at unawares in this accident, having ever foreseen,
that as my best endeavors were still employed, to follow so near as possible I
could, the integrity and virtue of Monsieur de Villeroy, and the president
Monsieur Iaunin, so ought I also to expect a fortune like to theirs. Your
Majesty's commandment agrees in that with the choice my self should have
made, if I had been at mine own disposing; desiring, rather to be a companion
of their disgrace, if I may so term freedom from troublesome Employments,
then to be used in the government of the State, with those who now remain,
being subject in time, by conuersing with them, to have to touch of their bad
tincture, whose prosperity I envy not, nor the augmentation of their
authority, which is given unto them at my cost. For I have never been
accustomed, to give an account every morning by stealth, neither will I suffer
any man to prescribe me what I ought to do, if the good of the State and
reason do not advise me unto it. It is more honorable for me, then the sealing
of a bill of eight hundred thousand pounds, in this great penuriousnesse of the
Exchecquer, to furnish his turn that blusheth not at it: Nay, who besides
this, is not ashamed to demand the Duchy of Alancon for a pawn, which is the
portion of a son of France, and to pretend the office of Constable, which the
deceased King would expressly have suppressed, after the Death of the late
Monsieur de Montmorency. Believe not, Sir, that because I would not consent to
these things, I would oppose your Majesty's authority. I know, it has no
other limit then your own will. Yet you are obliged to govern your self
according to reason, and follow the counsel of those, that are entered into the
managing of the State, by the choice of the deceased King, as being more
capable to give it unto you then new-commers, drawn from the dregs of business
and of the people. This exchange which is made from us to them, is as Woolues
use sheep, when the Dogs are absent. Does not your Majesty perceive it?
dare you not remedy it for fear of disobedience? Sir, by nature you owe it to
them that preach it unto you, but they owe the same to you, both by divine and
humane Laws. When you show them the least obedience, they have given you but
too much example. Remember if you please, that you are past fifteen years of
age, and Kings are Majors at fourteen, Isaac did follow his father Abraham
willingly to be sacrificed, because he was not of years to fear any thing. I
believe, that had he been a perfect Man, and had foreseen the danger, he
would not have carried the wood on his shoulders. These are but deceitful
sacrifices, I pray God keep your Majesty in these occasions from the effect.
For when I see that the authority of the Court is made to move when they will,
that they create and dispose of the Officers of the Crown, and none seek to
hinder them; The Princes of the blood, some being imprisoned, and others
retired for the security of their persons; when I see that amongst the Lords
those that are showed but the shadow of some better fortune, lend their hands
to their own servitude. Those that have attained to any establishment in this
strangeness, do maintain it for fear to return to the misery of their
first condition; so that it seems, the people and Provinces do suffer
together in this exchange, by the example of the great Ones, seeing that the
help of Laws are unprofitable, all being in disorder, through bribes, through
violences, and through corruption. The Louure it self has taken a new face,
as the Officers have done. There is naught of the old Court remaining but the
walls, the use whereof is also changed, for they were wont to serve for the
assurance of Princes, but now they serve for their prison, and (it may be) for
yours, if I may freely say so. It is not without some plot, that they give you
when you go forth, a company of light-horse-men chosen by a suspect hand.
These are your Gards, after the manner of the Bastille: this distrust
counsels you sufficiently what you ought to do, and there needs no other
advice. They hiss at me, they mock me and my discourse: so was Cassandra
served in Homer, when she foretold the destruction of Troy. Sir, I have
nothing remaining to serve your Majesty but my tongue. If I were so happy as to
draw your Majesty out of the error wherein you are nourished, I would a
thousand times bless my disgrace, which had given me the boldness to speak
freely, yea in a time when words themselves are punished. The falsehood of the
Alcoran is no otherwise authorized, then because it is forbidden to be spoken
of on pain of death. Their usurpation upon your Majesty's authority has no
other footing, then the danger of telling you freely of it. Consider if you
please, Sir, that those who usurp this power over your Majesty, are of that
Country, where every one will Reign, neither is there any town on that side
the Alps that has not his Republique or petty king: And if your Majesty had
somewhat yearly looked into your History, you would have learned, that the
bloudiest Tragedies that ever have been in France, came from those parts, the
last furies are the subject of a little book that I published, of constancy
and the consolation of public calamities. I fear, that contrary to my
intent, it will be a work for your Reign, if God in his goodness have not mercy
upon us. Think not, Sir, that sorrow to see my self deprived of emploiments,
induced me to speak so boldly. If I had been grieved for it, it is like
married people, that weep when they must go from their parents power, to enter
into the equality of Marriage: nevertheless it is true, that owing my service
unto your Majesty, I should have received greater content to have employed it
in your Council of State then in your Parliament, where matters are of less
importance. For I suppose, that if the Carpenter who made the caruing work for
the Admiral, where Don John of Austria commanded at the Battle of Lepanto,
had known that it should have served for so important an occasion, whereon
depended the safety of the rest of Europe, he would have taken more delight in
making of it, then if it had been a Vessel ordained for comers.
Notwithstanding seeing your Majesty commands me to retire, in a good hour be
it. The lesser Stars are part of the perfection of the world, although they
do contribute less then does the Sun and Moon. In what condition soever I
live, I will always to the uttermost of my power, maintain the good of your
Majesty's service. But if there be any of those who are near you, that lament
my remove, for my sake: I will tell them freely, Weep for your Children of
Jerusalem, that for want of courage suffered your Master to be betrayed, and
not for me, that have not offended, unless, in being an honest Man. Wherefore
I take my leave of you, Sir, praying God that he will have pity of your
State, and care of your education.

A REMONSTRANCE OF THE PRINCES, TO THE FRENCH KING. Dated the Fourth of
FEBRVARY.
SIR,
YOur most Humble and most Faithful Subjects and Servants, the Dukes, Peers,
ancient Officers of your Crown, and principal Lords of your Kingdom; seeing
the dangers which inviron you, and the evils which threaten your State with an
inevitable subversion, if speedy order be not taken, and that they are denied
all access unto your Person, wherewith they might freely, and securely,
discover the causes, and propound the remedies thereof; do in all humility
beseech your Majesty to take in good part, this their most humble
Remonstrance, which cannot but well befit their mouths, sithence it does
testify nothing but fidelity and affection unto your service, to the
conservation of your Sacred Person, and the good of your States. And it is by
so much the more convenient, because they are thereunto obliged, both by Divine
and Humane Laws, by the Oath which they have taken, and the duty which they
owe unto your Crown. We are not ignorant, that the evil is disguised by those
who do it, and who labor by all possible means to cover it, as well as
commit it, still indeuouring to make those distasteful unto your Majesty, who
complain thereof. And the unhappiness of France is such, that they having all
the power of your Estate in their hands, they cause you to hold your
faithfullest servants for Enemies. But the violence of their Tyrannical
carriage is grown to that excess, that it cannot longer be endured; The
complaints of it are general; every one sees it, and feels the miserable
effects; And their Artifices can no longer hinder the cries, and public
grief from striking your Majesty's ears, and from moving your compassion to
relieve your People; and your justice against the Authors of so great
miseries; which every one knows, and openly detesteth; And by a common vow of
your faithful Subjects are destined to just punishment, according to their
demerits.

The insatiable ambition, and avarice, of the Marquess of Anchre, and his Wife
is the only cause of the evils we are sensible of; of the disorders we see, and
of that we fear most.

This is the ulcer which has festered, yea, spoiled the whole body of your
State. It is of him only that men do complain, and of the Ministers and
Executors of his violent and raging passions, and no other.

This is the complaint of the greatest part of your Subjects, who as yet have
true French hearts: who seeing themselves compassed about with fear and
apprehensions, and exposed to all manner of dangers, by the intestine
conspiracies which aim at the ruin of your State, do implore your Justice,
to protect them from the oppression and servitude, unto which those persons
would make them subject; and for to free your Crown from the many disasters,
which now increase to the overthrow of the same.

The remedy (SIR) is in your own hands, and in your power, which if you do not
make use of, the disease will shortly grow incurable: And therefore to shun
it, the cause must be taken away, which being known unto you, there needs
now no other thing then your word only; to give order that the Marquess of
Anchre, with his Wife and Adherents, be chased from your Sacred Person, and
from the Queen your Mother: And to give way unto Justice, that it may duly
punish them for those crimes whereof they are culpable touching your State.

Every man well knows what deceit he has used, since the death of the last
king of most happy memory, to draw unto himself th'entire and absolute
Administration of your Kingdom; to make himself Master of your Councels, of
your Treasure, of your Arms, and of your Fortresses, to dispose of your
public Offices, and Charges, your Favors, and Pardons; because he would be
the sole Judge of Honors, and Dignities, and dispose of the life and death of
your Subjects. The courses he has taken to banish the Princes of the Blood
from the Court, and to breed discord between them, are not unknown; and
likewise of the rest of the Princes, Officers of your Crown, and principal
Lords of the Kingdom: The practizes and corruptions which he has used to
weaken and depresse the authority of your Parliaments, and violently to choke
the lawful freedom of their Remoustrances, imprison your chief Officers, and
make a division through all the orders of your Kingdom; that he might have
the whole disposing of them, and reign alone within the State, as he does now
with an insupportable presumption and insolency, supposing that nothing can
resist his ambitious Dessignes, seeing that, through extreme wrong and
injustice, he has imprisoned the first Prince of your Blood; and by this
audacious Action violated the public faith of the Treaty of Loudun; upon the
observation of which did depend the repose and tranquillity of your State,
which he had rather plunge into the calamities of a War, then to have the
mask of your Royal Authority taken from him; whereof he makes his benefit,
and uses it as an Instrument, for the destruction of your most faithful
Subjects.

These things are so manifest, and his proiects and guile so plainly
discovered, that no doubt can be made hereof. And the strange proceedings, and
violence, which he uses every day under your Majesty's name, against the Duke
of Neuers, upon so notorious pretexts, and forged imputations, that even the
voice of the people serves for proof enough to refute them; do witness
sufficiently, that the conspiracy is general, against all the Princes and
Nobles of your Kingdom; who will not stoop to his tyranny, and can resist his
plots, which he continually puts in execution, thereby to subvert the State.

For what offense is the same Dukes, saving only, that he is a Prince of the
most renowned Houses of your Kingdoms, one that loves his Country, seeks the
peace of it, and who has always testified his zeal unto your service, and
acknowledges no other Authority lawful then your Majesty?

He complains of some injury done him by one of his Tenants; and that in
contempt of the dignity of his Office, he cannot freely exercise his charge in
his Government.

He has prosecuted an execution of some feodal rights within his own
possessions, by the ordinary means of Justice, as unwilling to lose that which
his Predecessors left him: Perceiving some secret enterprises, ready to be
executed upon his Houses, he provided, as indeed he ought, for the securing,
defense and keeping of them under your Authority, and for your service.

These lawful and necessary causes are wrested to his rebuke; nay, are imputed
to him as a heinous crime and Rebellion.

We have seen the Declaration that has bin published against him, under your
Majesty's name, and the reasonable conditions unto which he does submit
himself for his trial, and make his innocence appear, which being known
unto us, we most humbly beseech your Majesty to be pleased to protect the same,
and not to suffer it to be oppressed and viole^ced by the Marquess of Anchre,
whose outrages and offenses we can no longer dissemble, because our long
patience has not hitherto served for ought else, then for to render it more
audacious, and insolent; that we be no more vpbraided, that our affection is so
small unto your Majesty, that we are so ungrateful to our Country, so disloyal
and unprofitable unto our selves and to our Posterity, as to be silent, when we
behold the prodigious favor of this Stranger, trampling thus insolently on the
throat of your State, holding prisoner in his hands the first Prince of your
Blood, treading under foot both Laws and Magistrates, emptying your Coffers by
his profusions, consuming, your people with excessive charges, and causing your
Subjects to be trecherously murdered, without any punishment at all. And for
recompense of such treachery and disloyalty, conferring upon them the
Governments of your places; deposing and discharging the chief Officers of your
Councels and Parlements, bereauing them of those Titles and Honors, which their
Age, their Virtue, and their Deserts have purchased them; for to establish in
their places his creatures, who are persons altogether unworthy, and
unexperienced for the manageing of your State, being men borne in bondage, and
therefore enemies to all honest men, and most proper to execute his passions,
what detriment soever may ensue thereby to your service, holding nothing
unlawful which may advance his passionate dessignes.

This is that which has induced us, thus humbly to beseech your Majesty to
consider the miserable estate wherinto your Kingdom is now brought, and to
apply, by your Wisdom and Authority, the necessary remedy, which depends
upon your own will, and not to suffer either your name, or your Arms to be
employed to the effusion of your Subjects blood, and oppression of your
Domestical servants, for the maintaining of Strangers to their prejudice, but
to banish them for ever from you: and by the chastisement and due punishment of
the guilty, reestablish confidence and security in your Kingdom, repair the
public Faith, which has bin broken, and set the Prince of Conde at liberty.
And to the end that order may be taken by convenient means, against the
disorders of your State; to cause the Treaty of Loudun to be observed; call
again unto you, and into your Councels, the Princes of your Blood, with the
rest of the Princes, Dukes, Peers, and the ancient Officers of your Crown,
and Counselors of State, whom the deceased King used during his Reign, who
also by natural affection, and as being particularly interessed, as strictly
obliged to the conservation of your State. And then we shall have the
happiness to render you in all security, every (...) according to his Rank,
Dignity, and Place, that most humble service, and faithful obedience which
we owe you, and which whilst we live we will yield you, as being

Your most humble, most loyal, and most obedient Subjects and Servants,
Signed, Caesar de Vendosme. Henry de Lorraine, Duke of Mayenne. Henry de la
Tour, Duke of Bouillon.



