CHRIST JESUS Triumphant.

A fruitful Treatise, wherein is described the most glorious Triumph, and
Conquest of Christ Jesus our Savior, over Sin, Death, the Law, the strength
and Pride of Satan, and the World, withal other enemies whatsoever against
the poor Soul of Man:

Made too be read for spiritual comfort, by John Fox, and from Latin
translated intoo English by the Printer.

1. Cor. 15. Death where is thy styng? Hell where is thy victory? The styng of
Death is Sin, and the strength of Sin is the Law. But thanks be unto God
who has given us victory through our Lord Jesus Christ.

AT LONDON, Printed by John Day, and Richard his Son, dwelling at
Aldersgate. 1579.

Cum gratia and Privilegio, Regiae Majestatis.

CHRIST TRIUMPHANT.


Psalm. 91. Thou shall go upon the Lion and Adder: the young Lion, and the
Dragon shall thou tread under thy feet.
To the worshipful M. William Kyllegrewe Gentleman of her Majesty's privy
Chamber, Grace, and Peace in Christ Jesus.
WOrship full Sir, when I gladly remember, and with no small comfort report
your great goodness, and unfeigned favor toward me, but a stranger unto you,
and a cold seely suter in the Court: I ca^ not but be ashamed of my self, that
ability does not affourde my hand so much too requite, as my heart wills my
tongue too utter, how deep indetted I am unto you. But you did it of a good
deed, not for a good meed: and at the request of a Godly-man, in suit of an
honest cause.

Wherefore, considering that your due; and full reward is laid up until an
other day, in an other place, by an other man, of all fulness, and ability,
Christ Jesus, the high steward, and play master of all, I am to request your
worship till that time come, which I trust shall not be long, too accept my
good heart, which in all honest possible duty is and shall be yours bounden too
command. A small regard for such a desert, I confess, yet as kind and
dutiful a myte as the greatest valor of a farther sum. And since that the
most precious jewel in this world which Man can show or give too Man is
unfeigned Love, then truly the Love that creeps when it can not go is as well
too be accounted of, and esteemed as Love, nay perhaps the rather, then when it
caryeth a higher look, and a loftyer countenance. For, to say the truth
Benefits which are liberal for the gift, and grateful for the repay, are in
that respect said too be great or little, as the affection of the heart is great
or little.

This consideration therefore, as also your zeal in Religion, your love of
learning, your place under the Prince, and the occasion ministered by these
worthy, yet but worldly, Triumphs for the Princely entertaynment of most Noble
Casimirus, that famous soldier of Christ his Church, move me too offer unto
you, and in you, too all Godly hearted Courtiers what soever CHRIST JESUS
Triumphant: whose superexcellent works ouerreach all hand, heart, and thought.
What his entertaynement shall be I leave unto himself who must give the grace
too entertain him. What he has deserved at our hands, he presents
himself in this little Book too declare. What enemies, whose enemies, of what
power they be whom he has utterly subdued, and in whose cause, or too what
end, and for whose benefit he ventered the pykes so far too shead his
precious heart blood, albeit we have often heard, and therefore should well
know, yet since we as often forget, and therefore are still too learn, he
comes now intoo the Court too show, being the supreme defender, and most
mighty Champion of the Church, with greater majesty, and cause of Triumph,
than any Monarch or Potentate whatsoever. But how shall he be received? What
Royal preparation shallbe made for his joyful welcome. Run a good race for
sooth, not with armed horse, but with a prepared heart: and whether? Non ad
Pacis Aram, sed ad Pacis Anchoram, and Authorem, that is, not too the altar of
Peace, (as they did) but too the Author, and Anchor of perfect Peace, Christ
Jesus, himself: and let us fight a good fight, not with a reached out arm
but with the strong hand of Faith: herehence shall we purchase more glory in
his sight, and be farther in his remembrance, when we come intoo his
kingdom, than if we had atchiued ten thousand feats of arms.

But so it falls out, that we rather regard this outward show and glorious
world, than the spiritual, and invisible creature: and all of us, especially
Courtyers (with all modesty be it spoken, without all offense, and affection)
rather hunt or hawk after the favor of the Prince, than after the love of
God: thereby like foolish builders plantyng our Tabernacles on the sand,
neglectyng too follow our buildings on the steadfast rock. Herein as I would
gladly avoid all teastie, and froward misinterpretors, so am I openly, and
faithfully too protest that all Obedience, Honor, Triumph and Majesty, is
secondly too be given too our PRINCE, (whom GOD preserve) but especially too
Jesus Christ our full redeemer. Hereof this little Treatise made by that
excellent instrument of GODS Church in England M. Fox does put your worship
and all other Christian Courtyers in mind, and remembrance: which when I had
Translated, and Imprinted, no one came so readely too my mind (my Gracious
Prince, and right honorable Lord excepted) too whom I might dedicate, and
offer these my first fruits, as too your worships favor: which if it shall
accept of my good meaning, my meaning is too be as serviceable, as all honest
duty shall require. Thus fare your worship well in Christ Jesus. Amen.

Your worshyps too command, Richard Day.

To the Christian Reader, comfort in Christ Jesu.
SUch is the force of flesh, Christian Reader, especially when the spirit does
make resista^ce, that what we would not, and should not, that Romans 7.
we do. A subtle, and most wily Serpent, who in security is well pleased to
be secure: and to them that sleep is also favorable too underlay a cushion.
Luke. 11.
But when the stronger-man Jesus Christ comes upon them both, and with Gods
finger awaketh the one, and dispossesseth the other, the^ he plays the old
Devil, and windyng his tale plumpe round, with greater force does hiss at,
leap at, and bruise the stronger-mans Gene. 3.
heel, because the stronger man brake his head.

And herein consider the wisdom of Gods spirit in these speeches of brusing
the heel, and breaking the head, as therein lively expressing the victory of
Jesus Christ, Satan's overthrow, and the special comfort of a mournyng
Conscience. For it was Satan's power (of God) too bruise Christ his heel, to
beat, buffet, hiss at, spit at, scourge, and persecute him in the flesh: too
shame him on the Cross, to goare his side, too pearce his head, heart, and
hands, too shead his blood: yet the same Jesus Christ Triumphantly rose again
with the same his flesh, ascended with the same: and with the same does there
remain at Gods right hand, Lord of Heaven, and Earth. In taking of which
bruised heel, albeit he sometimes fainted in the infirmity of the flesh: and
as it were calling his foot back again at the first touch or step, because
of the sharp sting which he felt (for his own reverence cried at the
entrance of his Passion, saying, Father if it be possible let this cup Math.
26.
pass) yet he willingly, for our only cause, and benefit, continued too be
bruised on the heel: manfully spoiled Luke. 11.
the enemy of his harness wherein he Psalm 91.
trusted: troad under the red Dragon: and finally brake and crushed his head,
that is, the rigor of the Law, the strength of Sin, and the sting of Death.

In the same case, and cause of quarrel, which he had with our Master he
laboreth to master us, using his force in, and upon our flesh, giving us often
in conflict a foil, or a fall: but it is the fall of the flesh, not of the
spirit: of the body, not of the soul: of Adam the old, and out ward man, not
of Christ the inward, and the new. For the same heel, or flesh bruised by the
fall, through the Law in it self (the corruption that yet remains even in
the elect) Romans 7.
rebelling against the Law of our mind, albeit it hold us Captive, and make us
as dead through trespass (sor it stands not with the riches of Gods mercy,
and grace, neither with the kyndnesse which he showed unto us in Christ Jesus,
that we should be perfect in this flesh) yet it has no dominion, it
quickens, and rises again, and is Ephesians 2.
made too sit in heavenly places.

Where note (Christian Reader) that the Holy Ghost says, it is made to sit, it
sets not it self. How then? or of whom comes the healing of this bruise?
the recovery of this fall? the delivery from this body of Death? and albeit our
enemies make often, and strong invasions, or incursions, yet whence is the
final victory? I thank my God, (says S. Paul) through Jesus Christ Romans 7.
our Lord. First he thanketh: a note of grace, and free gift, not of desert, or
duty. For, who gives an other thanks for that, which of necessity, and
desert is his own. Secondly he gives thanks to God, not to himself: and he
tha^keth not God, but in Christ Jesu our Lord. So that in our selves there is
nothing: in God the Father stands the gift: but Jesus Christ is all in all.
For God will not, neither can he be pleased, but only when Christ makes
intercession. Mark the course, and doctrine of the Scripture? It is God in
deed, who has raised us up together, and has made us sit together in the
heavenly places. But did he this for that we pleased him? or for that some
great Saint did make entreaty? no, he made us sit there (says the Text) in
Jesus Christ: in no other. And why so in Jesus Christ? Forsooth, that he might
show in ages too come the Ephe. 2.
exceedyng riches of his grace, through his kyndnesse toward us, in Christ
Jesus. So that his kyndnesse, grace, riches, and whatsoever his blessings which
we have, or shall have at his hands, it is only for his well-beloved Sons
sake: who only made us who were far of near unto his Father, and
reconciled us that were in hatred, and children of wrath by his Cross, and
precious blood. Without having him in thy mind, or heart it is an horrible and
fearful thing, but too think of God: A God of wrath and severe justice, but
only in his Son Christ, in whom he is well pleased.

Pleased he is, we all confess, and not only for original sin alone (as some
do affirm, thereby teaching, that what sin we commit after our baptism we
our selves, or the priest for us, having his hyer, must redeem, and not
Christ) but also for all other Sin in course of life committed. For, by grace
are we saved (says the text, not washed) and that through Faith. Which Faith
comes not by often workyng well (for the^ we might well argue that we are
saved by works, when we are saved by Faith which is the fruit of our
works) but it is the gift of God (says the Scripture in the same place) and
not of our works. And why? least any man should boast of himself. For thy
works therefore, and for thy Faith, thank God, and thank God through Jesus
Christ. He only is that good, and pitiful Samaritane, who, when we have taken
the foil, or the fall, being sore wounded in this conflict of the flesh, and
Spirit, and so cast as forlorn too the hedge, does wash, and heal our sores,
and wounds with his most pure, and blessed oil, his sweet heart blood, paying
the uttermost farthyng of our debt: too him be all honor, glory, and triu^ph
for ever. Amen.

Of this I thought good too admonish thee, Christian Reader, desirous with thee
to rejoice at the wo^ derfull works of mercy wrought by this our great
Champion Jesus Christ whose victory is our victory: and though we sin of
infirmity yet he is perfect. Read, and accept this comfortable Treatise which
I have translated: therein shall thou find faithfully set before thine eyes
what Christ has done for us in his Passion, and what he requires of us again
for being made partakers of the fruits of his Passion. The same Lord Jesus
Christ bless thy body, and soul to life everlasting. Amen. In whom I most
heartily bid, and wish thee too farewell.

Richard Day.
CHRIST JESUS TRIUMPHANT.
SO often as, inwardly in spirit, The Triumph of Christ notably appears in
Man's misery.
I behold the transitory, and frail estate of our mortal Nature, thoroughly
vexed with infinite miseries, perils, injuries, and lamentations, so that
nothing we have of sure account, nothing free, but all subject too the
servitude, tyranny, and slavery of most raging enemies: it seems too me
almost unspeakable, how deep indetted we are too CHRIST JESUS, our Savior,
and Triumpher most victorious. Untoo whom when of bounden duty, we have given
all that is ours, and our selves wholly, and more then wholly: yet in no respect
are we aunswerable to his wonderful deserts: so far do those things, which
this our heavenly Champio^ has compassed, and performed for our cause,
surpass, not only our strength, and Nature, but also all conceit of heart, and
thought: the great riches whereof welnere exceed all credit, and belief.

If so be therefore, we, commanly, and very much, esteem of the worthy
exploits atchiued by renowned Captains of this world: if with so great joy,
and desire we hunger after them, being Printed in Books, graven in Tables,
painted on walls, or set forth, and represented on a stage: if we greedely
harken after them, and wonder at them: if we give all triumph, all pomp,
honor, and praise unto them: how then ought we be affected toward this our
heavenly Conqueror, whose worthy acts, and most wonderful stratagemes do with
such infinite brightness darken all glory, and so far exceed the Nature of
humane things, that Heaven is not farther distant from the Earth, shadows do
not more differ from the things themselves, nor that which is Counterfaict
from that which is True?

But so it falls out, that as the commodity of the other, even so the
Majesty and incredible Benefits of this our heavenly Prince are not so hyghly
esteemed of us, unless we first perfectly know, and feel the force of those our
enemies whom he has subdued, or the depth of those dangers from which we have
been, and are daily delivered. Wherefore I am to request all godly, and true
hearted Christians to give dilligent heed, and attentive ear, whilst I shall
both plainly, and truly set before their eyes the most lamentable estate of our
wretched Nature, and the exceedyng might, and malice of our most cruel
enemies. So will it come to pass, that we shall more worthily account of, and
more joyfully acknowledge the victorious power of CHRIST in workyng our
salvation.

And that I may pass over with silence Consideration of Ma^s misery.
those lighter fleabitynges (in respect) I mean the common kind of greuances
(yet full of misery, and sorrow) which so^dry ways befall us in this life:
that also I may omit the inward gronings of the heart, and secret vexation of
thoughts, and temptations wherewith every one for the most part is inwardly
tormented, in himself (for who has not some one or other familiar Satan
attendyng at his heels) that I may let these things pass, the several
discourse whereof would require whole volumes long, and tedious, look upon
those common, and public Evils equally, and indifferently betyding to us all?
how miserable do they make this life, or rather to be no life at all? to be
touched therewith we count it much, yet they oppress us: but to be oppressed
by the^ we make a wonder, yet most wonderfully, and utterly we are thereby
consumed.

AND first to begin with the least, The invincible power of Death.
and lightest of these Evils, consider with me the invincible Tyranny of Death
daily raunging, and raging, in this world: the power, and force whereof not all
the Monarchs of the earth could once withstand: Not that great King of
Macedon, whose aspiryng heart the Conquest of one whole world could not content,
was at any time able too cope with her: Not Hercules strength, albeit the bane
of most ugly Monsters, was ever hable so much as too wound this biting Serpent:
Not that Persian Xerxes, even he that threatened fludds, and mountains, could
once amaze her, with all his armed troops: Not Marius the renowned, or the
more renowned Pompey: Not hauty Caesar: Not the most hearty, and valiant Roman
Soldiers, who limyted their Empire with the bounds, and borders of the earth,
bringyng all Nations intoo subjection were at any time able too cast of the
yoke of her subjection. How many ages of this world has this tyrannical fury
ryoted up and down, yet no mortal wight hitherto found, once able too delay,
much less too delude, and so escape her deadly invasion? Not the dreadful
Majesty of King or Keisar could at any time have her at beck or check: No
conueyaunce or deceitful drift in Law could circumuent her: No worldly Wealth
could brybe her: no reaching head, or high look of Philosophers could teach her
a trick of new devise in Schole: No painted speech of Rhetorique could
qualify her rage: No subtle Sophister could give her the shift: No brag of
Stoicall Liberty could ever shake of her seruil yoke: No Pharasaicall Holiness:
No Religion of Bishops: No Monkishe Austeritie: No Prayers of Priests could
entreat her: No Citizens Policy: No Handycrafts Labor, could banish her of
House or Town: Finally No Strength of Nature, No Reason of Man could at any
time resist, and give her the foil.

What Man, says the Prophet, lives, Psalm. 88.
and shall not taste of DEATH. For she, tyrannically sparing no one, inuadeth
all Estates, all sexes, and Ages of Men: she assaulteth as well Princes Towers,
as Poor Men's Cotages: she separateth Wife, and Husband: dissolueth Friendship:
and, which is most lamentable, violently snatcheth the tender sucklyng, from
the Mothers teat. o, most pitiful, and plentiful are the tears,
lamentations, and harthreakynges which hereof have, and daily do proceed. After
this manner, that seely Mother, in the Luke. 7.
Gospel, followyng her only son to burial, how thinck you did she lament,
and wring her hands? but the LORD, most happily meetyng her on the way,
restored her son to life again. So Lazarus of his two sisters: so Dorcas
John. 11.
(in the Acts) is of many lamented. Acts. 9.
These only I touch by the way, for examples sake, well knowing that no
house, or famelie whatsoever, but some time or other has like chances, and
cause of woe.

Now, if we were so clear of eye, as wherewith we might pearce the heart, and
bowels of the Earth, therein taking vewe, and tale of the infinite number of
all those, whom DEATH, since the creation of the world, has swallowed up:
good God, what a wonderful slaughter of dead Men, what outrageous tyranny of
devouring DEATH should we not only comprehend with inward mind, but also
behold with outward eye. For the infinite, and vnscrutable number of Men
living at this present hour, what are they in respect of those, who, so many
years since, taken way by DEATH, dwell, as the Poet says, and rot in grave.
Howbeit, such eyesight had that most wise Prophet, who by commission did
proclayme, that, All flesh is grass, and the glory thereof, as Es. y 40.
the flower of the field. And what then shall it avail any one in what
delights, pleasures, power, glory, wisdom, learning, counsel, honor, and
pomp he live, and florishe, when he shallbe perforce deprived, not only of
those things but of life it self, as also of light, air, and body. For, as
the wise Preacher does witness, The Wiseman as well as the Eccles. 3.
Fool, the learned as the unlearned, the rich as well as the poor, the Prince
and Paifant, all a like. There is no difference, no respect or regard of
Persons, one or other. DEATH meets with all, alike, equally strikyng all
mortal creatures. For all man are borne on this condition, to dye, some
sooner, some later: and though some one Man's life last to extreme Old Age,
which now is very seldom seen, yet that hinders not a whit, but that the old
Proverb may still be true as steel, A Man, a Bubble.

And here, first, does the TRIUMPH DEATH overcome.
of CHRIST, our LORD open, and show it self in our infirmity, by infinite
degrees surpassing whatsoever Triumphs, or stratagemes any where are, or at
any time have been under Heaven: not only, in that he alone of all Men, even
in that respect that he is Man, is now, contrary to Man's Nature, and condition,
become immortal: but in this also, that by restoring us miserable, and mortal
Men, from the bondage of DEATH to immortality, translateth us from a wretched,
and frail estate of life, to eternal bliss of salvation, there making us
coheires with him, and free Citizens of his glorious kingdom. The Victory, and
Triumph of Christ.
What thing in all the world, was ever comparable to this VICTORY? Take good,
and steadfast view of all, whatsoever is on Earth: what can there be of more
glory, soueraignetie, and wonderful pomp, I will not say be found, but either
desired, or once thought of, and conceived, than this most famous, and
superexcellent TRIUMPH? Shall not, here all the Princes, and Potentates of the
Earth abate their courage, and go back a foot: nay rather be as contemptible
and seely creeping worms, in comparison of this most heavenly, and Triumphant
CONQUEROR?

For, if we give such glory to earthly Princes, for their magnificence, and
bou^tifull hand open to all their subjects, throughout their whole Dominions
(albeit large, and wide) they themselves notwithstanding feeling no scant or
want: what eternal praise ought we the^, trow ye, give, and yield to this our
Triumphant MONARCH, and PRINCE of all PRINCES? whose kingdom first, being so
ample, and large, as not limited with the ends of ye whole world, nor coasts
of the Ocean Sea, but reaches into Heaven it self, even to the very Tribunal
seat of God, according to that Prophetical Psalm of David: And he shall rule
from Sea, to Sea: from Psalm. 71.
the fluddes, even to the outmost borders of the Earth: and in another place,
Ask Psalm. 2.
of me, and I will give thee the Heathen, for thine inheritance, and the
bounds of the Earth, for thy possession: Also we hear it said of CHRIST
himself: All Math. 28.
power is given to me in Heaven, and in Earth: innumerable are the testimonies
hereof, but these suffice to touch the matter. Now, concerning his Benefits,
as they be of their own Nature most excellent, so they are common to all,
appertaining The Benefits of Christ how great they be, and how common to all.
to all alike, and so appertaining, that no Man can be destitute of them,
without great misery: no Man again enjoy them, without salvation, and
perfectfelicitie.

And whereas the riches, and benefits of other Kings, are either consumed by
too large giving, or not bestowed on every one, or if so be they be very free
of gift, yet not too all, but too such as stand in need: the case falls out
far otherwise with this our PRINCE, whose eternal gifts and benefits, beside
that they never decrease, but rather increase, are also of such kind, and
sort, that as well mighty Monarchs as seely Beggars, the Wise-Ma^ as the Fool,
the Learned as the Unlearned, the Jewe as well as the Grecian, the Man as well as
the Woman, the Master as well as the Servant, Olde-Men as well as Children:
Finally, that I may not run through every several calling, all men, of all
estates, stand in need of him: with him there is no difference of degree, no
one better tha^ another, and no respect of Persons. All, whosoever, as many of
us as are Men, are after one, and like manner, beggars at this PRINCES gate.
Whereas he, in the mean time, fully rich in his own abundance, needs no
man's help, or aid at any time: nether could it avail him one hair, to have
all the Princes treasures of the world gathered on a heap, how huge soever it
were. For, what can thou give unto him, who only gives all things, and
has under his power, whatsoever is any where, in Heaven or Earth?

These things being thus, what The preposterous study and vain carking care
of men.
blind fury and mischeuous plague possesses Christian hearts, that they should
so greedely hunt after the favor of Earthly Princes, whereas, in the mean
while, either few do think of, or not very many care for the sovereign
favor of this eternal MONARCH? The labor, disposition, and corrupted
affections of Christians, in these days, witness the same. I speak not of all
Christians, yet I wish that my complaint took not hold upon so many: neither
do I herein touch all, toyntly, one with another, no not the wicked
themselves, but only for admonitions sake. For, as the course of the world
goes now, what Prince this day living, so simple, on the earth, whose
authority is not more regarded of his subjects, whose displeasure is not more
feared, whose benefits are not more earnestly desired, and esteemed, whose
will is not more speedely dispatched, whom we do not more faithfully serve,
than this our LORD, the only sovereign PRINCE of all power? Go too
Worldlyng: when the bountifulnes of thy Prince has enriched thee, even as much,
as Man may be of Man, and thou gotten into thy hands that, for which thou have
many years with great flattery hauked after, yet what have thou gotten?
perhaps a rich farm near the City, or thy barnes are better stored with
grain, or thy Powches close couched with golden Angels: and perhaps too, if it
take thee in the head, thou buildest stately and magnificall Palaces, purchased
high style, and title, authority, rule, and government, with all other
things appertaining to the show of the world: and do thou make so much
account of these trifles, that by and by thou weenest to have reached to
perfect bliss, and so to shoue nearer to Heaven gates? First, I omit here to
dispute of the uncertain The uncertain favor of Princes.
favor of Princes, and interchaungeable course of fortune, which ebbyng, and
flowyng, in shorter time, and more speedy recourse than any Sea, as she never
continues long, with the same Men after one sort: even so the sooner, and the
greater things she gives, the sooner and greater things she takes away
again. But, put the case that all is cock sure in good estate, and be it,
that to be certainly thine, contrary to that saying of Mimus, which Fortune
has made thine, when thy recknyng is made, what great commodity, I pray thee,
do thy great riches, so greatly desired bring unto thee?

I know what thy secret thought does The great felicity of this world is but
vanity.
murmur hereat: forsooth, That by this means, which I seem so to mislike,
thy Body is well provided for, and fares well. Be it so, I confess. But, in
the mean time, what, I pray thee, is become of thy miserable, and wretched
soul? thy Belly is glutted with delicates, thy ears full of Music, thou
flowest in wealth, thou excellest in authority, florishest in honor, and
dignity, aboundest with friends, thy privy chamber adorned with gold, and
precious stone, thou art guarded with routtes of seruingmen, honored of poor
suitors, and clyentes, finally thou art had in admiration, and reverence in the
face of the world. But in the mean time, what is done within in thine inward
world? how do thou there agree with thy KING? let us see? Forsooth, thou
beholding all things, only with thy outward eyes, art so ravished therewith,
that to thy thinking, nothing is worthy admiration but this world, nothing
else that does greatly appertain unto Man. ^, how far wide art thou, and how
greatly deceived? But open, I pray thee, the secret, and inward eyes of the
heart, then shall thou well understand, that there is a far other world than
this, where far greater riches, and richer treasures are found of them, who
seriously, and heartily travail to seek them out. And think not here, that I
send thee into some fiery, and Cristall Heaven, whereby thou might allege
agayust me, that saying out of Moses, Who is he, that Deuteronomy. 30.
shall ascend into Heaven? or that shall descend into Hell? no, I will bring
thee into an other place, even into thy self: thou shall need no long voyage,
or Ulisses travails: only consider, with good aduisement, those things that
are within thee, so shall thou easily perceive that thou daily cariest a world
about thee, in thy Heart.

For, what is Man else than a certain Man, a little world.
world? in respect of his bigness, small, but if thou regard his marvelous
workmanship, valor, personage, and Two sorts of Worlds compared together.
the image of GOD, according whereunto he was made, he is, in many respects, of
greater estimation, and excellency, than this visible world, the most precious
things whereof are but trifles, too the surpassing dignity of ye other which
is invisible. Will thou have a sight of the wonderful workmanship and riches
of this thy invisible world? The beholding of this Sun, this light, this
life, does, I know, greatly please thine eyes, but how much superexcellent is
the sun within thy body, the sincere Eye of the Mind, illuminated with the
light of JESUS CHRIST, the brightness whereof clears, and cheareth the whole
mind of Man? Glytering gold, plenty of silver, great lands, and rich
possessions delight thee, but how more brighter shines the most precious
pearl of a fervent Faith, sought in the fruitful, and most pleasant fields
of the Evangelists, which when thou have found, thou sellest all other things
setting them at naught, for desire of this?

The visible world has his Peace Worldly Wealth.
Tranquillity, and Liberty: neither does this world also want his Peace, and
Liberty, yea and it so wants them not, that (if we can distinguish truth
from falsehood) they are no where else to be found The peace of the world.
but here. Thou call that Peace, when there is no privy grudge, or malice
between thee, and thy neighbor: but how more excellent a Peace is a true heart,
a True Peace, what it is.
clear conscience before GOD, and a quiet mind being at unity with it self,
and with GOD? Moreover thou make much of Liberty which is but freedom from
the bondage of men, but rather esteem True, and false Liberty.
of that Liberty, when as neither the violence of DEATH, nor the power of
SIN, nor the tyranny of SATAN: when as neither the gates of HELL, nor the
frowardness of Fortune, nor the cruelty of Enemies: finally (that I may yet
speak more confidently in CHRIST) when as neither the very wrath, and curse of
GOD, nor the obligatorie sentence of the LAW, nor things to come, nor height,
nor depth, nor the whole Host of Heaven have any Law or power against thee.

But thou art a Courtier perhaps, The delight of Courtiers.
and thou can not be without company, or resort of men: thine old mates, and
fellows, sport, play, riot, idleness, and, by your leave, chambering is thy
repast: thou deemest it a Gentleman's life to spend whole days, and years in
dancing, drincking, dicing, hunting, in foolish pastimes, and more foolish
talk: and for such a yoncker as thou art to betake himself to Prayer, thou
take him for a doting, and frenzy fool. Thou think it an honorable thing
to be conuersaunt among great Personages, thou feedest thy fancy with an
Italian grace, with the Spanishe fashion, and the French courtesy, very
serviceable iu speech, a vostre commandment, Monsieur: then, if hapely it
chance that thou art in very good place about thy Prince, or wear his coat,
or be often in his presence, or if, by some means, thou creepest into his
favor, and art known of him, and spoken too, with affability, and receiuest
some commodity at his hands (for this is the end of Courtly Philosophers)
then thou persuadest thy self that thou art in most perfect, and blessed joy.
To be short, discover this thy whole world unto us, (...) an Anathomy thereof,
open all the veins of all the vain pleasures, and delights thereof, paint
them out to the purpose, amplify them as much as thou list, and imagine that
all the felicities of the world did light together upon one Polycrates,
namely, the favor of the Prince, the pleasures of the Court, Degrees of Honor,
Nobtlitie of birth, variety of delights, sumptuous buildings, friends, Gold,
Precions stones, farms, Clients, the favor of the Cominaltie, the
contemplation of this visible light, gaming, mirth, victories, Triumphs, or
whatsoever else of like kind of trash.

Let us now lay together, and compare A Comparison of out ward good things,
with inward.
the benefits of the invisible world, which make thy soul within thee most
happy, and blessed. And that I may begin with that, which is most worthily of
greatest estimation, namely, the Favor of GOD, the sovereign PRINCE of all
Princes, let us call to mind the singular Graces, springing, and Proceedyng
hereof: as, a good Conscience, Peace, Life, eternal Salvation, Joy, in the
HOLY GHOST, Patience of Mind against al Adversity, Victory over Death
Remission of SIN, Faith the subuerter of SATAN'S Kingdom, a Confident heart
void of all fear, Contempt of things present, Certainty of things to come,
the Riches of Virtue, and Wisdom more precious than all treasure, the
Repressing of immoderat Affections, diuerses signs, and Tokens of GODS
SPIRIT, the Light of Reason like unto the Sun, whose excaedyng bright beams
shine through the whole world: add hereunto also the gifts of Learning, and
Knowledge, and Tounges, fixed in this World as certain Stars: to conclude,
you can see nothing almost, in all this world outwardly, the like whereof is
not done in that inward world, spiritually: yet more effectually: so that this
world may be well termed no other than a shadow, or dead Image of a Man, as Man
is the lively Image of GOD. Finally, since that this outward world seems to be
ordained of God, only to the use of outward things, and the other to
blessedness, and felicity, truly they which gape after far greater abundance
than is sufficient, and necessary for sustenaunce of their life, being
seduced, and bewitched with a preposterous error, and false opinion, do hunt
after, and find shadows for true things, transitorte wealth for euerla sting
joy, and heap up coals in stead of rich treasure. For true Happiness is no The
vain felicity of this world.
where to be found but in that Celestial world of the mind, which not Caesar
though he were thrice Augustus, or more then a Pote^tate, nor all the Kings,
and Princes of the Earth are able too give thee: as they are not able to take
it from thee: it proceeds only from this one PRINCE, and LORD of all, CHRIST
JESUS, the eternal Son of GOD.

Go foreward now, and embrace this present world which thou have in such
great admiration, and addict thy self as much as thou list so the service of
temporal Princes. I know that Christian Religion, and true Discipline does The
Glory of Christ does not take from Earthly Princes their due Honor.
give unto Princes their due honor, and obedience: neither do I envy, or
grutch thereat, nay, rather I wish the greater increase thereof, so that it be
just, lawful, and right. No man more truly honoreth Superior Powers, than he
which does honor them in the LORD. But if the divine Law of GOD, by authority
admit so much reverence, and worship to be given to the Pote^tates of this
tra^sitory world, what than is meet, that we yield unto him, who so far
surmounteth, and obscureth the Majesty, and Grace of most mighty Monarchs,
that they are no otherwise to be counted happy, but so far forth as they
truly fear, and serve him:

We have now made manifest unto you, that all the tyranny of DEATH is
extinguished, and we delivered from the servile yoke thereof, by the means,
and conquest of this our Triumphant PRINCE. When I say DEATH, I understand also
thereby the whole army or violence of mischiefs, which any ways annoy our
life, both those which were the cause of DEATH, and thofe also that accompany,
and follow it. For DEATH of it self is nothing else, but The Law abrogated by
Christ. Romans 6.
the punishment, and wages for SIN, (according to Paul's saying) even as the
strength of SIN is the law. For where no Law is, there is no Transgression:
but where there is Transgression, there the wrath of GOD is revealed, from Romans
1.
Heaven, against all ungodliness of me^, which withhold the truth in
unrighteousness. And to this wrath we were all sometime subject, Ephesians 2.
being dead in Sin and serving Satan the Prince of this world, under whose
king dome we were all wretched, and miserable. For what greater thrall, or
more extreme misery could there happen, tha^ that SATAN, troubling, and
disturbing all things as he listed, should bear all the sway, and alone usurp
the kingdom, being not co^querable by any force of Nature, or power of Prince?
All things being thus in a desperate case, the more glorious did the power of
this our graund Cha^pion appear, who with a marvelous victory, and singular
overthrow, by suffering subdued the Enemy, and having vanquished the tyranny
of DEATH by Death, opened the everlasting gate of immortality too all that
would come, and enter therein. Wherefore he willing to communicate the fruit of
this his benefit with all, who draws all unto himself, cries in the
Gospel, saying, Come unto me, all ye that labor, Math. 11.
and are heavy laden, and I will refresh you. And as he does accept all sorts
of me^, in that he inuiteth, and allureth all: so he excepteth no kind of
burden, or grief, who promises that he will refreshe us in all, and
disburthen us of them all.

Go too therefore, good Brother in Christ, whosoever thou art that gronest
under any burden, acknowledge the voice of him that calls thee: and how much
the more thou art afflicted, so much the more boldly hasten unto him, who is
ready to help all, but especially he came to visit, and comfort the poor
afflicted. If the The wrath of God pacified.
Wrath of GOD terrify thee, thou have there an atonement, and Peacemaker, who
having slain Hatred by his cross, Satan spoiled.
and Passion, offers unto thee a sure sanctuary too flee unto. If his Law
touch or sting thee, or the feeling of thy SIN Collos. 2.
disquiet thee, he has taken away the hand writing of ordinances, that was
against us, and has spoiled the Principalities, and Powers, and has made a
show of them openly, and has triumphed over them in him self. Is the fear,
and horror of Death dreadful unto thee? DEATH has now lost his sting in him,
and does now fear thee more, then thou her. But perhaps, SATAN the worker of
all evil thoughts, and cogitations does not a little assault thee, tush, let
him rage, and raung as long as he list; how can he greatly hurt thee, when as
his Head being bruised and broken he can but hiss at thy heel. Peradventure
also thy Faith is shaken and tryde, or some other storm of Temptation coming
from some other where violently upon thee, does disturb the tranquillity of
thy mind: fight therefore, and put on the whole armor of Christian warfare: or
if the battle be over hot, and exceed thy strength, yet fall to Prayer: or
if thou can not pray, at the leastwise sigh and groan unto the LORD. The
inward sighing, and groaning of yt Heart, shooting up before ye LORD is a strong
and hearty prayer. Thou must strive, and labor too do what thou can, and art
able: but this which thou art able is not of such value of it self, as it is
esteemed of GOD, who both accepts and crowns in us the affection of a
willing heart, and ready mind, like as if it were an action, or deed.
Otherwise, that which the rigorous Justice of GOD does exact of us too our
salvation, and too the vanquishyng of these foresaid Enemies were exceedyng
great, too too far above thy strength, or reach: But yt which thou seely man
being borne of man wast not able to perform, yt a man, borne of GOD, the Son
of God, CHRIST JESUS has fully accomplished. He has fulfilled every jot of ye
Law thorough wonderful humility, and obedience: he has abated the pride of ye
world: opened the gates of heaven, which our sinful life had shut up:
dispossessed Satan of his The works of Christ Triu^phant.
kingdom: utterly weakened ye power of Death, and taken away the sting of
Sin, and torments of Hell. Finally, he performyng every point of perfect
righteousness, and being but one, answered that for all, which was required of
every one.

And beside that this heavenly Prince has wrought these, and so many
wonderful works, with incredible Triumph, which do amaze, and astonish even
Nature it self, it is also to be considered how much more famous, and
Triumphant he is, not only in that he had no fellow or mate to assiste him,
but in that whatsoever he took upon him, he The singular goodness of Christ
Triu^phant.
compassed it, and obtained the victory, not for himself, but for us only,
and our behalf. Wherein the Triumph of this our MONARCH seems far unlike
the victories of other Princes, not only in the excellency, and valor of the
things done, but also in the very manner of the doing. For, the victories of
earthly Potentates as they are always atchiued with cruelty and violence, so
are they oftentimes very injurious, but never without great danger, and much
manslaughter. Whereby it comes to pass that their Triumphs are nothing in
the end but a public pylage, and misery of the world, wherein while some do
laugh many weep, and howl, nether party deserving so to do, nether the
vanquisher nor the vanquished. Now, albeit that upon just cause the war was
taken in hand, it falls out notwithstanding in such Triumphs, I ca^ not tell
how, that the victory for the most part betideth unto him who did least of all
in battalle. For, albeit Princes be sometime present in the conflict, yet
surely they are farthest from peril, whose, notwithstanding, the victory is
said to be. Far otherwise stands the case between us, and our heavenly
Conqueror. For, they to whom the matter chiefly appertained, being free from
all danger and at ease, sat as idle lookers on an other man's labor, and pain.
He alone who deserved nothing abode all the peril. Who if he would have
voutchsaued, they also venteryng themselves to the battle, to have been but a
partaker only of their labor, or a Captain of their War, or any way but a
furtherer of the victory, it might have seemed a rare example in a Prince, and
a singular affection which he bare unto them. Yet he is not so contented: he
stands not in another man's cause or quarrel, only as on idle looker on
taking heed too himself that he be there where least danger is, no, no, he
himself alone ventreth the pykes, he treads the Wine press alone, and like
a most vigilant Captain, the rest sleeping soundly, puts himself alone in
danger, not for his friends only, but even for his bitter enemies: neither
does he win by fighting but by suffering: and so far he is from violence
and bloodshed, that not so much as a voice was heard in ye streets, showing
thereby to the world a most strange, and new kind of Conquest. Howsoever
worldlinges account of it, seem it never so blockish or doultish, yet if one
put up an injury received, and does not forthwith render like for like, or one
shrewd turn for an other, but commits the matter, and the revenge thereof
intoo the hands of GOD, he most truly may be termed a Conqueror. There is no
speedier, or more glorious a victory then Obedience wholly referring, and
framing it self to the will of the LORD.

There is yet another property in In the victory of Christ, what is to be
considered.
this heavenly Champion, not so much glorious for himself, as commodious, and
profitable for us all certes, far and wide differing from the example of our
common warriors. For, albeit they be sometime Conquerors, yet the victory
tarieth not with them long, but are them selves also at other times put too the
foil. Moreover, such is the Nature of those things which are won, that they
can be recovered again by the enemy, at one time or other. Finally, if there
be any danger in the battle, it is all laid upon the soldiers neck: if
there come any profit by the victory, it is not common, but if perhaps any
portion thereof be alloted to the many (which is very rare) though it come
hardly, and with grudgyng, yet it may be written, and scored upon ye wales for
very good luck. But the most happy, and blessed Champion, encountryng himself
alone with them who were much stronger then we, so joined incredible mercy,
and love with his force and power, in subduyng our enemies, that of the victory
he challenged nothing as due too him, but his sweating travail, and
unspeakable torments: the pyllage, spoil, booty, and all the cemmoditie
whatsoever, he would have wholly, and alone, and freely to redound to us.
Wherefore, when we have thoroughly pondered in mind, and heart, All the benefits
of Christ belong as well too us as too him.
all those things which CHRIST has brought to pass, in this most happy
battle, which truly are above all measure wonderful, let every one forthwith
thus persuade himself, that the excellency of this prowes, and glory of this
victory is not so much proper too him, as common too us with him. Finally let us
all think thus, that whatsoever was privately compassed by him, is a public
benefit for us all: and let us not so much look unto the glory and
magnificence of his deeds, as learn the use of them: for, in the former
consists the praise of CHRIST in the other our salvation.

And yet too say the truth, CHRIST is in nothing more duly or rightly praised,
than in the use of his benefits, when as we apply them too our selves, for
our special comfort, with thankesgeuyng: neither am I able to say, whether he
more desire to help thee, and do thee good, than for his goodness to be
praised: of this I am sure, that thou have more need of his help, than he of
thy praise.

You shall find many which count the Meditation of the cross of Christ.
highest, and chiefest point in Religion too be the often meditation, and
remembrance of CHRIST crucified for us, hanging on the cross, especially if
therwithall they with tears lament his pains, which he suffered, or with
detestation curse the Jews, that made him suffer. This their devout, and
religious affection is not to be misliked, or disalowed, which without doubt
is very godly. But as I deny not that a great part of Religion does consist
therein: so again we Christians must take careful heed that we rest not
here only, as in the chief ground of Religion: but rather take it as a step,
or degree too a farther matter, more properly belongyng to our salvation. For,
the Cross of CHRIST was not therefore erected that thou should be only a
beholder thereof, but rather a follower: not too give thee a show, but a
remedy, and a daily help for thy necessity. Thou beholdest Christ nailed too
the cross: why do thou not rather call too mind the cause, why this most
mild LAMB of GOD, did give himself too so great torments? why he rose
again? why he ascended up intoo Heaven, there reigning triumphantly at the
right hand of his father? which when thou shall find, and well understand
that they have been all done for thy sake, it shallbe thy duty on the
otherside too accustom thy self to the wise usage thereof, applying the same
too thine own private comfort, and commodity.

But thou will demand, How shall How we must take profit by the Passion and
victory of Christ.
I do this. I will tell thee: and our Lord JESUS CHRIST give thee his SPIRIT
of all comfort, and consolation, Amen. Tho Uhearest, and remembrest, that JESUS
CHRIST the son of GOD was crucified on the Cross for thy sake. Herein,
first, thou beholdest the exceeding love, and mercy of GOD toward thee:
secondly thou understand what a horrible thing SIN is in his sight,
whereof their could be no satisfaction made, but only by the wounds, and
blood of his only begotten son. Of which two, the former ought to inflame
thee with the love of GOD, the other too keep thee in his fear, and bridle
thee from custom of Sin. But if thou chance too fall intoo SIN, (as the
infirmity of man's flesh is very slyppery) wherein either ye Law accuses thee,
or the horror of DEATH casts thee down, or the examples of Scripture do
make thee tremble, or thy senses, and Cogitations of thy mind disquiet, and
trouble thee, or if SATAN stir all occasions of terrors against thee, as he
is always at hand too vex such as labor earnestly in holiness and Christian
Religion: Here thou have not only perpetual grace, and pardon purchased for
thee, but thou may also boldly, and gloriously triumph, and crow over Death,
the Law, SATAN, and thine own guilty CONSCIENCE. For, by what power, and
right these Evils are overcome in CHRIST, by the same thou may think they
are overcome in thee. But, when thou have pondered all other things in thy
mind, as deeply as may be, yet of all the uses, and benefits which we
gather, and enjoy by the mystery of CHRIST his Passion, and Triumph of
victory, this is the most ample and most excellent, namely, if thou so apply
too thy self all the deeds, virtue, and glory of CHRIST, as though thou being
wholly clothed with his righteousness did now as LORD of Heaven and Earth
reign, and triumph above with him, and in him for ever: and as he on the other
side, having changed persons with thee (for he bears the public Christ a
pu blique person.
person of us all) took upon himself the burden of thy sin, the wrath of
GOD, and the whole heap of misery. Whereupon arises immediately great
liberty of mind, freedom of conscience, courage, and boldness of heart,
likewise a certain majesty of spirit, not only despising earthly things,
and things under the earth, but also lifting it self higher then Heaven.
Finally there proceeds herehence everlasting comfort, and joy in GODS HOLY
SPIRIT, which the holy Prophets prophesied that he should Esaias 35.
light and come upon them, who were redeemed and converted to SYON.

Which Gifts seeing they be proper, and peculiar too Christians, and of such
valor that nothing can happen to Man more honorable, no not too the ANGELS of
GOD: I can not but much marvel how it should come to pass, that they are so
seldom seen, nay almost not at all, in the life and manners of Christians.
For, whereas you see some drowned in superstition, many as yet captive under
the old servitude, and bondage of the Law: and an infinite number of other
setting their whole hearts upon their abundance of worldly mucke: what one
almost can thou give me, who either inwardly inspireth, or outwardly
expresses this excellency of a Christian heart, and spiritual strength in
CHRIST, which before I spoke of. Hereof since there be many causes, the estate
of these our evil days and course of this time give me perhaps fit occasion
somewhat too touch them by the way.

The Cause therefore that we are so Why we are so strong in the world, and
faint in Christ.
strong in the world, and so faint hearted in CHRIST lies not in any defect of
the things themselves, (which as they are by Nature most ample, and abundant,
so are they most certain, and permanent) but in the natural corruption, and
imbecillitie of our flesh: so that the weak eye of our Faith, if it be not
lightened from Heaven with the sovereign light of Christ, is dazeled with the
brightness of the very things themselves, no otherwise tha^ as our bodily eyes
are dimmed at the beholding of the shining Sun.

Beside this natural dullness, and imbecillitie, there is another cause,
proceeding from the force and power of Satan, who never cease to assault us.
And partly our own slothful idleness is too too blame, when we do not
foster, and nourish whatsoever sparcle of Faith or good motion appears in us,
but, being tickled with the good success of things present, or having our
selves fastened upon other matters, or entangled with cares of this world,
withdraw our selves from cherishing that good motion, and neglect the riches of
the heavenly Kingdom. And what marueill is it than if CHRIST do not open and
show himself unto us, who so disdainfully neglect or reject his Kingdom. or
what cause have we too complain, if he imparte not his blessings unto us,
who make more account of this worldly Ma^mon? or if he send not his SPIRIT of
all comfort and consolation to cheer our hearts, who do more rejoice at this
transitory world? or if he satisfy them not that do not hunger and thirst?
or refresh not them that are not heavy laden or groan under any burden? The
Kingdom of GOD loves them who seek it, and those that are careful too
obtain it. They who are free Scholars, and followers of this world have at
their pleasure their customs, and commodities which they enjoy: but this our
King gives not his riches but to such as have need of them, and utterly
despising this wicked world follow the LAMB, with a cheareful courage whether
soever he go.

Neither ca^ I well let pass too speak of those who have Cure of souls, and
charge too minister the word of GOD unto the people. For, it lies on them
especially, whether the people be duly, and truly instructed in CHRIST, or not.
And aibeit I can give here no general precept which the Ministers of God might
use continually in instructyng such a multitude especially of so diverse
minds, fashions, and opinions (for, some live so, that you shall rot well know
or perceive whether they more neglect the Law, or the Gospel: whether they
reverence and fear GOD less or Man: whether they be Atheistes or Infidels.
Other some there be who giving themselves too all licentious and dissolute
living, savor as much of the sweet liberty of the Gospel, as swyne do of
sweet odours. Again, some there be of such a Conscience, that the Preaching of
the Law, and the lamentable voice of John, is not only unseasonable unto
them, but a sharp bitter bane, in stead of healthsome medicine:) Yet since that
CHRIST JESUS our LORD is the gift of his most tender and loving Father, shining
upon every one How the Gospel must be mi nistred.
indifferently good and bad, even as the Sun is common too us all: I think
it not meet or convenient that we should be more slow, or sparing in
dispensing or distributing this his benefit, than he was in bestowyng. If it
pleased the LORD GOD too show forth the exceedyng riches of his Grace, too
ransom us miserable captives from the bondage of the Law: too embrace us in
his arms: too call us too the common possession of Heaven, and all other his
blessings: if being called it pleased him too justify us: if being justified
too glorify us, of his own free love and mercy: certes, for us not too
acknowledge that which is offered is a point of great ignorance, not too take
it it were misery, but to detain, or grudge others that, which ought to be
most public and common, is either malicious unkindness, or plain theft,
especially in a Shepherd.

I deny not that the terrors, and threatninges The Law.
of the LAW have their place, especially in these corrupt, and wicked days:
but as they have their place, so also they have their bounds, and limits how
far they shall reach. For, great heed and care is too be taken of some (I
touch not all) least, whilst that the Princely Nation of CHRIST is kept under
the continual discipline of the LAW, it come too pass, in the mean time,
that it never learn too rise and aspire again too the end of the Law, which
is Christ, to the fulness of perfect Liberty, and too the exceeding joy which
the Gospel brings. Although perhaps not their order so much, as the corruption
of the people is here to be reproved: whose life and manners daily waxing worse
and worse are cause why they follow not some other kind of Method, and order
in instructing them. Notwithstanding whether that ought to be cause sufficient
to withdraw thee food of the Gospel, and continually too beat down the
hearers with the threats and curse of the Law, I leave it free for every man
to judge.

But in my opinion, they who are admitted The Gospel.
too the Ministry and function of the word of GOD ought to hold, and follow
that way of teaching, whereby CHRIST rather tha^ MOSES, may be imprinted in the
peoples hearts: and whereby the riches of Gods mercy may be so laid open before
their eyes, out of the wonderful treasures of CHRIST JESUS, as that like true
Christians they may at the last begin too know, and acknowledge their good
gifts, and blessings, and may rather of their own accord be allured too
godliness, through the singular commodities which they have received of the
LORD, tha^ with austeritie, will they nill they, too be terrified, and so
compelled. That which is well and orderly done, is then said so too be done,
and so likely too remain, when it proceeds of good will rather than of
constraint. For, whatsoever is of Compulsion, that can not be of long
Continuance. Neither surely can it be, but where CHRIST is rightly received,
and printed in the minds of the hearers, there also should accompany him all
kind of virtues, new affections, and a clean heart, and renewed spirit: so
that in my judgment there can be no way found more effectual too discipline,
and reformation of life, than for every man to acquaint his heart and mind with
JESUS CHRIST, and rightly too receive him. Contrariwise, where he is not, and
has not his abode, rippe up all the common places of Uice and Virtue, and lay
on lode with infinite labor, as long as heart can hold, it is all in vain.

I know there be some which will abuse the sovereign grace of the GOSPEL, too
the fulfilling of their fleshly, and carnal lust: even as the Sun shines
upon many perhaps unworthy thereof: neither was God himself ignorant long
before he gave, and bestowed the benefit, what would happen. Howbeit, as the
infinite number of the wicked did not stay his great mercy, and goodness: so
now his singular Benefit being already given, and received, I think it not
convenient, that for the abuse of some, they for whom CHRIST JESUS shed his
heart blood should be defrauded of their due, and only comfort. Nay, I will say
this moreover, (which also is the grave and excellent judgment of Martin
Luther, that most singular, Martin Luther his opinion concerning the
distributing and preaching of the Gospel.
and chosen instrument of setting forth the GOSPEL of JESUS CHRIST) If there
be but one Hearer in the whole multitude, who has need of cherishing, and the
comfort of the GOSPEL, even for that one man's sake that mylde, trumpet of the
GOSPEL ought to be sounded out of him that will wifely, and cunnyngly
discharge his function: after the example of the good Shepherd, who having
lost one little seely Sheep, left ninety, and nine, casting all his labor, and
care how too bring that lost one home again. For, the dispensation of those
things is not to be measured by the multitude, and number of Men, but by the
will of GOD, and by Necessity.

But when we have found out, and rekened up all the causes, and occasions why
the strength, and force of the GOSPEL is so fruitless in the hearts of
Christians, this is the most principal of all, (whereunto as too the chief all
the other have their full recourse,) for that commonly a certain Preacher is
absent, the most effectual Scholemaster too frame the Conscience a right, whom
I prefer before all other Teachers. I mean Trouble, and Affliction, which
only, as Affliction gives understanding.
it is in the Prophet Esaias, gives understanding. For, if it be not enough for
us that profess CHRIST his Philosophy, and Religion too have at our fingers
ends only, and in a quick readynesse the places, and chief sentences of holy
Scripture concerning God, his Justice, power, mightynesse, goodness, and his
Kingdom: or too be able too reason and discourse of them like Rhetoricia^s
with a goodly grace, and gravity, either Ex tempore and without premeditatio^,
or with art, and study, unless we be touched and affected inwardly with a
lively feelyng, or unless we have God breathyng in us, unless we inwardly
fear him in his Justice, quake at his power, and love him in his merciful
goodness, then truly that all these things might be done, nothing almost does
help but Affliction. For, how shall he fear God aright, who has never tried
the anger and wrath of God kindled against him? who never entering intoo the
battle of Christian warrefare has at any time proved either ye strength of
his adversary, or the greatness of Gods Justice, or his own weakness, and
infirmity? Or what occasion shall we have too feel, and taste Gods
goodness, when no Affliction does vex us, when no peril hangs over our
heads, from which his merciful goodness may deliver us? Otherwise we being
in good and perfect health, what need we the Physician? we being at hearts
ease, and in no danger, too what end should we crave and call for an Helper?
And therefore Why they who are best, are commonly most afflicted in this world.
(as far as I can see) this is the chief and especial cause, why God has
always trained up, and sharply scholed them whom he loved most dearly, with
many and troublesome dangers. For, otherwise such is our Nature, that as it
was said of the Phrygians in a Greek Proverb, that stripes strike wisdom
intoo them, even so the same may be verified upon us, who are never more holy,
then when we bear some grievous cross.

All Places are so freight, and full of Examples hereof, that we need not
fetch experimentes from far, or too allege the Commonwealth of the
ISRAELITES, The Chur che of the Israelites.
whose stife, and crooked neck would never yield too the Lords yoke, but when
some captivity or other did oppress the^. Ouely the CHURCH of ROME shall
serve us in stead of many: The Chur che of Rome.
which as long as she was under persecutyng Tyrants, and sharpened as it were
upon a grynding whetstone she was found, and truly called the only Nourse, or
Mysteries of all godlynes, and continency, in whom all the gifts of Christian
Religion, honest life did most abou^dau^tly excel, and most brightly shine.
But afterward, the case being quite altered, when in stead of danger,
vexation, and persecution, riches, power, pride, sumptuousnes, and all idleness
their companion came in place, and crept intoo the CHURCH: and when as Bishops
in stead of Martyrs began too be persecutors of Martyrs themselves: and the
strength, and force of the GOSPEL decayed, and weakened more, and more, intoo
what wickedness, and abomination that CHURCH did ru^ne and fall, let every
one consider, and judge within himself, I am not able sufficiently too
express it, according too the indignity, and haynousnesse thereof. These two
Examples might seem sufficient for my purpose, especially the matter being so
plain, and manifest. Howbeit this place does not permit me, (although
otherwise making have in the handlyng of my Argument) too let pass England, my
dear Country, so fitly offering it self unto me, too make mention thereof.
The Church of England.
Oflare days, under the blessed reign of Prince EDWARD, of most happy memory,
while for a time the Church had but breathed a little after the storms of
Persecution, too what wickedness it fell at the length I should be ashamed too
utter, but that the thing it self will speak. Afterward, that which the
continual, and incessant Sermons of the Preachers could not amend, that (as it
is well known) sharp and bitter persecution, yet profitable for the Church,
has brought too pass. For, so we are either framed of Nature, or formed, and
fashioned by educatio^, that except we be wakened, or shook by the ears, and
bitt with some adversity or other, we seldom, or never lift up our eyes too
the LORD: so necessary a thing is Affliction Affliction an wholesome medecin
in the Church.
in the CHURCH of GOD, being a most precious, and sovereign preservative
against the infection of all Evil whatsoever. As on the otherside prosperous
success, wealth, and security do loose the joints, and break the sinews
of all Virtue, especially of true, and pure Religion.

Go too, let us a while thoroughly view, as it were out of the espiall, and
watch tower of PLATO the affairs, either public of all, or private of some:
as in MONARCHS, and PRINCES an vnappesable hartburning, and unquenchable
thyrst to war: in Courtiers most dissembling flattery, and glosing speech,
like wind, and smoke: in Ecclesiastical Prelates as great aspyring ambition
to bear a Princely port, Prosperity without Affliction, how hurtful too the
Church.
as in any other: among Divines, and Scholemen obstinacy, and frowardness
altogether bent, and sworn to sects, and fashions, schisms, and contentions,
and no less rash and hasty in judgment, for very small, and light suspicions:
in the Laytie, and common People all kind of corruption: in Handy craftes-men
all manner of deceit: both in high, and low, rich and poor, an insatiable
desire of gain, and excessive care of this world: that I may in the mean time
conceal the grosser wickedness of the common sort, as whoredom,
Drunckennesse, Adultery, Perjury, Fraud, Robbery, Manslaughter, Sedition,
and such like. From whence I pray you comes this sincke of SIN but from our
great ease, and security, whereby no Affliction touches us, which might
bridle us a little, and keep us in the fear of GOD, and our own bounds?
Herehence it is that few of us are careful to reform our own manners, all
of us be either curious in markyng other men's faults, or sharp in rebukyng,
and correctyng them: One interprets that to be injuriously done, which
perhaps is his neighbors right: Nothing pleases this Man whatsoever an other
speaks or does: That Man makes of a moate a beam, of a Gnat an Elephant, if
he see a thing never so little awry in another, it is made a heinous matter by
and by: another Man, he cease not to carpe and bark at the good Name, and
fame of his brother in most reproachful and Tragical wise, and perhaps of a
party whom he never knew, sometimes undeserved, many times even of him that
has well deserved: Othersome prye, and spy, and harken after what is done
even at Cattaye, or the furthermost parts of the world, and is open eared too
all rumors on every side, nothing caryng in the mean season what is done
inwardly in his own secret closet of his breast, and heart.

But how much more meet, and worthy of our Christian profession had it been,
since every one has his Judge before whom he shall either fall, or stand, if
with fear, and tremblyng, according too Paul's counsel, every one took care
of his own salvation: so should he have no leisure either too mark other men's
Uices, or envy their Uertues. Then if any moate be in our Brothers eyes which
needs our help, we may so minister unto him, and use the matter, that he
may both see, and say he is dealt with of a desire too amend him, and not too
contend with him. For such mylde, meek, and merciful dealyng builds up, and
evifieth the Church of GOD. But I have too much forgot my self, who while I
study too keep other men within the bounds of their duty, scarce keepyng my
self within mine own compass, have strayed peradventure farther from my
matter than I should, or would.

That therefore I may return again The benefits of Christ toward us.
too speak of that from which I have somewhat degressed, thou see, Chri
stian Brother, what CHRIST JESUS has done, and performed for thy sake, who
having vanquished the Tyranny of DEATH, SATAN, and all malediction: who also
having canceled, and discharged the hand writing of ordinances that was
against us, has spoiled the Principalities, and Powers, openly triumphyng over
them by himself, but not for him self. For thy sake only he took upon him,
and fully accomplished these things: that thou might not only freely use
them, but of right, and duty challenge all his benefits, and victory: and
have now not only entrance too the FATHER, but free access, with confidence,
and boldness. If any man can purchase free license too come into the presence of
a mortal Prince, how does he rejoice at his felicity in that respect? But how
far greater blessedness is it too be admitted intoo the sight of GOD, the
fountain of all power, whom otherwise no mortal man shall see, and live. Now
then since permission is granted us, not only with free liberty, but with
boldness also too come too that dreadful mount, and invisible majesty of
GOD, it surmounteth not only all felicity, but is joined also with a certain
rule, and dominion. Which seeing it is such that CHRIST himself can not bring
us higher, I see no cause, Christian Reader, why I should hold thee any longer
with any larger discourse. Wherefore returnyng too our selves, for as much as
CHRIST JESUS our LORD has atchiued so many, and so wonderful things for our
sake, let us see on the otherside what is our det, and duty toward him?

And what is that det, or duty? Forsooth, Our duetyes in Christ.
if thou have respect too thy Neighbor, many things? for love is full of
duties. But if thou have respect, and relation to GOD, this one thing only is
thy duty whereunto thou art bound, howbeit very great, only that thou believe
in CHRIST JESUS the Son of GOD, who dyed for thy sins, and rose again for
thy justification?

But here I know how some mutter sore against me, and in manner charge me either
with a new devise, or some escape in Divinity, as seeming too them too
comprehend within too straight a room, and narrow bounds, so great and large
a matter of our Salvation. My answer is, that, first, we speak not here of
those things which are referred too our neighbor, but of those which are
referred too GOD. Secondly, I am not ignorant that there be many other things
which GOD requires at our hands, as Love, and Fear. But it is one thing too
be required The works of the Law, how they be necessary and how not.
too Obedience, another too be required too Salvation. For, we must (since we
are entered this disputation) proceed in it distinctly, and orderly, because of
these contentious, and troublesome times? Parents require many things of their
eldest Son, and Heir, in performing whereof he is said to be an obedient
Son too his Father, but not therefore his heir and eldest Son because he
does obey: for that title of eldershyp, and right of inheritance comes of
Birth, not of Works: of Nature, not of manners, and Conditions. In like manner
the Obedience of the LAW in us finds praise with the LORD, or rather auoydeth
and escapes punishment which GOD else would have laid upon us: but it does
not purchase Salvation, and eternal life. Look therefore what place Nature
does hold in the Heir, that very same holds Faith in the case of
Justification by the GOSPEL. For in this one thing is offered unto us the
whole gift of perfect Salvation, grace, and blessedness, only that we
apprehe^d CHRIST JESUS our LORD, ye eternal Son of GOD. Neither let any man
therefore think, that this matter, concerning our salvation, is to narrowly,
and straightly comprised of me (as if I should hold a Dolphin in a basen) for
that I require nothing else hereuntoo but faith only in CHRIST. I know that
eternal life is a difficulte thing, and not proper too our Nature: True faith
what it is, and what it does.
and therefore, I say, it consists only in apprehending CHRIST JESUS: for
that nothing in this world is hard or difficult, but only Faith in Christ. As
no Man has ever pleased the Father beside Christ: so in him the Father is so
well pleased, that for his sake he dearly loves all those, who are of Christ.
Let no works therefore, although never so godly, pufe up a man as if he were
pure, or rather not vnpure, and unprofitable even in his most holy Works.
Christ only is great and mighty in and through his Works. Works therefore
properly pertain too Christ, Faith properly unto us, which surely is of
force before GOD.

But by this means, a window is opened An objection dissolved.
(thou say) of overmuch liberty too some who by Nature are tootoo much
prone, and given to allkynde of licentious life. Nay rather, whatsoever is
opened here, God of his singular mercy has opened it: the Gospel of Christ
Jesus has opened it: not we, who are but witnesses only, and Ministers of
the Doctrine. You must debate the matter with him, if any thing herein
displeases your Judgments. He opens not the window of wickedness, but the
gates of the Kingdom of Heaven. If any Man be of such a froward, and ill
disposed Nature, that of a joyful and blessed door he will make to himself a
window, or way of wickedness, the fault is not in him that does rightly open,
but in him that does crookedly enter. It was never otherwise yet among men, but
that the greater part always did most wickedly abuse the best things. Finally,
if all other men whosoever would abuse this doctrine, and I knew but ten only
in the whole world whom this consolation would comfort, I would (to speak
unfeignedly) for their sakes testify, and profess confidently this that I have
said. For it is necessary that this Doctrine should be retained and preached in
the CHURCH: which being of long time hidden from Christians, and almost
extinguished, the heroical, and mighty spirit of CHRIST, by the ministry
and preaching of Martin Luther, has kyndled and raised up again in the
CHURCH. Yet such is the mischief and misery of these wicked days, through the
subtle practicing of SATAN, that all Christendom is in an uproar about
bymatters of contentions, sects, and schisms, and in the mean time all
regard of that which is the most principal point of our salvation, is set at
naught, and almost brought again to utter decay. But Christ Jesus lives, the
stronger Man, and mightier, who will never forsake his dear, and well-beloved
Spouse: to whom be all honor, all glory, all Triumph, all dominion in Heaven
and Earth, world without end.

AMEN.
A very Godly, and hearty prayer upon the mind of Christ his bitter Passion.
O Lord Jesus Christ, the everlasting sweetness and Triumph of them that love
thee, exceedyng all joy, and longyng, thou sauer and lover of repentaunt
sinners, which auowest that thy delight is to be among the children of Men:
and therefore in the end of times, becamest man for Men's sakes: remember all
the foretast and grief of sorrow, which thou did endure even from the
instant of thy conception in the human Nature, forth on: but most of all when
the time of thy most healthful Passion was at hand, according too the eternal
ordinance which God had purposed in his mind before all worlds. Remember the
grief and bitterness which thou feltst in thy heart, even by thine own
record, when thou saydst: My soul is heavy even unto the Death. And at such
time as thou gave thy body and blood to thy Disciples at thy last Supper,
did wash their feet, and comfortyng them sweetly, toldest them of thy
Passion that was at hand.

Remember the sorrow, anguish, and grief which thou did suffer throughout
thy whole tender body, before thy suffering upon the Cross, at such time as
after thrice praying, thou did sweat water like too blood, wast betrayed by
one of thine own Disciples, apprehended by thine own chosen people, accused
by false witnesses, condemned wrongfully by three Judges in thy chosen City,
at the time of the Passover, in the florishyng youth of thy body: and being
utterly giltlesse, wast delivered too the Gentiles, bespitted, stripped out of thy
own garment, clothed with another bodies apparel, buffeted, blindfolded,
bobbed with fistes, tied to a post, whipped, and crowned with thorns.

O most sweet Jesus, I beseech thee make me myndefull of these thy pains and
sufferinges which thou abodest for my finnes, that I might be discharged and
set free from them, and mine atonement be made with thy Father: through thy
chastisement. Make me to abhor my so detestable cursednesse, which could not
be put away, but by thy so grievous punishments. Make me to be heartily sorry
for my sinnefulnesse, and to eschew my offenses, which draw thee to the
suffering of so great torments. Make me myndefull of thy great love too me,
and too all mankind, and let the infinitenes thereof, kindle an unfeigned love
in me toward thee and my neighbor. Let this thy unmeasurable goodness breed
in me a willing mind, and desire to abide all things patiently for thy sake,
and for the truth of thy Gospel: And let it engender in me a despising of all
worldly and earthly things, and an earnest longyng and endeavor too attain
too the Heavenly heritage, for the purchassing whereof unto me, and for the
bringyng of me thereunto, thou have endured these, and all other thy most
bitter and intolerable torments.

Wherefore I beseech thee grant me true repentance, amendment of life,
perseueraunce in all goodness, a steadfast faith, and a happy death, through
the merits of thy sufferings, that I may also be made partaker of thy blessed
Resurrection.

AMEN.
An other of the same.
WHat man is this whom I behold all bloody, with skin all too torn with
knubs and wales of stripes, hangyng down his head for weakness toowards his
shoulder, crowned with a garland of Thorns prickyng through his skull to the
hard brain, and nailed too a Cross? What so heinous fault could he do too
deserve it? What Judge could be so cruel as too put him too it? What ha^gmen
could have so butcherly mynds, as too deal so outragiously with him? Now I
bethink my self, I know him: it is Christ.

Art thou he that excellest all the children of Men in beauty? in whose lips
grace was shed most plentyfully, yea, even with Gods own hand? where then is
that beauty of thine? Where is that grace of thy lips? I find it not, I see
it not, fleshly eyes conceive not so great a mystery. Open thou the eyes of my
mind. Bring thy Divine light nearer unto me, and give me power too look
more wistly upon thee.

I see it is Jesus the son of God, the unspotted Lamb, without sin,
without fault, without offense, which took my wickedness upon him, too the
intent that I (being set free from sin) might be brought again into Gods
favor: rise again from my fall: return home again from banishment: and
attain to the end for which I was created. That which I deserved, he suffered:
and that which I could never have attained unto, he gives.

O my Redeemer, deliverer, and Savior draw me too thee, that (being always
myndefull of thy death, trustyng always in thy goodness, and being always
thankful for thine unspeakable benefits) I may be made partaker of so great
reward, and not be separated from thy body through mine own unthankfulness, so
as thou should have been borne in vain as in respect of me, and in vain
have suffered so many torments, yea and even most bitter death of thine own
accord for my sake,

Amen.
An other.
MY mind beholds thy body crucified for my soul: O that thou would also
crucify me with thee, so as I might live, or rather not I, but thou my Lord
Christ in me. Who will give me too dye with thee, that I might rise again
with thee too life everlasting? Thou dyedst for me, that I might live through
thee. Thy flesh is crucified, O Christ: crucify thou the power of sin that
reigns in me: that being stripped out of the old Ada^, I may be tra^sformed
into the second Adam: to lead a new life by shaking down, and dispatchyng away
of all wickedness, unbelief, and tyranny of Satan.

Let thy yoke become sweet, and thy burden lightsome too me through thy
Cross: that I (followyng thee willyngly and chearefully) may come to the same
place where thou art: that is too wit, too thy most blessed, and immortal
Father, from whom nothing may ever separate us hereafter.

Amen.
An other.
O Most high and singular obedience, where through thou did submit thy self
to innumerable torments, yea, and even to most bitter, and reproachful death,
because it liked thy Father too have it so. O Noonetyde of fervent love, and
Sunshine never drawyng toward Euentyde, show us where thou feedest in the
midst of the day, and where thou shroudest thy Sheep from cold. O would to
God we might be transformed intoo that Cross of thine, that thou might
dwell in our hearts by faith, rooted and grounded in charity, so as we might
with all thy holy ones, comprehend the length, breadth, height, and depth of
thy Cross, which exceed all the strength and wisdom of the world.

Amen.
FINIS.
AT LONDON, Printed by Richard Day, dwelling at Aldersgate, beneath S.
Martines.

1579.

Cum gratia and Privilegio, Regiae Majestatis.


