A TRVE REPORTARIE OF THE MOST TRIVMPHANT, AND ROYAL ACCOMplishment of the
Baptism of the most Excellent, right High, and mighty Prince, FREDERIK HENRY;
By the grace of God, Prince of SCOTLAND. Solemnized the 30. day of August. 1594.

Printed by R. Walde-graue, Printer to the K. Majesty. Cum Priuilegio Regali.

A TRVE REPORTARIE OF THE BAPTISM OF THE PRINCE of Scotland.
THE Noble and most potent Prince of Scotland, was borne in the Castle of
Striuiling upon Tuesday, the 19. day of February 1594. upon which occasion the
Kingis Majesty, sent for the Nobles of his Land, and to all the capital
Burrows thereof, to have their advise, how he should proceed for the due
solemnization of his Royal Baptism, and what Princes he should send to: When
they were all compeired with great diligence and goodwill, he proponed unto
them, that it was necessary, to direct out Ambassadors to France, England,
Denmark, the Lowe-Countries, the Duke of Brunswicke his brother in law, and
to the Duke of Magdelburgh, the Queens Majesty's Grandfather, and to such
other Princes as should be thought expedient. Likewise, he thought the Castle
of Striuiling, the most convenient place for the residence of this most Noble
and Mighty Prince, in respect that he was borne there: As also, it was
necessary, that su^ficient preparation might be made for the Ambassadors that
should be invited to come for honor of the Crown and Country. And besides
all this, because the Chapel Royal was ruinous, and too little, concluded,
that the old chapel should be utterly rased, and a new erected in the same
place, that should be more large, long and glorious, to entertain the great
number of strangers exspected. These propositions at length considered, they
all with a free voluntary deliberation, granted unto his Majesty, the sum
of an hundredth thousand pounds money of Scotland. Then was there Ambassadors
elected, to pass in France, England, Denmark, the Low Countries, and other
places before mentioned, who were al dispatched with such expedition, and their
Legacies took such wished effect: That first there came two famous men from the
King of Denmark, the one CHRISTIANVS BERNEKOVV, the other, STENIO BILLE, these
came to Leyth the 16. of July, The next day after them, came ADAMVS CRVSIVS,
Ambassador for the Duke of Brunswick, and IOACHIMVS BASSEVITIVS, Ambassador
for the Duke of Magdelburgh, who is Grandfather to the noble Princess ANNE,
by the grace of God Queen of Scotland. Thirdly, the 3. day of August, there
came Ambassadors from the States of Holland and Zeland, the Barron of
Braderod, and the Treasurer of Zeland, called IA^O^VS FALKIVS.

There was also a Noble man directed from England, to wit, the Earl of
Cummerland, who, even when he had prepared himself richly, and honorably in
all respects for his voyage to come into Scotland, and diverse Noble men and
Gentil men of renown, prepared and commanded for his honorable conuoy, It
pleased God to visit him with sickness: And in that respect another Noble man
was chosen to supply his place, which was the Earl of Sussex, etc. And he in
consideration of his short, and unexpected advertisement, made such diligence
in his voyage, and magnificence for his own person and honorable convoy, as
was thought rare and rich by all men: wher^^y it fell out, that betwixt the
sickness of the one Nobleman and the hasty preparation of the other, the time
was so far spent, that the very prefixed days of the Baptism, were sundry
tunes delaied. And because the Ambassador of England was so long a coming:
and the Ambassadors of Denmark, Brunswicke and Magdelb^rgh, were feared to be
hindered in their voyage by the Sea, by reason of the near approaching of
Winter: They desired daily of the Kings Majesty, during their remaining in
Edinburgh, to have some prefixed day to be nominate and certainly kept, that
immediately thereafter, they might be dispatched, which he granted at the last,
although he had diverse great impediments to the contrary. The first was
because the Chapel Ro^^ll and C^stell of Striuiling, was not fully compl^^t
in all such necess^ries, as was requisite, although he had the supply of the
greatest number of Artificers in the whole Cuntrie, conuened there, of all
crafts for that service, and his Majesty's own person daily ouerseer, with
large and liberal payment: but the chiefest cause, was the long absence of an
Ambassador from England, which his Majesty greatly respected for many causes:
And last of al, exspecting, that some Ambassador should have come from France,
which fell not out as was looked for. But when the Ambassador was come from
England to Edinburgh, forthwith, his Majesty dispatched one of the Gentlemen
of his Nienes chalmer, to request him to repair toward Striuiling the next day
with all possible diligence, (which was the 28. day of August) because he would
have had the Baptism administered the day following. But neither were the
Propynes sent by the Queen of England, neither her Ambassadors own cariages
as then come: Therefore the Baptism was delaied until the 30. day of August,
as ye shall hear particularly hereafter.

But in the meanetime, it is to be understood, that all these Noble
Ambassadors before expressed, were honorably sustained upon the Kings
Majesty's own proper costs, during the whole time of their residence in
Scotland, save only the Ambassador of England, whose whole expenses, were
defrayed by his Souerane the Queen of England. And because the rest of the
Ambassadors were repaired to Striuiling by his Majesty's direction, long before
the coming of the English Ambassador his Hienes bestowed the time with them in
magnifique banketting, reuelling, and daily hunting with great honor.

The Kings Maies^ie, purposing further to decore by magnificence this action,
committed the charge thereof to the Lord of Lendores, and M. William Fowler,
who by their trauells, deligence, and invention, brought it to that perfection,
which the shortness of time and other considerations culd permit. So they having
consulted together, concluded that those exercises, that were to be used for
decoration of that solemnity, were to be divided both in Feeld pastimes, with
Martial and hero^-call exploites, and in household, with rare shows and
singular inventions,

The Feeld to be used at two several days: the first to be of three Turks,
three Christian knights of Malta, three Amazones, and three Mores. But by
reason of the absence, or at the least, the uncertain presence of the three
last Gentlemen, who should have sustained these personages, it was thought
good, that the number of that mask should consist of Nine Actors, nine Pages,
and nine Lack^es, which coming from sundry parts and at diverse times, together
with the diversity of their apparel, should bring some novelty to the
behoulders.

The place most expedient for this action, was the Valey, near the Castle,
which being prepared for that purpose, both with Carier and Scaffold, after the
coming of the Queens Majesty, with her honorable and gallant Ladies,
together with the honorable Ambassadors, the field being beset by the brave
Yonkers of Edinburgh with their hagbutes, during the whole time of that pastyme.

Then three Christians entered the field with sound of Trumpet, who were the
Kings majesty, (...) and THOMAS ER^KINE, ((...) h^s M^^^^lles chalmer) who made
up this (...).

A little after followed, three apparelled like ^^rhes, very go^g^ousl^e
att^red: and these were the Duke of Lennox, the Lord Home, and Sir ROBERT KER of
Ces^urde Knight.

Last of all, came in three Amazones in women's att^^^, very sumptuously clad,
and these were, the Lord of Lendores, the Lord of Barclewch, and the ^bbote of
Holie-rood-house. So all these persons being present, and at their entry,
making their reverence to the Queens Majesty, Ambassadors and Ladies, having
their Pages ryding upon their led Horse, and on their left arms, bear^^g th^^r
masters imprese or device.

The Kings Majesty's, was a Lions head with open eyes, which signifies after
a mistique and ^^^roghphique sense, Fortitude and Vigilancie: the word^s were,
Timeat and primus and vltimus orbis. The second was a Dogs collar, at veset
with iron pykes, the words were these, Offendit, and defendit. The third of
that Christian army, was a Windemil, with her spoakes vnmouin^, and winds
vnblowing on every side, with these words, Nisperat immeta.

The second faction did carry these: A Heart half in fire, and half in frost: on
the one part Cupids torch, and on the other, Jupiters thunder, with these
words, Hine amor, inde metus. The other Page a Zodiac, and in the same, the
Moon far opposite to the Sunn^, with these words, Quo remotior, lucidior.
that is to say, the tarther, the fairer. The third of this pairt^e, carried
painted, four coach wheels, the hindmost following the foremost, and yet never
ouertaking the^, with these words, Quo magis insequor.

The last three Pages, bare in their Targes, these impreses following, and
Crown, an eye, and a Portcuilis: the Crown betokening the power of God, the
Eye his Providence, and the Portcullis his protection, with these words, which
were composed in Anagram^, of Walterus Scotus, the Lord of Bacleughs name,
Clausus tutus ero The second Page of this pairtie, carried on his targe, the
Portraiture of an hand, holding an^ Till by the tail, alluding to the
uncertainty of persons or of times, with these words: V^ frustra sic
pattenter. The last was this, a fire in sight of the Sun, burning, and not
perceived, with this sentence, Oblector lumine victus.

And every Lackie, carrying in his hand, his M^isters Lance. They began their
pastyme by running at the King and Glove: The laws whereof were these.

First, that all the persons of this pastime, compeare (...) l^ts his Lance
fall out of his hand, is de^^^^ed of all the rest of his courses. Fiftlie, that
eu^rie one run with loose rain^s, and with as much Lennox, who bringing it to
his side and pairtie, had the praise and prise adjudged to himself. Thus the
first days pastime was ended, with great contentment to the beholders, and
commendation of the persons enterprysers.

The second days pastime was extended, by reason, that the artisans were
employed in other business, who should have followed forth that invention
given them: And seeing the grace of that exercise, consisted in Embosserie, and
the craftesmen apt for the same, otherwise and necessarily busied, it was left
off: Which, if it had been brought to effect, this Country had not seen, nor
practiced a more rater: for what by the bravery and strange apparel of the
persons themselves, and by the diverse shapes of the Beasts, that should have
been born and brought there in sight, had been commendable and wonderful: by
reason that such beasts, as Lion, Elephant, ^art, Unicorne, and the Griphon,
together with the Camel, Hydre, Crocadile, and Dragon (carrying their riders)
had carried also with it by the newnes of that invention, great contentment and
commendation of that exercise. But I say, some arising lets impeshed this
invention: and al things were cast of, that might have farther decored this
solemnity, through other urgent occasions.

And when all the Ambassadors were conuened together, and all necessary
materials ready, the Chapel Royal of the Castle of Striuiling was richly
hung, with costly tapestries: And at the North-east end of the same, a royal
seat of Estate, prepared for the Kings majesty: And on his right hand, was set
a fatre wide Chair, with the dew ornaments pertaining thereto, over which, was
set the Arms of the King of France.

Next thereunto, was a princely trauers of Crimson Taffeta, for the Ambassador
of England, and over his head, the Arms of England: on the desk before him,
lay a Cushion of red veluot: There stood attending on him, two Gentlemen Vshers,
appointed by the Queen of England, for that present service.

Next unto him, sat M. Robert Bows, Ambassador ordinary for the Queen of
England: On the deske before him, was laid a cloth of purple veluote, and a
Cushion suitable thereunto.

Then sat the Ambassador of the noble Prince, Henricus Julius, Duke of
Brunswick, and before him on the desk was laid a cloth of green veluote, with a
cushen of the same: and over his head, the Arms of his Prince.

Next unto him, sat the Ambassadors of the Low Countries, with a long fair
cloth, spread on the desk before them of blew veluote, and two Cushons suitable
thereunto, and over their heads the Arms of their Countries.

On the Kings left hand, was placed nearest his Majesty, the two Ambassadors
of Denmark, with a large broad cloth spread on the deske before them of purple
veluot, and the Arms of Denmark over their heads.

Next unto them, sat the Ambassador of the noble Prince Vdalricus, Duke of
Magdelburgh, with his Princes Arms over his head.

In the midst of the Chapel Royal within the partition, where the Kings
Majesty, the Ambassadors, and Prince with his conuoy were placed, there was a
new pulpite erected: The same was richely hung with cloth of gold: All the
pauement within this partition, was Prince-like laid with fine tapestrie,

Under the Pulpit was another deske, wherein sat in the midst, M. David
Cuninghame, Bishop of Abirdene, M. David Lindesay, Minister of Leyth, and John
Duncanson, one of the ordinary ministers to the kings Majesty: Before whom
was set a table, covered with yealowe veluote.

And when all things were in readiness, as was requisite. There was placed a
hundredth Hagbutters (being only the youkers of Edinburgh, bravely apparrelled)
in order, betwixt the Princes utter chalmer door, and the entry to the Chapel
Royal, on both the sides of the passage.

Then the Kings Majesty, with his Nobles and Counselors attending on him,
entered the Chapel, and there sat down in his Royal seat of Estate.

All the Ambassadors likewise were sent for, and conuoyed to the Princes
Chalmer of presence where the Prince was lying on his bed of Estate, richly
decored, and wrought with brodered work, containing the story of Hercules and
his travels.

This bed was erected on a platform, very artificially, with a foot pace of
three degrees ascending to it: The degrees being covered with tapestrie, all
wrought with gold, and a large cloth of Lawne, covering both the bed and the
degrees which reached forth a great space over the flore.

Then the old Countess of Mar, with reverence past to the bed she took up the
Prince, and delivered him to the Duke of Lennox, who presently re^dered him
likewise to the Ambassador of England, to be borne to the Chapel Royal.

The Master of the Ceremonies, addressing himself to a table in the said
Chalmer, curiously ordered, whereon stood those ornaments of honor, which were
to be borne to the Chapel before the Prince, with due reverence delivered
them to certain noble men, according to the order appointed by his Majesty
for the bearing thereof.

In like manner, the Princes Robe-royall, being of purple Velnote, very
richel^e set with pearl, was delivered to the Duke of Lennox, who put the saine
about the prince: the train whereof, was born up by the Lord Sinclair, and the
Lord Vrquhart. Then they removed themselves to the utter chalmer, where, there
was a fair high Pale made foursquare, of Crimson Veluote attending: which was
laid on with rich pasments, and fringed with gold. This Pale was sustained by
four Worshipful Barons, The Lord of Bacleugh, the Constable of Dundie, Sir
Robert Ker of Cesfurd Knight, and the Lord of Traquhair. Under the which Pale
were the Ambassadors of England, Robert Erll of Sussex, carrying the Prince in
his arms, and M. Robert Bows, ordinary Ambassador for England, assisting him.
Next to the^, was the Duke of Lennox. About the Pale, were the Ambassadors of
Denmark, Magdelburgh, Brunswick, and the Estates. There followed, the old
Countess of Mar. Mistres Bows, diverse Ladies of Honor, with the Mistres
Nurse.

Then the Trumpets sounding melodiously before the Prince and his conuoy, went
forward: LION King of Arms, and the Heralds his brethren with their
coat-armors, in goodly order following.

Next followed the Princes Honors, borne by these Noblemen: The Lord Sempill
carrying a Lavar of water, The Lord Seton, a fair Basen: The Lord Leuingston a
Towell, and the Lord Home a low Crown competent for a Duke, richly set with
Diamonds, Saphires, Rubies, and Em^rauldes: who approaching near the Pulpit,
where these Honors were received from them, by the master of the Ceremonies,
and by him placed on the Table before the pulpite: the Noble men retyring back
to their appointed places.

Lastly, the Pale was carried in before the pulpite, where the Ambassador of
England rendered the Prince to the Duke of Lennox, who immediately delivered
him to the old Countess of Mar, and she consequentli^ to the Mistres Nurse.
And all the Ambassadors were then set, in such order of places, as the
demonstration of their Armories, gave notice.

Without the partition, were ornate fourmes, all covered with green, whereupon
were placed the Gentlemen of England, Denmark, Almaine, Flanders, and
Scotland.. And as all men were thus competentlie placed, and universal silence
made, entered M. Patrik Galloway, one of his Majesty's ordinary Preachers into
the Pulpite, who learnedlie and godli^te, entreated upon the text of the 21. of
Genesis. Which being done, the Bishop of Aberdene, stood up in his seat, and
taught upon the Sacrament of Baptism, first, in the vulgar^ tongue, and next
in the Latin, to the end, all men might generally understand. This done, the
Provost, and Prebends of the Chapel Royal, did sing the 21. Psalm of David,
according to the art of M^sique, to the great delectation of the noble
Auditorie.

Then they proceeded to the action. The King aros^* and came toward the
Pulpit. The Ambass^dours followed in their or^^^. The Barons that carried the
Pale above the Prince, moved toward the Pulpit: The D^k^ of Lennox, received
the Prince from the Countess of Mar, and delivered him to the hands of the
Erll of Sussex, Ambassador for England: Where he was named by all their
consents, FREDERIK HENRY, HENRY FREDERIK, and so baptized, In the name of the
Father, Son, and holy Ghost, by the said names.

This being done, Lion King of Arms, with a loud voice, reports these names
thryse over: and then after him, the rest of his brethren H^rauldes, with
Trumpets sounding, confirmed the same.

Then the Kings Majesty, Ambassadors, and all removing to their places: the
English Ambassador alone, withdrawing himself on the one side was met and
attended on, by two Grooms, who humbly on their knees, the one presenting a
large rich Basen, the other a suitable Lavar, repleat with sweet water,
wherewith the Ambass^dor washed: a Gentleman Sewer, with humble reverence,
presenting him a fair To w^ll, wherew^th he dried his hands, and so forthwith
returned to his place.

This being done, the Bish^p ascended to the Pulpite, where, after that he
had delivered in verse, a certain praise and commendation of the Prince, then
he converted the rest of his Latin Oration, in prose to the Ambassadors,
every one in particular, beginning at the Ambassador of England, and so
continuing with the rest: Wherein he made mention of the Chronology of each of
these Princes: and recited the proximitie, and neernesse of bloo^ that they had
with Scotland. Co^cluding his Or^tion, with exhortation and thanksgiving to God
for that good occasion, and prosperous assembly.

In conclusion, the ^lessing being given, Lion King o^ Arms, cried with a
loud voice, God save FREDERIK HENRY, and HENRY FREDERIK, by the grace of God,
Prince of Scotland. The rest of the Herauldes, proclaimed the same at an open
window of the Chapel Royal, with sound of Trumpet.

Then the King, the Prince* the Ambassadors, the Nobles, and Ladies of Honor,
retired forth of the Chapel, in such order as they entered, and repaired
toward the Kings Hal, During their passage, the Cannons of the Castle roared,
that therewith the earth trembled, and other smaller shot made their harmony
after their kind.

In the Kings Hall, the Duke of Lennox received the Prince from the Ambassador
of England, and presented him to the Kings Majesty, who addubbed him knight.
He was touched with the Spur by the Erll of Mar: Thereafter the Kings M^iestie
presented a Ducall crown of his head, and then was proclaimed by Lion King of
Arms, The right Excellent, High, and Magnanime, FREDERIK HENRY, HENRY
FREDERIK, by the grace of God, Knight and Barron of Renfrew: Lord of the Yles,
Erll of Carrike, Duke of Rosay, Prince and great Steward of Scotland.

These words were repeated by the Heralds with a loud voice, at an open Window
of the Hal.

Then the Prince was carried by the Ambassador of England, to his own Chalmer
of presence: where, the most rich, and rare propynes were there presented.

Also, there were certain Barons and Gentlemen addubbed Knights, whose names
do follow in order as they were proclaimed. And first their oath.

The Oath of a Knight.
1 I Shall fortify and defend the true Christian Religion, and Christ's holy
Evangel, now presently preched within this Realm, to the uttermost of my power.

2 I shall be leil and true to my soverane Lord the Kings Majesty, To all
orders of Chievalry, and to the noble office of Arms.

3 I shall fortify and defend justice at my power, and that without favor or
feed.

4 I shall never fly from my soverane Lord, the Kings Majesty, nor from his
Hienes Lieuetenants in time of mellay, and battle.

5 I shall defend my native Realm, from all Allieners and strangers.

6 I shall defend the just action and quarrel of al Ladies of Honor, of all
true and friendles Widows, of Orphantes, and of Maidens of good fame.

7 I shall do diligence, whersoever I hear there is any Murderers, Traitors or
maisterfull Reavers, that oppresses the Kings Lieges, and poor people, to
bring them to the Law at my power.

8 I shall maintain and uphold the noble estate of Cheualrie, with Horse,
harnisse, and other Knightly abillzements: And shall help and succor them of
the same order at my power, if they have need.

9 I shall enquire and seek to have the knowledge and understanding of all the
Articles and points contained in the book of Chievalry.

All these premises to observe, keep, and fulfill: I oblesse me, so help me
my God, by my own hand, so help me God, etc.

Sir William Stewart of Houstoun, Knight. Sir Robert Bruce of Clackmannan,
Knight. Sir John Boswell of Balmowt^w, Knight. Sir James Schaw of Salquhy,
Knight. Sir John Murray of Ethilstoun, Knight. Sir William Menteith of Kerse,
Knight. Sir Alexander Fraser of Fraserburgh, Knight. Sir John Lindesay of
Dunrod, Knight. Sir George Leuingston of Ogilface, Knight. Sir James Forester
of Torwood-head, Knight. Sir Andrew Balfoure of Stratho^^, Knight. Sir Walter
Dundas of over Newlistoun, Knight. Sir John Boswell of Glasemont, Knight. Sir
George Elphingstoun of Blythwood, Knight. Sir William Leuingston of
Darnechester, Knight. Sir David Meldrum of New-hall, Knight.


These names were proclaimed upon the Tarrase of the forefront of the Castle,
with sound of Trumpets, and great quantity of diverse especes of gold and
money, cast over amongst the people.

These things being accomplished, the King and Queens Majesty's, with the
Ambassadors, addressed themselves to the banquet in the great Hal, about eight
of the clock at night. Then came Lion King of Arms, with his brethren the
Herauldes, and entered the Hal before the King and Queens meat, the Trumpets
sounding melodiouslie before them: with these Noble men, beating office for the
present.

The Erll of Mar, Great Maister-housholde. The Lord Fleming, Great
Maister-Vsher.
For the Kings M.
The Erll of Montroze, Cartier. The Erll of Glencarne, Copper. The Erll of
Orkenay, Sewar.
For the Queens M.
The Lord Seton Caruer. The Lord Hume Copper. The Lord Sempill Sewar.
This delicate banquet being ordered with great abundance, the King, Queen,
and Ambassadors, were placed al at one Table, being formed of three parts,
after a Geometrical figure, in such sort, that every one might have a full
sight of the other.

The King and Queens Majesty's, were placed in the midst of the table, and on
the Kings right hand were set the English Ambassadors, the Earl of Sussex, and
M. Robert Bows, next them sat the Ambassador from the Duke of Brunswicke, and
the Ambassador from the Duke of Magdelburgh.

On the Kings left hand, next to the Queens Majesty, sat the Ambassador of
Denmark, and Ambassadors from the States of Holland and Zeland: Betwixt every
one of their seats, was left a good space.

On the East and west side of the Hal, was placed two very long Tables, where
were set certain Noble men, Ladies of honor, and Counselors of Scotland, and
with them, the Noble men and Gentil-men of England, Denmark, Almaine and
Flanders. And betwixt every Nobleman and Gentil-man stranger, was placed a
Lady of honor, or Gentil-woman.

Now, being thus in a very honorable and comely order set, and after a
while, having well refreshed themselves with the first service, which was very
sumpteous, there came into the sight of them all, a Black-Moore, drawing (as it
seemed to the beholders) a triumphall Charlot (and before it, the melodious
noise of trumpets and Howboyes) which Chariot entered the Hall, the motion of
the whole frame (which was twelve foot long, and seven foot broad) was so
artificial within it self, that it appeared to be drawn in, only by the
strength of a Moore, which was very richly attyred, his traces were great
chains of pure gold.

Upon this Chariot was finely and artificially devised, a sumpteous covered
Table, decked with all sorts of exquisite delicates and dainties, of
pattisserie, frutages, and confections.

About the table, were placed sit Gallant dames, who represented a silent
Comedy, three of them clothed in Argentyne Saten, and three in Crimson Saten:
All these six garments, were enriched with Togue and Tinsal, of pure gold and
silver, every one of them having a Crown or Garland on their heads, very
richely decked with feathers, pearls, and Jewels upon their loose hair, in
Antica forma.

In the first front stood dame Ceres, with a sickle in her right hand, and a
handful of Corn in the other, and upon the outmost part of her thigh, was
written this sentence, Fundent vberes omnia Campi, which is to say, the
plenteous Fields shall afford all things.

Over against Ceres, stood Faecunditie, with some bushes of Chesbolls, which
under an hierogliphi^ sense, represents broodines with this Devise, Forlix
prole divum, and on the other side of her habit, Crescant in mill. The first
importing that this Cuntrie is blessed by the Child of the gods, and the
second, alluding to the King and Queens Maiesti^s, that their generations may
grow into thousands.

Next on the other side, was placed Faith, having in her hands a Basen, and in
the same two hands joined together, with this sentence, Boni alumna coniugij,
The fortress and nurse of a blessed marriage.

Over against Faith, stood Concord, with a golden Tasse in her left hand, and
the horn of abundance in her right hand with this sentence, Pleno beant te
numina Sinu. The heavenly powers do bless thee with a full bosom.

The next place was occupied by Liberality, who having in her right hand two
Crowns, and in her left, two Scepters, with this denise, Me comite plura quam
dabis, accipies. That is to say, having me thy follower, thou shall receive
more than thou shall give.

And the last was Perseverance, having in her right hand a staste, and on her
left shoulder an Anchor, with this devise, Nec dubiares mutabuns, nec secunda,
Neither doubtful, nor more prosperous things shall change your state.

This Chariot which should have been drawn in by a Lion, (but because his
presence might have brought some fear, to the nearest, or that the sight of
the lights and torches might have commoued his tamenes) It was thought meet,
that the Moore should supply that room: And so, he in outward show, preassed
to draw that forward, which by a secreet conboy, was brought to the Princes
Table, and the whole desert, was delivered by Ceres, Foecunditie, Faith,
Concord, Liberality, and Perseverance, to the Earls, Lords, and Barons that
were Sewers.

Presently after the returning of the Chariot, entered a most sumpteous,
artificial, and well proportioned ship, the length of her keele, was 18. foot,
and her breadth 8. foot: from her bottom to her highest flagge, was 40. foot:
the Sea she stood upon, was 24. foot long, with breadth convenient: her motion
was so artificially devised within her self, that none could perceive what
brought her in. The Sea under her, was lively counterfeit, withal cou^outs: On
her foresterne was placed Neptunu^, having in his hand h^s Trident, and on his
head a Crown, his apparel was all of Indian cloth of si^ver and silk, which
bare this inscription, ^unxi atquereduxi which in sense imports, that as he
joined them, so he reduced their Majesty's.

Then Thetis with her M^ce, goddess of the sea with this devise, Nunquam abero
and tutum semper te littore sistam, which signifies, that by her presence, she
always shall be careful to bring them into a safe shore and harborow.

Then Triton with his wilke Trumpet, was next to her with this devise, Velis,
votis, ventis, by Sails, by Vows, by Winds.

Round about the Ship, were all the Marine people, as Syrenes, (above the
middle as women, and under as fishes:) and these were Parthenope, Ligea, and
Leucosia, who accommodating their gestures to the voice of the Musitions,
repeated this verse, Vnus eris nobis cantandus semper in orb. And all the same
was decored with the riches of the seas, as Pearls, Corals, Shelles, and
Mettalls, very rare and excellent.

The bulk of this Ship was curiously painted, and her Galleries, whereupon
stood the most part of the Banquet in Christalline glass, gilt with Gold and
Azure. Her Mastes were read, her takling and cordage, was silk of the same
color, with golden Pulle^s, Her ordinance was 36. pieces of Brass, br^uelie
mounted, and her Anchors Siluer-gylt. All her Sails were double of white
Taffata. And in her fore-sayle, a Ship Compass, regarding the North Star, with
this sentence, Quascunque per vndas. Which is to say, through quhatsoeuer seas,
or waves, the Kings Majesty intends his course, and protect of any acrysing
action, Neptune as God of the Sea, shall be favorable to his proceedings.

On the Main-saile, was painted the Armories of Scotland and Denmark, with this
device, competent in the person of the Prince of Scotland. En quae divisa
beatos efficient, collecta tenes. That is to say, Behold (O Prince) what does
make these kingdoms severally blessed, jointly (O Prince of hope) thou holds,
and have together.

Her tops were al armed with Taffataes of his Majesty's Colors, Gold, and
Geules: and all her flaggs and streamers suitable to the same.

Her Mariners were in number six, apparelled al in changeable Spanish
Taffataes, and her Pilote in cloth of gold, he alone stood at the helm, who
only moved and governed the whole frame, both the Ship and her burden, very
artificially.

The Musitions within the same, were 14. all apparelled in Taffataes of his
Majesty's collors, besides Arion with his Harp.

Being thus prepared, at the sound of Trumpets, she approached, and at the next
sound of Tritons wilk Trumpet, together with the Masters whistle, she made
sail till she came to the Table, discharging the ordinance in her Stern by
the way: But because this devise carried some moral meaning with it, it shall
not be impertinent to this purpose, to discover what is meant and propyned
thereby.

The Kings Majesty, having undertaken in such a desperate time, to sail to
Norway, and like a new Ia^on, to bring his Queen our gracious Lady to this
Kingdom, being detained and stopped by the conspiracies of Witches, and such
denillish Dragons, thought it very meet, to follow forth this his own
invention, that as Neptunus (speaking portically, and by such sictions, as the
like Interludes and actions are accustomed to be decored withal) joined the
King to the Queen.

So after this Conjunction, he brought their Majesty's as happily hither: and
now at this her blessed delivery, did bring such things as the Sea affoords, to
decore this festiual time withal: which immediately were delivered to the
Sewers, forth of the Galleries of this Ship, out of Christalline glass, very
curiously painted with Gold and Azure, all sorts of Fishes: as Hearinges,
Whytings, Flookes, Oysters, Buckles, Lampets, Partans, ^^apstars, Crabs,
Spout-fish, Clammes: with other infinite things made of Sugar, and most bluely
represented in their own shape. And whiles the Ship was unloading: Arion
sitting upon the Gal^^ nose, which resembled the form of a Dolphine fish,
played upon his Harp: Then began her music in green holyne Howboyes in five
parts. After that, followed Violls with voices in plain counterpointe, to the
nature of these Hexameter V^rses.

Vndique conveniant, quot Reges nomine Christi
Gaudent, huc que suas maturent cogere vires.
(...), O Rex, opibusque antejueris omnes
Quisque suam jam posse velit tibi cedere sorte^.
Regna, viros, aurum, quae tefecere potente^.
Omnia conjugij decorant haec pignora chari:
ANNA precor foelix multos feliciter annos,
^ive, resume novas, atque annuus anni
Instar eat, redeatque; novo tibi partus abor^^.
Cresce Puer, sacri men's numinis imbibat imbres,
Semper vterque parens de te nova gaudia captet.
Scotia, qua^ quondam multis tenebrosa vocataes
Lumina magna nitent in te superantia coelum,
Lux Verbi, and Rex, and Princeps diademata Regni.
After which, ensued a still noise of Recorders and Flutes: and for the fourth,
a general consort of the bes^ Instruments.

So this Interlude, drawing near to an end, in the ver^e last courses, was
discovered this sentence likewise. Submissus adorat Occ^anus, inferring that
the Occean Sea, by offering the shapes of her treasure humbly adored and
honored the sitters. And when in this time, all the banquet was done, after
thanks being given, there was sung with most delicate dulce voices, and sweet
harmony in 7. parts, the 128. Psalm, with 14. voices, And that being done,
at the sound of Tritons wilk Trumpet, and the Pilotes whistle, she wayed
anchor, made sail, and with noise of Howboyes and Trumpets, retired, and then
discharged the rest of her ordinance, to the great admiration of the behold^rs.

After all which Pastime and sport, with merry and joyful repast, the King and
Queens Majesty's, after other offices of honor and respect, the place being
prepared for the Revels, and the Persons appointed for the same, discharging
themselves sufficiently. Their Majesty's, and Ambassadors, went to another Hal,
most richly and magnificently hung with rich Tapistrie, where for the
collation, a most rare, sumpteous, and Princelike desert of Sug^r was prepared,
which being ended, after taking of leave, and goodnights, they departed about
three of the clock in the morning, to their nights rest.

The dates ensewing, so long as leisure might serve, was bestowed by the
Ambassadors, in banketting of Noble men and Gentilmen of their acquaintance,
and the King in the mean time was Solicit and careful of honorable and
magn^^^ke rewards, to be bestowed on either of them, which was also Princely
performed, to their great contentments.

And as they were come to Edinburgh, they were all banketted at some time,
severally, and at other times together, by diverse Noble men of Scotland, with
great honor: Last of all, one Ambassador banketted another, for commemoration
of that Joyful meeting and good success.

Then the King and Queens Majesty's came to Edinburgh, where they were invited
by the Ambassadors of Denmark, unto a Banquet within their Ship, which lay
at anchor in the River of Forth: She was so great, that she could not enter
the Harborow.

The Banquet was very sumpteous, and the Ambassadors so Joyous of their final
dispatch, behaved themselves to their Majesty's on a kindly manner, according to
the ordinary custom of their Cuntrie, by propining of drink unto them in name
of their Princes, which was lovingly accepted and requited: In commemoration
whereof, the whole Artillery of that great Vessel were shot in great number.

The three great Ships of the Estates, lying in the same Road near by, made
correspondance and resonance to the number of six score great shot, and thus
concluded their Bien all.

Then the Castle of Edinburgh, for performance of the Kings honor, as they
perceived the ships to lose, and to hoyse up sail: The Captain of the Castle
saluted every Ship, as they showed them selves in readiness by order, with a
number of great Cannon shot. And so I conclude.

FINIS.

