News out of France: Concerning great troubles likely to ensue, by occasion of
the departure of the Queen Mother from Blois: And the causes thereof.

Contained in the Letters of the said Queen Mother, unto her Son the French
KING, and his Answer thereunto; manifesting the Motives of his taking up
Arms, and against whom he entends to employ them. Dated the 17. of March, 1619.

With four other Letters of the Queen Mother, to the Lord Chancellor, Keeper
of the Seals; President Iannin, and Duke de Mayenne, and the Prince of Pyemont
his Letter unto her, concerning these Affairs.

Faithfully translated, according to the French Copy.

LONDON: Printed by T.S. for Nathanael Newbery, and are to be sold at his
shop under S. Peter's Church in Cornchill, and in Pope's Head Alley at the sign
of the Star. 1619.

THE QVEENE Mothers first Letter, sent unto the King of France, her Son, from
Loche, the 23. of February, 1619. Style nouo.
MY Lord my Son. I have long suffered and endured my honor and liberty to be
suppressed, and withal conceived many strong and strange apprehensions of the
danger of my life, and that which most fencibly moved me thereunto, was the
deprivation of your sight and presence. All which in some sort and manner being
done under the authority of your name; with the like patience I would have
expected and attended the future event thereof, without (for mine own part)
once seeking to know whether your proceedings and desires be well or badly led:
but being (to my great grief) to preach and set forth your virtues, and
commendable praises, in such a place wherein you shall think good, that I
shall continue the rest of my days. Beseeching God (as continually I do, with
the most passionate feeling of my heart) for the prosperity of you, and all
your kingdom, being most truly, even in the uttermost degree of fidelity and
affection, my good Lord and Son.

Your most humble and most affectioned Mother and Subject MARIA.
From Loche, the 23. of February, 1619. Stilo nouo.
THE LETTER Written by the Queen Mother, and sent from Angoulesme to the King
of France: Bearing date the 10. of March 1619. Stilo nouo.
MY Lord, and dear Son, I am persuaded that no man will approve the counsel
that has been given unto you, to abstain ten days from returning an
answer unto my Letters, and then to put me in a doubt how to understand your
intentions, which to be borrowed from others, and none of yours, I do too much
conceive and apprehend, by the great numbers of Commissions, which are sent
forth under your Name to renforce and to levy new companies of foot, and
troops of horse, by the Switzers, which are said to be sent for, by the
Cannons which are reported to be already mounted and set forward out of your
Arsenall, and by the munitions of war which are sent against me; I most
humbly entreat you my Lord and dear Son, for a while to stay your
proceedings, and withal to consider, what you are by others moved to do.

When I writ that I desired to be so much obliged unto you, as that I might
let you understand and know such things specially as import the good and
furtherance of your service and estate, and to belocue that the extremity of
the grief which I conceive for the arms and forces which you are counseled
to leuye, at this present does in a manner kill me. The stain which is given
to your name in all ages of a prodigious violence, and the desolation of your
people, which thereby will ensue, will do you more wrong, then death can
procure unto me, in such manner, that prostrating my self at your feet; I
beseech you, and earnestly entreat you, speedely to countermaund all your
aforesaid preparations of forces and armies now levied, which are bent only
against me, what show soever is otherwise made and pretended, seeing they are
presently levied upon my departure from Blois, and that it is evidently known,
that at this present you have no other occasion of civil or foreign war to
move you thereunto: And therefore once again I earnestly entreat you to give
ear unto me; If my intent and determination had no other ground then only a
desire to be freed of captivity, I think and certainly believe that no man
could dislike it; there being no law in the world, (no not among the
Barbarians) which prohibiteth Prisoners to seek for their liberty, and to
secure their lives.

But seeing that I never had, nor yet have, any intent or meaning but to let
you know and be made acquainted with the evident danger of your affairs, as
also of your good Subjects, easily to be perceived, by the withdrawing of your
person and your counsel from the greatest and most noble personages of your
realm; I am undoubtedly persuaded, that your bounty would gladly have
conceived the passion of my zeal, and withal commended the fidelity and
respect which I ought to have, and owe unto you, if it were not violently
diuerted by those, who disdaining all the offers of amity and good will, which
in consideration of you, I have made unto them, hazard the state, and trouble
the peace and tranquillity thereof, being persuaded that they cannot build the
miracle of their fortunes, but upon my ruin, whereunto I would gladly consent,
if thereby I might further and procure the continuance of your greatness.

I protest before God and his holy Angels, that for mine own part, I pretend
nothing, neither have any other design then that which I ought to have, for
the prosperity of your reign and kingdom: and for that I see and manifestly
perceive your ears to be stopped against my faithful and just supplications,
I must and shall be constrained, presently to make known in all places both of
France and Europe, and hereafter unto your self, the true proofs of my
sincerity and innocence, assuring you, that as much as I can, I will seek
means to impeach and hinder the force of arms, whereunto you are drawn, not
only against the law of God, but also of the whole world, and Nature, causing
the great personages of your Monarchy, offended and discontented, to break
their bounds and to do as much against the obedience whereunto (as it is well
known) I always counseled them: But for mine own part, I will in all
places, use my liberty and my life to please and content you, but yet to
oppose my self against the cruelty of those that govern, if for the space of
this whole week I perceive and see the continuance of the unjust forces, which
at this present are prepared, contrary to that which I hope to find in your
good nature, and the equity of my cause, which I expect from God; I think I
shall be forced by my just and general complaints, to publish and make known,
that my deplorable misfortunes continually increase by unjust and superfluous
excess of the ambitions and fears of those that soueraignely possess your
person and Kingdom: and that as by your permission, (but yet with my most
great displeasure and dislike) I ought to dispose my actions to the necessities
of defense, always containing my self so religiously within the bounds
thereof, that I may only draw you from an opinion of dislike, for giving me
leave to suppress them, that so I may preserve my life, and the long days
upon earth, which I assure my self you will and wish unto her, which is, and
ever shall be, whatsoever happens, my Lord and dear Son,

Your most humble and most affectioned Mother and Subject MARIA.
From Angoulesme, the 10. of March, 1619. Stilo nouo.
A LETTER Written by the King of France, in Answer to a Letter sent by the
Queen his Mother, bearing date the 17. of March 1619. Stilo nouo.

Faithfully translated, according to the French Copy.

LONDON: Printed by T.S. for Nathanael Newbery, and are to be sold at his
shop under S. Peter's Church in Cornehill, and in Pope's Head Alley at the sign
of the Star. 1619.

A LETTER, Written by the KJNG of France, in answer to a Letter sent by the
Queen his Mother, bearing date the 17. of March 1619. Stilo nouo.
MADAME. Your last Letters, as also the first that I received from you, are to
me assurances, that it rests not in your power to write and signify unto
me the true feeling of your Interior cogitations, touching your opinion
concerning the government of mine estate. You know and may persuade your
self, that the same neither can, nor may, in any sort be blamed or disliked,
but that the disgrace thereof must needs fall, and specially be laid upon my
self: which moves me to think, and verily persuades me, that you will not
offer me that wrong, to bereave me of the glory of my reign, by attributing
unto me the reputation not to do or effect any thing, but by the motions of
others.

I know there are some that not only seek the means to persuade you, yea,
and to imprint in your mind an evil opinion of my affairs, but also enforce
themselves to move you to apprehend, and sinisterly to conjecture of the
preparations to War, which at this present I make, as if I had an intent or
meaning to use them against you. But although my authority of a King, does
dispense with, and warrant me not to yield an account of mine actions unto any
man, but only to God; Nevertheless, I would that all the world should know,
that my resolution and intent is, to employ them, only for the maintenance of
mine own authority, the peace and tranquillity of my Kingdom, and to hinder
and impeach the means and motions, that in any wise may or might trouble the
same, or procure the Ruin and desolation of my faithful Subjects, as also to
oppose my self against the pernicious intents purposes and practices of those,
who under your name and title, have levied and gathered diverse companies of
Soldiers, as well within, as without the Realm, which I should never have
believed, if I had not seen and heard the Letters, which they have caused you
to write, not only touching this subject, but also to give an evil
impression, of the administration of my affairs unto diverse Princes, Lords,
and others, as well my Subjects as strangers, who would not believe it. The
knowledge and feeling (which the perturbators of the common peace of this
Realm have always had,) of the singular affection and honor which I bear
unto you, makes them hope that my clemency will indifferently pardon and remit
all the attempts which they enterprise and take on them to do in your name,
against my regal authority.

But I always knew, and know how to distinguish your interest from theirs, in
me, having no other resolution, then only to love and honor you as my
Mother, and to punish them as rebellious Subjects, and enemies to my estate.
Nature so powerfully unites me to harken unto all that which in any wise
touches and concerns your good or hurt, that I am bound to employ all the
power and force that God has given unto me, for your deliverance. Those that
attend upon my person, have so many and so evident testimonies to persuade them
of the respect which I always have had and borne unto you, that you may
believe, and certainly persuade your self, that they are as desirous of your
contentment, as in reason they are affected, to further and advance those
things that concern and appertain unto my service. The former testimony as
also those which continually they show unto me thereof, are so evident, that
they bind and obliege me to maintain and protect them, both by reason and
Justice.

Assure your self, MADAME, that there is no man so bold, that dare enterprise
or take upon him to propound any proposition, which may in any wise sound
against, or be contrary to the Honor and respect which is due unto you. If you
persuade your self, that there is any thing to be required and desired in a
Kingdom, wherein Justice and Peace has equally flourished and been
maintained, ever since I had the care and government thereof, you may when it
pleases you, utter unto me that which you secretly conceive in your mind,
without spreading, or causing Complaints publicly to be given forth: Which
manner of proceeding, as it is wholly against my meaning and intent, so it gives
cause sinisterly to judge of yours; for that the same has never been nor is
practiced or used, but only by those that always have had a desire, rather to
perturbe and trouble the government, than to procure the reformation thereof.

In my last Letters I wrote, and likewise by Mounsieur de Bethune, by word of
mouth certified unto you, that if it please you, you may choose any of your own
Houses, or of mine, therein to live at your pleasure and full and free liberty,
without any impeachment; in such manner that it is long of your self, if you
live not happily and contentedly. Let me only entreat at your hands, to be
ayding and assistant unto my good ententions, with a true correspondence of
will and affection; and let me see and perceive some testimonies from you
therein, as worthy of a good Mother, as those which you shall receive from me,
are worthy of him, who

MADAME, rests your most humble and obedient Son LOVYS.
From Paris, the 17. of March, 1619. Stilo nouo.
Letters written by the Queen Mother of France, to the Lord Chancellor, the
Lord Keeper of the Seals, and the Lord President I annin.
The Queens Letter to the Lord Chancellor.
MY Lord, I have hitherto labored and sought only to let the King my Son
understand, the just causes and reasons of my escape from Blois, wholly
grounded upon the passion, and bounden duty which I have and owe unto the good
and furtherance of his service. But to the contrary, those that are and attend
about his Person, think me so unworthy to know his intents, that they have
made me defer the same, and induced him to rigorous and violent courses, such
as the like were never heard of before; as those which I specially apprehend,
which are to raise puissant forces against the person of her, that brought him
into the World; and who breathes and apprehends no other thing, but only
passion and obedience, to those things which may be good and profitable unto
him, although the place and presence of evil counselors, were contrary, and
suspicious unto me. Villiers has not forborne in heart, to acknowledge the
tender affection of nature, in such manner, that I must of force with more
hope, summon you before God, and your native Country; that according to the
duty of your office, you should not fear to show unto him, the great
importance and danger of that which he is moned to do: without any respect at
all of my dignity, or commiseration of my misery. And to the end that you may
truly know and understand, what I have written unto him, I have delivered unto
this bearer two Coppies of the Letters which I sent him touching this matter,
as knowing well, that they are often times kept from you, and all others the
good and ancient Counselors and Servants to the King and the Crown. And
herewith I beseech God, my Lord Chancellor, to protect and preserve you.

From Angoulesme the 10. of March, 1619. Stilo nouo.
The Queens Letter to the Lord Keeper of the Seals.
MY Lord: It was never yet heard of, not known, that a Prince would at any
time purposely defer and put off the hearing of the counsel or suite of a
faithful Subject, and that a Son, in stead of satisfying the sincere
affection of a good Mother, should be moved, or counseled, violently to take
arms against her, therewith to oppress her. I know well that the wisdom
wherewith you are so religiously in dowed, neither will nor can move you to
give him any such counsel; and much less can I be persuaded, that the good
nature of the King my son, can be induced or moved unto any such
extraordinary motions, whereof if I were in doubt, the very grief I should
thereby conceue would kill me. But seeing that God has presently made me to
perceive and know the violent natures, of those that always were my enemies,
and seek to afflict me: I thought good to put you herewith in mind of the
strict duty whereunto you are obliged; which is, freely to tell him your mind
and opinion, in so important a cause. And reading the Coppies of two Letters
written by me unto him touching this matter, you may judge and easily perceive
the equity and true intent of my deserving: which that you may the better
consider of, I beseech God (my Lord) to have you in his keeping.

From Angoulesme the 10. of March, 1619. Stilo nouo.
The Queens Letter to the Lord President Iannin.
MY Lord, my desire is, that you should tell the King my Son, that which in
conscience you think convenient and fit for him to believe and to do, touching
the supplication by me made unto him; to hearken unto the great passion which
at this present I have for the presernation of his authority, and the good of
his estate: for that your Office, and your counsels at this present are much
more necessary and convenienter for him then ever they were, in regard that he
is moved unto the most violent and unlawful war that ever was heard of. I
writ unto him another Letter, whereof, as also of the first, this bearer shall
give you a copy, to the end that being informed of the justice and cleerenes of
my proceedings, you may give him counsel as much as possibly you can, for the
good and furtherance of his service, and the peace of his Kingdom, which I
will seek to maintain as much as in melieth, even to the loss of my life;
and so I beseech God my Lord to have you in his holy keeping.

From Angoulesme the 10. of March, 1619. Stilo nouo.
The Queens Letter to the Duke de Mayenne.
MY good Cosen, I was resolved for ever with patience to have furmounted my
afflictions, as long as there had been no other question made but of my
interest and pains, thereby not to minister any cause or shadow unto the King
my Son, that I once so much as imagined or dreamt of a desire to separate my
self from his intents, although it is to be thought, that therein he is badly
counseled: but having for the space of a whole year been solicited by the
general complaints and entreaties of diverse persons, both within and without
the Realm, to let the King my Son understand and know the eminent danger of
his authority, and the tranquillity of his Realm; I made no difficulty to
hazard my life by a most dangerous escape, that so I may safely show him the
intent and true meaning of a good and faithful Mother; and hau^ already
written unto him, most humbly beseeching him to set me down such a form as
it shall please him to appoint me to hold and observe in the uttering thereof.
I thought good speedily to impart thus much unto you, not only because the
account I make of you, together with all France, makes me desire to let you
understand my determination: but also knowing the great estimation which the
King my Son has, and ought to have of your Counsel; I wish you would join
your entreaties with mine, thereby to move him unto the remedies, which I
assure my self you know better then others to be most necessary. Strictly
entreating you above all things, as much as possibly I may, in the mean time
carefully to put to your helping hand, that no stir be made; and that every
man attend and expect from his good nature that which he is obliged to show
unto his Subjects and estate. If I needed any witnesses to prove, that the
opinions of the service of the King my Son have moved me to certain
resolutions, which nothing concerned mine own particular, I would first set
you down for one; and at this present I protest unto you, upon the confidence
which I desire to have of your magnanimity, in a business of such importance;
and in respect of the inclination, which you know well I always bare unto you,
that in the most interior thoughts of my heart, I have no other intents nor
resolutions, then only those, which the prosperity and power of the King my
Son cause me to have. Let us therefore labor to that end, and for your part
you shall find me (together with the account I make of your valor) to be
always

From Roche Rezay the 6. of March 1619. Your very good and affectionate Cosen,
MARIA.

The Duke de Mayennes Answer to the Queens Letter.
MAdam: I cannot conceal from your Majesty, the extreme displeasure that I
feel in my self, to see and behold the estate whereunto your departure from
Blois may reduce and bring the affairs of this Realm: And should conceive
much more, were it not for the assurance which it pleases you in honor to give
me, of your true intents, for the good and contentment of the King. I beseech
God with all my heart, (Madam) that he would be pleased to aid you with holy
inspirations. For mine own part, having not the means to contribute any other
thing thereunto, but that which belongs to the duty of an honest man, a most
faithful Servant to the King, and one that resolutely has determined (all
other considerations set apart) wholly and only to rely upon his will and
pleasure: Do me that Honor in the mean time, good Madam, to believe that I am

Your most humble and obedient servant, De. Mayenne.
From Bordeaux the 12. of March, 1619. Stilo nouo.
A Letter written by the Prince of Piemont to the Queen.
MAdam: I have conceived an exceeding contentment, to accompany my most
Soueraign Lord the King, in his pretended voyage to Blois, to visit your
Majesty, in hope there to to have had the means to have done you some service;
persuading my self, that the enteruiew of your Majesty's, reestablishing a
perfect union between you, as we here saw, noted and perceived by all sorts of
good dispositions, I should have had a better means, by my submission and
obedience to testify and show forth, how much I esteem of the Honor to be
allied unto the same. But how much the more I rejoiced in the expectation and
attendance of that good hap, so much the more grief I received and conceived
at the displeasure I took to see my self estranged and prolonged from it, by
the sudden and unexpected departure of your Majesty from thence: And that which
grieved me more, was, to see and perceive by your Majesty's Letters, that you
have taken occasion to withdraw your person from Blois, supposing your self
therein not to be secure, and that you could not freely let the King know of
the disorders which some men have made you believe to be crept into his estate.
Which I esteem not to proceed from the pure will or conceit of your Majesty,
whose judgment and nature is most excellent, but only from the craft and
policy of those, who seeing and perceiving your Majesty to stand upon the
point of strict uniting together, have given you those impressions, hoping to
reap profit by your disunion, and the trouble which they peradventure suppose
it will breed unto this state: for it is most certain, and I am able to
justify it, as having known it well; that there was not any kind of liberty
whatsoever, which your Majesty should not have had in Blois; and that there
cannot be any more added to the tender motions, and true affection, which the
King bears unto you, if we mark and consider the conduction of his actions,
both private and public, which all are answerable to the most great reputation
which he has gotten, and to the estimation in all places made of his virtue
and generosity, whereof, besides the effects which all Christendom feels, I
daily see and perceive diverse manifest proofs, beholding him sitting in the
middle of the ancient Officers and Counselors of the late King his Father,
with so solid a judgment, so exact Justice, and so firm and courageous
resolution, that there is no man but will judge (and shall find subject to
admire him, and to believe) that God has endued him with so many excellent
parts, with an intent to bless his Reign, and to raise and eleuate his glory,
above that of his Ancestors. The profession that I have always made to love
the truth, the duty which binds me to publish that which I know, and the
extreme grief I conceive to behold the labyrinth, whereinto (those which in
some manner disguise the same unto you) would cast you, shall dispense with me,
if it please you Madam, for speaking so freely unto you. And further, if I
beseech you, (as I do) with all humility, to banish out of your thoughts all
whatsoever you may have imagined or conceived therein, to the prejudice of the
sincerity of the Kings intents, and of his Graces prudent and wise conduction.
Assuring my self, that when it shall please your Majesty to look better into
it, without suspicion, you shall therein find all sorts of satisfactions;
seeing that like a good and a wise Mother you cannot have any greater desire
then to behold the prosperity of the King your Sons affairs, and to live in
perfect love and amity with him. I know he is much moved against those, whom he
conceiueth and esteems to have a pretense, under your name to move and
procure an alteration; and I perceive that he makes preparation powerfully to
assail them. It consists in your wisdom Madam, to prevent the infinite
mischiefs that thereby may arise, and not to endure nor see by your occasion,
and under pretense to procure another order in the State, confusion; and those
disorders therein to reign, which commonly follow and ensue civil wars,
God, nature, your own good, and all sorts of considerations bind you
thereunto; I assure and persuade my self that the bounty, and good nature of
your Majesty will wholly move you to the contrary. The House of Sa^oy, and my
self specially, are so much beholding unto the King, that in case to preserve
his authority, to bring and compel the enemies of the quiet estate of France,
and the greatness of his Crown, to reason and obedience, and to restore your
Majesty to the liberty which you are bereaved of, by your retract from Blois,
he shall be constrained to make war, we will therein freely venture our
lives and goods, and all our forces to testify to the World that we are not
unthankful for the unspeakable favors which it has pleased him to impart
unto us; herewith beseeching God long to preserve your Majesty in health, and
to give me Madam by my good endeavors and services, the quality*

From Paris the 12. of March, 1619. To be your most humble and most obedient
servant, V. Amedee.

FINIS.

