CREDIBLE Reports from France, and Flanders. In the month of May. 1590.

VBIQVE FLORET G. B.
printer's mark of John Wolf, McKerrow 242: deivce of a fleur-de-lis with
cherubs at top, and a satyr and a human figure at foot

LONDON Printed by John Wolf, and are to be sold by William Wright. 1590.

Credible Reports from France, and Flanders.
A Week since, came from Diepe a certain Bark the which arrived at Plymmouth
which reported, that the governor of Diepe, was come to Diep after the battle
sick of an ague, and that during his sickness, the Papists murmured, and
would not suffer the exercise of Religion, conspiring to betray the town: But
the Governor being certified of their ill intent, did banishe out of the town
about one hundredth and twenty of them which were the authors of the conspiracy,
amongst which are many of the chiefest and richest of the towns men, and many
of their wives, and the governor has seized upon their goods.

Cressy has been taken by the Marshall Byrron: a man of Parris was their
Captain, whose name was Pierre, for whose ransom was offered seven hundredth
French Crowns, but the King caused him to be hanged, and five and twenty of
the Chiefest with him.

Beaumont sur Oyse has been taken by the Duke of Longueuille: there the Lord
la Noe was hurt with a hargabuse in one of his thighs, but there is no peril:
the duke of Longueuille nevertheless has caused the chiefest men of the City
to be hanged.

The Governor of Renes has caused one friar to be hanged, and half a dosen
of the chiefest of the City, who did call the King heretic.

From Flanders.
THe enemy battering the Skonce of Seven Berghen with great fury on the fourth
of this instant, a breach being made, they had first provided a great ship to
lie on the water, erecting a frame on the top of the mast propped up with other
posts, where diverse Musketeers were placed to beat our men from the breach,
giving an assault also at ye instant with the choice men of their army, by
chance fire salling from the top among certain poulder liyng in the ship,
spoiled them all, to the number of two hundredth that were above and below:
which the assailants seeing, partly failing of courage (but in truth by the
resolution of our men) were repulsed. One other attempt was given, and in
conclusion there was lost of them in this service eight hundredth men, and
thirteen Captains of especial account, so that Count Mansfield chief
commander there was enforced to retire with dishonor. The self same day, it was
our hap with our troops of horse to overthrow two hundredth of their best
horse, we having taken some five and thirty prisoners and one hundredth and
forty horses, the rest being put to the sword: the enemy makes head again at
Furnholt, as it is thought for the relief of Numeghen, which our men have
beleagerd: the Duke of Parma continues at Brussels full of infirmity and
discontentments, the minds of them all being so divided, by reason of the
continuing hatreds between the Spaniards and Italians, so amassed with these
daily misfortunes, and so weakened by reason of many overthrows we have given
them, as a very reasonable force here, would work no slender effects, and
without question divert many other dangerous resolutions.

Berghen up Zoan this fifteenth of May. 1590.
The late news from France.
THey of Paris have made a sally, in the which they have lost a great many of
their men: The Duke de Nemors their governor, and brother to the Duke de Main,
issued out of Paris with them, and as it is thought is slain.

The King does prosper in all his actions.

It is said that the King has taken Pontoise and S. Denis.

Paris is in great distress and in desperation.

Rouen is in like sort.

The Duke de Maine is within Peronne, with very small hope of any great
succor.

The King has taken Gisors.

The Lord Vigues had besieged Ponterson, and had already made two breaches,
the one of five and twenty paces, and the other of fifteen, and had given
three assaults, in the which he had been repulsed, but he hearing that the
Earl of Torigny was coming with great force to raise up his siege, he retired
within mount Saint Michael, and wrote his Letters to the Duke of Mercury who
was at Nantes, requiring him to come to his aid, for his honor and profits
sake, or else he should be forced to yield

He that carried the Letters, came straight to the Earl of Torigny, who did
see his Letters, and sent ye copy of it to the Prince of Ombes, who was
between Saint Malo and Vitre, and forthwith sent the messenger to the Duke of
Mercury with his Letters, who after he had seen them, did write by and by an
answer to the Lord Viques, and prayed him to be strong, saying, that within
three days he would come to his aid with three thousand men, to the end that
their forces being joined together, they might set upon the Earl, being
assured that he could not have the help of the Prince, because he knew him to
be very busy in base Britain. The messenger came again to the Earl, and
showed him the answer of the letters, the coppies whereof were sent to ye
Prince, who caused all the horsemen to march in have between Nantez and the
Duke, when he did know that he was out of Nantez, and when the Duke did know
that he was between two armies, he ventured to fight with the Prince, but
whiles they were fighting, the Earl came upon him, and the Duke was there so
sore beaten, that he lost seventeen Ensigns and twelve hundred of his men,
who were there slain, besides them that were taken and wounded, and he
himself fled to a little Castle called Chasteau Iosselin, in the which he is
besieged, and cannot long endure.

This Castle Iosselin is in Britagnie, and is thought to be the strongest
place in the world, being a tower, builded upon a high rock, and almost not
possible to be batterrd.

When the Lord Vignes understood this, he yielded, and to make his peace, he
gave to wife his daughter and only heir, to the younger brother of the Earl
Montgomery, who was his prisoner, and kept only mount Saint Michael for the
safety of his person.

The inhabitants of Dinau, which is the strongest place of Britanie, hearing
the discomfiture of the Duke, did chase out of their City their governor, who
is the Dukes brother, and did kill many of his men, amongst which was the
chief of his Captains called Captain Iean, and yielded themselves to the
King.

Within the river of Bilbow, there are 4. great ships. In the Passage there
are thirteen great ships and two pataches, that have been ready six weeks
since, and have stayed only for the Kings order: which was, that they should
with all speed go to Saint Andrews, there to take in men, biscuit, and other
prouosion for the whole Fleet, and from thence presently to go to Farole.

At Farole there are six Pinnaces, of ten and twelve tons a piece.

It is supposed that the Kings force will be in this action one hundredth and
fifty sails, that is, three score and ten, or four score great ships, eight
galleys, four galliasses, and three score and ten, or three score and fifteen
pataches and pinnaces of small effect.

It is said also, that he has caused to be made certain broad Boats, for
the landing of men, which the ships shall draw after them.

There be three thousand oars carried out of Biskay to Farole.

One hundredth Dutch gunners are come into Spain, to go in this Fleet.

Their greatest want is Mariners and gunpouder, but they have great store of
other provision.

The chiefest general in this Fleet, is Don Iuan de Belsam, brother to the
Marquis of Saint a Cruce.

For sea Captains of same, there be few or none: but ordinary and new found
fellows are allowed.

The soldiers for this action are very simple and inexpert in wars.

The Fleet is appointed to come forth in the end of May, or about the tenth of
June.

The report is, that this Fleet shall go for Bell I Will, or for Nantz, and some
say, that it is only to keep their own coast, and not for England.

There are in the Court of Spain diverse Ambassadors, one is from the Duke de
Maine, another from the Duke de Mercury, and another from the Duke of Lorain,
and another from the whole body of the League.

They demand three millions of gold, and thirty thousand men.

There came of late to the Court of Spain, an Irish man, about forty years of
age, as Ambassador, who was well received, and is well thought off: but what
his business is, that is not known.

There be six thousand Germans looked for in Spain, about the end of May.

It is said that the king of Spain is very sick, and it is thought that he
will hardly escape.

FINIS.

