A DECLARAtion concerning the needfulnesse of peace to be made in France, and
the means for the making of the same: exhibited to the most Christian king,
Henry the second of that name, King of France and Polande, upon two Edictes,
put forth by his Majesty, the one the tenth of September, the other the
thirtenth of October. Anno. 1574.

Translated out of French by G. H. Esquire.

Jmprinted at London by Henry Bynneman, for Raufe Newberie, dwelling in
Fleetstreat, a little above the Conduit.

To the right worshipful his especial good father Sir Pearciuall Heart Knight,
one of the Sewars, and Knight Harbinger to her Majesty: his humble and
obedient son G. H. wishes health and long life.
IT is now (Sir) long time since I not only desired but fully determined, to
testify the acknowledgement of my duty toward you, by some piece of my
travel, in this present kind of exercise. The bringing whereof to pass,
although I have often sought by perusing many books: yet could I not light
upon any to answer my contentment (which stood always on the choice of some
such matter, as J thought might best like you) until there chanced into my
hands this little french advertisement: The which I had no sooner read over,
but by and by there was kindled in me a certain desirousnesse to take it in
hand, partly for the argument thereof, which caryeth great cause of likelyhoode
to please the reader in general: but chiefly for my particular purpose to
delight you, whom I know to have a special inclination to hear and read the
discourses of the french affairs, because you your self in your young dais,
having served the kings Grandfather Francis of Valoys, in his Court, and
trauayled that country, have had good occasion to be acquainted with the
customs thereof, and with the nature of the people there. And I doubt not but
it will like you so much the better, for the variety of foraine histories,
applied most aptly to the ground of the present matter, wherewith it is, I say
not poudered or filled, but fraughted. Nevertheless, although my liking of
the work did hale forward my labor to the translating thereof: yet I must
needs say, that after I was somewhat entered thereinto, straitwayes there
stood up such a number of doubts, and so huge a heap of imperfections to
withstand me, as had not my desire to pleasure you prevailed against all those
stoppes and stays: my travel and devotion therein had lain in the dust,
before my race had half bin run. But yet notwithstanding, the reasons
aforesaid, and the desire I had to do the thing, and the delight I took in
doing it, wrought such persuasion and incourageme^t in me, and did so keep me
still in breath, as I never gave it over, till J had turned it into English,
in such sort, as you my good father, may now vouchesafe to see: to whom, J
most humbly present it as a newyeeres gift. Therewithal heartily wishing, that
your earnest zeal toward all wise, worthy, and virtuous proceedings,
(whereof neerenesse in blood forbids me to speak according either to your
desert, or to my knowledge, desire, and duty) may increase, to Gods glory and
the profit of your country. And the same God prosper you and all your
doings, and bless you with many more new years, to the contentation of your
own hearts desire.

This first of January.1575. Your humble and obedient son George Heart.

The first Edicte the tenth of December, of the will and intent of the most
Christian King of France and Poland, Henry of Valoys, the third of that name.
HEnry by the grace of God King of France and Poland, To all that shall see and
read this present Edict, greting. The brotherly amity which always has
been mutually between our late most honorable Lord and brother king Charles,
(whose soul God pardone) and us, and the natural inclination and duty
which we have to the conservation and quietness of this realm, has
heretofore not only made us mindful of the welfare of our said late Lord and
brother, and of his subjects: but also enforced us to neglect our own
commodities, and to participate the care and travel of managing all affairs,
as well public as private, and as well of wars as of peace: in which we have
willingly employed, not only al our means, but also our own proper person, as
appears by diverse encounters and battles, which God by his holy grace has
alwais favored according to ye right and equity of the cause which we defend.
Whereas notwithstanding it is most certain and evident, that ye losses in yt
case so happening as well on the one part as on ye other, did altogether tend to
the diminishing and weakening of the forces of the realm. Our said late
brother knowing this, had at sundry times assayed to qualify the sharpness of
that inconvenience, by benignity and clemency, indeuouring to bring again
the hearts of his subjects to their due obedience by gentleness, and to
reconcile their wills to good unity and concord, which were at odds
before, specially the year passed when I was his Liefetenant general before
Rochel: we following his mind and commandment by the advice and counsel of
Princes, Lords and notable persons, which at that time were with us, did the^
again accept yt gentle means of pacification, which we thought most meetest, as
the thing which we specially desired, to be firm and durable, knowing that the
most part of ye subjects of the realm, had sufficiently tried, felt, and
proved the miseries and calamities which civil and inward war brings with it.
And yt was ye very cause, upon hope whereof, we took our journey into Polande,
whither ye states of the country (that alittle before had elected us for their
king) did call us: whereas if we had thought that ye wars should have seized
and rested so short a time, we had not aba^doned our said lord and brother, nor
yet ye realm. But rather we would have preferred ye conseruatio^ and defense
thereof, above al aduanceme^t or particular benefit yt could touch us or
apertain unto us. Yet notwithstanding some being seduced by evil council, have
under diverse prete^ces, renewed ye troubles and entered again into arms. Whereby
it is come to pass that the realm is immediately fallen into ye same malady of
which it was but newly crept out, and the means yt had bin attempted for the
redress thereof, brought not the fruit that was looked for, and desired. Now
for as much as it is the duty of a good king, as well as of a good father and
pastor, to strain him self to the uttermost of his power, and to employ all
his doyngs to the benefyte and preservation of those whom God has put under
his charge, specially at ye beginning of his reign. And seeing that it has
pleased the divine bounty to call us to the rule and government of this
realm: We have thought good, first of all to prove all means possible to
bring our subjects again to the right way by gentle means, that they may
live peaceably one with another in good unity and concord, and yield us the
obedience which by all right they ought to do, as the thing which every man
of his own part ought of right to desire and procure. Therefore to the intent
that all men may understand our will and meaning, which tends to nothing but
the benefyte and comfort of the Realm and our subjects: We have said and
declared, and do say and declare, that all those which heretofore have risen
and taken arms against our late Lord and brother the king last deceased, and
against his authority and ours, or have absented themselves out of ye Realm,
withdrawing them into strange countries without our leave, and at this present
will lay a part arms, give over the practices of war, return home into
their houses, leave up and put into our obeisance the towns which they hold
and occupy, and do as good and loyal subjects ought to do to their king and
sovereign Prince: they shall find us disposed and ready to admit and receive
the^ into our good grace, with intention and will to entreat them well,
forgetting the former things, and providing that neither present nor to come,
any of those of what quality degree or condition so ever they be, or for any
cause that may be pretended to have bin done by them during the troubles,
shall any way be disquieted, molested, or sifted by us or our officers, either
in their persons, goods, or honors, but shall live in all assurance, rest, and
tranquillity, both they, their families, and posterities: assuring them that if
they will come or send to us to this end, they shall do it with all surety
by virtue of these presents, which shall serve them for safeconduit, howbeit
so as in their coming toward us, they take safeconduites and pasports of the
governors and Liefetenants of the provinces by which they pass, whom we
authorize and enioyn to do so without refusal or let, commanding all governors
and captains of places iusticers and officers, Shirefs of towns, and other our
subjects, according to their duties to let the^ pass in all saftie toward
us, without giving or suffering to be given, any disturbance, molestation, or
impeachme^t. And if any of them be not disposed to receive and accept this our
favor, and to use ye goodness and clemency which we offer the^, but rather
will persevere in their evil inte^ts and purposes: the^ are we fully resolved to
employ all the means which God has put into our hands, to repress their
insolences, and to bring their malapertnesse and rashness to reason: wherein
we hope and do promise our selfs, yt god (who knows our intent) will of his
gracious goodness favor and aid us, to maintayn ye authority which we
acknowledge our selves to hold of him: And yt therwithal our good and loyal
subjects will not forget their duties and allegea^ce which they have always
borne us, to ye end therefore the rather to put ye realm in quietness, and to
reestablish it in his ancient greatness, dignity, and beauty: We charge and
command al our Liefetenants general, and governors of our provinces, baylifes
Stewards and their deputies, to cause this present Edict to be proclaimed in
every of their governments, assemblies, and jurisdictions, and to continue ye
keeping and observing of ye same inviolable, without impeachme^t or suffering it
to be impeached in any sort or manner what soever it be, expressly forbidding the
officers of our courts of Parliame^ts, to impeach it for their part, and
putting as well the^ as our solliciters and atturneys general and al other
persons unto silence upon ye sight hereof, for so is our pleasure. In witness
whereof we have caused our seals to be put to these prese^ts.

Given at Lions the.x. day of Sept. the year of grace 1574. and of our reign ye
first.
Also signed upon ye reply, by ye king being in his counsel, with whom there
was also the Queen his mother, my Lord the Duke of Alanson his brother, ye
king of Navarre, the Cardinals of Burbo, Lorein, and Gwyses, ye prince Dolphin,
ye Dukes of Gwyse, Namors, and Main, ye Earl of Charnie, the great Esquire,
ye lords of Moruillier, of Valence, of Lanssak, of Limoges, of Foys, of
Bellieure, and of Monluke, and other Lords of his privy counsel then
present, Fizes.

And sealed upon double labels, with the great seal in yellow wax.

The second Edict the thirtenth of October.
HEnry by ye grace of God King of France and Polande, To all that shall see this
present Edict, greeting. Though at our coming into this our realm, and by
our letters patte^ts signed with our hand the.x. day of September last past,
which was sent unto our governors, Liefetenants general in our provinces,
judges and officers, to publishe the fame, and to continue the exact
maintayning and observing thereof, we have plainly and particularly enough
declared and opened the inward meaning and intent of our heart, and the desire
that we have to embrace and receive all our subjects into our good favor,
which will frame them selves to their duty, and yield the obedience that God
and nature has bound them to, being very willing to forget all that is
passed: Yet notwithstanding because many of our subjects which be far off,
and within the towns and places possessed against our authority, and
peradventure not well advertised and certified of our said meaning, or have
had it misreported unto them by some which have a will to maintain still
these troubles and disorders for ye particular profit and commodity which
they receive by it, under color that since our coming either we have caused
ye Rutters, Swysers, and other forces to march in some provinces of our realm,
(which forces we found ready assembled to recover the said places withholden
against our said authority, and to open the passages of our provinces,)
intending under that pretense to bear men in hand, that our meaning was not
to pacify the affairs of our realm, according to our declaration, although
it be the only thing which we most chiefly seek: and we likewise have bin
advertised that some of them have delayed their coming or sending unto us (to
enjoy the favor which we have offered them by our said Declaration, for fear
of their lives, and for fear to be forced and constrained in their
consciences, for that there was not express mention thereof in our said
Declaration, notwithstanding we have both heard, and gently received all those
which have come unto us for that purpose.

And have granted particular pasports, and necessary suerties to others,
which have given us knowledge of their desire to do the like: For these causes
and other great considerations moving us thereunto, and to take wholly away al
doubt and scrupulositie from our said subjects, we have sufficiently and as
much as necessity requires, said and declared, and by these presents signed
with our hand, do say and declare, that our greatest care and desire, is to
restore our said Realm in to the ancient estate of quietness and
tranquillity, by means of such peace as we intend to give to our subjects,
and the clemency we purpose to use toward them, forgetting all that is
passed, without remembering any part thereof, and intending that none of all our
subjects, of what quality, degree, or condition so ever they be, or for what
cause so ever may be pretended, to have been done and committed by them
during the troubles, or by their occasion, shall any way be disquieted,
molested, or syfted by us or our officers, either in their persons, goods, or
honors, but that they may live in their houses in all assurance, rest, and
tranquillity, both they, their families, and posterities. And therefore we
following (and conforming our selves, to our said first letters,) mynding
moreover so greatly the benefit of peace, that we will not in any wise have
them syfted, distressed, nor troubled for their consciences, but do utterly
forbid it, and for the same will make all necessary provision to be put in
readynesse.

And to the end that those which are willing to come to us to show us their
griefs, may do it safely, and so likewise return: We will that these
presents shall serve them for safeconduct. Provided always, that as well for
their coming as their going, they take safeconductes and Pasportes of the
governors and Lieftenantes general of our provinces by which they pass. Whom
we command to deliver ye same unto the^ without refuse or delay. Enioyning
also all governors and Captains of places, our iusticers and officers.
Sherifes of Towns and other our subjects, according to their duties, to
suffer all such travelers to come and go safely, without giving or suffering
to be given any molestation or impeachement. And we promise in the faith and
word of a king, and upon our honor, to accomplish and perform that which is by
these presents and shall be by us after accorded and assured: And for more
greater surety it shall be allowed and approved as matter of record
throughout all the courts of Parliamentes of our Realm, by the Princes of our
blood, Lords, Gentlemen, Mayors, Sherifes, and principal dwellers of our
Towns, and others, if need shall require. Thus we give commandment to our
trusty and well-beloved officers of our Courts of Parliamentes, and our said
Liefetenantes general, governors, Baylifes, Stewardes, and other deputies, to
keep and observe inuiolably these presents, without contradiction or
suffering any contradiction in what sort or manner soever it be: putting our
attorney general and all others unto silence: For so is our pleasure. In
witness whereof we have caused our seal to be put to these presents.

Given at Lions the thirtienth day of October in the year of grace.1574. and
of our reign the first: So signed, HENRY:

And upon the reply, By the king, being in his council at Neufville.

And sealed with double labels in yellowe wax.

A declaration to the most Christian king, Henry the third of that name, king
of France and Poland.
Sir, the two Edictes that your majesty has caused to be published since
your new coming to the Crown, (which GOD make prosperous unto you) do make
great show, that your said Majesty is desirous to see a good peace in
France. And truly, al good people do greatly praise God, for the good will and
fatherly affection, that he has put into your heart toward your said
subjects, and desire that the same may there take so deep and lively root, as
it may utter it self more and more in deed and effect. But (according to your
said Majesty's complaint in the last of those Edictes) many are so full of
mistrust, as they can hardly believe such affection of peace. to be yet
thoroughly imprinted in your heart, the rather for that they see your Majesty
to make war against them, to whom you say you intend to give peace: in so
much that, seeing on the one side a pretense of your will tending to peace,
and on the other side, an execution of war, they know not what to determine
thereof. Some say, they must rest them selves rather on the deed, than on the
word, paper or ynke. Other some think that the word and promise of a King, is
ground sufficient to rest upon, excusing your Majesty's making of war,
with the same excuse that is contained in your last Edict, that is to say, that
your Majesty assembled not those forces, but having found them ready
furnished at your coming to the crown, thought it more requisite to employ
them, than to suffer them to be idle, specially seeing that the entertaining of
them was so chargeable, and they must needs be paid whether they serve or no.
Some say moreover, that what so ever your Majesty has done touching the
execution of war, was but to sharpen men's apetites unto peace, which held your
towns in their hands, and were in arms against you. because fear is a ready
mean to make the weaker crave peace of the stronger. Othersome say further,
that a noble prince ought to behave him self mildely toward such as humble
them selves under his obeisance, and to tame and repress such as make
resistance against him: and that therefore your Majesty has just cause to
make war against those your subjects, which will not yield you their
obedience, to whom nevertheless ye would give peace, if they would put off
armor and desire it of you with humbleness. But (to speak the truth) all
these reasons can not make the greater number, to hazard them selves by
believing the contrary (say they) to that which they have seen and yet do see
with their eyes. And especially those that be in arms, who think ye mean to
make of them a matter serviceable to your glory and triumph. (as did the
ancient Emperors those barbarous nations whom they subdued.) And they ground
their belief upon your first Edict, by the which your said Majesty seems
to take for great victory and matter of triumph, the lamentable adventures
happened in the wars passed, in the late king your brothers time, against
those that named them selves your subjects, and were in deed Frenchmen
borne. Again they grant that a prince ought to repress and tame such as will
not obey him, and that God and nature do teach us to obey our princes, and
sovereign Lords: but they also say, that God and nature do likewise teach us
to preserve our lives, and yt to the obedience due to princes ought to be
joined the assurance of the subjects lives, which should not be taken away,
but by order of law: and that if they were assured of that point upon any
other pledges than paper and ynke, there were nothing in the world that they
would more willingly do, than the yelding unto you their whole obedience and
service: and that therefore they are not to be accounted as traitors and
rebels though they submit not themselves without assurance of their lives,
because the former time serves them for a sufficient example and lesson to
learn by the harms of their kinsfolk and friends, neither to be light of
belief, nor to hazard their lives but upon good warrant. They further discourse
hereof in many other sorts, your Majesty may well consider, that to such as
live in fear of their lives, all things are holden suspect. For some, because
them selves are desirous of peace, are easily persuaded that your majesty
desires the same: and othersome for the doubt they stand in of their lives,
are loath to believe any thing: and all generally hang in the balance between
hope and dread, and know not what to trust unto, nor which way to turn them.

Now sir, seeing the world in this manner is tossed, I have adventured to take
upon me the humble presentment of this little declaration unto your majesty,
thereby to give you knowledge of three points of great importance, which I
intend to verify by examples notable and worthy of memory. One is, that
never Prince found it good to make war against his subjects, nor to deal
rigorously and cruelly with them. Another is, that a good peace would not only
make your realm of France to florishe, and your poor subjects to prosper,
which are now at the last cast: but also make you the greatest king that ever
was in France, yea without exception of Charlemaine, Clowis, or any other. And
ye third point is, that a good peace is not so impossible to be made as many
judge it to be. But before I enter into ye discourse of these three points, I
will here recite one history much to ye purpose of my former saying yt the
poor pretended rebels are in such wise tossed between hope and dread, as they
know not where they are. And God grant your majesty a willing desire, to follow
the example of this history which I shall declare.

The Romans had in ^imes past much war with the Latins which were their
neybors, and (as it were) subject to the^ by reason of their near neighborhod.
But the Romans (having overcome them in many victories) would needs
constrayne them, to the yielding of a good part of their goods and
possessions, by way of an amends making, for that the Latins had broken the
treaty of their assotiatio^, and were become rebels against the^. The pore
Latins being sore troubled and vexed, knew not which way to wind them, for it
grieved the^ extremely to endure so great a loss, joined with such shame and
dishonor, and on the other side they saw no mean left them whereby to
maintain the wars any longer. Hereupon, one Furius Camillus, a brave and
valiant Captain, and then Co^sull of Rome, declared to the senate that he
knew a very good and an assured means, how to make, that the Latins should
never after that rise up in arms against the Romans, but ever live in peace
and fidelity together with them. Then demanded they of him what that means
was. Even this said he, that now when they are vanquished and so troubled as
they know not what to do, we receive them for Citizens of Rome as our selves,
to enjoy ye like profits, commodities and privileges as we do: for they look
not for so great a benefit at our hands, but prepare them selves, both to do
and receive all hostility. And herein is offered unto us a very fair occasion
to increase our glory, which we ought not to let slip, because there is
not a surer nor a longer lasting government, than that which is plausible unto
the governed. But we must make have, to the intent that now while they look
for war, and prepare for it, we may prevent them with so great a benefyte.
When Camillus had so put forth his mind and opinion, the voices ran, whereof
the greater number stayed upon his sayings, and his advice was followed, for
the receiving of the Latins to be Citizens of Rome, to the enjoying of the like
rightes and privileges as the Citizens did. And from that time forward they
were always so firmly united to the Romans, as there was never any war or
division between them. Now then if your Majesty would voutchsafe to imitate
this noble and honorable manner of taking perpetual peace with the poor
pretended Rebels (which are your subjects) your goodness, gentleness, and
liberality showed toward them which deserve it not, would very greatly
increase your glory. And so much ye greater would the benefyte be, because they
look not for it, but are utterly persuaded yt your majesty will either have
no peace at al, or else such a peace as shall only tend to your own advantage.
And therefore they be fully bent rather to endure all extremity, than to trust
any more to those fruitelesse peaces (which they call Paix fourrees, and
wherewith (say they) they have always heretofore bin entrapped.

I will herevppon recite one other history much to the purpose. In the time
that the Romans were at war with the Samnites, i. Liuius b. 9. deca. 1.
(a war like people) it happened that Porthumius and Veturius consuls and
captains of the Roman army, were by occasion of evil conduct, enclosed in a
straight of disadvantage. And for lack of a better remedy, they entered into an
entreaty of peace with the Samnites, which so in that straight held their
enclosed. The Captain general of the Samnites was a brave young gentleman named
Pontius, whose father called Herennius, had of long time governed the state of
the Samnites. The advice of this good old man was asked for the making of
peace: he answered that they must set go the Romans whom they held already
couped up as Captives, without any harm or violence. This advice was not very
well liked of by Potius his son, which eftlones asked him whether he knew no
better way than that; for ye bringing of ye peace to pass. To whom the good
old man answered, that if they misliked of that his first opinion, his next
advice was, that they should kill all the Romans which they held then
enclosed, without suffering of any one of them to escape. For (said he) there
is between both no mean, that may avail to the winning of a good peace, ye
same must of necessity be gotten either by the virtue of some benefit
bestowed upon the enemy, or else by the so weakening of them (through the
putting of the whole army to the sword) as in a long time after they shall not
be able to recover again their force. Neither ye one nor the other of this good
man's opinions were followed, but in the end a dissimuled peace was made,
which was not only shameful to the Romans, but also by them incontinently
broken to the utter ruin and decay of the Samnites, which understood in the
end, yt the counsel of the good old Herennius had bin the best to have bin
followed. Hereof sir I mean to conclude, that for as much as the Hugonots cannot
al be enclosed in one strayte, and that if they could, to kill them al (being
your subjects and not your enemies) it were a thing neither reasonable nor
convenient: ye could not do better, than to agree to such a peace, as might to
each part be both profitable and agreeable, which would cause it to be of
continuance. In this respect ye great warrior Ha^niball demanded peace of the
valiant and happy Scipio after this manner. It is I Ha^nibal yt do demand the
peace, which I would not demand if it might not be profitable, and having
obtained such a one I will willingly keep it, for the very same profit for the
which I required it: ^ionisius ^alic. lib. 3.
for to be short, a good peace ought not to be made in have, but rather to be
digested with mere deliberation, loking to none other end, than the profit of
the common weal. And for this cause was it by Tullus Hostilius king of the
Romans said, that the mutual intercourse of commodities, was the true band of
peace.

But coming now to entreat of those three points which before I proponed, as
subject to this declaration. Touching the first, which is, yt a prince ought
not to take in hand ye making of wars against his subjects: I set down for a
true co^seque^ce yt a people do never die. The perticulars or several parts of
ye same do die in deed, but they leave always behind such as do succeed them
not only in their inherita^ces, but also in their quarrels and passions: so as
seldom or never dies there any so very a caytife and unfortunate wretch yt
leaves not another (yea two or three, either children, brethren, parents or
friends) which will be sorry for his death, and seek reue^geme^t of it if it
were violently procured. Wherefore, who soever has to do with a people, by killing
of ye perticulars profits little, because they leave alwais to succeed the^
such as are (as it were) married to their quarrels. The same is at this day to be
seen by ye Gospellers (so do I term them in stead of Hugonots, and catholics
in stead of Papists, as did ye Lord of Valence in his declaration made to ye
Polonia^s: for within these.xv years, what by the wars, what by justice, and
what by murders, there has been done to death more than 200000. and yet for
all that, there are still so great a number of them, as it may seem there has
not any one dyed. There is very apparent reason why it should be so: namely for
that a people dies not, because the perticulars have always other perticulars
to succeed them, not only in their inheritances, but also in their manners,
instructions, and other conditions. But contrariwise, the great Princes dye, as
the late king your brother is dead, and many of his best seruitors are dead,
your self also are mortal, and your best seruitors be mortal, wherthrough it
is commonly seen, yt great men's great devices vanish away in the smoke,
because that for the most part their successors are not of the same humor
and will, but use their government far otherwise, the one undoing what by the
other was done. In so much as it is seen that ordinarily they pull down, whom
their predecessors had set up. Whereof among others, master Enguerran of
Marigny may be a witness, which having bin in great credit and authority, in
the time of king Philip the fair: was by his brother and successor king Jews
Hutin so abased, as he therethrough became a poor man, without any cause
apparent, other than for the envy and hate borne to the greatness that he had
gotten. Also the wise Courtiers (which will not their lives, honors, and goods,
to depend upon the life of one only man) are accustomed not only to please
him that presently reigns, but also him that is like to succeed him. For as
Pompei said unto Scilla, there be more that do worship ye sun rising, tha^ ye
sun setting.

Alexander the great did in his time many wonderful and incredible things.
Plutarch in Alexandro.
For with an army of.30000. Macedons, he ouercam Darius ye great monarch of all the east leuant in three battles. In the first whereof Darius had 300000. me^,
which was twenty against one In the.2. he had.600000. which was.20. against
one. And in the third, he had a Missio^, which was thirty against one. He
subdued all the Empire of Darius, as the Persians, the Medes, the Parthians, the
Armenians, the Babylonians, with Egypt, Palestine, and Syria, and generally all
the land habitable of Europe and Asi, from Macedonie eastwarde unto India. But
all those fair conquestes vanished like smoke, and in the end came to
nothing, for he him self died young, and left not successors of like nobleness
and valia^cie as he was. Whereupon Titus Liuius puts forth this question.
Liuius lib. 9. deca. 1.
If Alexander the great had taken in hand the wars of his time against the
Romans, whether he should as easily have overcome them as he did Darius? he
answers no. For though (says he) Alexander was a valiant king, and a stout
and brave warrior: yet was he but one: and in having to do with Darius, he had
to do but with one head. Where, had he had to do with the Romans, he must have
fought with a number of brave Captains one after another. As Valerius
Coruinus, Martius Rutilius, Caius Sulpicius, Manlius Torquatus, Publius Philo,
Papirius Cursor, Fabius Maximus, Lucius Voluminous, the two Decians, Marcus
Curious, and many other, which would from hand to hand have received him, so as
he should have known that they understood the mysteries of the wars. And
as concerning Council, Alexander which was a young Prince, could have no
better than they, that were guided by the heads of a whole Senate. The
conclusion (says Titus Liuius) is, That the Macedons had but one Alexander,
but the Romans had many captains which would have matched him, of whom
every one should have lived, and dyed without peril or danger to the state
public: Whereas by the death of Alexander, the state of his Monarch was rent
and torn in pieces.

The experience of this discourse of Titus Liuius, Ti. Liuius lib. 2. deca. 1.
was well seen in the wars that Hanniball had against the Romans. For he
was a wise and valiant Captain, and knew as well how to guide his army as
when to fight. Neither was he ignorant of the stratagemes or policies of war.
And in deed he overthrew many of the Roman Captains, as Flamminius, Paulus
Emilius, Terencius Varro, Marcellus, and many other. But in the end he was
repulsed by Claudius Nero, Fabius Maximus, and other, and last of all so
utterly overthrown by the great Scipio the Affricane, as he found well that
it was no small thing, to have to do with a people, which do daily breed new
Captains and men of war. And that well the perticulars of a people may be
vanquished and overthrown, but the whole people never. According to this
saying of the philosophers: A general kind is immortal, by reason of the
succession of perticulars (which succeed one another) though every particular
in it self be mortal. And this reason advises a Prince, not only to
forbear to strive with his people: but also to shun the evil will of them,
for fear of after clappes. The Emperor Caius Caligula, Su^ in Calig. cap. 30.
3^. 49. 56. Dion ibid.
in his time put to death many of his subjects, even of the chiefest, most
commonly for his own pleasure without lawful cause, and namely those which
found any fault with his doings and government, thinking by that means to
have made away all that hated him, and imagining (though fondly) that with
cruelty he might avoid hatred, wherewith cruelty is ordinarily and worthyly
accompanied. But the more he caused to dye, the more his haters increased, and
by the kylling of one, he gat the hatred of ten, in so much that perceiving
him self to be hated of all his people, he wished that all the people of Rome
had had but one head, whereby he meant, that if he had could, he would have
dispatched the^ al at one stroke. But at the last experience taught him, that a
people has many heads (which daily multiply) where he had but one, by the
taking whereof from him, he was miserably slain. For although by being Emperor
of the world, he was of great power: yet was the power of the people found to
be greater than his.

This was well declared in a Comedy to the great Emperor Maximine,
Capitolinus in Maximino.
great I say of stature, (for he was in length eight foot, and in bigness
thereunto accordant, but in virtue very small. This Emperor was of personage
so strong, as with one blow of his fist he struck out the teeth of an horse,
with one spurn of his foot he burst in sunder a horses leg, and with both
his hands he plucked a horseshoe in sunder. With yt natural force, he had also
ye force of ye Roman Empire at commandment, so as he thought him self to be
invincible and immortal. And therefore as one careless of the peoples
displeasure, he put to death many gentlemen and other persons of credit,
partly for his pleasure, and partly for the envy that he bare unto their
virtues. Therefore as he was one day in the Theater beholding the playing of a
Commedie, one of the players with a good countenance, said aloude as follows.
Whom one alone could never hurt, a number may confound,
The huge and mighty Elyphant, is so borne down to ground:
The princely Lion, though he be vnfeareful, strong and stout,
Is notwithstanding overthrown, and killed by a rout.
The cruel Tygre so is left stark dead upon the ground,
For all his fell and furious mood, that passes for no wound.
And thou that stand in no fear of any one alone,
At leastwise fear the common rage of many knit in one.


Maximine perceived not that this player had cast these verses as it were a
stone into his garden. Or if he did perceive, yet did he dissemble it, but
within a while after, he found what so was said in jest, toward him to turn
to good earnest. For after he had exercised many cruelties, and therein done to
death more than.4000. Gentlemen without order of justice, he was of all his
subjects so mislyked, as (leading an army against the town of Aquilee) the
whole country conspired to keep him from victuals, (notwithstanding any
commandment by him put forth to the contrary) by reason whereof the
soldiers (being pinched with famine) conceived a hatred against him, and began
to grudge at him, and so at the last murdered him. The ancient Romans would
always seem invincible against strangers, but never against their own
people. The chief of whom were esteemed amongst them as the head, and the
mean sort as the members. And if at any time the commons were fallen into any
mutenie, the heads incontinent went about to appease them by gentleness, often
thinking good, rather to yield them what so ever they demanded, than to assay
to daunt them by any force of arms. Ti. Liuius lib. 2. deca. 1.
On a time the people, rose by reason of the great rygoure that the bankers and
usurers (to whom they ought money) used against the^. By and by the Consuls
assembled their Senate, to be advised how that tumult of the people might be
appeased. After the matter had been propounded, and some speeches passed of it,
Appius Claudius (a severe man) was of opinion that the bands of the bankers
and usurers ought and were to be paid, and that such a liberty was not to be
set open, as the suffering of the people to break their contractes whereunto
they were bound, but that they ought rather by force to be compelled to
perform them. And that if they would punish some of the ringleaders and most
seditious persons, that had of that mutenie bin the first mouers, all the
residue would shrink and be so discouraged, that hardly should there any be
found, that would at any time after that, become a captain to the commo^s, or
any motioner of sedition. On the contrary part, the Consul Seruilius was of
opinion that the sedition was to be appeased by gentle means, saying, that it
is much easier to bow a people than to break them, and that for the
conservation of the common weal, the gentle means is much surer than the
rigorous, because if that rigor take not good success, the people become
mad, and utter vnsubduable. By the decree of the Senate the adulce of
Seruilius was followed, that they should rather cardesure, than to commit to
hazard the estate of the public weal, and for a time the exaction of the
hands, (whereupon the bankers and other had lent money upon interest to the
people) were suspended. Ti. Liuius lib. eodem.
Within a while after, certain of the chiefest in Rome, caused one of the
Tribunes of the people (which was (as it were) the maintayner of ye liberties
of the third estate) to be slain as secretly as could be, because that under
the color of his office, he had gone about to move the people to sedition.
The people were sore grieved at the death of their Tribune: but they said
nothing to it, because they knew not to whose charge to lay it nor whom to
blame for it. The noble men (which had caused that blow to be given) were
very well a paid, that the people durst not open their lips at it, thinking
the^ selves to have used a very good mean of preventing the sedition, and that
other Tribunes thereby, would take example of it hereafter: They thought surely,
that by their causing of the chief mouer of the sedition to be slain, they
had taken away the cause of sedition. But in very deed, they had not the
principal efficient cause, that is to say, the r^cour, miscontentment, and
indignation of the people, but they had rather increased it by such unlawful
execution. What beca^e thereof? It happened anon after, that there were certain
soldiers to be leuyed in Rome for a piece of service that the Romans had in
hands, and every man thought that the ^eath of the Tri^r had then bin fallen
asleep, and for ever forgotten. The Consuls commanded one Vale^o (a man of
the third estate, that had before^ene captain of cr^t^we footmen) to put this
compauit in a readiness: ^e answered ^atly yt he would not. Thervpo^ Emilius
and Virginius then Co^^s, (...) certain S^ri^s to ar^stohi^, and (...)
toward. But he es^ping the (...) of the Sar^ant^, cast him self into althroug^
of the people, and crying out for (...) said, Masters let us stand to our
(...) loo^ing to be any were helped (...) Tribunes, who dare not say any thing,
because they be put to death for doing of their duties. Upon those wordis of
his, notwithstonding that the Consols did what they would to appease that
sedition, so^ of them (...) upon the ^r^ants, who being will ^ffeted, and ha^ing
their m^ces (...), did with much add (...) the Pa^are where the Senators were
assembled. Then began they to fall to consultation, how that uproar might be
remedied. Many speaking rigorously, said, that such boldness and rashness of
the people was to be repressed with force and severity. But the ancient and
wiser Senators, which were of opinion that it was not meet for the head to
subdue the members by violence (but rather by courtesy and gentleness)
prevailed in that counsel. For they knew well that they had already done too
much, in causing the Tribune to be slain without order of justice, (although
he had deserved it) and in offering that extremity so rashly to Valero, and
that in such common misorders, the my^dest remedies are the surest and
holesurnest. I will reaccount one example more of this gentle manner of
proceeding, which for the appeasing of tumults and civil seditions, the ancient
Romans liked to use, because it is a point both worthy the marking, and
appertinent to our purpose. It fell out one day in Rome that amongst the people
there was so great a mutenie, as the commons would needs separat them selves
from the nobility, taking occasion therinto, through the grievous burdens of
their impostes, subsidies, and other like exactions. And it went so far, as the
poorest and meanest of the people, did separate them selves from the rich and
noble, and forsook their houses to dwell elsewhere, howbeit without quarelling
among themselves. When this matter came in question, by what means the said
mutenie might best be stayed, and the people framed and brought to the yelding
of their obedience toward their superiors and magistrates: amongst the
Senators ran two opinions, one contrary to the other. The one was of Appius
Claudius, a man very severe and rygorous against the common people: whose
opinion was, that there was no yelding to the common people, whose nature is
such (said he) if it were not brideled, would wax stubborn and proud, and
the grau^ting of any thing unto them under color of this sedition, would be a
maintenance and furderance of other rashness and boldness, and an occasion to
make them do the like another time: and therefore they were to be subdued by
rygour and force. This opinion of Appius at the first sight was allowed and
followed of the young Senators, whose blood was as hot and fierce, as their
discretions were cold and unstayed. The other opinion was of Menenius Agrippa,
a very good man, courteous, of good reputation, and of a right noble house, (but
poor and a despiser of riches) which said, that the public affairs were as
the body of a man, from the which the good Surgeon does not by and by cut
off the member that has an vleer o^ impostume, but rather deuiseth, how he may
with good and wise remedies heal it, adding also, that experience always
shows the nature of a people, to become tractable by good and gentle dealing,
and the most modest and myldest, to become fierce with end and rygorous
handling, no more nor less than a wild beast, being entised and flattered
becomes to^: and the tame being beaten and evil entreated, becomes wild.
And that they ought by bearing with ye people, and bearing of their plaints and
griefs to win their hearts, and by gentle and favorable means to bring the^
back again to their obedience. This opinion of Menenius was followed by those
ancient wise Senators, that were well practiced in the government of the
common affairs, to whom also soon after agreed the younger sort, somewhat
ashamed to have holde^ contrary opinion to their ancients in years and
judgment. And they excused them selves of it by the mouth of one of the^ named
Spurius Nautius, who desired the ancient to hold their youth excused, which
is not lightly accompanied with stayed judgment, assuring them yt their
following of the opinion of Appius, proceeded rather of a boiling and unadvised
affection, and not of purpose to stand upon terms with the^, promising from
the^ceforth to flee the falling into any such fault, and to be conformable to
the judgment of the elders, as men of more wisdom and greater experience.
The young Senators were much praised, as well for the reuoking of their opinion,
as for their so courteous excusing of the^ selves, and so Appius remained alone
in his rigorous judgments And charge was given by the Senate to Menenius to
make known their good will to the people, which he did in such courteous manner,
and with so sweet words, that he not only won their hearts, but also abated
their fury and fierceness of courage. My masters (says he) the Senate has
neither done you harm, nor mean to do you any. They are as it were the
belly, and you the members of the body: and should the members complain them,
that what they labor for is all for the belly? Is it not the belly that
nourishes, mayntaineth, and keeps the members, being (as it were) the
storehouse or Garner of all the whole body? When the belly takes and receives
sustenaunce and nourishment, does it keep it altogether to it self? does it
not rather disperse it through the whole body, even to the fingers of the
hands, and to the toes of the feet, which are furthest off from it? Do we not
see that the nourishment which it gathers, serves not for it self alone,
but for the whole body? And even in like sort does the Senate employ those
things which they demand and gather of you. The Tributes and Subsidies that
they levy and receive, are they not to be employed for the service of the
whole body of the common wealth? Cease then my masters to complain you of
your superiors and Magistrates, which do nothing but for you and for your
conseruations. Whereof do you complain you, and the cause of your complaint
shall be taken away (for a malady cannot better be cured than by the taking
away of the cause.) All things shall be yielded you that shall be found
profitable and necessary to the whole body of the common weal, which band of
common profit shall be one mean of assurance to conserve the one with the
other: and the public oath which shall be sworn unto you, shall also be
another good guage. By this oration and declaration of this good man Menenius,
were the people appeased, their hearts won, and them selves reconciled and
brought again under the obedience of their superiors and magistrates, and
above all, he was greatly commended for his sweet manner of speaking, but
especially in that he compared the Senate rather to the belly than to the
head, to show that they were rather fathers and nourishers than any hautie
rulers over the people. It is then a thing very certain, that the manner of
appeasing the people by gentleness and profit, (and not by making them war) is
the true mean to bring and hold them under obedience as it is also for the
appeasing of troubles and seditions. Nero that was Emperor of the Romans,
Suetonius in Nerone ca. 38. 40. 42. 47 48. 49. Dion eodem.
would needs make war against his subjects, not by preparing an army
against them, but by causing an infinite number of them to be slain and
murthred one after another, only for his pleasure sake. For the which also he
set on fire the four corners of Rome, to the end to have burned ye whole town,
whereof in deed he burned a good part. And when he had done, he made pretense
that he did it to have builded it new again, for the doing whereof, he laid so
great tributes and subsedies upon all the provinces of the Empire, that he
sucked the^ dry with his fines. These cruelties and oppressions, so won him
the evil will of all his subjects, as they one after another revolted from his
obeisance. And him self in the end being abandoned of every one, (yea even of
those of his own guard) fled and hid him in a little lodge in the fields where
he was discovered, and fearing to be taken alive, killed himself. Galba
succeeded him in the Empire. Suetonius and Dion in Nero. Cor. Tacitus Annalium
libr. 13. 14.
But seeing I am entered into the making of some discourse concerning the
Emperor Nero, I will make a little digression which shall not be impertinent
nor out of my purpose. This Emperor being the last of the house of Caesar's,
was as vicious, wicked, and cruel, as the first (which was Julius Caesar) was
virtuous, good, and gentle. The recompting of the legend of his wicked life,
would require too long a time: but it shall suffice me to tell how he dealt
with his best servants, and what he gained by such dealing. He had then many
noble and good seruitours, which as long as he trusted them, were to him very
loving and faithful, but when they once saw him to become mistrustfull of
their doings, their fidelities began to waver and diminishe, for fearing least
he should execute like cruelty upon them, as he had done upon many others that
had deserved it. Among other he had seven al right grave and excellent
personages that were his most especial servants, and by him employde in the
greatest charges of his empire. That is to say Seneca, which in his youth had
bin his tutor and governor, and was (as it were) the superintendent of all the
affairs of the Empire. Ruffus which was his Constable and great master of his
household. Subrius Flauius which was captain general of his guardes.
Sulpicius after one of his darlings and one of ye principal Captains of the
same guard. Corbulo which was his liefetena^t in the east parts, and captain
general over the Roman army, against the Parthes, who was a valiant warrior
and did noble acts against Teridates Vologesus, and other kings in the East,
wherethrough he gat great honor and reputation throughout the world. Vindex
which was likewise his Liefetenant general and governor in the gouernmente
of Gaul, a great and mighty province, containing all that which is now the
realm of France with base Alemaigne on this side the Rhine, the low country of
Flanders, Brabant and Henalt, even unto the sea: Switzerlande, Sauoye,
Piedinont and Lombardy even to Reniui where there is a little flood called in
old time Rubicon, that separateth Gaul Cisalpine from Italy. Also Sergius
Galba was his Lieftenaunt general and governor in Spain, Portingale and
Granade, which likewise was a very great government that comprehends at this
day seven or eight realms. And this Galba was a wise and valiant captain,
but greatly stricken in years, for he was.lxxiij. years old when Nero died.
These seven great Lords were good and loving servants to Nero, til such time
as he becam so wicked, and so far past al goodness, as he was no longer to be
borne withal. His corruption came chiefly by the means of Agrippine his mother,
which would needs govern and manage all the affairs of the Empire (so
ambitious she was and desirous to co^mau^d.) But this was the mischief, that
Seneca suffered himself to be won by her. For she was a fair well favored
princes, and with her entered he into so great familiarity, as he enjoyed her
secretly. They two then (to the end that al things should pass through their
hands) persuaded Nero (which was a young prince) to take his pleasures and
sports, and to leave unto them the charge and pain of the public affairs,
thinking that the fury of his youth would wear away in fond delights and
pastimes, and that wisdom would increase with his age, and that in the mean
time they should better govern than he. Of the same opinion was Burrus a
singular person, and next unto Seneca in the weighty causes of government. And
surely about the space of five years, they governed the Empire reasonably
well. Howbeit; because Agrippine took upon her to rule all alone after her
own appetite, these two persons Seneca and Burrus, took order out of hand,
that the Emperor should withdraw some part of the gouernmente from her, and
not suffer her to deal any more with it. But as wisemen as they were, yet were
they greatly deceived, in that they thought the Emperor Nero should in age
become wise by passing his youth in follies: for it happened clean contrary,
and he became a most wicked and cruel tyrant. And truly it is not to be
believed, that Seneca which was so sage and so great a Philosopher, was
ignorant that of a dissolute life in youth, Nero could not gather ought else
than an evil inclination in age, and that his continuance in riot and
voluptuousness (joined with a princes liberty) could not otherwise do, than
draw him to a marvelous corruption. But to say the truth, Seneca was puffed up
with ambition and desire of soueraintie, notwithstanding that in his words,
and writings, he detested it most of all men, for he was a great hypocrite and
deep dissimuler, speaking one thing and doing another. He preached against
covetousness and covetous men, whilst he himself flattered the old rich
people that had no children, to get thereby their heritages. And he had banks
going in diverse countries where his servants made gain of his money through
interest, so as his revenue came to five or six Millions of sextercies, which
is in value eight hundred thousand pounds of rent. He preached against pomps
and delights, and in ye mean while had the fairest houses, and best builded
that might be, not far inferior to ye proud palaces and royal houses of
Nero the Emperor, and thereunto the most fair delicious gardins that were
possible to be seen, together with so sumptuous moueables that he had.50.
tables of Cedar with their trestles and frames of yuorie, and so much silver
vessel and tapistry as furnished every house that he had thoroughly. He inueyed
against whoredom, when he enterteyned the Empress and delighted in the
company of Bardasses. He cried out and stormed against flattery, and there was
not a finer nor craftier courtier in that quality than he, for he could make
the court to every body, (yea even to the Pages and varlets of the chamber)
from whom any commodity was to be drawn. And lastly he exclaymed against
ambition, and in the mean while would needs govern all himself, and suffer
nothing to pass but through his hands. Moreover, to hear him speak, was
nothing else but honey, but eloquence, but holiness, but wisdom and
knowledge. And to be short, if he were now living, he would deserve to be the
greatest Cardinal of all France. But now to come again to our matter. Seneca
having let lose the reins to the Emperor Nero, and suffering him so far
forth till he had done a thousand mischiefs and cruelties against one and
other, great and small (as his fancy led him) began to doubt least the like
might happen unto himself. Also Burrus, Ruffus, Sulpitius and Flauius, and
diverse other great Lords that followed the court by reason of their estates and
offices, entered into the like fear and mistrust, especially after they had
seen him do to death his mother Agrippine upon displeasure only, that she
would still take upon her the dealing with the matters of the Empire. They
then to avoid his cruelty, made a conspiracy to kill him, but the enterprise
was discovered in such sort, as contrariwise, he caused all them to be killed.
Nevertheless before they were executed, he would needs talk with Sulpicius
one of the Captains of his guarde, and with Flauius the general of the same.
Of Sulpicius he demanded wherefore he had broken his oath in conspiring
against him. For that (answered he) there was no other mean to heal thee of
thy naughtiness. He likewise did ask of Flauius, wherefore he had conspired
against him: I have (said he) loved, and hated thee about any man in ye world:
Loved thee, so long as there remained any hope that thou would become a good
Prince: and hated thee, when I saw there was no more hope of thee but that
thou would grow every day worse and worse: For so long as thou deseruedst
to be beloved, thou had not a more faithful and loving servant than I: but
when I saw thee once to become a manqueller, a murderer, a player of
enterludes, a fencer, and a touneburner, I could not but hate thee extremely.
Those brave answers of those two captives or captain prisoners, made Nero more
afraid tha^ any other thing, as one maruelously astonished to hear that they
durst speak unto him so boldly. In the end, after he had put them to death,
and all other that were but never so little suspected of that conspiracy, he
made great sacrifices of thanksgiving unto Jupiter his deliverer, as one that
thought himself now to have gotten the vpperhand of all his enemies, and in
place of amendment, he gave him self to do worse than before, assuring him
self to reign then forty years and more through the prophecyings of his
Magiciens and deuines which had willed him to take heed to the year of his
age 73. and he had then skarsely accomplished 29. But as he continued his
naughty disordered course, behold Vindex became a reuolter from his
obeisance, together with all the provinces and countries under his
gouernemente, whereof though the loss were not small, yet was not Nero
therewith much troubled. But when he understood that the old Captain Galba
his governor of Spain was revolted, he was greatly astonished, fearing least
that which the magiciens had said unto him, touching the age of.73. was to be
understood, not of his own years, but of Galbas, which was then of the
same age. Corbulo which was then with a great army in the East, was greatly
provoked to do as Vindex and Galba had done. But he as one that would never
thereto consent, continued always so faithful and trusty to Nero, as he gate
therefore evil will, and was blamed of al me^, which said he was a maintainer
of tyranny. Yet for all this, Nero fearing least he should do as his other
fellows did, sent for him by loving letters to come and speak with him.
Corbulo making no doubt of the matter, took the journey in hand: but before he
was come to the place where Nero was, he was at Cenchre betrayed and taken by
the assailaunts which Nero before had sent thither to kill him, who seeing how
the world went, and weying his fault in the not doing as other did, drew out
his dagger, and therewith struck himself to ye heart with uttering these for his
last words I am worthy. Now sir by this short digression it may be gathered,
that the best mean to make a Prince to be well and faithfully served of his
servants and officers, is to be a good and faithful Prince toward them,
without mistrusting of the^, and to use clemency and gentleness (and not
rigor and cruelty) in his government. For a good master makes a good
servant. And ye have not so good a servant, but he will be discouraged when
he sees his master to mistrust him, or his service not to please his master,
specially when the case concerns the service of a prince, who has power of
life and death, over his subjects and servants. For let the servant of a prince
receive a sour countenance of his majesty, and by and by he enters into the
fear of the loss of his life, or at the least of his goods and estimation.
But before I pass out of this matter of Nero, I will on the contrary part set
down an example of ye gentle and courteous Prince Alexander Seuerus (of whom
your majesty has heretofore borne the name.) And that is, to show that those
two Emperous have both of them failed the loss of their lives by following of
two extremities. For Nero having a will to govern all upon his own head, was
cast headlong into the mislikyng and hatred of his people, to ye loss of his
life. And Alexander by suffering him self to be ruled by the fantasies of
other men, won the evil will of his nobility and me^ of war, which
unhappily slew him. And of a truth, a man must always keep an even hand,
and eschew extremities in all things, and specially in matters of state and
government. For as Horace says. Horace lib. 1. Sermo. Satira. 2.
Often whilst the fool does one fault fly,
He falls into the contrary.


Nero (as I said) had good and wise servants about him to his officers. But
when he had suffered the^ to bear authority awhile, he fell into misliking
of them, and therevpo^ would not be ruled any more by them. Lampridius in
Alexandro. Herodianus lib. 6.
Contrariwise Alexander would do nothing at all, but by the council of wise
men, of whom he had a great number about him and therein surely he did well.
Nevertheless ye writers of histories find fault with him in this, that he gave
too much authority to his mother Mamea, which otherwise had bin a good woman,
but that she was not only greedy in gathering of goods from the poor people,
but also a covetous niggarde toward such as served the Emperor her son
beside the which she was very ambitious, aspiring altogether to the government
of the affairs, ever sorry to see her son so courteous and gentle in his
gouernemente: for where he was surnamed Seuerus, he took that as well of his
predecessor Septimius Seuerus, as of his severe observing of warlike
discipline: but otherwise he was the most affablest and ge^tlest prince in the
world. Nevertheless, by his yielding so much authority to his mother Mamea,
he so gate the evil will of his gentlemen and men of war, as by way of a
conspiracy they slew them both together. Truly it was a spectacle very
piteous, to see this gentle young Prince (when the conspiratours entered the
chamber to kill him) run and cast him self between the arms of his mother,
lamentably crying, Ah mother mother, you are hereof the cause. So were they
wretchedly flayne, the one in the others arms, to the great damage of the
Empire, for the loss of so good and gentle a prince, who in all other things
governed him self as well as might be possible, through the good and wise
aduises of such excellent personages, as were of his privy counsel: Amongst
whom the chief was doctor Vlpian, a man singularly learned in ye civil law,
and very well practiced in matters of the state, and issued of the house and
stock of Alexander, whom he served as his chanceler.

This man was not an old doterd of a strange nation, ignorant of the laws,
manners, and customs of the country, drawn out of Vulcans shop to deal with
sealing: he was one made of another manner of metal. But in sum (as I said)
ye fault of this good Emperor Alexander in giving his mother too much
authority, cost both him and her their lives. And truly that fault of his was
not small. For Alexander ought to have considered what he had learned of
Heliogabalus his cousin and predecessor, Lampri. in Heliogaba. Dion in pseudo
Antonino.
which Heliogabalus governing by his mother Semiamira (without whose advise
nothing passed touching the common wealth) was incontine^tlye despised of all
the world, and after he had reigned not passing three years, was by certain
rebels slain very young, and had his body together with his said mothers,
drawn through the fylth of the river Tiber. And thereupon it was decreed by
the Senate, that never woman should enter into the counsel. Froyssart lib. 1.
cap. 4 15. 24.
The gentle King Edward of England the third of that name, governed himself
far otherwise. He was son to Edward the second a cruel king, that was
deprived of his kingdom by his subjects, and to the Lady Isabell daughter of
Philip the fair, king of France. This Lady Isabell Queen of England, was the
cause that her son was crowned King, by the estat^ of the Realm, and
therefore thought he should do nothing but by her council, as in very deed
he did not for a time, but gave to her the chief authority touching the
government of his realm. But it happened that this good Queen mother to
revenge her self of certain of the nobility at her pleasure, caused her
son to commit certain cruelties, for the which he was misliked and much
blamed of his subjects. Which when this gentle King Edward perceived,
judging it best rather to loose the favor of his mother than of his people, he
neither would fall into like peril as did Nero and Alexander Seuerus, nor yet
put his mother to death as Nero did: but made her to be bestowed in a strong,
howebeit a very fair and pleasant castle, of large circuit, wherein there
were many goodly courts, gardens, and walks, enclosed with walls: and
appointed her a good company of Ladies and gentlewomen, with men of worship
and honor, to serve her after her state. And because she was of the house of
France, and Queen mother of England, he assigned her a sufficient revenue for
the maintenance of her estate. And to honor her as his mother, he went to
visit her twice or thrice a year. But neither would he ever suffer her to
pass out of the precinct of the castle, nor to meddle any more with the
government of the realm. And he was much esteemed, as well of strangers as of
his subjects, for his valiant and manly heart, in that he would not submit
himself under the rule of a woman. But let us return again to our former
matter, touching such Princes as have undone them selves by making war
against their subjects. Titus li. 17. Sueton in Vitel. 10. cap. 10.
The Emperor Vitellius ouerthrewe and made a great slaughter of the Romans,
in his battle had against Otho: his soldiers seeing so many dead bodies in
the field, were therefore very sorrowful, but especially for that there was
of them few or none that found not amongst those dead bodies some of their
parents and friends (for they were all Romans) whose death ministered to them
much cause of grief, upon the which occasion they generally detested those
civil wars had between Vitellius and Otho.

Vitellius one day walking through the field where the dead bodies of that
overthrow lay, and seeing some stop their noses, did as it were in mockage
thereof, and as one glad of the slaughter, utter this detestable saying: the
body of a slain enemy has a good sent, but the body of a slain citize^ has
yet a better But not long after, yt tyrant which found so much sweetness in
the savor of his slain citizens, was him self slain as shamefully as he
possibly might be. For being taken and bound by such as conspired against him:
he was brought into the market place with a halter about his neck, all naked
from the waste upward, his apparel all to torn, and his hands fastened
behind him, his chin also being underset with a bodkin, to make him hold up
his head. With which furniture he was in derision harryed through the
streets, not without dirt and filth flung in his face, till he came to the
common gibet, where he was slain and cut in pieces, and lastly cast into
Tyber. That was the reward that he reaped of his pleasure taken in the smell of
the dead bodies of his citizens. Trebellius Pollio in Gallieno and in Ingenio
tyranno.
The Emperor Gallien made war against ye inhabitants of Bizance his subjects.
Bizance was then a goodly flourishing city, which was after named
Constantinople by Constantine the great. This Gallien having gotten the
possession of this goodly city, the townsme^ whereof had yielded themselves to
his devotion, caused to be slain and murthred, (contrary to his word) all the
inhabitants of the same (young and old) without mercy, none other escaping,
than such as he could not come by. And he used like cruelty against many
other good towns wherein his manner was to leave no male vnkilled, so bestly a
bludsucker he was. Also this other good quality he had, that Sardanapalus was
never plunged more deeply in disordinate lechery and voluptuousness than he.
These two fair properties of cruelty and lechery, caused the most part of
the provinces of the Empire to revolt from his government. In so much, that in
diverse countries there rose up against him eight and twenty captains, whereof
one got one province, another got another, so as a great part of the nations
subject to the Empire of Rome, did cut them selves quite off from their
obedience to the Empire, which could never after that recover again his
dominions, but being extremely hated, was slain by a captain of Sclauonie.
And when one came to him and said, sir, France is revolted against you. Well
well (said he) shall we leave our good chetre for those pyde coats? (for the
Frenchmen then ware their garments embrodered with colors.) And when another
said unto him, that Egypt was revolted from his obeisance: Well well (quoth he)
cannot we forbear the surplices of Egypt. The like words used he of other
Provinces, when tidings was brought him of their reuolting. Whereupon by the
way I note, how welnere ordinarily it happens, that when one Province or
town reuolteth, the reuoltes of other do easily follow, because naturally men
desire change, and are never contented with their present state, but hope still
upon better, when it turns commonly into worse. The example of which manner
of reuoltment, is well to be seen in this History of Gallien, for after
France was revolted, the other Provinces ensued one after another. It was also
to be seen in that I said before of Nero, from whom as first France and
then Spain revolted, so the other Provinces followed. Ti. Liuius lib. 3. dec. 3.
When Hanniball had won the journey of Cannas against the Romans, a great
part of their subjects one after another forsook them, and willingly yielded
them selves to Hanniball. Ti. Liuius lib. 7. de. 1.
The like may be learned of the wars which the Romans had against their
confederates, Appianus de bello Social.
which revolted one after another, yea and banded them selves together against
them. De bello Gal. lib. 7. cap. 19.
Caesar does also write, yt after he had brought under his obeisance the towns
of France: they of Autun, which were the first that drew him into France,
were also the first that withdrewe them selves from him, and made the most
part of the other towns to do the like, in such sort, as he found more
painful his governing therein at ye last, tha^ he did his conquering of them
at the first. Whereupon he said, that the french men are naturally enclyned
to reuolting, when the way is once opened to the^. I could allege an infinite
number of other examples to this purpose, but the matter is clear enough of it
self, and requires no large discourse, and therefore I will now return to my
purpose. Frois. lib. 2. cap. 95. 96. 97. 98.
Jews the last Earl of Flaunders (for after him the Earldome fell into the
house of Burgoign, and from thence into the house of Austrich, where it now
tarieth,) made great and grievous wars against his subjects of Gaunt,
because they were not to him so obedient as he would them (as people that in
deed were always too stubborn against their Prince.) He having then
continued a long and sharp siege, by cutting off their victuals, brought
amongst them a marvelous famine, wherethrough they were driven into an utter
despair. The poor people desired the Duchess of Brabant, the Bishop of Liege,
and certain other of ye nobility, to entreat for some good peace, with the
said Earl their Lord. The which the said Lords took great pains to do, but
the Earl would in no wise agree to any other end, than that all the
inhabitants of Gaunt, should in a certain place come before him barefoote and
bare headed, with halters about their necks, demanding pardon for their
rebellion, and their pardonings nevertheless to stand upon his pleasure. When
the poor Gauntois understood no better remedy to be hoped for tha^ that, they
desperately determined (rather than so) to hazard them selves to die with their
swords in their hands. Whereupon out of the town there issued about 5000.
Gauntois (compelled thereto by famine, as the wolf is to the wood) which sped
them toward Bridges, where the Earl their lord then lay with his power. And
when they came somewhat near the said town of Bridges, their captains, and
certain Friars that were with them, began to encourage them, and told them
that their case was like to the children of Israel, which had humbled the^
selves as much as might be unto Pharao, and yet he had never the more pity
upon the^. And that even as God had drowned Pharao in the depth of the sea for
his rygour reached out to the Israelites: so would he punish Jews their
Lord for his cruelty extended to the Gauntois. Whilst the Friars were thus
preaching to the poor hungerstarued people, behold, the army of the Earl
(which were forty thousand men in good array,) came raunging toward the
said five thousand famished Gauntois, who (on the one side being past all
hope of any favor at their Lords hand, and on the other side, ready to be
swalowed up by famine) determined verily to vanquishe or to dye, and thereupon
fought so valyantly and desperately, as they ouerthrewe the Earls army,
sacked his houses, and took his town of Brudges, and gate under their
government all his towns of Flaunders, Audenarde only excepted. The Earl
saved him self within Brudges, after the overthrow of his army. And when
Brudges was taken, he hid himself in the house of a poor woman, which bestowed
him in a garret under a little couch, upon the which her young children were
laid to sleep. The next morning he found the means to steal out of the
town secretly, disguised in a Costerdmongers apparel, wherewith he gat into
Lisle, where he tarried in safety. But after that time never lived peaceably in
his country, for whereas before he had but only the Gauntois against him,
(which he might easily by gentle means, have brought under his obeysante:)
he was after that banded against by all the whole country.

Roboam King of Israel, 3. Re. cap.. 12.
a Prince evil advised (although he were the son of Solomon a wise father.)
Would needs put upon his people greater tributes and subsidies, than ever his
said father did. The people opening to him their griefs, by way of
complayntes, showed them selves unable to sustain so great charges. Whereupon
Roboam brought the matter to his counsel, to the end they might determine
what best therein was to be done. The old and sage Counselors were of
opinion, that his best was to grant to his subjects their demand, in not
augmenting of their impostes, wherethrough he might at his new coming to the
Crown, win the hearts of his people, to the rendering of their obedience and
frank good will to his service. The counselors which were young (as well in
judgment as in years, and such as at this day there are too many of,) were
of ye contrary opinion, saying, that it was not mete for a king to grant the
people their wills, by doing whereof (said they) he should receive law of
them to whom he ought to give law, and subject him self to them that ought
to be subject to him: but rather, that he ought to make them know him for
their Prince and sovereign Lord, whose office was to command, and theirs
absolutely to obey.

Roboam following this opinion, would needs lay great taxes and impositions on
his people, by reason whereof the most part of them (that is to say) ten
parts of twelve, rebelled against him, and raised for their King one Jeroboam.
Whereupon the said Roboam prepared an army of 80000. men, for the repressing
of those rebels, wherein he lost both his labor and time, for Jeroboam
continued King in peace. And from that time forth, that kingdom remained
divided in two: Philip de Co^mnies lib. 1. cap. 3.
King Jews the eleventh (as fine and subtle a prince as ever was in France)
at his coming to the crown governed him self very ill, in displacing and
hindering of many good and ancient seruitours, that had don great service to
Charles the seventh his father, in the recovering of his realm, the most part
whereof, the Englishmen long time enjoyed. Wherewith the nobles being
discontented, raised against their said king a civil war, which they called
the common wealth. To them many towns and commonalties also adjoined them
selves, by reason of the great impostes that the king put upon them. But the
wise king (knowing his fault) sought all the means possible for the appeasing
of that war, therein following the advice and council of his good friend
Fraunces Sforze the Duke of Millaine, which councelled him for ye obtaining of
peace, to deny nothing of their demaundes. And in deed by granting their
requests, he appeased those civil wars, and was al his life after served of
those noblemen and gentlemen, yt were against him in the same, toward whom he
never reserved so much as any desire of reue^gement. It may be said, that what
the king did herein, was done upon policy. But how so ever it was done, the
Frenchmen till these days were never so Italionated, as to bear malice long
in their hearts. And this wise king would never hazard his common wealth, by
giving of battle unto his people, saying, that he would not commit his estate
(which was so good and so great, as the king of a royal Realm) to the peril
of so uncertain a thing as a battle. And after the peace made, he frankely
confessed, that he saw him self in great peril of loosing his kingdom, and
had determined in his mind, to have saved him self at Millaine, or else
amongst the Switzers, if Paris had not held with him, but been won and
possessed by his adversaries. Froissart lib.
Edward the second of that name King of England, for the pleasure of Hugh
Spencer his chief mynion, made war against his subjects, and put to death
many of his Princes and nobles without any order of justice, in so much as
Queen Isabell his wife, with his son and hirs (to shun his fury and
cruelty) were feign to flee into France, who after returned again into
England with her said son, and a small force, which she had gotten by the
means of a mean Gentleman called sir John of Henawd, brother to the Earl of
Henawd. And being aryued in England, found all the people ready at her
commandment, as those that had taken a great displeasure against the King, by
reason of his cruelty: So as she besieged her said husband, took him
prisoner, and bestowed him in the Tower of London. Then caused she all the
estates of the realm to be assembled, by whom King Edward the second (for
his cruelty committed against his nobility) was found and pronounced
unworthy to be King any longer, and so was deprived of his dignity. And while
he was yet alive, and prisoner in the said Tower of London, the said estates
crowned his son Edward the third their King, of whom I have spoken before,
and showed that he did the like to his mother. Dionis. Hal. 4. and. 5.
Tarquine the proud a King of the Romans, was by his people driven out of
Rome, as well for his governing over proudly, as for suffering his son to
violate a woman of honor named Lucrecia, and being thence banished, he sent
his ambassadors thither for the procuring of his peace, and restablishement of
his estate: many gave their consents to restore him, and had he proceeded in
gentle and tractable manner, there had been great likelyhoode of the recovery
of his kingdom. But being unable to master his own pride, he gathered
together as many as he could get to take his part, and with Porsena king of
the Hetrurians (whom he raised up to aid him) made war against the
Romans. This war procured him such hatred of the Romans which had been his
subjects, as they would never after return under his obeisance: in so much as
both he and all his posterity were deprived from off the kingdom, and the
estate of that Monarchy changed into a public state. And from that time forth
the name of King was deadly hated and abhorred among the Romans. And no
marvel though the name of King were so sore hated of the Romans for one man's
fault, that even when the same state returned again to a Monarchy under
Julius Caesar, neither he nor his successors would be called kings, but
Emperors. For it has happened so to diverse other names. The name of Tyrant,
which at this day sounds so ill, and is of every man hated, was amongst our
Elders an honorable name, and signified none other thing but lord, insomuch yt
Virgil whose only drift in his Aeneiad^s, Virgil Eneid^ lib. 7.
was to advance the godliness and virtue of his Aeneas, calls him Tyrant.
Likewise ye name of Judas (which signifies a Confessor,) was in times past
reputed honorable, and yet by reason of one man's fault, it is now taken for
a traitor. And before the Emperor Neroes time, this name Neron (which in the
old Sabin tongue signifies noble) was esteemed as a glorious name, especially
after the days of Claudius Nero, which overcame Asdrubal Hannibals brother, and
his 50000. men: but for the offenses of one only man, the same is now taken for
a tyrant. So much may the wickedness of one man do, to ye utter defacing of a
fair and honorable name for ever. God grant that the vices of some of us
frenchmen, do not bespot ye name of Fre^chman, which has heretofore bin
esteemed and honored throughout al ye world: which thing I am sore afeard of,
if we mend not ye sooner: for already in Germany, they call al frenchmen
indifferently Schelmes. Continuing our examples, I will recite you one which is
the more to be noted, for that it was done by the way of justice.

After the death of the great Herod king of Judea, Samaria, Galile, and
Idumea, As Josephus De bello Iud. lib. 18. cap. 1. 2. 3.
there arose a strife and contention between Archelaus and Herodes Antipas his
sons. Archelaus would needs make wars against his subjects, upon a very
slyght occasion, in such wise, as for the giving of one blow, he caused three
thousand persons to be slain by his horsemen, whom he made to trauerse and
run through the whole assembly of his people. Whereupon his brother Antipas
sped him straight unto Rome, where before Augustus Caesar he accused Archelaus,
for at that time welneere all the Kings of the world were subject to ye Roman
Empire. The Jews also sent from Judea to Rome, fifty Ambassadors, to accuse
him before Augustus, and to show how unworthy he was to reign, that had upon
his people committed such cruelty: and that also there was no better courtesy
to be looked for at his hands, that would so soon after the death of his
father (and immediately upon his entry) commit acts so cruel and unnatural.
In consideration whereof they besought Augustus to give them rather Antipas for
their King. Augustus Caesar took knowledge of this matter, nevertheless, for
that he bare some favor and friendship to Archelaus: be confirmed his
succession in Judea, Samaria, and Idumea, and assigned Galile to Antipas. But
therewith he exhorted Archelaus to the governing of him self thencefoorth
more mildly and gently toward his subjects. Archelaus returning into his
country with so good speed at Augustus hand, behaved him self there, more
cruelly than before. Whereupon he was again accused at Rome, and there
condemned by the Senate, to whom Augustus had referred the examination of the
matter, in somuche that all his goods were confiscate to the Emperor by
sentence of the Senate, and he him self was banished to Vienna in Dauphine,
there to end his days, as he miserably did. After this judgment, Judea,
Samaria and Idumea, were ruled by such governors as the Emperor did
establishe, as by Coponius and Annius Rufus in the reign of Augustus Caesar,
and by Valerius Gratus, and Pontius Pilate (that cruel man, which judged our
Savior to death) during the days of Tiberius. The conclusion is, that
Archelaus for his warring and ouerrigorous dealing with his subjects,
miserably ended his days, and was the causer of the alteration of the state of
his country. Upon this matter of alteration of states, I say by the way, that
it has often fallen out, and still does, that when Monarchies have bin
excessiuely corrupted with vice, they have bin changed into commonweals: and
likewise when the commonweals have once bin corrupted, they also have bin
changed into Monarchies and kingdoms. The example hereof was seen in the
nation of the Jews, at whose beginning even from the time of Moses and Joshua,
that people was governed in the form of a Monarchy (for those two were as
chief governors one after another.) Afterward in the time of the Judges was
the same state changed to the form of a common weal, for the people were
governed by a chosen number of ancients (except in time of war when God
always raised up to them a Captain (which they called their judge.) But
again in the days of Samuel it altered from a common wealth to a Monarchy,
at which time Saul was chosen King. After that, in the time of the Machabees,
it was changed from a Monarchy to a popular state, howbeit, that to say the
truth, it was a confused state, which had no manner of form of good
government, and yet afterward it returned to the manner of a Monarchy in ye
reign of Herod ye great, and was lastly put into the form of a province under
ye Roman Empire. Likewise ye estate of ye Romans was governed as a Monarchy
from the reign of Romulus till ye time of Tarquine the proud, whose pride and
evil gouernemente was the cause that the same state was changed into the form
of a common wealth. In that state ye Romans continued unto the days of Julius
Caesar, at which time it was so corrupted with riot, avarice, and ambition
(whereof the civil wars between Scilla and Marius, and between Caesar and
Pompei may be a witness,) that it could not but alter and come again to a
Monarchy. Since ye which time that great Roman Monarchy has been piteously
wasted by the evil gouernmentes of many Emperors. And of the wast of the
same, have bin erected many common wealths and great kingdoms, as France,
Spain, England, and other greater and smaller Monarchies. To be short,
these chaunges have been seen in the state of the Roman Empire, in less
than.1500 year. Caesar de bello gall. lib. 1 cap. 13.
France before the time of Julius Caesar stood in the state of small common
wealths, which governed themselves apart the one by the other, by
co^federations that they had together to revenge them upon strangers, as the
Cantons do at this day. But ambition made them bandie, and make war each
against other, to prove which should be the greatest. Of whom, when they of
Autun had gotten the upper hand as the stronger, those of Sequanois their
neighbors, feeling them selves the weaker, called the Almaines to their
succors against them of Autun. The Almaines coming down under the conduct of
Arionistus, served them and occupied a good part of the country Sequanois for
their wages. They of Autun on the other side demanded succor of the Romans:
whereupon Caesar came into France, and under the color to succor them of
Autun, and to chase Arionistus from the country that he occupied: he won to
himself the whole country of France. So as it may truly be said, that that
change of the French state happened through the division that then was in
France, without the which division, Caesar had never vanquished them (what
Caesar soever he had bin.) And truly we see by the histories, that always
till then, the Frenchmen had well canuassed the Romans, yea and taken and
burned Rome. In so much that (as says Salust) Salust de bello Iugurthino
the Romans so feared them, that always when they heard the French (to be
in arms, young, and old, priests, and laymen, none excepted or excused amongst
the^) were commanded to arm them. Yea, they would openly confess, that
against all other nations they warred for the gaining of honor and glory, but
against the French men, for the preservation of their lives. But Caesar finding
them in division, added oil to the flame of their fury, partly by which
policy, and partly by his valiancie he set upon them, and overcame them,
changed their state from sundry common wealths, to one only Monarchy.
Plutarch in Caesare.
Yea, thus much more he did, that as with the Roman power, he vanquished the
Frenchmen, so with the French men's money, he obtained ye Roman Empire (another
very good policy) for with the money that he gate in France, he corrupted the
chief of Rome, through the favor of whom, he was chosen Dictatour perpetual,
which is as much to say as Monarch of the Romans. So was the Realm of France
by Caesar united to the Roman Empire, from the which they often after sought
to cut them selves off, as in the end they did. In the time of the Emperor
Tiberius, Cor. Tacitus Annal.
one Julius Sacrouir of Autun made part of France to revolt, raising certain
small assemblies secretly in the Towns, and exhorting the people, no longer
to suffer neither the continuance of the tributes (wherewith the Emperor
oppressed them) nor the pride and cruelty wherewith the Magistrates (sent
thither from Rome) ouerburdened them. Also they revolted under the Emperor
Nero, as well for his great cruelty, as for his ouercharging them with great
paymentes of money (by me before spoken of.) Likewise under the Emperor
Gallien for his great riot and whoredom, Trel. Pollio in Gallienno.
as before I have touched. For the Frenchmen (says Pollio) were in those
days of such disposition, as they could not abide a vicious Prince. And
again, after they revolted from the Emperoures, Probus, Dioclesian, and
others, till they had quite cut off them selves again from the Empire, and
politiquely brought their country into a self settled Monarchy, the which
the Lord long maintain.

Who soever would take upon him the discovering of the infinite number of
examples, which touch the alterations that have happened in public estates,
from Monarchies into commonweals, and from commonweals into Monarchies
(when corruption had once caughte them) should never make an end: but to
me it suffiseth to have touched these few, to the end that your Majesty by
your wisdom might provide, that the corruptions, which are now crept into
France, and are daily like to creep further, bring not with them a change to
the state (which God forbid.) For truly there is nothing that more foresheweth
the alteration of an estate, than when corruption is seen to spread over far
into it. I know well that men can not be without faults, neither can
Monarchies, nor common wealths, be so governed, as there may not in the
government be found matter of reproof, but when al things in the fame are to
be seen turned ye vpside down, when vice is made virtue, and virtue made
vice, when good men are hated, and evil men advanced: in sum, when
corruption has recovered the highest degree that it may reach to: then may it
well be said, (according as men do see continually) that an exchange of state
approaches. Wherwithall is to be noted, that by the ordinary course of worldly
things, no one state can endure for ever. And sir, seeing that your kingdom
has endured this twelve hundredth years and more, you ought so much the
rather to fear, least in the state thereof, some alteration should happen.
And if in Julius Caesar's time the strangers drawn into France could find
the way to win the same: it is not to be doubted but if it may lie in their
power they will now do the like. The Frenchmen, when they saw the evil
dealing of Caesar, repented their calling him into France, but then it was too
late. Let us therefore in time be warned by the harms of our ancestors, so
to provide for our safeties, as we be not overtaken as were the Troyans which
became wise, but not til after such time as they were utterly overthrown.

The second point.
HItherto I have (I think) sufficientlye spoken of the first point of my
treaty, that is to say, that a Prince shall not find profitable, his making
of wars against his subjects. It follows now, that I come to say somewhat
of the second, which entreats of those miseries that civil wars do
engender, and the profit that a good peace might bring to your Crown, and
poor Subjects.

Of the calamities that from civil wars do proceed, we need not to make any
long discourse, each seeing and feeling the same in a thousand sorts of
afflictions, touching their persons, loss of goods, and death of parents and
friends, and each knows (that has any judgment) the mischiefs thereof to
be such, as will (if they continue) bring the realm to utter destruction. For
there is none (that sees what we see, and knows what we know) but may
think, that (the civil wars enduring) it will happen unto France as it
happened to ye two fighting Frogs, which when they had fought till they were
weery, were by the Kyte that came to part them (in each foot one) carried
away. And it is not to be doubted, but the strangers which to that war
encouraged us, are as glad to see us together by the ears, as was the Kyte
soaring (over the Frogs to see them fight, whose fyghting he meant to make a
furderaunce to his pray) as they hope ours shall one day be to theirs, when
we shall be unable any longer to maintain wars. And therefore it is, that
some on the one side, and some on the other, to the proceeding on both sides,
give so great encouragemente. Ah Sir (says one) will you lose the glorious
title of most Christian King heretofore gotten by your ancestors, through
their maineteyning of the Roman Church? Will you sir (cries another) suffer
your Subjects to prescribe laws unto you, and to bring into your Realm a
new Religion maugre your will? will not you perform the agreement of the
holy league, which is to abolishe whatsoever in faith is contrary to the holy
Church of Rome? The Frenchmen have aforetime had this honor, to have often
passed the mountains, and to have made beyond the seas many iourneyes for the
defense of the catholic religion, and holy sea of Rome, and must they now
lose that glory? Philip August king of France, overthrew the Albegeois his
subjects, and made of the^ a great slauter, for yt they would have intruded
into their country a new kind of Religion, which by ye execution was put away
and abolished. Why follow you not then ye example of ye good king your
predecessor? These and such other proper devises put forth by ye Spaniards and
Popes Pencionaries, to encourage you to the setting on fire the four corners
(yea and middle part) of your Realm. But in the mean season, none does say
unto you. Sir, you spyll, and utterly spoil your Realm, in making war
against your subjects, which kind of war, no Prince did ever find
profitable. There is none that says unto you, Sir, you bring your self in
hatred of your neighbors the Almaines, Englishmen, Scots and Flemings, from
whom in time of need more amity might be drawn than may either from the
Italians or Spaniardes. None dare to you say, Sir, this cause of religion is
not yet so brought out of doubt, that the gospellers be vanquished in the
error of their faith: for they presented themselves at Poissi, in the time of
your late brother, to maintain the points of their Religion, but my masters
the Prelates, were as then at no leisure to confute them: so that whether in
faith they err or not, is as yet undetermined. And therefore you should not
be so greatly moved as to execute them before they were condemned. And touching
the council of Trent they say, it is as it were a determined sentence given of
a selfwil, and that they ought nevertheless to be heard, at ye least in
purging themselves of stubborn dealing, as in deed they may well do. Besides
this, there are that beat down the said counsel as a thing of no force, as
the late master Charles of Molin a very learned lawyer does, who has taken.xxx.
or forty exceptions to the said counsel. And there are some of opinion yt
men ought to be admitted to have a writ of error against the same counsel, as
well as against a wrong judgment in the Parliament of Paris given upon ye
hearing of the parties. Wherefore to execute the poor gospellers and to root
them out by peremptory judgment before they be duly condemned, and their
reasons and defenses herd, were too wro^gful and unreasonable dealing, seeing
that ouerhastie judgments are not used in lesser matters. Yea but (say they)
they be rebellious and seditious, ha, that is another manner of matter. The
things that I say at this present, are but to disprove the reasons of such as
help to kindle ye fire in France under pretense of rooting out the enemies of
the faith, for in that respect I say, that that point is not void* Touching
that which is said that the gospellers should be rebels, they flatly deny it:
put the case they (...) it cannot be denied but they have these be (...) bin
compelled by sundry great (...) yet were it no hard matter, by (...) to reduce
them to obedience.

Those which so sound ye trumpet, to provoke us to ye wars, and to ye staying
of one another, care not much by what makes they do it, so it be don. For ye
mark yt they (...) at, is yt we destroy ourselves with our own proper forces,
a thing to them ind^end, so it be done without their cost. The Spaniardes
stand in hope to become greates, by our becoming less, and would gladly
unite Spain with the low country. and they could (by ye gayning of France
that ^i^d between both.) And the potentates of Italy know very well, that were
the Frenchmen once at rest, they would by and by vndertak^ some voyages
thither, for ye recovery of the realms of Cycill, Naples, and the Duchy o^
Millaine, as did the late kings of happy memory Charles the eight, Lewis the
twelfth, Frauncis the first, and Henry the second. They (...) be further the
like part and no^ (...) the doing in as much, not to be (...) Henry ye third
wherewith also, they s^and ^n fear, least under the color of su^ vo^ages,
Italy will one day be encouraged to cry liberty, liberty, if they shall once
see such mother King in France as was Ch^tes the ^ght. So take they pleasure
to see us at war whilst they as lookers on lie at their ^a^e in peace. But
does they and we (it we did well) should more advisedly look to ye matter, than
either to run one upon another, or to nourish civil diuetio^s amongst our
selves. For within little more than.80. years, the Turk has taken
Constantinople from the Christians, and since he never ceased ye enlarging of
his limits upon Christe^dom, as well with the Island of Rhodes and Cipres, as in ye
land of Hungary and other places. And di^ring our deuisio^s, he works his
advantage, whereof may bear good witness the prises by him of late taken at the
Goletta and at Tunis, with the overthrow of the Spanyardes, wherthrough he has
made open the passages for ye enbarquing of himself at his pleasure, either
into Spain, Cicill, Italy, Marcelles or Narbone, without any stop or stay.
And might he once enter into Italy (as god forbid he should) it were greatly to
be feared that he would make him self Pope, with a short roabe. Wherefore
holy Saint Peeter might do well to look to his own business, and rather to
solicit matter of peace to ye Christians, tha^ to mayntayn in France such
civil wars as is like to consume the strength of that Realm, which might in
time to come be a necessary neighbor for Italies defense.

But are not we maruelously blinded in our passions? For those my masters the
potentates of Italy which have their factours in France of great credit, are
ye chief means, that we with civil wars are entertained, taking pleasure to
see us buckle together, no more nor less than did the auntiente Romans, when
in their theaters they saw the sword players kill the one the other. This was
a kind of pastime accustomed to be showed to the people, who took great
pleasure to behold such cruel spectacles (so full of impiety they were) and ever
accustomed to ye shedding of blood. And truly we Frenchmen are now become ye
right successors to those ancient Romans (successors I say to their vices not
their virtues) in ye using our slaughters and desperate skyrmishes as sportes
and pastimes to please the^ withal. I will not say holy S. Peter himself
reioiceth in the effusion of french blood, for yt were an error in ye faith of
holy church, after whom we must believe yt it can do, speak, nor think any
thing yt is evil: but what was his meaning, in making in Rome so great
bonefiers for joy, and jolly general processions in ye year 1572. in
September, upon the ariuall of the news of the Bartholmew conspiracy?

To conclude upon this point, certain it is, that our civil wars (if they
continue,) will bring much pleasure and pastime to strangers (and it may be,
much profit to) but not without our prejudice and utter destruction. For what
other may we look for, than that those of us which shall happen to escape the
sword (be they Catholics, be they Gospellers) shall not escape famine and
those that escape famine, it may be, shall not escape the hand of the strange
enemy, to whom they must then become servants and slaves. Then will they
lament those dead in the wars, wishing for death and can not dye. Besides
this sir, your Majesty can not look after ought else, than reuolts,
rebelloins disobediences, hatred of subjects, and lastly, the utter ruin and
overthrow of your estate, (which God forbid.) And whylest these mischiefs
are in hand (and before the storm come) you shall reap none other fruits than
displeasures, heaviness, despites, angers, treasons, troubles, and such like
that may hinder the health of your person, wherewith also ye must taste part of
the peoples poverty, that will not or can not so fully furnishe you with
money, as the necessity of your case shall require.

Otherwise, is there not occasion to fear some particular danger? Childerick
king of France, for having only offended a mean Gentleman named Bandille,
whom he caused to be scourged, was slain in ambush by him. What became of it?
Bandille was not so much as once serched for by Childericks successor, and as
touching the fact, it was esteemed as a thing well done, in revenging such an
injury. And the gentleman was for that deed commended by the historians, as
he was also of Ronsard, where he speaks of the king Childerick, thus: The
King unable for to rule
him self through heat of wrath.
The valiant Knight sir Bandil
to a post last tied has
In public place, and causing him
stark naked to be stripped,
From top to toe most cruelly
with passing rage him whipped.
Now Bandil stout and fierce of mind,
conceyuing more disdain
Of so outrageous villainy,
than passing for the pain:
And feeding in his pensive heart
on purpose to requite,
Will wisely for a time let slip
the wreaking of that spite.
But afterward (the shamefulnesse
so sore his heart does sting)
He burning in disdain and rage
against the cruel king.
And having no regard at all
of scepter, crown, or state,
Will pay him home his hasty mode
with stroke of blouddy fate:
His heart will never be at rest
until his hand have shed
His lord and masters blood, and wrought
reuengement on his head.


And is it not to be presumed, that there be at this day a thousand Bandils,
which feel the^ as much offended as he did, your majesty perseuering in the
taking away of their goods and lives? And shall ye not as readily find
Ronsards to praise and set them forward in such enterprises? Be there not now
also Magiciens that can torment (and by little and little) consume a body by
his image or cou^terfait, as well as were in the time of Valens and Valentinian
the Emperors? Yes, this world is at this day more poisoned with Magitiens,
Enchauntours, and Sorcerers, than it was these five hundred years past. But
these Hugonots (will some say) be of too good conscience, to use those kind of
people. I answer thereunto, that there be of diverse sorts, some have a right
good conscience, and some none at all. There be wise, there be foolish: there
be sufferers, and there be reuengers: but more without comparison out of order,
than reformed. And be there not numbers also of Catholics not contented: and
of Atheists not satisfied: which will make small scruple, to employ those
Magiciens in revenging of them selves? But to encounter with those enterprises,
you shall do well sir to take council of that gentle prince Arnus, son to
Porsena King of the Hetrurians. Porsena in the quarrel of another (that is to
say) to maynteine the tyranny of Tarquin the proud, undertook the wars
against the Romans: who seeing this King to make them war, for a thing that
nothing touched him, took the matter very haynously, in so much as there was
found amongst them, three hundred Gentlemen which conspired to go in
counterfeit apparel, to King Porsenas camp, to the end there to kill him. Q.
Mutius was one of the conspirators, who being come inot the said camp, and
seeing one of the kings servants set in a chair bravely furnished (taking him
for the king him self,) killed him with the stroke of a dagger: having given
this blow, he was taken and carried to the king, who demanded of him for what
cause he had so slain his servant: to whom Mutius with a great courage
(putting his hand into the fire that then presently there burned) answered
after this manner. This is the hand that committed the fault in killing thy
servant, where I meant to kill thee, and therefore it is reason it suffer the
pain due to such desert. Hereat was none more abashed than Poisena him self,
who seeing the magnanimity of this jolly young gentleman, commanded him to be
set at liberty. Mutius who looked for none other than death, seeing the Kings
noble disposition, said unto him: Sir, for as much as thou have toward me
used a far greater clemency, tha^ I could in any respect have looked for, I
will in recompense of yt thy goodness, do thee truly to understand; yt there
are of us.300. Roman Gentlemen, which have conspired thy death, for the
preventing whereof, it shall be good that thy guard have a good eye unto thee.
Porsena upon those words more astonyed than before, caused an assembly of his
council to consult what guarde he might best entertayne, for the keeping of
him from those conspiratours. Amongst whom the gentle Prince Arnus his son,
was of opinion that he was not so much to consider of, what guard he should
use, as he was to provide for his having no need of a guard. Then his father
asked him how that might be done: in making (says he) the Romans of enemies
to become your friends, which you may, and were best to do, if you make more
account of your life, than ye do of the maintenance of Tarquins wicked cause.
The King believed his son, made peace with the Romans, and departed in
safety.

A number of other miseries and calamities that hang on civil wars, might
here be discovered, whereof when I think, me seems to see a Chimere or other
hideous monster, accompanied with all the evils, mischieses, and miseries that
are in earth, sea, or hell, whereof (as of a detestable thing) it grieueth me
to speak, or once to think: neither would I serve as a Nosterdame to our
poor Realm of France, in the foreshewing of those calamities and
desolations, which daily do threaten us (if our said civil wars
continue) but had rather to stand as a Jonas, in praying unto God for his
dealing toward us, as he dealt toward that great city Niniuie, from whom
for one amendment, he turned away the destruction before threatened unto them.
we have already endured misery enough, both to make us wise, and to provoke us
to amendment: if neither wisdom nor amendment have followed thereof, let it
now do: It is better late than never.

I will hereunto add (as it were in ye detestatio^ of war) a sentence of the
great Emperors Augustus Caesar, worthy by all princes to be noted. That good
Prince was wont to say, that wars should never be taken in hand, but where
hope makes more show of profit, than fear can do of loss: meaning, where
victory may bring great profit, and vanquishment small loss: for those
(says he) which will seek small profit, and hazard therefore great loss,
may well be likened to him that fisheth with a hook of gold, which broken off
and carried away, brings more loss to the fisher, than much fish can
recompense. Let us a little consider I pray you sir, what advantage may grow
to you by vanquishing all the Gospellers? is it the chasing of the Religion
quite out of your realm? Let it be so, yet can you not for all that so chase
it out of the world, but that it may after your time return again into
France. And before ye attain to that small profit, ye are like enough to lose
(what of your nobles and of your commons) an infinite number of Catholics, as
the late king your brother, in his wars late passed (the more is the pity)
has done. For let it be counted a small loss, the losing of so many brave
Gospellers, as the courteous and right noble Jews of Burbon, Prince of Conde,
the valiant Dandalot, the wise Admiral, the good Count Rochfoucault, the
honest Teligni, the brave captains Bruoquemauds father and son, Pills,
Monius, the Pardillans, with a number of like other. Yea let the Bartholmewe
journey be reckoned for a brave politic exployre (although the Gospellers so
confesses not) but do rather in their Almanackes macke that feast with
blackt ^te^s, in token of heaviness, sorrow, and blot everlasting. Where me
thinks if rather deserved to have dwelte in red letters, in remembrance, that
the same day all France was dyed red, with the blood of her children. And
though nothing else (I say) were to be weighed, the loss of so many notable
Gospellers: yet is it nothing to have soft so many valiant and noble
Catholics? Is it little to have lost Fraunces of Lorraine Duke of Guise,
great master of France? (verily a good and valiant Captain, and an alter
Charles Martel, which Ronsard thus writes of.) Among the frenchmen Martell
reigns with fame,
As king of kings, though not a king in name.


Is it nothing to have lost the good (...) d'Aumale his brother, the lusty
Count Brisooke, the courteous Count Martignes, with a great number of other,
wherethrough there remains at this day few good soldiers in France, (the
nobility thereof being also well next extincte, through these in the civil
wars: yea but some master (...) may chance to say, that the nobilitie^ may
sone be renewed, for the King has ^wer of villains to make noble men. (...)
confess that your Majesty of ignoble (...) make noble, so far forth as to
the inioy^ing of the privileges of nobility, and (...) aduau^d^ment of the
persons to great estat^ and pre-eminence: but I believe not the a King of a
Clown or base artificer, (...) make a noble Gentleman, no (...) of a B^zarde
or Kestrell can be made (...) Hawke. Nobility must from nobl^ ^ture naturally
proceed. And it can (...) be denied, but there is commonly (...) appearance of
generositie, in such as (...) descended of nobility, than in fu^ (...)
lineally proceeded from parents of mea^ degree. For as says Ho^. Each breeds
his like the Bull a Bull,
the warlike horse, a horse:
The cruel Eagle breeds not
(...) Dove deuoyd of force.


Yet will I not altogether deny, but some issued out of the mean places,
become honorable personages, and are replete with nobleness, virtue, and
knowledge, but those are very rare. And therefore they that to encourage you
to the prosecuting of the wars against your fith^es, say, ye may all new
make nobility: speak both without reason and good consideration, and there
such speeches are odious.

But again to return to Augustus Caesar. It is certain that in the civil
wars, as the gain to be gotten by the vanquishing of the gospellers can (at
the best hand) be, but small: so may the loss to grow thereby, be (at the w^
hand very great, even to the daungering of the state, if it should so fall out,
that ye (...) with good policy) should bound vpper^ood: And yt is a thing not
altogether impossible, though your Majesty to your late brother have hitherto
had ye (...) for ye wars are ^iable, and ye adue^tures of the same dangerous,
so as he that loses this day, is commonly a winner to morrow. The Beniamires
after the ouercomming of their adversaries in two several battelles, were in
the third, of the same adversaries overcome.

And I would very feign ask of those yt counseled you to the besieging of
Pouzin, and Grave, how well they understood that saying of Augustus: was not
that the right fyshing with a hook of gold broken off and lost? cost not
those two pieces fifty times more than they were worth? neither Pouzin nor
Grave, with all their revenues, goods, men, women, and children, being sold to
the uttermost farthing, shall ever be so much worth. Now coming to entreat of
ye goodness of this peace, alas my desire to see it well stablished in
France, does so rauishe me, as I know not at which end thereof to begin:
willingly would I prognosticate, that like honor and glory should happen unto
your Majesty (if the Lord were so pleased) as in time past happened to Augustus
Caesar, who after the civil wars were ceased in the Roman Empire (wherein
him self had been a party) stablished throughout the same a perfect, good,
and sure peace, and therewith settled the people in rest and tranquillity. Well,
I will in hope of good hap that may follow my happy desire, write this verse
which Horace song in the honor of Augustus, and so apply it to your Majesty.
AS I the deeds of Mars, did mind in meetre for to bri^
And of his praises to my harp a dittie for to sing,
Apollo did by words express, command me for to ceas^
And for to turn my note, to sing of glad and joyful peace:
Which thou king Henry, should in France establish, so as (...)
Of corn and wine and all good fruits, should plenty have by the^
Thou, thou art he, I say, that shall the golden age renew,
By means whereof, immortal fame shall unto thee ensue.
The doors of Ianus thou shall shut: the terror of thy mace
All evil and ungracious deeds by holy laws shall chase.
And under thee all wholesome arts shall flourish new agein^
Which in the east shall spread abroad the honor that does reig^
Within thy royal Majesty. So daunted Mar^ shall be,
In Henry's reign, that civil wars we never more shall se^
There shall no war nor trouble be, in field nor yet in tow^
His power the frenchmen shall compel, their choler to lay dow^
Which drove them to such miseries. Al quarters of this lan^
Shall humbly and obediently submit them to his hand.
There shall be neither great nor small yt dare once break his he^
To heaven we shall advance his praise in quiet peace and re^
Beseching God to grant the house of Valoys to retain
The royal mace eternally, for aye in France to reign.


Many are the commodities sir, that a good peace might bring to your people,
which are (as it were) the husbands and traders by whose means your realm
might become plentiful in corn, wine, silver, gold, and al other needful,
pleasant, and profitable things: and thereby (think I) your state royal
should be greatly augmented. For the chief part of a princes greatness, is
the prosperity and wealth of his subjects (who bring poor, their prince can
not be rich,) next the which a Princes force depends upon his peoples
willing obedience, but that render they not so willingly, when they are
oppressed with wars, and want wherewith to furnishe them, as when they are
maynteined in peace, and by their tillage and traffike, have those wantes
supplied.

And surely the money that mainteyneth these unhappy wars, employed upon the
entertaynment of strangers, and liberally bestowed upon the well affected
toward you, would purchase you no small strength.

And might the Polonians once understand, that your Majesty had established a
perfect good peace in France, to the contentment of the professors of both
the religions: as it is not to be doubted, but they would yield you much the
more affection and obedience: so is it to be feared, if it should otherwise
fall out, that they will provide them of some other king. And so much the rather
for that their late king Sigismond, did always maynteine them, not only in
good peace, but also in the exercise of both the religious, the altering of
their liberty wherein, can not but be to them a thing both new and
troublesome.

The Almaines also (which amongst them selves for Religion have had great
wars, and by whose harms we might learn, that force and violence, has not
power to command the conscience, (the guiding whereof is to be left to God
only) are people that would greatly esteem of you sir, if once they
understood that you had in France framed a peace to the lyking of both the
Relygions. Yea they would be so glad of your neyghborhood, as ye might and
should command their friendships in any necessity of war. A commodity of no
small value considering that Almaine is the storehouse of soldiers, whereout
may be leuyed army upon army, without disfurnishment of the country, that
never can be made barren of men of war.

And when I consider the small number of Christian Princes that live in these
days, wherein ye Emperor is already decaying: and that the law of creating
Emperors, called (Le bulle doree) forbids the chosing of any more than four
Emperors together out of one house, and how there have been diverse of the
house of Austriche, (as Albert, Frederike, Maximilian, Charles the fifth,
Ferdinando, and Maximilian, now reigning) chosen one after another: Me thinks
there is no prince in the world, that might better aspire to the Empire than
your Majesty. But to bring the same to pass, it beloueth you to win the
love and favor of the Almaines, which ye can no way better do, tha^ by ye
erecting of a good peace in your realm, plausible to both religious, in ye
exercise whereof, they now both govern and are governed, and have their
chamber composed of persons professing the one and the other. True it is that
both the said Religions through out all Almaigne be not used, because there
are not in all places people of both sorts, some place consisting of
gospellers, and some of Catholics: but in places where people of both be,
both religions are exercised. If it then pleased God, that your majesty might
come to be emperor (as that way ye might easily do) was there ever so great a
king of France as you should then be? might ye not then march from one of
your Realms to another though they be 200. leagues asunder, still in your
own dominions? And (having the forces of Almaine at commandment, with those
of both your realms) should there Moskouite or Turk be comparable to your
greatness? Some will answer me and say, that the Turk is a mighty and a
puissant governor, holding under his obeisance, many realms and provinces. I
frankly confess it, but I reply thereunto as did Quintius a general of the
Roman army to the vaunting and bragging messengers of King Antiochus.

This king was a great and mighty monarque in the East, who lacked little of
the Turk in the enlargeme^t of his dominions. His Ambassadors willing to
fear this brave Captain Quintius, and thereby to make him retire out of
Greece, (where he was,) said unto him, yt their master brought toward him an
infinite number of people, all well expert in war, passing well appointed,
and such as shot on horseback. And the more to astonishe him, they named unto
him diverse sorts of nations to be in Antiochus camp, some of the which this
Captain Quintius had never heard named before (as Dahans, Elimeens, Cadusiens
and such others. Adding further that he should not have to do with Hanniball
of Carrhage, nor yet with king Philip of Macedony, but with the greatest part
of Asia and Europa. Well (answered Quintius) I will say unto you, that your
talk puts me in mind of a Supper, which mine host of Chalchis (a good
companion) once made me. I being his guest in the Summer time when the weather
was very hot, greatly marvelled from whence he had gotten the sundry sorts
of venison, wherewith we were served. Upon which my maruelling, this good
fellow (that vaunted not as you do) began for to laugh, confessing all those
diversities of services, to have bin made of a tame swine, but dressed with
variety of sawces. Even so (said he) all those sorts of people which you have
now named with diverse names, are all but Syrians, for all their sundry names.
Coming again to my purpose, I say, that all those Nations under the Turks
obeisance, be all but Easterlings, between whom and the western people,
touching their men of war, there is a great difference. For all the histories
bear witness, that those of the West, with their small numbers have always
vanquished them of the East with their great numbers, as appears by the
wars which the Romans have made the^. If it be replied to me that the Turks
be at this day more valiant, than were the ancient nations of the east, as
being issued out of the warlike nations, inhabiting the South, I will thereunto
answer, and that by two reasons. The one is, yt how warlike soever the Turks
are supposed to be: they have by ye French often times bin vanquished, as in the
voyage which they made into Leuant under Godfrey of Bulloigne, when they
conquered Greece, India, and Asia the less with their confines, even to the
mount Taurus. And not only so conquered those countries, but also them selves,
and their successors reigned over them.26. years, in the end whereof, those
successors fell in division and banded the one against the other, and by that
occasion they were all expulsed thence. My other reason is, that it is very
likely that the Turks since they came from the South parts to dwell in
Greece, and other the East countries: are much degenered from their natural
and first nobleness, as were the French that sometime went to dwell in that
part of Greece, which after was called Gallo Grecia. For the first that went
thither were so brave, so valiant, and so warlike a people, as they not only
enjoyed the country at their pleasure, but by their virtues and valiances kept
in awe all the kings and countries that were round about them, so far forth,
as they were glad to yield them tribute, for the enjoying of their favors. But
in process of time, that race so degenered, as Attalus a King in Asia first
refused the payment of the tribute by his predecessors before paid, by whom
(when they had long therefore assailed him with war,) they were in the end
overcome: and after that they became every day more cowardly than other, so as
they were again vanquished by the Romans under the conduct of Captayn
Manlius. And what should let your majesty from doing as much as did sometime
those of the French nation, under the conduct of that gentle Godfrey of
Bulloigne? Seeing that the people of that country (namely the Greeks,) desire
nothing more than their cutting off from their obedience to the Turk, which is
a barbarous tyrant, enemy to all laws, godliness, knowledge, yea and to
learning, whereof that country of Greece was wont to be the nourishing
mother. It is also well known, that the King of Moscouia is a very cruel
tyrant, and so cruelly and barbarously reigns over his subjects, as they
would most gladly be vnyoked from his subjection. Of other countries of
Christendom I speak not, leaving for every man of judgment to think,
whether welneere any thing shall be impossible to your majesty, having linked
ye forces of your two realms with those of Almaine, and especially when your
government shall be favorable and agreeable to your subjects; wherethrough
also other nations will become desirous to submit them selves to your obeisance.

We read that Charlemain your predecessor was so wise and so good a prince,
that all Italy desired him for their Lord. And it came to pass, that (by the
means of that good liking which the world had of him) he was chosen Emperor.
Xenophon writes, that Cirus the great Monarche in Leuant, was so gentle and
modest in his government y^ those nations that never saw (but had one^y heard
speaking of him,) desired to becomes his subjects, and this property he had,
that he would leave to every nation their laws, customs, liberties, and
religions, without changing in the same any thing contrary to their consentes,
which the Greeks called in one word Autonomie. The granting of which, has
always bin and is the very ready way to walk in for any Prince yt would
either gain any strange nation, or win the hearts of his own subject. So
vse^ Ale^der the great his conquests, contenting himself with the sovereignty
over those nations which he subdued, without altering of their estates, or
forcing of their religions. The like whereof used the aunciente Romans, when
under their government they brought any nation, for they willingly altered not
ye state of the countries which they conquered, nor forced the people to the
receyt of their laws or religion, if they made any change, it was in
diminishing the tributes for the drawing unto them the love of the people. and
Julius Caesar did even so in his co^quests of France, for he altered nothing
of the states of those Cities which he conquered, but used them with as much
courtesy and gentleness, as he possible might. If any city rebelled, by
gentle means he sought to reduce the^ under his obedience. And though he was
often constrained to fetch them in by force, he used not (being victour) his
victories cruelly, but was always inclined to pardoning. To the unfaithful he
forbear the rendering of unfaithfulness, as one yt in such (...) would take no
example of his adversaries* And of a truth, there was nothing more furthered
(...) Alexander, Cyius, the (...) Caesar, and such other great (...) ^han did
the grant of that (...) little care took the people for (...) resistance,
when they (...) by being to their g^ue (...) submitted, they^ cases should
rather be much (...), shall any whit app^i^ed. The Switch^ (...) day with much
(...) entreat their subjects, saying; (...) stronger castles nor more (...),
than those shall be builded within the hands of the subjects.

Who so would take upon him the ^^rring at large of the great benefits, that
a good peace would bring to your crown and poor subjects, might find mat^
(...) to fill a great volume: but I shall content me with what before is
said, adding only this unto it, that in having a good peace, y^e shall shun
all the mischiefs and miseries that wars always bring with them and though
there grew thereupon none other commodity, yet were the same alone
sufficient to move you to the procuring of peace. Which (...) grace fo^ke,
(...) of your^o^ (...) to the (...) of (...) people. The (...) God (...) you
(...) happy (...) Augustus, which (...) the (...) and (...) wars, (...) good
and perd^ peace throughout the Empire of Romes

The third point.
(...) rests now that I ^ate upon the (...) point, of the which I say, that
it i^ not so much impossible to establis^ a good (...) in (...) as many judge
it to be for the better (...). I will first answer to the difficulties which
therein are alleged. It is said that a peace cannot be made throughout all
(...) without the permitting of the (...) of both the (...) a thing (...)
because it holds the Subjects, in ^alities and de^ision. I can ^tentedly
confess that pea^ ^nnot otherwise be made, but I deny it to be a thing
insufferable.

The Turks by their Alcaron, are bound to become perpetual sworn enemies to
the Christians, and to detest Jesus Christ, in denying him to be God, to
reject the holy Trinity, neither may they believe the holy Scriptures of the
Bible: and they never crown Emperor but they solemnelye swear him to
continual war with the Christians. All the which notwithstanding, the Great
Turk, does suffer the Christians under his obeisance to enjoy their Religion,
wherein (paying their tributes) they live peaceably without controlement or
murmr of the people. And every man sees the Turquish Religion, to be much
more contrary to the Catholics, than is that of the Gospel. For the
Gospellers acknowledge Jesus Christ for God and man, and to be the mediator
between God his Father and men: they allow of the Trinity and holy Scriptures
of the Bible. Yea they agree with the Catholics, in the Articles of the
Faith. Wherefore then should these two religions be insufferable (the
Catholics and the Turks being together tolerable.)

The Jewish Religion was and is much contrary to that of the Painims, for never
did nation so much detest images and numbers of Gods, as did the Jews,
notwithstanding that they have had and yet have: (an infinite number of
Ceremonies particular to them selves) and contrariwise the Paganes have had an
infinite number of Gods with their temples full of images, and their ceremonies
and traditions clean contrary to those of the Jews. And is there not amongst
all the nations of the Painims (as Greeks, Parthians, Medes, Elamites,
Mesopotamians and generally throughout all the East and West peoples,)
Sinagogues of the Jews? Yea, and it is lawful to the Painims (amongst whom
they dwell) to make them selves Jews, after the which done, they are called by
the name of Proselites. We read also of diverse Roman Emperors, (as well
Painims as Christians) which have suffered ye Jews to dwell under ye obeisance
of ye Empire, as Nerua, Antonius Pius, Constantine, Theodose, Valentinian,
Gratian, Honorius, Arcadius, Justinian and other. Dion in Nerua capitolinus in
An Putat C. de Iudeis and Gelic.
And at this day, ye Pope, ye Venetia^s, many towns of Italy and Almaine,
suffer sinagogs of ye Jews under obeisance, and yet is the Jewish Religion
much more contrary to the Catholics, than is that of the Gospellers. Some
peradventure will say, that the French men will not suffer any Jews in
France, but have always expulsed them. I confess that they have ch^ed them
away, yet not for matters of religion, but partly for their cruelties committed
upon young children (whom they robbed from the Christians,) as the histories
make mention, and especially for the hatred that they bare to their vsuries:
whereupon they yet use this proverb, when any is noted for a great usurer, He
is in usury a very Jew. Upon the which occasion also the Italians heretofore
called Lombards (which with their great vsuries did rob (as still they do)
the realm of the treasure) have bin chased out of France. In the best towns
whereof (yea and that in the very heart of the same where diverse streets and
places, yet bear the names of Iewries) the Jews should now dwell at their ease
(as well as ever they did) were there none other matter to let them than their
only religion, which (though it be much contrary to that of the
Catholics) was never the cause of their chasing out of France, where before
their expulsemente, they had dwelte many hundred years.

Neither can it be denied, that the Paynims Religion is clean contrary to
that of the Catholics, and yet have diue^s Paynim Emperors suffered as many
as would, to become Christians under them, as Nerua, Anthonius Pius, and
Alexander Seuerus. Dion i^ Nerua. Apio. Lampridius in Alexandro.
Traian also did secretly suffer them likewise to do without any search made
after them. And those Emperors did not so in respect of any good thing they
found in the Christian Religion, the professors whereof they believed to be
the wickeddest people in the world, in somuche as among the Paynim people, the
only name of Christian was detested and abhorred, witness hereof Suetonius
which called the Christians, men of a new (and malicious) superstition. And
Tacitus said, that the people used the name of Christian as a matter of mockery
and derision, the professors whereof were hated because of their wickedness.
Wherein Suetonius and Tacitus Suetonius in Nerone Cap. 16. Tacitus Annalium.
lib. 15
showed them selves good courtiers, taking pleasure with lying to please the
princes and the people. Pliny the second, though he was a Painim as they
were, and lived in their time, durst not lie so impudently, but of the lives of
the Christians, (to the Emperor Traian) rendered a good testimony, as in his
Epistles is to be seen.

Seeing then the Painim Emperoures had so evil opinion of the christians,
wherefore suffered he them to be Christened? Even for the benefyte of peace?
The Emperors Dioclesian and Maximian did greatly persecute the Christians, and
that of purpose, to root them out, in which persecution they did to death an
infinite number, but when they saw their cruelty nothing to paruayle (but
that for every one they kilde, ten other increased, Maximian at the last
suffered, who so would to become Christened, and to exercise that Religion. As
much might be said of the Christian Emperors, which did as well detest the
Painims Religion, as did the Painims that of the Chrystians, yet would they
never take upon them she constraint of their consciences, but suffered to
continue Painims as many as would.

The Historiographer Marcellinus Am. Marcellinus libro. 30.
witnesses, that the Emperor Valentinian (which was a Christian) used not
to molest any person, for matters of Religion, nor ever commanded that any
should worship either this or that, with one fashion or other.

Likewise also the Emperors Honorius, and Theodosius, I. Christianis C. de
paganis.
(which were Christians) would not that the Painims should be forced to be
Christened, but caused an express law to be made, that none should offend
them, (either in their persons or their goods) under the pretense of Religion.
If then the Christians have suffered the Painims Religion, and the Painims have
likewise suffered the Religion of the Christians. Wherefore (to win peace)
will not the Catholics suffer that Religion of the Gospellers? Those two
religions have bin seen (sir) to dwell peaceably together within your realm of
Poland, as also in many towns of Almaine, and wherefore should they not as well
dwell peaceably together in France? Are the French men more hard to be tamed,
more disobediente, or more barbarous and fierce, than other nations? It
appears clean contrary. For upon the Edict of January, the Catholics were
not grieved at all to see the Gospellers use the exercise of their religion,
though it were somewhat new unto them, but lived the one with the other
together in good peace, wherein also they had till this time continued, if the
unhappy execution of Vassi (which was the welspring of all our wars, and of
all the miseries and mischiefs which we have since that time suffered or yet
do suffer) had not happened.

I will not deny, but the wars and acts of hostility, passed between ye
one and the other, have bredde in the hearts of men, hautie minds, and evil
dispositio^s, which may be some cause, that the Catholics will now, (more
hardly tha^ in the beginning,) suffer to come so near them the exercise of the
Religion: and the rather, for that many esteem the same Religion to be the
cause of all the said miseries and mischiefs which they fear, would exceed
if it should again be reestablished in France. Whereunto I answer, that the
people of any good judgment, are not of that opinion, as those that well know
(and it is in deed most true), that the ambition of some, with the desire they
have to command, and their greediness by the robbery of other to enrich
them selves, have been and are the only causes of our troubles, and that there
the name of Religion, has been used but as a cloak or a curtain to cover
those pretenses. For some say, they will not suffer in France, any other
religion tha^ the Catholic, as the most ancient, and that has been received
from time out of mind, since the time of great king Clouis: and other some
say, they will follow the religion reformed, that was not only before Clouis,
but also before the realm of France: and that they ought not in their
consciences, to be forced: upon the which controversy these civil wars have
been builded, but the chief aduauncers of the cause have had in their hearts
another manner of zeal than of religion, as men of judgment have well
perceived the common people (which judge all things rashly) for that they
esteem religion to be the cause of our wars and calamities, stand in fear
that (it taking place) the old wounds would break out and bleed again.
This vulgar opinion is not much to be passed on, because it always readily
rangeth to the strongest part. But for mine own part, I believe that the best
part of nobility, of the commonaltie, yea of the clergy, for the obtaining
of peace, would easily consent that the Gospel should freely be stablished in
France, till such time as God (to whom only the clearing of man's heart by
the light of his truth appertains) might knit us all in one kind of
religion, which we are to hope that he (who is the father of knowledge and
discouerer of all things) will do, after men shall awhyle have reposed them
from the civil wars, and cast quite off the stoutnesse and hatred which
now blinds their judgments. There is at this present no order, because
each to the side be stands on, sticks fast each (...) says to him self,
my religion is good, and I will not step one foot from it. For wherefore
says he shall I now change my faith and belief, seeing I have fought and borne
arms in defense of the same? Behold the reason men make at this day, of whom
ye shall have none other matters. But if their hearts were once a little
vnfraighted of their stoutnesse and malice, they should all easily see, that
for having borne arms of any side, they should not forbear to follow the
truth, nor willingly seek their own damnation. Standing the^ at this
present, without any order to join as in one religion, every wise man may see,
that to this point it must come, either we must nourish wars al ye days of our
life in France: or in ye same suffer the use of both the religions, and of two
necessities, the least is to be chosen. For to think that the Gospellers will
be easily rooted out, and wholly dispatched away, it were a mere madness (the
experience of xv. years having showed us the contrary.) And the histories
bear witness, that often the smaller number has overcome the greater, and
that one thousand soldiers (brought into extreme necessity) are many times
more worth, than ten thousand other. There is surely as much difference
between murder ^ight (...) the conservation of their consciences, win^
children, and goods, and such as sight only for wages: as there is between
that one wolf, which in his den defending her young ones is assailed, and that
other (which having no young) through the wood at pleasur^ is chased.

Now, if ye must in France either have your civil wars continued, or both
religions suffered: who sees not of the two, such sufferances to be most
expedient? Yea but (say they) neither the people, nor the clergy will
thereunto agree. I know not their minds nor wills, but I shall prescribe
such a reasonable mean, as would easily I am sure; procure their consentes,
and that without constraynt: the mean fyr is this. Let your Majesty command
that patentes be dispatched to all the communalties of your towns, and to the
Chapiters and Colleges of your clergy, wherethrough they may be done to
understand, bow you are destr^ that your realm of France, should be
restored to rest and peace, and that the same can not be done but by the one
way of these two, that is, either by war to overcome and clean note out all
the pretended rebels: or by giving them peace, with the granting to them the
use of their religion. Whereupon your pleasure, is, that they deliberate in
their assemblies, and of their resolute aduices aduer^i^ you, which of those
two ways they find most expedient, without using in the same either
circumstance, or any if. And let it further to them be known, that such shall
prosecute the wars against the said pretended rebel^ at the charges of their
towns, communalities, Chapiters, and Colleges:) as (...) most expedient the
following of the same, from the which charge also shall be exempted all ^he as
for the having of peace, are willing to accept the exercise of religion. And I
^y think sir, that upon the putting forth of such patentes, all the realm
will sone be sient to incline them selves to peace, ^le one being glad rather
to accept the exercise of that religion (yea within their chief and fairest
Churches) than to maynteine at their charges a w^te, the end and victory
whereof is so uncertain. For touching the first they can not deny it for a
thing very reasonable, that those which would have wars, should bear of
wars the charge, and those desirous of peace should from such charge be free:
it is a thing ordinarily used in the ministratio^ of justice, where they
condemn in costs, damages, and intrestes, such as prosecute any process to
the diffinitiue sentence, and discharge thereof such as in time break off
their suit: and let it so in this case he determined, and the charges arising
to the rest, will appear no small portion. For the furnishing and entertayning
of an army of 25000. footmen, and five or six thousand horsemen, will
require no less charge than three hundred thousand crowns a month, which
amounts in the year near to four Millions of gold. If any shall say that
many soldiers will be found which in this war will serve gratis, I can not
believe it, for there are at this day both footmen and horsemen much grieved for
their nonpayments. Wherefore, the best they could do, were first to pay those
arrearages. And if they say yt your ordinary finaunces may bear some part of
such charges: the contrary is well known, they are otherwise bestowed. For
the sums of your revenue, are no more than sufficient to the ordinary
entertaynment of the estate of your Court, and officers of your crown: and the
money ordinarily raised of your tarts and subsidies, does but discharge so many
Garrizons as are this day in the Realm, which in all your good towns and
castles, must of necessity be entertained, else would the pretended rebels
with some of them be at host. The ordinary treasure of your fynaunces then
being otherwise employed: it shall be necessary, that my said Masters of the
towns and Chapters (which are desirous of war) wyllingly determine them
selves to furnishe yearly unto your Coffers four Millions of gold, and that
thereof they make to you an estate as of an yearly rent, not to cease in their
time, for it had need to be a great revenue that should maynteyne those
wars all our life.

But what answer will the aforesaid masters of the towns and Chapters make?
me thinks I hear already what my masters the Parisians will answer: a
sir, let al alone, for by Saint John we had rather the Hugonots preached
where they listed, than we would disburse so much money as should maynteine
wars against them, and after if in the end they should get the better hand,
they would rob and spoil us of all that we have: and the^ what gains win
we thereby? And my masters of Lions, what will they answer? Our traffikes
(will they say) by these civil wars are decayed, and nothing is left
wherewith to sustain us, but the stocks of our shoppes. For since the decay
of those Hugonots in this good town: we have seen nothing else but misery
and hell. There were many good men of them, that loved well the profit of this
town, and therein maynteined such a good trade of merchandise, as the town was
much the better for, and the merchantes well liked of: and were we not better
to suffer them with their Religion, than to adventure the loss of all that we
have? They of Roan, Orleans, Tholosa, and all other good towns of France will
answer no less. And to be short, ye shall find few of such courage, but
they will stoop to the sufferance of the exercise of the said religion, (both
within their towns and without) to purchase peace, for the avoiding of such
burdens as the charges of those wars will require. And as for my masters of
the clergy, they will be somewhat loath to agree hereunto. Nevertheless, when
they shall see them selves driven to the disbursment of so great sums, about
a thing the success whereof they shall find doubtful and incertaine, they
will look better about them. Herewith it may also like your Majesty to do
them to understand, that if they have such zeal to chase this new Religion,
(which they call heresy) out of the realm of France, they must show their
said zeal, not only in contributing of their money, but also in following of
the wars, by serving in their own proper persons.

The Levites followed the wars: and so did the Bishops and Prelates of
Almaine. The Cardinal Fernase went also against the Protestants, and why, may
not the clergy of France do the like? Set forth the young Monks that are
under three score years, and let those that be above tarry at home to say
their Masses. They will answer by the words of David, Zelus domus tuae
comedit me. The zeal of thine house has eaten the up. That is to say (say
they) that the Priests ought to keep their houses, but under correction, they
take that passage of the Scripture amiss, for to the keeping well of Gods
house and their own, it behooves them to pass through a number of dangers. Of
truth, if these good people were but somewhat near touched with their being
set forward in their furnitures, to march in the wars: their change of
countenance would son be seen. I^ would seem to the^ a strange
Metamorphosis in lieu of a surplis to put on a corslet, in place of a myter to
wear a morio^ or burg^ner, in stead of a cross, or an holy water sprinkle,
to bandle a lance, or an harquebouse: where these were wont to be mounted upon
mules, to ride upon barbed horses or fierce coursers, or else to trot on foot:
and as they lay erst upon their soft beds, to lodge now upon the hard ground
(yea and that at the sign of the star:) I am well assured, that their only
apprehension of so strange an exchange, would drive them to yield even the
leaving of their Temples, to the preachers of the Gospel. Marry it is not to
be doubted, but that upon this Mart they would be assured, that those
preachers nor their preachings, should be prejudicial to their goods and
revenues (a point very requisite to be agreed upon.) For they have good
reason, not to consent to the forgoing of their goods, (the sale of the same
being to them forbidden under the pain of excommunication,) and their revenues
are needful to their sustentation of life. The wise Solomon that sends us
to the Ante, shows us (say they) that we ought not to suffer our Garners to
be empty. The argument is good: For if the small beasts (as the Antes) have
some care for what to live by, how much more for living then ought to be the
care of ye great? This way sir shall not be impertinent, to make the hearts of
your good subjects, to consent to the acceptance of peace. And if they refuse
peace, you are by that means to enjoy their money, wherewith they can no less
do, than furnish you to the mayntenance of the wars, that make choice of the
same: But I verily judge, they will like best of peace, as thereunto moved in
respect of their profit and quietness.

And this point being gained, that your subjects will agree to the exercise of
both religions, for the obtaining of peace: all other means to bring the same
to pass, shall easily be compassed. For in that the Gospellers desire a
reformation of justice: the Catholics and they agree, both feeling it good to
have justice justly administered. And it should be very necessary, that a good
search and survey through your Parliamentes should be made (as well of the
highest as of the lowest members thereof,) among whom should many be found
napping and faulty, that have pouled and pilled good men, to their utter
vndoings. I mean not the sifting of the same too near, only the notorious and
gross offe^ders, (for their offenses) are to be touched. And such a search or
survey should be no new thing. We have of the like many examples. In the time of
ye Roman civil wars, between Scilla and Marius, Pompei and Caesar, many
were dispossessed of the Senators estate, yea even by those with whom they
took part. For every of those great contenders sought the mean to make many
friends in the Senate.

But Augustus Caesar (after he had gotten ye goal from his competitours,) was
peaceably possessed of the Empire, and had established peace amongst his
subjects: he straight sought reformation of the states and offices. And a
special trial made he of the Senate, as thereunto had slipped by unlawful
means, purging the same of such unworthy persons, and so restored he it to the
ancient beauty and dignity. Sueto. in Augusto cap. 35.
The like (sir) were needful in your Parliaments and other places of justice
in France. For the wise and good that now be there, shall not be grieved, that
the corrupt which are among them by unlawful means entered, should be cut
off, to the increase of ye honor of such as shall remain. Treb. Polli in
Valeriano.
We read that one of the principal charges of the Censours of Rome, was the
chastising and displacing of the unwise and unworthy Senators, which were many
times chastised even for very small faults, and what inconvenience were it, if
at this day the office of censure were somewhat amnogst us brought in ure?
Besides these points of the exercise of the Evangelical religion, and
reformation of justice: there be many other necessary points to the making and
perfiting of a good peace: which I mean to forbear here to touch, as
things not expedient. I will now show the mean how such a peace may be
concluded upon and made. For the bringing to pass whereof, it should me
thinks be very good your Majesty did as your predecessors have done, when
they would yield a rule for any good peace of justice or policy to pass in
France. Their manner was to put their trust in certain personages that were
faithful and wise, such and: so many as might suffice, to the body of a
Counsel to any kingly estate, for their understanding in the formalities of
justice, in the points of right, and in the perticulars that in any policy
were to be considered of. And if it might likewise please your Majesty to
commit to a dozen (or such other like number of personages,) the entreatie of
all the perticulars of a peace: it seems to be the only way whereby all
manner of matters, doubts, and difficulties, might be decided and resolved.
But it shall (sir) be needful, that you show so much favor to the
Gospellers, as they may nominate one dozen of such persons as they shall think
meet (provided that they be good, will (and apt men) out of the which number,
you ^way those six to be of the number of the (...), by you so to be deputed
to entreat of the said matters. And to those twelve (by your said Majesty to
be chosen) it shall be requisit^e, that ye give a strong and large commission,
for the hearing of all plaintes and griefs, and the appeasing and ending of
the sai^e, together with the deciding of all such articles, as shall to them
by the Gospellers be preferred, in such manner as may be most furthering to
the said peace and the common weal^: And that what so ever shall be so
determined and agreed upon, may be of like weight, force and authority, as if
your self (sir) in proper person, had decided and accorded it. Which good and
large commission, being given to those deputies: it were requisite that a place
of no side to be suspected to them, were assigned to execute that commission
in. As this good town of Frankford (might it please you to permit their coming
thither) is free from all suspicion, because both the Relygions, Catholic and
Euangelike are therein exercised, yea the very Jews have here their place of
safety, if not here, at Ausburge, where both Religions are likewise used, or
at Strasbrough where both parties shall be welcome, or else in some other good
town where into may be safe and sure access, as well for the commissioners, as
for all such other as shall have with them to do. The said commissioners also
must by your fayde Majesty be enjoined (upon pain for ever to be banished the
realm of France) not to depart thence, till such time as they have fully
concluded, upon so much as shall be necessary, to the perfiting of a good
perpetual peace. No more than may the Cardinal from the Conclaue when they
those a Pope. Nor the electors of the Empire, when they elect an Emperor. And
it behooves that it be further ordained, that such of the same commissioners
as descent from the rest, be bound to yield forth in writing, the occasion or
reason of their such dissenting, to ye end that if the treaty therethrough
become ineffectuall, as well strangers as those of the french nation, may judge
and know, in whom the default does rest, that the peace was not concluded,
and that then the reasons of both parties be to the world put forth and
published: whereby it may be seen who is in the right or wrong, by which
mean all the world shall in the end come to judge of both parties, and so
justly hate the obstinate opinion of them, that by the letting of that good
peace shall tumble France afresh into the miseries of war. And if (by the
grace of God) it shall happen all the articles to be resolved, concluded, and
agreed upon, by your said commissioners, and the same by both sorts in two
coppies (whereof they of each religion to have one) to be signed: Let it then
please your majesty that under the name and authority of the same, it be put
forth in form of a perpetual Edict (without altring any jot thereof,) and
that the same Edict also be stablished, sworn, and confirmed by your self
first, in your full privy counsel, then by all the princes and other
councillors of the same, and after by all the general and particular estates,
by ye governors of provinces, towns and fortes, and their Lieuetenauntes, by
all the Parliamentes, places of Presidentes, Bayliffes, Stewards, and their
Liefetenauntes, with all other your officers: and by the Cardinals, Bishops,
Prelates, Chapiters and Colleges of your Realm. The form of which oath also
to be, that each promise, and swear before God, and upon pain of loasing
their honors, estates, offices, and dignities, with the encurring of your
displeasure, as infringers of your peace, and under the damnation of their
souls (as much as in them is) to observe and cause to be observed without
fraud or guile, all things contained in the said Edict, nothing therein
altered, by way of moderation, declaration, or otherwise, other than such
declarations and modifications as were made by your Edict in like manner and
form as was the said Edict of peace. The records of which oaths, (chiefly
those of the Lords of your privy counsel,) the governors of provinces and
towns, the Parliamentes, places of presidentes, and provincial estates
(joined to the said Edict) together, with the acts of publication and
establishment, to be imprinted: And that the said oath be yearly renewed, and
given to all such, as shall hereafter be enstalled in any office royal, or
take the charge of any other office in the common weal.

If it might please your Majesty to think good of this platte laid for the
bringing to pass of a perfect peace to be had in France, mine opinion is,
that the Gospellers would well like thereof, and thereunto agree, though they
be full (and not without cause) of mistrust, suspicion, and dread to be
deceived, al things welneere being to them suspect. And to prove that this
way carries with it some reason, and no whit touches the derogation of your
sovereign authority, experience teaches it to be a thing almost ordinary to
all Kings and Princes, when they are to deal with any matters of importance,
(be it with strangers or others, or when they will make any laws or
ordinances touching justice or policy in their kingdoms, or countries) to
commit the doing thereof to commissioners and legates. When the late Kings of
France your predecessors have made any good ordinances either of policy,
or for the execution of justice, within your Realm, wherein were contained
the formalitie of pleas, the order of judgments, the manner of making
contracts, and many decisions of rightes taken out of the lawyers hands: it is
very certain, that they were driven in the same to use as commissaries and
Legates, their chauncellours, and other meet persons chosen out of their
Parliamentes or privy councels, (for they them selves never studied in the
schools, nor proceeded Doctors of the laws, Civil nor Canon, to the
furtheraunce of their knowledges in the making of such ordinances, but trusted
their good and faithful deputies) and authorized what their said deputies
found good and profitable for the common wealth, although such resolutions
proceeded not of their own devices, neither did they well understand the^. But
when your predecessors would cause to be set down in writing, the customs
payable within your countries, they did the same by the service of deputies
and legates, and such customs as were by the said deputies and legates
assessed and written: the Princes by a law authorized the perpetual payment
thereof. And when the Romans liked to have laws made to rule rightly their
common wealth: they appointed ten Legates which made a collection of all the
laws and ordinances that seemed to them profitable or necessary, either for
the universal state, or for particular commodities. Which said laws, they
placed in twelve tables, and had them in as great estimation, as if all the
people had made, decided and established them. For seeing they were made by the
authority and commission of such as then held the sovereignty, it was al
one, as if they them selves had made them. When the Emperor Justinian
collected the civil laws into certain volumes which he called Code e digeste
(generally used at this day) he committed ye doing thereof to Tribonian,
Theophile, Dorothe, and other notable lawyers, for him self understood
nothing thereof, as witness the Historiographers, that say he could not
read, so is it very certain that he never understood the thousand part of
these matters contained in the said Code e digeste. Yet were those books
nevertheless by him aucthorised in his allowing of that which his
commissioners by his commandment did. And it was never fayde that those
Roman people, had done any derogation to their souereigntie, in their
authorizing of those ten persons, to the composing of those twelve tables, nor
that the Emperor Justinian, nor your predecessors, did any whit derogate
their sovereign authority by deputing commissioners, to make laws and
ordinances, that passed under their princes names and commandments, who as
it appears, allowed of what their deputies so by their commissions had done.
Wherefore me thinks the saying may be holden for void, that your majesty
may not make an Edict of peace by commissioners without any derogation to
your royal authority or sovereignty.

No more shall be any thing against the same your giving to the Gospellers,
the nomination of the said number of persons, whereout your majesty to choose
the moytie for the joining with the like number, by your self to be named and
chosen as legates or deputies for the bringing to pass of this good work.

Your predecessors have given ye nomination to two or three persons, of their
courts of Parliaments whom they would to choose for them, meet men to supplye
the offices of Presidentships and counselors rooms, that were void in ye
said courts, as they have also done to Majors, Consuls, Shireses, and other
like officers of Towns, for the choosing of under Baylifes, under stewardes,
and other like petie officers, yet has it never the more bin said, that your
said predecessors in granting the said nominations to their subjects, have
taken ought from their authority royal, which lies as much in creatyng of
magistrates, as in making of laws (as any man of judgment may both see and
understand.) The Pope which says himself to have full power over the gifts
of benefices, leaves the nomination of the incumbent not to two or three, but
to one, not to princes, but to particular persons, which commonly in benefiers
have the right of nomination, and the presenting of such persons to ye same, as
to the^ seems good, without reseruatio^ to ye said Pope of any election, but
only ye institution: and if by suffering of the same, he thought any whit to
derogate, the sovereign power and authority, which he has over the said
benefits, he would not (I warrant you) permit any such nomination. So may it
plainly be seen to your majesty, that your authority royal, shall no whit
be deminished, by the granting of your good favor to the gospellers in ye
said nomination.

Withal is to be considered, that it were a thing unreasonable (with your
favor) that all the said Commissioners should be Catholics, for by the
ordinance of the kings your predecessors (by all the form of justice here
and else where) and by the laws divine, natural and civil, it is lawful for
the party to accuse his judge suspect, be it in matter criminal, or civil. And
a judge may be holden for suspect, not only if he be of kindred, alied, or
Gossip, a friend to the party adurrse, but also if he be enemy to the party
that refuses him, or if he or any of his kin have any interest (little or
much) in the cause, yea if he have at any time showed him self more
affectionate on the one side, than on the other, (as he may also in diverse
other less causes of refusal.) And who is he that sees not, that there is
never a Catholic in France, against whom these poor gospellers cannot
allege (not one but) many and sundry causes of recusation? And if it be
thought tolerable to hold a judge for suspect, and upon that suspicion to
refuse him in matters of mean weight: ought he not then to be refused when he
shall have to deal with conscience, honor, lands, goods, wives, children and
life?

And it ought not to seem strange, that I said it should be mere that the
said peace by the said commissioners, were entreated of without the Realm, for
there be many reasons that require the same. First for that it is better (as
says Master Philip de Comines, a man well experimented in the affairs of an
estate) it should be done far off than mere, and that for diverse
considerations, namely for the keepyng close of that which shall from time to
time be agreed upon, till all be concluded and finished. For as in a painted
table he that veweth ye first draught, shall find in the same little or
nothing to his contentment, yet after, the whole work being perfited, does
please him very well: Even ^o, if during the time of the treaty (and before
the conclusion of all things therein to be argued) some piece thereof agreed
upon should be published: many were like enough to gaynesay and control
that peace, that upon the sight or bearing of the hole resolution, would find
good cause of contentment, because that he which is not satisfied in one
point, may be satisfied in another. And as the Doctors of the law say, it
stands not with good reason that any should judge of a law or of an Edict,
without having read the same from the one end to the other. And as it were a
thing very hard to decide or deal with any thing within the Realm that should
not incontinent be deuulged* so the reprehensions and sclaunders that would
follow such diuulgation, might be an infallible cause that nothing should be
done, but that intended good work broken off and laid aside. Beside that,
there is no place within your Realm, but is suspected of the one side or of
the other. For the Catholics will not go to Nismes nor to Rochell, and the
Gospellers will be as unwilling to come at Paris, Lions, Tholosa, or other
like place, so that for the doing thereof such a place is to be chosen as may
be sure and free for all that shall there in have to do. And therefore it was
that in times past when they would hold any council for the examining of any
new doctrine newly come abroad, for place where the council should be
holden, was chosen within the province where such doctrine was abroad, or
else in some other such place near thereunto, as was both sure and commodious.
Therefore was it also that by the ordinance of your predecessors no inquest
might be taken, nor any justice proceed in a place by any of the parties
holden suspected, as in the house of the kinsman, ally, or special friend, to
him that caused the inquest to be enpauelled: but an indifferent place
therefore by the judge was to be chosen, and by shall reason may all the towns
in France be suspected: For if the suspicion of a place be curiously to be
looked to and aduoyded in small things: how much are they to be looked to in
a matter of so great a weight as is the seeking and concluding of a peace?

And where I said it should be meet, that when the commissioners could not
(...) upon some articles of the treaty they which refused to agree and go
through should give out by their writings, the reasons of their dissenting and
standing aloof, to the end the world might see who were in the fault: it is
not a matter unreasonable. For such as shall yield (as meet is) to the
agreement of all things that right and reason shall find expedient for the
common profit, shall not find it evil, that a reason be rendered by them, that
otherwise, in their passions will be wilful: and therefore if any refuse so
to do, it shall seem yt they want good will to see ye way that should bring al
things in from yt are to be founded upon equity and common profit.

Neither aught to to be evil taken what I spoke touching oaths. For as the
common saying is) he that will well pay, will willingly become bound: And your
majesty already by your said last Edict of October approved this point, when
ye promised in the word of a king, to cause to be observed whatsoever should be
agreed upon, and to make the fame pass in manner of a record, with the
consents of your Parliamentes, towns and commonalties of your realm.

I shall think my self well ^iffied sir), (in all humility and reverence) to
have showed unto you (as to my natural prince) the three points whereof I
have before entreated. Most humbly beseeching your Majesty to take the sa^ in
good part as in that is proceeded from the hearty affection of a good french
subject, that wishes all increase of honor and prosperity to your crown, and
quietness to your poor subjects. And if it shall please God to move you to
think so well of this plot (laid for the building of a peace) as you will
appoint and charge commissioners with the dealing in the same I will settle my
self to the opening of such other particular means for the bringing thereof
to pass, as are not mee^e at this present in writing to be discovered. But
amongst other things, I will open unto them how needful it were that a good
(...) should be made for ye banishing of Machi^ae^ for ever out of France, as
one that has been the greatest liar, and imposture that ever was in the World,
the ancient Romans, Greeks, and Frenchmen, and all other well ruled
commonwealthes, having bin ruled ^leane contrary to his doctrine. And that his
disciples which have brought into France the observation of his precepts,
have been the very cause of the civil wars and miseries of the realm. It
may be that his precepts be good and necessary for those of his nation, for
they reach (among other things) the nonmaking of account of any religion,
otherwise than for the keeping of the people in a superstitious fear and
obedience: upon which his opinion might be inferred, that the Turkish religion
(wherefrom God deliver us) might safely of any be received, for by the same the
Turks holds his subjects under such fear and obedience, as they refuse not
at his commandment the murdering of them selves, thinking thereupon to flee
straight to their Paradise, that flows with milk and honey. He shows also,
that a Prince should bear good countenance to all promise much, and keep
touch in nothing, more than sire^th to his advantage. Moreover, his disciples
use these fair persuasions. If it be profitable to a King (say they) to took
out and destroy such houses and such old him do it, without taking any advise
(...) what may follow of his so doing. Such as have brought into France the
observation of Machiauels precepts, have not well considered, that the
Frenchmen in nature far differ from their nation. The French are naturally
religions, lovers of virtue, and take no pleasure neither in falsifying of
their faith, contemning of their honor and reputation, nor in the sheading of
blood. If the Macheuilians be endued with those good qualities: let them there
keep them, and follow their Doctors doctrine, that was the greatest Atheist
that ever the world bred, with his companion the Aretine, as their writings
does openly show, so as they keep them selves from poisoning of our French
nation, with those their abominable vices. But I will reserve till another
time (when it shall better fall out to the purpose) the speaking more largely
to my Lords and Masters the Macheuilians, whom I will then show, that al
their policy and sufficie^cie, is none other than a brutish ignorance,
accompanied with a wicked heart and will: and that they never read the good
histories written in Greek, Latin, or French, or if they have read, they
never well understood them. I will for this time proceed no further, but make
an end of this present declaration, the which I once again most humbly beseech
your Majesty to take in good part, so as it may pass from this good town of
Frankford to your hands. Praying the Creator of all things, to endue you with
his grace, shortly to establish a good peace in your poor Realm, so much
torn and spoiled by these wars paste, by mean whereof, all your subjects
may render unto you their good and willing obedience. The same also preserve
you in happy prosperity, and increase you with much power and honor.

FINIS.

