A Iournall, wherein is truly set down from day to day, what was done, and
worthy of noting in both the Armies, from the last coming of the D. of Parma
into France, until the eighteenth of May 1592. according to the French
computation.

Whereunto is added other news from Genes, the which are confirmed by sundry
letters of credit.

Translated out of French by E. A.

LONDON Printed by John Wolf, and are to be sold at his shop, right over
agai^^^ the great South door of Poules, 1592

A Iournall, wherein is set down from day to day, what was done in both the
Armies, from the coming of the Duke of Parma into France, until the
eighteenth of May 1592. according to the French computation.
THe Duke of Parma perceiuinge himself, notwithstanding his great and well
prepared forces assembled, namely the king his masters power, consisting of
Spanyardes, Launceknights Wallons, Italians, and Neapolitanes, footmen: also
his horsemen Wallons, Flemminges, Italians, and Rutters: together with the late
Popes forces, consisting of Suitzers and good nombers of Italians, on
horseback and on foot: likewise the aid of the Duke of Mayenne, which was no
small number: unable to force the king to raise his sieg from before Roan,
determining to practice the Spanish manner of Stratagemes, used in the days of
the late kings Jews the twelfe and Fraunces the first, thereby to shonne the
fury of the French: retired out of the way into a place of safety, there
waitinge until their heat were over, and all the French army in process of
time, of it self ^roken up and scattered.

To this end he s^t a face, as if he purposed to besiege S. Esprit de Rue, a
place lying beyond the River of Some, and the rather at the request of the Duke
of Aumale, and the inhabitants of Abbeuille, and others who found them selves
greatly annoied thereby: still lookinge for the departure of the kings French
troops, wherein he was no whit deceived: For the French, who for the most part
served upon their own charges, did retire, as being persuaded that the Duke of
Parma, considering he was past the River of Some, meant only to take his way
into the Low countries. There he lay a whole month, providing to plant his
artillery before Rue, but understanding that the king had no more remaining
with him but only of French five hundred footmen, and as many horse, also
that the rest of his army, consisting of strangers, was scattered into
several places, because of the situation of the town of Roan, which was
environed with great Barricanes and valleis, whereby they could not pass from
one lodging to an other in less then two hours: also that some troops of his
forces were in the subvrbes of S. Severe, beyond the river of Seyne. The
enemies army, upon the advantages that their leaders found themselves to have
over the king, marched toward Roan, and in four days approached within four
leagues thereof.

Hereupon his Majesty retired a league and a half from Roan, drawing toward
Pont-del-Arch, to a village named Gouy, there to assemble his forces, and to
receive such as he had sommoned out of the I Will of France, out of Picardy, and
out of the gouernements of Orleance, Chartres, and Normandy, attending the
ennemy notwithstanding in the same place, with such power as he had about him.

The Duke of Parma and Mayenne, seeing Roan set at liberty, having tarried there
about two days, where the Spanish faction boasted greatly that they had
removed the king, whom they thought certainly would pass the River of Seyne,
marched thence toward Caudebeck, a village lying downewarde upon the same
River, with full purpose to take it.

The five and twentieth day of April, the king upon the arrival of some
French troops, both of horsemen and footmen, marched toward the enemy, and
lodged at Fountain le Bourg, but by the way he took three Castles, which the
ennemy had before seized upon.

The next day being the six and twentieth, the Rendez-uous was at Fresnoy, and
the army passed on to Outeuille and there abouts, where the Dukes of
Montpensier and Longueuille, with the County S. Paul came in, with diverse
other Lords, some together with them, others leading troops a part.

The seven and twentieth day, the king undertook to pass on to Iuetot, where
the Dukes of Mayenne and Guize were lodged, who were somewhat bravely
displaced, and more lustely had been, but for certain ditches that environed
the grounds every way, whereby the Duke of Bouillon could not pass as he
would to back the Baron of Byron, yet were there some slain and some taken,
among the rest Blanque-Fort who is one of the said Barons train, took young
Chastre. Iuetot is not past one league from Lauetot, where the Duke of Parma
was lodged, who was somewhat abashed, when he perceived the king so near him
with his army, and hunting after him, whereby finding himself enclosed
between his Majesty and the River of Seyne, having besides received a
harquebuze shot in his arm, at the siege of Caudebeck, which was not worth
the pains, and being in great necessity of victuals, he fortefied his lodging
with trenches. After the king had remained two days at Iuctot, on the last of
April he drew nearer to the ennemy to a village named Varicaruille and there
abouts.

The enemies purposed two hours before night to set upon the English,
whereupon the king returned and sent the Baron of Biron to conduct the English,
who were gone too far out of their lodginges. The ennemy came with some
fourteen or fiueteene hundred footmen: also in the fore-fronte there were a
number of horse, besides sundry other troops that followed. The skirmish was
hoate, but in the end, coming to handy blows, the Duke of Parmaes horsemen
gave a charge, of whom there were slain sixteen or seauenteene parsons of
account, every one in velvet hosen, besides diverse others, and five and twenty
or thirty wounded.

The Baron Biron, in the view of them al, stew one of the principals, and Sir
Roger Williams Coronell of the English slew an other. At which time they also
took one Cornet, very well furnished with all manner of weapons, and some that
carried money. This was a great disgrace to their whole power: as being done in
the sight of the rest of their army, which was almost all in battle array,
and the Prince of Parma the Dukes son had the repulse.

The first of May the enemies army was betimes in battle array in their fort
and thereabout: yet not without suspect of some mening to dislodge: For there
were passed some troops both of horse and foot toward the ways, whereby
they received their victuals, namely toward Lislebonne, Tankeruille, Arfleur,
Newhauen, Eescam, and Honflew, which stands beyond the River, so that the
same day there were taken three or four thousand loaves, about 400. carriage
horses that were gone on a forraging, and twenty fair horses belonginge to the
artillery. There returned also many carriages that came from the said places
laden with victual: There were also taken some horsemen that went forth for
to safeconduct them: so that the loaf of bread that was worth but one souse
before, was now sold among them for twelve and fiueteene souses: and the pot
of wine, the worst for three franckes, and that that was somewhat good was
sold for four.

This first of May was the Feast of James and Philip and it fell upon a Friday,
all which concurred for the Spanyardes to lay the platformes of all their
enterprises and purposes: howbeit the king took so good order in every
quarter, that we incurred no inconvenience: but contrariwise the enemy finding
our troops to be (as they term it) frollicke, stood in greater doubt of
being assaulted, then in desire to assail.

The second day most of the enemies army stood still in battle ray, part of
them passinge into a wood, which lies between their Forte and the kings
army, which was but five hundred paces from one of their trenches, and was
environed with a very deep ditch, the trees standing on both sides in manner
of a hedge, so enterlaced that it was almost inaccessible albeit there were
none to defend the same.

The third day the king with his chiefest Captains, went to take a view of the
head of the enemies army, to the end there to endeavor to work some effect.
He found that the enemy had made five rauelinges about the said wood, which
flancked the champion whereby he was to go to the head: also that he had
lodged two thousand footmen in certain houses that stood as in a villadge
under the side thereof, compassed with the same ditches yet in some place there
were three ditches one with in an other that divided the fields from the said
head, which was with in the reach of a small coluering on the one side of the
Switzers lodgings, so that planting the Canon he might have struck into some
of our lodginges, namely into the Englishmens. Never the less the king, having
taken counsel in the field, resolved to seize upon the said wood together
with the vilage therein comprehended, which was one of their chiefest
lodginges, and to that effect appointed all his troops to be in place before
day in battle array, so to give the assault at the break of day: but the
darkness of the night was in part the cause that some that were lodged far
of were not so dilligent but that it was almost eight of the clock before they
arrived in estate to perform the purposed effect. Neither could this assembly
be so secret, but that the enemy did some what perceive it, which caused him
to believe that it was never gathered with out intent to enterprise some matter
whatsoever: they for their parts put them selves in battle, using all
diligence to fortify and raise the said rauelings, shoting of two canons to
aduertize all their troops, where upon some were of opinion to refer the
enterprise to an other time. But the king finding al his troops full of
courage and heat, resolved to assault them in sundry places. On the one side
the English and Wallons and the rest to support the^: on an other side the
French and the lance knights to support them. The first, who were as
adventurers, strok in so valeantly that they entered the trenches with hard
sight, rather with the pike and sword, then with the harquebuze, and forced
the enemy out of the said wood and village, albeit they were two thousand men,
and some Spanish Captains that were come at the brute of the assembly of our
forces.

There were left dead upon the place above three hundred men, whereof some were
Spaniards and some Wallons: Amongst them were six or seven Captains, and the
Liefetenant Coronell of la Verlette and he himself wounded, without any loss
of ours, except two or three slain, and seven or eight hurt.

The Lord Baron Biron advanced himself according to his Office of Marshall
General of the field, whereby he beheld the countenance and retraict of the
enemies, and advertised the king thereof, who sent him fifty horse, led by the
Lord of Maligni, Vidam of Chartres. Upon their coming he pursued them that
fled, even until they came within fifty paces of their first entrenchment,
where their army stood in battle ray. Here were also slain between six and
seven score, with the loss of only one of ours, who passed so far that he
was slain at the foot of the trench. So likewise were there some horses
slain and some hurt: yea there were some such enemies slain as offered ten,
six, and four thousand crowns.

The king stood about eight hours offering the battle, having to that end
advanced his Switzers, horsemen and artillery. The enemies trenches were
raised very high in respect as they were at the beginning in the field, and
they somewhat annoyed us with their artillery: but the king placed his forces
else where, in place where the Canon could not hurt.

His Majesty perceiving after so long expectation, and the night coming on,
that the enemies made no countenance to come forth of their Fort, returned
every man to his lodginge, until further occasion to do more, having by this
effect with their great hurt, given the enemies to know that our footmen are as
good or better then theirs, at the cost of the Spanish bravery and presumption,
who can now grant that the footmen the which the king now has are very good:
for of his horsemen they make no doubt, considering the many proufes that they
have had.

The next day being the fifth of May, about eleven of the clock, there came
other advice, that the ennemie dislodged from their Forte, whereof grew sundry
opinions, the greatest importing that they meant secreately to steal away to
Roan, and from thence to the Forest of Andely, which is but three leagues
thence leaving in Roan their munition and most heauiest baggage, and truly had
they ben able so to have done and to gotten six or seven hours before hand
whereby to have (...) into the (...), with that aduantadge they might easily
have sent their horsemen and baggage before, and left their footmen upon the
tail, whom our horsemen could not have broken or fought withal in the forest
neither could our footmen have marched in time to overtake theirs, but that
afterward through this forest they might have retired even to New castle or
toward Beauuais.

The king here upon sent out some to view the enemy, who returned answer that
they dislodged, then in the morning he sent more and stronger troops, who gave
him to wit that the enemies were departed over night and that they were broken:
here upon his Majesty resolved to bring his maine battle toward Clayre, so
to win the fore part of the said forest, whiles himself with his horsemen
followed the enemy in the tail to the end truly to learn the order of their
march, what way they took, and what iourneys they might be able to make:
leaving the Lord Marshall Biron to conduct the army and to cause it to march
in order. His majesty had not marched far but he perceived that he had not
had certain advice, for within half a league of the fort where the enemy was
lodged, he found them in battle array, and for a token that they went not
scatering they discharged some canons. But had he been truly aduertized, he
would surely have brought his army, and so undoubtedly we had had battle, and
that with advantage, or at the least in equal balance, which is the thing
that the king chiefly desires. The king seeing how the case stood, sent word to
marshall Biron to stay the army where it was, also to consider how to lodge,
like wise soon after hesent the Lord Baron of Biron son to the said Marshall
to appoint the seat, which he did at Iuetot, two leagues from the ennemies
camp, who began already to fortefie, notwithstanding the strong situation
thereof, which was upon a hill between two valleis, neither was there any
access unto it, but at one only head, and that very difficulte, as being
flancked with wood and valleys, besides that attending until the trenches were
made, they had placed at the said head three rows of carriages, whereof they
had great plenty.

The king seeing his army too far off, namely that his Rutters, were lodged
three leagues off, and diverse of his troops so far away, that they could not
come together until it were very late, determined to retire until the next
morninge, and then to see whether he could work any good effect.

The seventh day of the said month of May, the king departed with some of
his forces, to lodge at a place called Saint Katerines, from whence he might
plainly discover the ennemies Camp, but perceiving that he was first to
pass two great valleys he returned to the former lodging.

The eight day, some went to discover the ennemies army, who found them within
a great trench which they had augmented.

The ninth day, the king took counsel to assail the ennemies horsemen, who
were lodged along a valley, for the commodity of water, and in three villages
beneath their army: Herevppon he gave charge to Baron Biron to take his
Regimente, wherein were six hundred French footmen, one hundred English
pikes, and one hundred Musquettiers, and as many Wallons, likewise the Lance
knights, to seize upon this lodging. He also appointed that the Lord
Marshall de Aumont, should march after with his Regimente, also that when
they were near the execution, he should take on to the left hand, so to
keep that side from hinderinge the same, as also to set a fa^^, as if he
would fight with such as should gather together, namely with the last
villages, or else with the whole army.

The Duke of Bouillon was likewise expressly appointed with his Regimente to
take on to the right hand, toward the ennemies Camp, where he got up
above on to the top of the valley, and marched toward the ennemies trenches
within the volley of a small culuering, whereby he stopped the ennemies from
coming forth of their Camp to succor those lodginges. The Lord Marshall
Biron marched after with eight hundred French, two hundred footmen English and
Wallons, most of them pikes, and then his own Regiment.

Being come to the first village he slayed and sent four hundred hargabuziers
into the wood on to the right hand, to support the Duke of Bouillon, if need
should require, also two hundred to his son the Lord Bar^^ of Biron. The
king remained on the top of the Hill, to the end to make head against the
army, in case it should pass out at the end or beginning of the valley with
his Cornet, his Regiment, and the Regiments of the Dukes of Montpensier and
Longueuille, the counties of Saint Paul and Do. for it was to be feared that
the ennemy would pass that way to hinder and disturb the execution aforesaid.

The fight was sore, for ye are to note, that where commonly men set upon
lodginges by night, the king would have this done by day, to the end that if
the ennemy should offer any attempt, he might be seen coming, and to be
fought withal.

Besides of the kings troops some tarried over long: others showed themselves
in the view of the ennemies camp, so that when the said Lord Baron drew near
the lodgings, he found doble ward of Rutters and lances, and almost all the
troops taking horse, being in number between thirty and forty cornets, seven
companies of men of arms of the ordinances, and the Rutters.

The said Lord Baron had but few men, in respect that the passage was narrow:
albert in deed the Lord great Master of the horse came unto him with some
fiueteene or twenty of the kings Cornet, and the County of Chasteau-Roux
Marshall de Auments eldest son, accompanied with some gentlemen was also with
the said Lord Baron.

The said Lord Ba^^n seeing some threescore and ten or fourscore Rutters
coming to charge upon him, turned to them, albeit but meanly accompanied, in
respect that part of his company had taken an other way, by reason of a
hedge, where were five and thirty men. For he considered that if he should
retire from before this troop, it might bree^e some danger of fear, to the
rest of those that came behind, and therefore he resolved to set upon them.
There followed some store of Pistol shot and handye blows, wherein the said
Rutters were overthrown, and so he entered the village, where he found certain
Spanyardes that stood at defense, and thereupon the said Lord Baron staid for
his Harguebuziers, to distodge them from the hedges and ditches, where the
County Chasteau-Roux was hurt on the leg, which was great pity, in respect
he was both valiant and forward.

Those that parted from the said Lord Baron, did report that they met with a
troop of lancers whom they withstod, to the end so to favor the excecution,
which was great both in slain, wounded, and prisoners: as also was the spoil
and loss. For the enemies do give out that they lost four hundred horse of
service and sixtene hundred other, a great deal of baggage and moueables, and
much silver in vessel and coin.

There were sundry conflicts, and the Lord Baron of Biron fought three or
four times against both horsemen and footmen, who, gathered together both in
the lodginges and among the hedges and ditches, yet in the end they were all
broken, and the rather for that the Lord Marshall de Aumont put some of the
spanish troops in fear, as also those that gathered again together. The duke
of Bouillon was forsed to put self under couuert from the enemies artilery.

The king also sent a great troop of horse toward the enemies camp or
trenches, to hold them still in fear that the said troup would enter their
Camp, whilst the rest of the army assaulted the trenches.

This execution performed, the Lord Baron began to cause those whom he
brought, to retire, but in great disorder by reason of their booty, and those
two hundred fresh harguebuziers, whom the Lord Marshall had sent him, stood
them in good stead: When most of his troops were on their way, himself began
also to retire toward the right hand, at which time the Duke of Bouillon
began to descend into the valley, being seconded by the small shot that was
sent into the wood and hedges.

All these troops aforesaid thus passed, the Lord Marshall Biron, sounded the
retreat, with his booty, and the ennemies set a face as they would have
followed in the tail, but they were so well wellcommed, that sundry of them
were slain and hurt: And here came his son the Lord Baron unto him, with
sundry men of acaccompt that were with him. This was performed thus honorably
for the execution of the kings purpose to the ennemies great loss as is
aforesaid: and his Majesty was also come down to see how things went, from
whence he commanded whatsoever was requisite.

The eleventh day of May, the king was advertised, that the enemy had brought a
great many of boats, which he caused to be fastened by two and two, making
thereof small bridges to pass over: and that they transported upon each
bridge, some sixty horse with many footmen and some baggage in the bottom, so
to get over the River of Seyne. A matter scarce to be imagined. Also that as
for forage, there came great plenty a long the way toward Lislebonne, and
along the river, likewise that they had some store coming a long from toward
Newhauen, Harfleur, Fescam, etc.

Hereupon the king determined to follow their army, to the end to cut of
their victuals and forage, also to assault Caudebeck, or compel the ennemies
to battle. The which day he departed from Iuetot, and came to lodge in a
village called Lauetot.

The twelfth day he went to take the view of Caudebeck, where he found that
they had made a Fort at half the mountain, wherein were a good number of
people, and likewise in the town, But his Majesty had brought but few troops,
and therefore he referred al to the next day, being the thirteenth. Likewise he
might behold the boats laden with men horse, and baggage, passing over the
River with all diligence.

The same day he marched with part of his army and some artilery, and at the
coming of our footmen the enemies began to retire to a place of execution where
they made as it were a little fort, but passing forward they habandoned their
fort, which was at the mid mountain, neither could we any longer perceive the
number of boats at the kay: But the most of them marched toward Roan, and as
for their forces they were al already passed over the river saving those that
marched as it is aforsaid toward Roan and four hundred of the town garrison.

Hard by the other side of the river the enemies had before made a fort for the
safety of the passage, where they had 7. pieces of ordinance, which being
taken forth of their boats they left behind them. In the forte had they left
some men, also in a small vilage thereby some both horsemen and footmen, who set
themselves in battle array without the danger of the canon, which the king
caused to be often times discharged against those that were in the forte and
about the pieces. Hereupon the enemies sent three teemes of horse to draw away
the said pieces against the which we shot sundry times and slew some of theit
horses, which notwithstanding, they drew them away one after another.

The king left certain French in the aforenamed fort above the town, with
some Wallons and English, also some artillery upon the top of the mountain
and there he lodged the Suitzers. Likewise some of the ships approached and
shot off, howbeit but few.

The fourteenth day of May, the king caused his company to shoot into the
town: they that were within, made a brag, whereupon the king sent them word,
that he would hang them all: But toward eueninge they craved parley, and so
the king sent the Lord Baron of Byron, to make the composition.

There came forth of the town of Caudebeck four hundred men, whereof two
hundred were Spanyardes, whose composition was the easier, to the end they
might have no cause of delays or longer stay. Because it is hard to plant a
siege, also that the water stood in many parts of the ditch, and could not be
voyded.

There were also threescore and ten artillery horses, that could not pass
away, and some mulets, namely the Prince of Parmaes own. Besides the king
determined to depart and to follow the ennemy, and therefore took his way to
Pont-del-Arch there to pass over the River of Seyne, to keep the ennemy from
temporising on the other side of the River, and to force him to some action.

The king being on the way to Pont-del-Arch had advice that the enemies horsemen
that could not pass at Caudebeck but took to Roan, had passed the River at
Roan, and so marched wholly toward Paris, whereupon he resolved with diligence
to make way to learn the truth, where the ennemy would become. He left his
French horsemen, with the Duke of Montpensier to proceed forward, also his
footmen with the Lord Marshall Biron to the end upon advertisement from
himself, to pass over Seyne, or to march toward Paris, either to pass over
the River of Oyse at Creil, or at Ile-Adam, so to cut off the ennemies retraict
into the Low countries.

The sixteenth day, the king received letters from the Lord of Archant
governor of Eureux, importing the overthrow of a great number of the ennemies,
whom he surprised, lodged in the suburbs of the said town, of whom fifty
were left dead in the place, and many were taken prisoners.

He writes moreover that upon Friday the fiueteenth day of this month of
May, the Prince of Parma, son to the Duke, had passed a long not far from
Eureux, accompanied with seauentene ensigns of footmen and two maine troops
of horse, who marched the one before, and the other behind, so disorderly and
fearfully, that it had been an easy matter with a thousand horse, to have
defeated them all: and that he marched directly toward Paris where he hoped
upon the Sunday after, being the seventeenth of the same month, to arrive.

The king purposes shortly to return to the assault of Roan, who has found
her death in place where she hoped for health. For the same town has had no
supply of the things that it stands in most need of, neither need we to
fear, so long as the king is master of the field and keeps the River of
Seine shut up, that the ennemies shall deliver themselves from their misery and
want of victuals.

By letters of the eighteenth day from the Camp near to Caudebeck, we hear
that the Duke of Parma remains at Roan sick of his hurt: also that the Duke
of Mayenne is likewise sick in the town, of a sore and in a manner incurable
disease: likewise that the most part of the said Dukes army is also there
enclosed: and most certain it is that the Switzers are there shut up.

There is news come sense that the Duke of Parma having passed the River of
Seyne, and understanding that the king lay for him toward Paris, has passed
the River of Marne at Charenton bridge toward Meaux, also that the said Duke is
very sick.

The Lord of Fay is at Guillebocus which he fortefieth, as being a place that
may greatly hinder all traffic between Roan and Newhauen.

The Lord Marshall Biron, on the nine and twentieth day of May, entered upon
Newcastle, and it is thought that the business will not be long.

Roan is brought into great extremity, as being victualed but from day to day.
The king purposes very shortly to keep it shorter.

Other news there is written from Genes the fifth of April 1592. the which
are confirmed by diverse letters.
The Duke of Sauoy is returned out of Prouence unto Nice, thence to depart to
Thurine to take order for the affairs of Piedmont where they greatly fear the
coming of the Lord of Diguieres. That both before and since his departure
from the same place he has still lost, namely the good wills of the people:
also that particularlye Aix was revolted against him: and had expelled all the
strangers his adherents: had changed magistrates and slain the consul and
three counselers. That the governor of Antibe having received money of the duke
for delivery of the same to him, had mocked him, and with the canon chased away
four hundred soldiers sent to take the possession. The Marquse Seralin is
come out of Spain into Piedemont to serve the Duke in his wars of Prouence,
as also to the same effect there are leauyed new forces in Lombardy.

The states of Arragon, Catalogne and Valence by common accord and consent sent
unto king Philip to complain of his executing of the chief Justice of the
state of Arragon, whereto he answered that he executed him not as in quality
of chief Justice but as a particular rebel, where of they craved declaration
in writing together with the confirmation of their privileges: Furthermore in
as much as it seemed that the king meant to send some men toward the Pirinean
mountains, they withal besought him not to send above five hundred at once
according to their said privileges, whereto the king has as yet returned no
answer.

FINIS.

