THE GROANS OF THE SPIRIT, OR THE TRIAL of the Truth of PRAYER.

1 Ioh. 3. 21. 22. Beloved, if our hearts condemn us not, then have we
confidence toward God; and whatsoever we ask we receive of him.

Cor in thuribulo Oration pura. OXFORD, Printed by Leonard Lichfield and are to
be sold by John Allen in Lecester, An Dom. 1639.

TO THE NOBLE AND much honored Company of HIERVSALEM'S ARTILLERY, all increase
of skill, Success and Valor.
AS the Saints were not after the flesh, so the weapons of their warfare are
not carnal, but mighty through God, to bring down all the strong holds and
mighty imaginations of devils and men, plotted cunningly against the Israelites
of God; yea, all the forces of the flesh and the world must faint, and fly upon
the use of these Arms. Of this complete glorious Armature, Prayer is a
special part; yea, it is the very evergetical manifestatio^ of the powof all
the rest. It puts on all the other parts, it keeps the whole armature
close to a man, it sanctifies all the rest to their several uses it guardeth
all the rest of the golden furniture from thieves and robbers, it daunteth the
Devil and the Devils limbs, it carries the armed Soldier through out all
forces and furies, as a victorious Conqueror. And hence is that saying of the
Ancients, Supplications and Tears are the Arms of the Saints. As the power
and excellency of this spiritual piece is unexpressible, by tongues of men or
Angels; so am I the least of all to be called, of so high and heavenly a
faculty; but since it has pleased him that has mercy on me to teach me the
use of it, (though in much weakness,) and to guide me as a weak pensill in
his draught of the truth of it, to whom should J then commend it both for the
Touch and Tuition, but to the Military Forces of the new Jerusalem, who are
experime^tally acquainted with this piece of proof? To you then my dear and
thrice noble Fellow Soldiers, the Trained Band of heaven, the Artillery men of
the most High, I dedicate my self and this little Treatise; accompting it my
only happiness if I be but a doorkeeper of the Company; bear with the
feebleness of my hands in the unsheathing of this Sword: man you it with a
holy and undaunted courage, and it will maintain you. Times call you all to the
breach, stand close one to another; hold fast what ye have, and let no man
take your Crown: Lay about you with this fiery shaking blade upon all within
you and without you, that oppose Christ and his Kingdom: Walk worthy of so
high a gift; make not this good commodity to be ill spoken of; part not with
your Arms and you shall overcome. If these my poor pains may add any thing to
your skill, the greatest recompense I crave is to have a share in your cunning

Your fellow-Souldier and Servant in love GEORGE FOXLE.

TO THE READER
AS there was never more slight in venting bad commodities under false
glosses, nor never more falsehood in counterfeiting of coin, to make it go
current, then in these our days, so never more cheating tricks in the venting
of shows and shapes of holy performances, under the color of true and
essential duties, in this selfe-cosening age of ours: Instance in this duty of
prayer, under the shadows and show whereof, the Devil masketh himself even as
an Angel of light: All that are of any religion will seem to pray, but a few
pray indeed. It is an easy thing under the means (especially of quick wits,)
to draw a fair picture or dumb show of prayer; but the Spirit only can make
a living prayer. As nothing is liker true friendship then flattery, so nothing
liker Piety then Hypocrisy: nothing liker Prayer then painted words; but words
without quickening power of the Spirit are no prayer at all. All that are of any
knowledge within the pale of the Church, will acknowledge the indigested prayer
of the brutish ignorant, to be but babbling, and also the prayers of such as
worship a strange God, or the true God after a false manner, to be but sin but
that a man may have fit words, a fluent phrase, patheticall expressions, yet
no prayer, that seems a Paradox: but that so it may be I have showed at large
in this Treatise, wherein I have endeavored to clear by proper and distinct
notes the true Being of Prayer from all Semblances of prayer. And where the
comfort in prayer arises from the sense of the spirit in prayer, I have
delivered (as I may) the means of attaining the sense of the Spirit, together
with encouragements and motives to go on in prayer though sense be not
present. And lastly I give directions, how they that want the Spirit of
supplication, shall labor for it. Though my insufficiency in every particular
may appear to an Artist in the faculty, yet, to Gods glory be it spoken, I
have gone along by the light and feeling of some sparkles of the Spirit, but
with matter of much sorrow, for my shallowness in the duty. Take heed then,
Christian Reader, how thou prayest, for it is Satan's main imposture to get thy
heart to deceive thee in this duty, which is the lock and key of all other
duties; read and consider, impute the failings to me, and give God the Glory if
any thing pleases.

Yours to use in Christ, G. FOXLE.

THE CONTENTS of this Treatise.
WHat Prayer is. 2 How a man may know when he prays in the Spirit. 3 How the
sense of the Spirit in Prayer may be attained. 4 How a man should hold on in
the duty without the sense of the Spirit. 5 How they that want the Spirit of
Prayer should labor for it.
THE GROANS OF THE SPIRIT.
1. What Prayer is.
AS there is no evil of sin, The excellency and necessity of Prayer:
nor plague of punishment, more fearful and dangerous then the Spirit of
slumber; Isay 29. 10
so there is no better preservation against it, Romans 12. 8.
and medicine for the cure of it, then the Spirit of Prayer. The best of Gods
people are taken with some dregs of this.

I sleep (says the spouse) but my heart waketh: Cant. 5. 2.
All had need therefore to be awaked, and there is no better means to awake
us, then to hear God speaking to us, and to set our selves a talking to God.
These be the two means indeed that abandon all that break off familiarity
with God, and keep and increase acquaintance with God; let that counsel of
our Savior ever be with us, watch and pray. It is the best means for watchmen
to keep themselves awake by talking, and so rouse their Spirits by conference.
This Prayer is the best medicine, the safest refuge, the truest messenger, and
the most mighty prevailer with God.

To stir us up then to so excellent and necessary a duty, in so dangerous,
secure, and backsliding time, I have made bold to hang out a little light, that
they that have erred from the way (as who does not) may return, they that are
in the way may go on with comfort, and they that never came into the way (who
yet suppose themselves to be in the way) may, if it be possible, be brought
into the way.

For Method and memories sake, the subject of this little Treatise, contains in
it, or divides it self into these particulars.

In the first, there is a description of Prayer.

In the second, are discovered the marks of the Spirit of Prayer.

The third directs us how to attain to the sense of the Spirit of Prayer.

The fourth shows how a man should hold on the duty of Prayer without the
sense of the Spirit.

The fifth and last directs men that want the Spirit of Prayer how to labor
for it: Of these and of their proper particulars in order, and first, briefly
of the first, because the manner of true Prayer does discover fully the nature
of Prayer.

The Schoolmen, Description of Prayer.
and Fathers have diverse Descriptions; in which for me to be curious, stands
neither with the nature of the Treatise, nor with the scope or my intent: And
for my own part as one said in another case, I had rather pray powerfully then
define Prayer accurately: The sum of all these; The sum of all
Descriptions, may be comprised in this, namely, That Prayer is a spiritual
Ability infused into the heart, whereby the soul expresses it self
familiarly and immediately to God, in the name of Jesus Christ, with confidence
in the promises. It is called by some the pious affection of the speaker to
God; August. Hom.
by others the manifestation of the heart to God, and the assent of the soul to
God. This definition is made good by diverse places of the Scripture compared
together: Romans 8. 26. 16.
First, the Spirit makes intercession for us with Groans: Secondly, the heart
is the seat etc.

Lord before thee is all my desire, Psalm. 38. 10. 65. 3.
and my sighing is not hid from thee: This must be done immediately to God; for
thou that hear Prayers (says the Psalmist) unto thee shall all flesh come,
and that in the Name of Christ. Ioh. 5. 14.
If ye ask any thing in my name I will do it; Neither does Christ his
Mediatourship make ours not to be immediate; for he is God as well as man, and
is appointed our Mediator, as the place quoted testifies, I will do it.
Lastly with confidence in the promises, and this is the confidence that we have
in him, Ioh. 5. 14
that if we ask any thing according to his will he hears us.

First, that Prayer is not an natural acquired ability.

Secondly, it consists not in words though they be ornat, or well set forth
with seeming holiness, but in the pouring out of the heart, by sighs and
groans inexpressible.

Thirdly, It is no Prayer at all that is not made in and by Christ.

Fourthly and Lastly, without faith it is impossible to pray: Of these
Conclusions more fully in the second particular, to which now I proceed.

2 How a man may know when he prays in the Spirit.
AS Prayer is the special gift of God; so all men have it not that can talk
well, or that seem to have it; Joel, 2. 28.
I will pour out my Spirit (says the Lord) upon all flesh; that is, upon all
his own; he promises no such thing to the wicked. Pray always, Ephesians. 6. 18.
says the Apostle: Try we therefore, whether we have this or not, for good
words except they be the words of the Spirit, will not serve. Would you then
know whether you pray by the Spirit or no, try your Prayer by these particular
evidences.

The first evidence of the Spirit of Prayer is our Adoption, Evidences of
praying in the Spirit. 1. Is Adoption.
or Sonship, wherein we are interrested. Bastards and strangers, yea, mere
servants cannot pray; they learn not, nay cannot learn the language of the
house, as children can do; they call not upon God; they may get some broken
language, or terms of Art wherewithal to serve their necessities, as for
meat, prefentment and esteem among Gods people; yea, for some words they may
come to be admired, but in the true pronounciation of Shiboleth they are to
seek, and so they come short of that language: But the sons and daughters,
be they never so weak, yea, but babes or Infants in Christ, yet they can
speak the language of their Father truly, though not througly, nor eloquently.
All this the Apostle proves in that Phrase to the Romans: Romans 8. 15.
Ye have received the Spirit of Adoption whereby ye cry Abba Father: Where
observe, first, who cries, namely Sons, and they only: Secondly what they
cry, namely Father, which if they can speak truly, if with little children,
they can say little more, yet they pray truly, speaking the language of the
Spirit.

A second note that one prays by the Spirit, 2 A desire and endeavor of the
presence of the Spirit.
is an earnest desire and endeavor to take the Spirit along with them: They
will not go willingly without the evidence of the Spirit; witness the same
Apostle; the Spirit makes request for us: Where we must understand that the
Spirit is said to make request for us after an other manner, then the son is
said to make request for us. v. 34. namely by the virtue and power of his
merit: But the Spirit makes request by stirring us up, and putting us on to
make request. The Spirit (as one says) by that anointing power teaches and
frames us to frame our petitions. In this we must be like Moses, Exodus 33. 45.
If the Lords presence go not with us let us not go from hence.

The best of Hypocrites can be content to have an Angel go before them, give
the Angellicall style, coming from lips touched with a coal of strange fire,
moved by no internal principle, except it be from some common gift at the
best, it is enough, and in this they please themselves, and gain admiration
from others; but their praise is but of men and not of God; but this will not
serve the children of Prayer; they will not stir without the Spirit of their
Father, neither can they do it: Romans 8. 26.
We know not (says the Apostle) what to pray as we ought: we have neither
thought to conceive, nor will to consent, nor art to perfect of our selves. As
the Spirit of God did move or flutter upon the waters for the inclining of that
vast body, by a powerful and procreative heat, so the heat of Gods Spirit
must either quicken us to the duty, or we, and it are no better then a deed
Carcass, or at the fairest but like a specious Picture. The people of God do
now and then neglect (I must confess) this duty, the taking their guide with
them; they weigh not so attentively, nor watch so seriously after this first
mover, as they should: As a man forgets to set his watch, or to take his
guide with him. And this is a main cause why they seek and find not; yea, why
they walk not in the strength of the Spirit. Again the people of God may be
without the sense and feeling of the Spirit, and yet the Spirit be there, they
not being aware: howsoever they are very sensible of their insensibility, and
much humbled for their neglect.

The third evidence 3 A sensibility of our own inability.
that we pray by the Spirit is a sensibility of our own inability: As the
Spirit helps our infirmities, so it discovers the infirmity of the
understanding, the will, the memory, the affections; yea, the Spirit
discovers* all indisposition, sloathfulnesse, impatiency, inconstancy, and
too much making have, flesh and blood cannot discover these: Indeed flesh and
blood will discover want of readiness, or of an outward frame of words, or for
want of some supernatural heat to inliven the outward action, which the
hypocrite may take for the true heat of the Spirit; but the want of that
celestial heat, or true quickening motion of the Spirit, it neither
discovers nor bewaileth: But the godly out of knowledge of these infirmities,
are exceeding humbled, whereupon there is room made for the Spirit to rest in,
for repairing of those ruins; yea, the child of God by the knowledge of these
his wants, comes to speed best, when in his own conceit he prays worst,
yea, when he can say nothing with Moses, and is to himself as it were
breathless, and speechless, yet out of the sensibility of his prolixity he
cries hardest of all, and God is nighest to him, when he conceives him to be
farthest off: If then thou find or feel not in Prayer that comfort that
thy heart desires, be not discouraged, but rather comfort thy self, upon the
feeling of thy wants, and humiliation for them, because it is a work of the
Spirit; go on then, and rather then thou pray not at all, cast thy self
before the Lord, look up to heaven, if thou can but cry like a little child,
cease not till thou make the Echo of the Rock to resound.

The fourth evidence of the guidance of the Spirit, 4 Help against infirmities.
is a sensible helping of us in some measure against the aforesaid infirmities
of Understanding, Will, Memory, and Affections. Romans 8. 26
The Spirit helps our infirmities: It teaches for what and how to pray: It
strengthens memory with motives, Memory and Understanding.
out of the which the understanding frames arguments, as judgments, mercies,
precepts, promises, renuednesse, ranking every one in his due place, and
causing the soul to pick some good out of of every one of them. So the Spirit
brings the will in Prayer contrary to its disposition to be subject to the
Will of God, and to make choice of that which God wills as the very best: in
this our Savior Christ is a perfect pattern, in his heavy and dreadful
conflict, saying often and again: Mat. 26. 39.
Not as I will but as thou will Father. The Spirit does not only correct and
change the averseness, and deadness of the affections, as fear, love, joy,
and sorrow, but it sets them on with a high and heavenly temper upon their
proper objects; As that the soul in Prayer, should love nothing in comparison
of God, and his countenance; hate nothing so much (no not the Devil or Hell it
self) as his own sin, grieve, at nothing so much as the grieving of God;
fear nothing as the God of his fear.

Lastly the Spirit helps the stupidity and benummednesse of the conscience,
Conscience.
making it tender and pliable, and also impartial in the applying home of the
particulars to the present seat of the soul, which is the proper function of
the conscience: As for instance, it either excuses by application of mercy,
the fruit whereof is present peace; or accuses by application of Judgment, the
present fruit whereof is trouble and terror: yet it brings forth and
begets the quiet fruit of righteousness; for upon the judging of our selves
by the afflicting of our selves, God cease to judge us. Try then what help
thou find of the Spirit, in strengthening thy weakness in the seeking of his
face; for assuredly we all find the less help for want of this trial.

But some will say, we find no help at all; Objection.
Our understanding is darker, our memories weaker, our wills more perverse, our
affections deader, our consciences heavier then ever they were.

I answer, Answer 1.
first there may be a neglect of the trial of the performance by the several
notes, and also such a carelessenesse, to walk by the rule of Prayer, that the
duty is fallen into a custom; so that, because we look not to take the Spirit
along with us, and cast not our selves, and the duty upon the help of it, we
come to want the help thereof when we would, because we looked not for it when
we should.

Again, it may be answered for some, that sense is no true Judge: For as some
may conceive of help from the Spirit, that never had any, and conceit of sound
and well ordered parts in Prayer, that have nothing but rottenness in their
inward parts (for all their painted oratory and glozing words) so some may be
unsensible of the aforesaid help for some mistakings, or some disorder in the
course, yea, by Gods hiding his presence, of sense, and yet he helped mightily
by God: which may be instanced and proved by these two particulars.

First, the sense of those infirmities in Prayer, is the work and evidence of
a praying Spirit;

Secondly, the going on with sighs and groans, under the burden of these
infirmities is word for word, to take us up (as it were by the hand) and to go
with us against our infirmities. If the spirit in these two be with us, it is
not want of sense that can nullify his presence. Elisha's servant, while his
eyes were shut could not see the armies of the Lord, but his eyes being open he
saw clearly that there were more with him then against him: So let the soul
of such go on, and wait upon the Lord, without censuring the Lords work for
want of feeling; and let them for their better stay, view and try all the
points of the evidence, for if one hold, all the rest will in some measure make
for them.

Yea but others will say they are so far from help against their infirmities,
2 Ob.
that the infirmities of earthly and idle thoughts do strive into the very
duty, whereby the work of the Spirit (for the time) is quenched, the soul
beaten off, and the heart stolen away.

For answer, Answer
I must confess it is a shrewd encounter, and a dangerous infirmity arising
out of the looseness of the heart, the atheism of the mind, the deadness of
the conscience, the corruption of the memory and earthly condition of the
affections; whereby we let slip and forget with whom we have to deal, and
what we have to do: Here is want of devotion and want of attention. Bern. de
medit. 6. 8.
It is mad folly (says one) to thy self, and great injury to another, when
thou will neither attend him nor look to thy self; yet for all this it is no
other temptation but such as may and does overtake the children of God: but
with this difference from that vagrancy in the hearts of the unregenerate men
be they never so smooth: First the same spirit whose work for a time
recoileth, at length like a great and sole conquering commander, routs all
those rebellious thoughts, How the godly are troubled with idle thoughts in
prayer.
yea and taking them on a sudden, reserveth them in chains for execution; then
he brings up, or rather beats up these disordered forces or faculties of the
soul with sorrow and shame enough to their neglected service; which service
being done then he shows them what base slaves had caused them to recoile
from so glorious and gainful a service of so great a God; what a commander
they had forsaken; and what dangerous and shameful hazard they had brought
themselves into; at the consideration whereof, their hearts smite them, they
abhor their own souls, they weep bitterly till they leave a Bochino or
place of weeping behind them to set their feet upon their necks, and do
execution upon those slavish Canaanites, to whom they had shamefully inslaved
themselves; which I doubt not but many have a care to do; yet when they have
done all they can, some will escape in a corner, starting out now and then to
do them a mischief at unawares: As they pray therefore, so let them watch.

But with the unregenerate man it is nothing so: How it is with the
unregenerate.
for he can draw nigh to God with his lips, but keep his heart far enough off,
and yet his heart never smites him: he is content to have a Dove in his hand,
and a Hog in his heart; thought is free with him; and that is the mark of a
slave: It is one thing to let Traitors and plaguie Rogues in at doors by
negligence, and so to be troubled with getting them out, and another thing to
keep open house for them. The fairest sunshine may be over-clouded, but
darkness it self can never be light: As for the interposition of Satan's
suggestions, let that be set on Satan's score.

Last of all, 3 Ob.
some will say, they are so far from the aid and assistance of the spirit in
prayer, that they neither can pray, nor dare pray, nor have they any mind to
pray; can those be the children of God?

I answer, Answer
though they be in an exceeding great strait, yet they may be Gods children
for all that; for though they cannot, neither dare pray, yet they desire to
pray: and though they have no desire, yet they wish they might desire. But we
must learn to distinguish between parties in a due temper both of body and
soul, and themselves distempered in one or both: sometimes, through the
distemper of black fumes of melancholy, the imagination is corrupt, sometimes
the conscience is wounded with the sense of sin, the want of grace, or with the
trouble of some blasphemous or wicked thoughts sometimes the Lord is pulling a
sinner as a brand out of the fire, leaves sparkles of his terrible wrath in
him, for his greater humiliatio^, sometimes the Lord may seal the heart and
close up the mouth for the trial of the party himself, the example of others,
and the manifestation of his own power, in keeping of the^ in that case, and
his mercy in the enlarging of their hearts according to the time of restraint.
In all these cases the soul may be clear of the things, the exercise of prayer
barred, and yet the spirit of prayer remain; which may be evidenced by the
fruits of the spirit which are a tenderness of conscience, a hatred of sin,
love to the Saints, and obedience to God. So much for the fourth note, wherein
I have been the larger by reason of the power of the spirit herein.

The fifth evidence of Prayer made by the spirit, 5. Fervency of spirit
is that spiritual vigor or fervency of it, which as a consuming fire from
heaven, causes the odours of the prayers of the Saints to ascend like incense:
To this effect is that of the Apostle, Romans 8. 26.
The spirit makes request for us with groans that cannot be expressed: By
these unpressible groans, is meant the vehemence or fervency of Prayer, being
the work of the spirit, which works after an unspeakable manner in the hearts
of all that pray; Genesis 32. 28.
this is that wrestling that prevails with God; Exodus 32. 10.
this is that which stirs up a man to lay hold on God; Isay 64. 7. Can. 3. 4.
this is that which lays violent hold on him whom the soul loves; This was
the practice of our Savior Christ, Heb. 6. 4.
who in the days of his flesh offered up prayers and supplications with strong
cries and tears: Against this his own practice Christ cannot stand out;
witness that parable of the importunate prevailing widow; Luke 18. 4. 7.
and shall not God revenge his elect that cry day and night? The want of this
wrongeth Gods cause, makes the enemy prevail, and our prayers to be forceles
and fruitless, yea our courses uncomfortable; whereas on the fervency of
prayer all the contrary effects attend. This fervency was Luthers excellency,
and in this he and many others found most good: This smites and overturneth
both the inward and outward Amalakite. If thou will sacrifice, take fire with
thee; the want whereof may justly invert the saying of Abraham to thy
disadvantage; here is the sacrifice but whereis the fire. The golden Censer
receives no Odours without fire, more or less to consume them, and according
to the height or lowness of the fire, the motion of prayer is the swifter or
flower. The lazy, cold, and frozen prayer prevails nothing with God, but by
weeping and making earnest supplication, we may find God in Bethel, Hos. 12. 4.
and speak to God, and prevail with God, as Jacob did.

Let us then (as Paul says) labor fervently in prayer, Col. 4. 12.
that the power thereof may be an evidence of the spirit in us; but herein we
must take heed of the deceitfulness of strange fire in the heart; for as a
burning fever, or the fit of an intermitting Ague, or a hecktick disposition,
may manifest more heat outwardly to the touch, yea inflame the inward parts
with more ardency, or scorching and consuming heat, begetting an unquenchable
thirst by drinking up the radical moisture of the Spirits, then is to be felt
in a due temperature; So a feverish heat, or counterfeit zeal, may exalt an
hypocrite high in the outward action, yea he may have a deceiving taste of the
power of God, and seeming thirst of the glory of God, and a preposterous desire
of honor and immortality, yea all this may be like to the former heat and
thirst in nature, an unnatural and adventitious heat, not truly inlivening and
maintaining the life of prayer, but consuming and devouring the supposed spirit
of prayer. Of these two if you desire to know the essential difference, I take
it to consist in these particulars.

First, The difference of true ferve^cy and counter feit in prayer. 1
Difference.
this fervency is a sanctifying and saving fruit of the spirit, wrought
immediately in the heart and affections, whereby the understanding faculties are
much sublimated and refined, whereon follows a more pure conception, with a
swifter and directer motion of prayer; because both heart and understanding are
quickened and agitated by true celestial heat. Neither must you conceive that
the fervency of affection must carry the understanding without information from
it: this were zeal without knowledge; which the spirit peremptorily condemns:
but this sacred fire of fervency clears the clouds of the understanding: so
that the forms of divine motions are more quickly and purely framed in the
passive faculty thereof, and are more soundly and judicially wrought on by the
active faculty, so the fire be compact: so that you see this fire is of a
heavenly operation and from heaven; well may it be compared with that divine
fire which came out from before Jehovah and consumed the burnt offering upon
the Altar: But the strange fire in the seeming zealous hypocrite is nothing
like; for first it is but a supernatural common gift of the spirit at the
most; again, it is rather an infla^mation of the brain, arising from the
rapture of some vainglorious conceit, deceiving the heart, and running all
along like a devouring wildfire, rather (I say) then any true fire, warming
and quickening the life of supplication.

Secondly, 2 Difference.
this true celestial fire has no fuel but the spirit, but the strange fire
has either private injury or public applause for the fuel.

Thirdly, 3 Difference.
this true fire has for the end or object, Gods glory and the salvation of
those that are heated with it, co^suming every thing that stands in the way of
either of these. The spouse speaking of the nature of this zeal, Cant. 8. 6.
tells us, that the coals thereof are coals of fire, which has a most
vehement flame: Of this David says, Psalm. 96. 10. 119. 13.
the zeal of thy house has eaten me up, and in another place, my zeal has
consumed me, or suppresseth me, because mine enemies have forgotten thy words:
But counterfeit zeal in prayer has for its end or object, the ravishing of
men's conceits, the glory of applause, the gaining of some worldly commodity;
so far as the sun shine of Gods glory is adored by the times and state, so much
will hypocrisy seem to advance it: like clouds, they will follow the Sun, and
seem to carry Gods glory right on before them, but when the current crosses it
they go no further with it, but like a running hound, they cast up, and with
an open mouth they run another way.

Fourthly, 4 Difference.
this true fire though it set all on fire within and without, and turns all
that it touches into the nature of fire, carrying all upward with it according
to the proportion of fire; yet it humbles the soul exceedingly, and makes it
vile in its own eyes: for by this true fervency, the stubble and rubbish of
men's corruptions, and interposition being removed and consumed, Gods excellency
and man's means, Gods mercy and man's misery the more appears, which be the
means and motives of man's humiliatio^. But with the strange fire-workmen it is
not so; for as Cooks by unnatural heat of the fire extinguishing the natural
heat, and exhausting the radical moisture, and by excess of drinking become
hydropicks; so these are puffed up with a swelling conceit of themselves, by
the unnatural or adventitious heat of this strange fire; crying in effect with
Iehu, come with me and see my zeal for the Lord; 2. King. 10 16.
yea if these counterfeits of true zeal be not admired, they are all off the
hinges, they count their charges and pains to be lost: Their zeal is like to
the virtues of the Heathens, from which, if you separate (as one says) the
splendour of glory, Salust. ad Caesar.
virtue it self will go bitter to them: So take from the zeal of seeming
zealous Hypocrites, the swelling cloud of puffing up applause, their fervency
falls presently into an atrophie or pining away under abundance of means; so
that their pride not maintained with applause either like a handful of
gunpowder carries fire and fuel and all that lies in the way out of the
chimney top, or like a dropsy by peecemeale it consumes the natural heat,
and drinks up the radical moisture: But the heat of the truly zealous is
like the harth of the Altar, hallowed by humility, for the receipt of Gods fire,
and for the keeping and increasing of the heat thereof.

Fifthly and lastly, 5 Difference.
the true fire of fervency is never extinguished, it is for diverse causes more
intense or remiss, higher or lower in the best of Gods children; yea the
sparkles may lie very low overlaid with ashes; notwithstanding it is true fire,
though it be never so little or never so weak in nature; always like the fire
upon the Altar which burns continually, Numb. 6. 12. 13.
and shall not be put out; to the which the spirit affords the fuel,
stirring and blowing it up for the consuming of the sacrifice: But the strange
fire is but a flash, quickly out and unorderly kindled, like a fit of an
Ephemera, or diary fever, and is as quickly extinguished either by the oil of
prosperity, or by the water of adversity, yea like a rotten, sulphurous, fiery
squib, it cracks and flashes, stinks and dies. Let every soul examine its own
fervency in prayer by the particulars, by which examination if they can find
in the least measure, these notes of fervency, they may assure themselves to
their exceeding great comfort that they can pray in the holy Ghost.

But some distressed soul will say, Ob.
they can find no life of fervency in their prayers, they are taken in the
duty with syncopes, or many fainting and sounding fits of the heart, many a
cold sweat goes over them, they are taken with many Lethargies of the
understanding, mad melancholy aberiations in the imagination, much
forgetfulness in the memory, yea, with a cold astonishing stupefaction of the
whole man; what fire of the Spirit can be here? Surely (say they) none at all.

Conclude not so, Ans. 1.
for true fire may be raked up in the ashes of neglect or distemper, though it
do not appear.

Again, the sense and sorrow of and for the overswaying suppressme^ts must
needs arise from the light and heat of true fire, be it never so weak or
little; for the common gifts and most glorious excellency in counterfeit Prayer,
cannot truly and ingeniously discover an essential defect in Prayer.

Again, the sparkles of life that the most distressed and daunted of Gods
people find in Prayer, now and then make the strongest kind of demonstration,
that the Fire of Gods Spirit inlivens their Prayer: For where there is action,
there is life, and where is life there is heat; for life consists in heat: As
the Spirit of faith in the Disciples was very weak when they counted the
relation of the Resurrection but as an idle tale; Luke 24. 11. 32. 34.
so that they would not believe it, yet the Spirit of faith was not
extinguished, witness the burning of their hearts within them while he talked
with them in the way to Emaus, which arose from the quickening of the Spirit,
which lay as it were quenched in them; even so the fervency of the Spirit of
Prayer, may seem to be quenched, and yet the flames bursting out now and then,
in sighs and Groans that cannot be expressed, argues heavenly fire to inspire
thy Prayer, howsoever thou will not be persuaded of it.

Lastly, observe thy earnest desire of fervency and striving endeavor to go
on, though thou feel but little or no comfort; these be true flames of the
Spirit, which were never kindled in the least measure in the breast of any
Hypocrite: will an Hypocrite with all his painted flames hold out? No, they
will murmr if God hear them not; but the godly will trust in him though he
slay them. Isay 58. 2. 3.
Let every one then stir up the gift that is in him, whatsoever it be, and
the Lord will be with us ere we be aware. Job. 13. 15


The sixth evidence of the Spirit of Prayer, 6 the train of all graces
accompaning.
is that godly train of allsaving graces garding it, strengthening it, and
attending upon it, He that can do an errand to God is destitute of no gift, 1
Cor. 1. 7.
as Paul says of the Corinthians: that Embassy is guarded with all the graces
of God in some measure, as first it arises from that impregnable palace of
faith, which ascends like a Cloud with Prayer in it, never ceasing, but still
increasing the motion, till it come to heaven. In, and from this Palace,
Prayer is armed with an irresistible violence, and comes forth like a valiant
Champion, beating all downright before it that stands between God and it;
Innumerable instances of this in Gods servants put that immediate principle of
the Spirit out of all Question: Whatsoever ye shall ask in Prayer, Mat. 21.
22.
believing, ye shall receive: David and all the Saints make ever this
foundation of their Prayer, Psalm. 5. 3. 4.
Unto thee will I pray Jehovah, thou shall hear my voice. Secondly, as Prayer
is grounded from faith, so it is under-propped by Hope; I will look unto the
Lord (says Micha) and I will wait for the God of my Salvation; hope and
patience.
My God will hear me; This place expresses also the Christian patience
wherewith the Prayer of the Saints is seasoned, and also that perseverance,
whereby the Chariot of faith is drawn: These set the soul upon the
Watchtower (as Habacuk speaks) and makes her wait, Habuc. 2. 1
and hearken what the Lord will answer, David's Prayer in his distress was
thus qualified, Psalm. 5. 3.
I will look out says the Prophet.

Further, Preparation, Opportunity, and Diligence.
Prayer made in the Spirit is attended, with Preparation, Opportunity, and
Diligence: Preparation makes ready the Chariot of faith, awaketh Prayer, and
attireth it with a holy disposition of heavenly position: Opportunity as a
guide takes it the nighest way; and Diligence as the driver of the Chariot,
drives more nimbly then Iehu the son of Nimshi. All these attend David's
Prayer, I will direct my Prayer unto thee, or I will orderly address unto
thee; there is his Preparation: In or at the morning (that is early) there is
his opportunity; I will look out or else espy, there is his diligence, or I
will pray, that is, still do pray and cease not.

Try then, Hypocrites fail of these graces.
or let thy Prayer be tried by these clouds of witnesses, whether it be of the
spirit or no, for the Prayer of the Hypocrite has none of these witnesses, or
attendants: as it is said of faithless hearers, Heb. 4. 2.
that the Word heard, did not profit them, because it was not mixed with faith:
They may make a fair show in seeming to lay hold on God, deceiving others and
their own hearts; Mich. 3. 11
they will lean upon the Lord (says the Prophet) and say, is not the Lord
among us, etc. But they build upon the sand and hence are their ruins; neither
is their hope any better then Hypocrites hope, Job. 3. 13.
which shall perish: as for their patience wherewith their Prayer should be
seasoned. If God attend not their pleasure in answering of their desires, it is
quickly turned into murmuring: In this they are like that graceless servant of
that godless King; 2 King. 6. 33.
because this evil is of the Lord, why should I wait for the Lord any longer?
As for the attendants of Prayer, namely Preparation, Opportunity, and
Diligence, the Hypocrite is not acquainted with them; the counterfeit shows or
shadows of these he may have, but the things themselves in the true nature of
them, he neither has nor desires to have: The Hypocrite rusheth into Gods
presence without premeditation of Gods most glorious presence, and without
consideration of his own vileness, and unworthiness to speak to so glorious
and great a God: His best Preparation is but a vizard of Prepation, or outward
show of seeming holiness, in the position of the body: Their best opportunity
is base and by respect, and their diligence carries the duty no further then
customary performance, or so far as it is in request with the times. So never
an Hypocrite (you see) can be an Ambassador to God; for he wants both the
Commission of the Spirit, and that train of attendants that do accompany the
Commission. It is no-wonder then that their Prayer be converted into sin; for
they are Traitors to God in taking upon them his Embassy without his
Commission.

Let them pray then that can pray; Trial of these graces is necessary.
yea, it stands us all upon, to look to it, whether we pray or prate or
babble: For Lord, Lord, a multitude of fair words, and fair shows will not
serve. An Ambassador with a gilded coach of temporary faith, will not serve
the turn; yea, though it were full of miracles attended with a many imbrodered
Lackeyes of smooth words and courtly complements, and eare-pleasing music,
shall never have admittance to God, nor audience of God: look to it then that
thou be an Ambassador indeed, and that thou have thy Commission sealed, and
art sent by the Spirit, and that thy train be such as may be heartily welcome
to God and make thee welcome. In the first place make trial of thy faith, and
that by the inward acts of purifying the heart, Trial of thy faith.
uniting it to God by victory over temptations, casting thy self upon the
Lord, by contentment of thine estate: also by the extensive work of love,
first to God for himself, and then to thy neighbor in him and for him. The
heart so purified by faith is a fit lymbeck for Prayer. Out of this the Prophet
David was bold to press his Prayer upon God; Hearken to my Prayer Psalm. 17. 2.
that goes not out of feigned lips, or without lips of deceit; by which is
meant the syncerity of the heart, agreeing with the words of the mouth: Nothing
so much adorneth the heart as faith, nothing commends faith more then Prayer,
Esaias. 29. 13.
and nothing graceth Prayer more then syncerity: This (with the proud Pharisee)
all Hypocrites want, Mat. 15. 8.
drawing nigh God with their mouth, and honoring him with their lips, but
their hearts be far from him: or as the Psalmist, they flatter or flatteringly
allured him with their mouth, Psalm. 36. 37.
and with their tongue lied to him, for their heart was not right with him, or
not firmly prepared with him: And this especially makes the Prayer of the
Hypocrites of an evil savor in Gods Nostrills, for as he is the hearer of the
heart (as one says) and not of the voice, so he loves the syncerity of the
heart, and hates the hollownesse and rottenness thereof in Prayer above all
things, because they go about to deceive him, denying him in effect to be the
discerner of the heart; otherwise they would never deal so with him.

Try also thy hope in Prayer, Trial of hope and patience.
namely by clearing of thy Author, and casting it within the veil. The nature
of hope is to keep thee from shame, by the repulse of thy desires, because the
love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the holy Ghost, in such abundant
measure and unspeakable manner, that he cannot deny us the things hoped for.
Try also thy Prayer by patience, waiting on the Lord, and going on in Prayer in
the time of distress. This an Hypocrite, as I have showed, cannot, nor will
not do. In the time of affliction they will set very freshly upon the duty; so
far as great words will carry it, but if they be brought to any strait, or
put to any hard shift, like whitelivered soldiers they die downright in their
own air or element, or else fling away their arms, and run from their
Colors. It is much to be feared that our nations woeful experience shall
teach the truth of this in one as well as the other! But God gives his own
another heart, namely to overtop the height of their affections, with the
height of their Prayers, and never give over till by patience and importunity
they possess the gates of their enemies and become more then Conquerors: The
Scripture to this purpose affords abundance of remarkable instances, for a
touch whereof take these two; Steven the first Martyr being cast out of the
City and stoned for his worthy Sermon, as the stones were flying about his
ears, in the midst of all the mischief that they could do him, by the power
of the holy Ghost, Act. 7. 55. 59. 60.
called upon God, and that with cries kneeling upon his knees: This lesson no
doubt he learof his Master Christ, the best and only pattern that any man can
follow: He, though a Son, learned obedience by afflictions, in the days of
his flesh, offered up Prayers and Supplications withstrong crying and tears
unto him that was able to save him from death, and was heard in that he feared:
where observe what force, fear, and afflictions added to our Saviors Prayers,
which as swelling seas make well grown fish, and thundering, and lightning
cleereth the air, and the nipping frost makes the fire the hotter; So the
afflictions of the Saints adds force to their Prayers; they cry more mightily
to God then ever they did, yea, where they could not speak before, now they
cry and that day and night (says the Spirit) though he bear long with them:
Luke 18. 7.
where observe the patience of the Saints, they bear long in Gods bearing with
their enemies: Then observe their instant continuance, they cry day and night;
to the same effect the Lord speaks by his Prophet, Zacch. 13. 9.
I will bring the third part through the fire, and will refine them as gold is
tried, they shall call upon my name, and I will hear them: Affliction makes
the wicked impatient, and drives them from God; because they are a burnished
blade of terror in the hand of the Almighty: as the pearl in oysters by
thunder vanishes, so does the Prayer of the Hypocrite by affliction; but the
trial of the godly brings forth patience, and drives them nigher to God,
because their afflictions are but trialls indeed, and at the worst they are but
as a rod in the hand of a loving Father. In a word, as the Saints extremities
are Gods opportunities; so the same extremities are whetstones to the Saints
importunities.

Lastly, as for preparation; labor to set thy heart in frame, consider what
thou art about, and with whom thou have to deal: As God bid Moses, Exodus 3. 5.
put off thy shoes from thy feet, for the place where thou sta^dest is holy
ground; whereby is meant the putting off of earthly and carnal affections,
preparing the mind to spiritual and heavenly duties. Endeavor to come before
the Lord with a simple and naked heart, and with affections duly prepared for
so great a presence. As for Opportunity, endeavor always to be fit upon every
occasion, and fea^^ to choose the best occasion, not omitting it at any hand:
for Diligence know this, that use makes an Artist or Tradesman. To conclude
this particular: If thou call upon the Lord in truth, that is in faith,
syncerity, earnestness and constancy, the Lord will be nigh unto thee; which
is both the cause and evidence that thou prayest by the Spirit.

The seventh evidence of Prayer made by the Spirit, 7 The guidance of the
Spirit in all our actions.
is the guidance of the Spirit in all other actions: For as he that is born of
the Spirit, is Spirit, so he is spiritual in all his parts, faculties and
actions; because the Spirit is of an all renewing nature, though many remainders
of the flesh, and much reluctation be intermixed therewith throughout all the
parts, faculties and actions. To this effect is that of the Apostle, As many as
are led by the Spirit, they be the sons of God; where observe, he says not,
they that have received the Spirit, or live by the Spirit, or pray by the
Spirit, or do any other action, as he says other where, but that they are led
by the Spirit, intimating thereby the inclining disposition and everruling
power of the Spirit, whereby the whole spiritual man is guided in all his
ways, as a ship by a pilot, or a horse by his rider; the place alludeth to a
blind man, or a man wanting strength, who is wholly guided or carried by
another; so Gods supplicants as they pray by the spirit, so they wholly resign
themselves over in all their ways to the guidance of the spirit: Wherein the
guidance of the Spirit manifests it self.
The guidance of the spirit in all a petitioners ways, does manifest it self
in these two particulars;

First, In the subduing the whole body of sin.
in the subdueing of the whole body of sin; for though the remnans of sin
remain in the best of Gods Saints, yet no sin bears dominion in the^; for
then should they not be led by the spirit: who are led by the spirit (says
one) but they whose counsels and actions have nothing to do with sin and
Satan; according to that of the Apostle, 1. Ioh. 3. 9.
He that is borne of God sins not, or commiteth not sin, viz. he serves
not sin, he delights not in sin, he makes not a trade of it, nor lies not
in it, gives not way to it, but resists it and hates it; it is an
intolerable burden to him, he cannot bear it. But on the contrary, V. 8.
he that commits sin is of the Devil, that is, he that loves sin, loves
and obeys it in the lusts thereof. Now where this sin-subduing power of the
spirit bears sway, there the prayers be the prayers of the spirit: For as
diverse gifts come from one spirit, so where there is one true gift of the
spirit, there be all the gifts of the spirit; but on the contrary, where one
sin bears sway, there is not the guidance of the spirit, and where the
spirit is not the guide, there the prayer is not the prayer of the spirit,
according to that undeniable position, God hears not sinners, but if any man
be a worshipper of God, Ioh. 9. 21.
and does his will, him he hears. viz. he hears not, nor grants the
desires of such as live in any sin; but such as worship him according to his
will, and live accordingly, have their desires granted; But a party, family, or
nation, that lives in any sin, God will not hear them. If I regard iniquity in
my heart (says David) or look upon it with a love to it, Psalm. 66. 18.
God will not hear me. Instances of this are innumerable in the Scripture; The
Lord tells the Israelites for choosing Saul for their King, 1 Samuel 8. 8.
that they should cry out in that day, and he would not hear them: So all
that set at naught the counsel of God, when fear, desolation, and destruction
comes upon them, Prove. 25. 26. 27.
They shall call upon the Lord but he will not answer; they shall seek him
early but shall not find him: Will men steal and rob, Ier. 11. 11.
commit murder and uncleanness, and conspire against God by impiety and
iniquity (as God says by Jeremy) yea will they hide it under their tongue,
and will they cry unto the Lord when unavoidable evil comes upon them? yea
they shall cry (says the Lord) but I will not hearken unto them: For the
farther confirmation of this point, look these places. Ezech. 8. to the 19.
Micha 3. to v. 4. Zach. 7. 13. Did God ever hear the Israelites, for all their
tears, supplications and cries under the oppression of the Philistines, Judge.
10. 6. to 18.
until such time as they put away their strange Gods, 1 Samuel 7. 2. to 12.
yea their beloved Idols, Isay 1. 15. to 19.
Baal and Ashteroth? No sure; witness the word; neither will he to others till
they do the like: yea God does not only deny to hear his people, though they
make many prayers, but to enter so much as a parley with them, till they put
away the evil of their doings from before him. Yea let the formalist
hypocrite, or hollow-hearted petitioner, free from outward touch, yet hiding
iniquity under his tongue, let him (I say) carry the matter as cleanly as he
can, yet God will not hear him, witness that in Job; What is the hope of the
Hypocrite, will God hear his cry when trouble comes upon him? No sure; the
interrogation is a vehement negation; a good reason is given of it: As he
delighted not in God, make what show he can, so God delights not in his
prayers, for they are not the prayers of the spirit, neither has he cleansed
his heart for the spirit to reside in. That thou may be sure that thy prayer
is from the spirit, be sure to walk in the Spirit: submit thy self to the
guidance of the spirit; wash thy heart and make it clean, Esaias. 1. 16. Ps. 26.
6.
wash thy hands in innocence, and then compass the Altar of the Lord with
success; or, as the Apostle, pray every where, Tim. 2. 8.
lifting up holy hands without wrath or doubting: On this place one speaks
well; the hands are holy, when the heart is clean: further, in the Text
observe three remarkable conditions of prayer, holiness in a man's self; love
toward his brother; and faith toward God: prayers thus qualified shall surely
be heard, for Amen has engaged his promise for it: Jehovah is near to all that
call upon him in truth: the Lord is far from the wicked; but he hears the
prayers of the righteous.

But some of Gods people will here object, Ob. 1.
that they feel a great deal of rebellion of sin in them, as carnality, hate,
infidelity, pronesse to evil, averseness to good; pride, hypocrisy,
self-love, and the like; a world of disorder in the affections, a flat
repugnancy in the will, an apparent impossibility of self-denial: In a word,
the whole inner and the outward man, is nothing but a confused mass of sin:
Can the spirit govern and guide such a one where there is nothing but rebellion
against the Spirit? And if the Spirit bear not the sway in all and over all,
though I am somewhat affected in prayer, yet I pray not by the spirit at all,
because I want the guidance of the spirit.

To this I answer; Answer
As the aforesaid graces accompanying the spirit of prayer, may be in a child
of God in a very weak measure, without sense and feeling, yet true in their
own nature; so the lusting of the flesh against the spirit, may and does
mightily domineer in them; so that they are carnal and sold under sin, Romans 7.
14.
yea they have a law in their members rebelling against the law of the Spirit,
whereby they are led captive to the law of sin; which thing was the matter of
the blessed Apostle's complaint, making him to cry out, Wretched man that I am,
who shall deliver me from this body of death! And yet the spirit lusting
against the flesh will hold his own, not only overco^ming, but giving good
evidence from the very strife, that he reigns and rules there, maugre the
heart of the flesh: by which they come at the length to thank God through our
Lord Jesus Christ, Rom 7. 25.
that with the mind they serve the Law of God, though with the flesh the Law of
sin.

But Paul, 2. Ob.
ye will say, spoke this of himself, as of his unregenerate estate.

For answer; The Papists would have it so, Answer
and some of the Fathers take it so, amongst whom Austin was one of that mind,
but upon better consideration reversed his judgment, and that upon good
grounds; for the Apostle speaks of himself of his present estate, which none
can deny to be regenerate. Again, to will was present with him; he delighted
in the Law of God and thanked him for his deliverance: all which are evidences
of a regenerate estate. But this is strange, say you, that he should be
carnal, and sold under sin, since the Saints are bought with a price; and war
not after the flesh. For answer, he was not carnal in the service of the
flesh, as the unregenerate are, but he was carnal in respect of his pronesse,
1 Cor. 6. 20.
to give way to the flesh; 2 Cor. 10. 3.
So he was sold under sin, and not as Ahab, who willingly inslaved himself to
sin; but as Joseph a captive or slave against his will.

O but you will say, Ob. 2.
if it were so, then these were Paul's strong straggling motions of
concupiscence, not breaking out in effect, but I am not only troubled with the
first and second motions of sin, but I am foiled with the very actions of sin:

I answer, Ans.
was not that Paul's case: That which I do I allow not; Romans 7. 15
for what I would, that I do not; but what I hate that do I: where he
shows himself often to be so foiled by his carnal desires, that he did that
which in the inner man he did not desire, but rather hate; And so it is with
the best of Gods people, who both in words and actions cross their inward
desires,

Yea, Quest.
but where lies the difference of failings and falls of the regenerate and
unregenerate heart.

I answer, in the chief desire of the heart; Answer
which in the unregenerate longs and lamenteth after good, though it have
many shrewd rubs in the way through the remainders of sin; but in the
unregenerate it is carried with full sway toward sin without any resistance,
though it may stumble now and then upon the sting of conscience: neither would
I have any, by presuming to abuse this cause of Paul, to sin, for none can
benefit by this, but such as have Paul's feelings, desires, and endeavors in
some measure: but let al such as are fervent in spirit serving the Lord, though
with much opposition and little or no feeling of the evidence of the spirit, lay
home this case to their comfort.

The latter particular wherein the guidance of the spirit consists, is the
quickening and increasing of grace: Quickening and increase of grace.
for as by the spirit, the deeds of the body are mortified, so by the same
spirit the graces of the soul are quickened, Romans 8. 13.
and therefore is the spirit called the spirit of grace: Zac. 10. 12
Now the spirit of grace is joined with the spirit of supplication, as the
Cause and the convertible Effect, the state and the demonstrative evidence of
the state: I will pour out (says the Lord by Zachary in the place quoted) the
spirit of grace and supplication or deprecation: Where by the spirit of grace
is meant the gracious spirit of regeneration, proceeding from the grace of God,
guiding and quickening his own in all the ways of grace: and by the spirit of
deprecation, that spiritual immediately infused ability (as I have showed,)
whereby his penitents do beg and obtain pardon of sin and all other things
conducing to Gods glory, and their own good. Between this spirit of grace, and
deprecation there is a mutual strengthening or corroboration: As health is the
cause of walking, and by walking is strength assured and increased; so grace is
the internal, immediate, conjunct cause of prayer, and is also quickened and
strengthened by prayer: Or as the heat of the sun reflecting upon some solid or
impenetrable body, is made more forcible; So the radiant beams of grace,
exercising themselves upon that firmly framed object of prayer by a gracious
reflection, they become out of measure gracious. If thou would then excel in
grace, labor to excel in that eminent ability of prayer, which does not
consist (as I have showed) in the excellency of words but in the heigtht and
depth of the groans of the spirit, which no words are able to express. Try
also by the gage or landmark of prayer, the ebbing or floing of the tide of
grace: for so much as thy soul is taken up with the true strain of prayer, so
much do thou gain in the rich traffic of grace; and so much as thou loosest
in the faculty of this heavenly Oratory, so much thou loosest in the stock of
grace. Therefore for the keeping of both stock and interest on foot, it shall
be good, in my judgment, to put these two particular observations in practice:
First look what particular sin either of person or calling thou art most
addicted unto; and in what patticular grace thou art most deficient; Means of
keeping and increasing of grace.
labor to countermand, and subdue the particular sin by the opposite grace,
and to quicken and strengthen the weak and decayed grace by the special or
proper remedies. This is the wisest policy, the highest point of war, the
richest trade, and the proper employment of our precious talent.

Another remarkable observation to be practiced is this; Let no day pass thee
wherein thou do not call thy self to a strict account, of the well
employment, ill employment, or misimployment of the day; record as near as thou
can thy commissions and omissions, in thy calling or out of thy calling, in
thought, word, or deed, against piety, equity, or sobriety; recall thy company
and conference, thine or others profiting thereby or unprofitablenesse; recompt
the favors, the frownings, the cherishments or chastisements, mercies or
judgments toward thee and others as nigh as thou can; observe what
corruption has prevailed against thee, or in what particular grace thou
gettest any better footing. This course deserves neither obloquie from the
wicked, nor should it seem unnecessary, strict, or impossible to professors:
For the very Heathens by the guide nature have given order for it in their
morals, namely, that we should not suffer our eyes to sleep, nor our eyelids
to slumber, till we had recompted all the passages of the former day. But alas
they had but a leaden rule to walk by, turning all their strictest and most
glorious actions into glistring sins! but we have a golden rule of trial,
which by a true touch will (indeed) turn us and our actions into the purest
gold. It is a double shame therefore that they in this should shame us: this
same point was a particular of Moses his Petition; So teach us to number our
days that we may apply our hearts to wisdom! Ps. 90. 12.
There is no better ways to thrive than for a man to be a good accomptant, and
to observe well his losses and his gains, his receipts and his layings out;
what is owing to him, and what he owes to others. This gains a wise heart or
a heart of wisdom (says Moses) which is more worth then all the wealth in the
world. This is the only means whereby to redeem the time: in which phrase the
Apostle implies the calling a man's self to account, and his actions, as
thrifty Merchants do; the Apostles words look both back to the time past,
advising us to make good one time what we lose at another, which cannot be
done without reckoning, with our selves; and also forward to the time to come,
injoyning us to take all occasion and opportunity of serving the Lord, with
more strictness, sincerity and alacrity, then heretofore we have done, suppose
it be with temporal loss or incommodityt: he very word Redeem includes this
evidently, that for our profits, ease and pleasing of others, we put off, or
altogether neglect the casting up of our accounts; now if we will redeem that
loss, we must be content to part with all these to become good accomptants;
not that men hereby should neglect their callings; for this will make them more
strict, sincere, and diligent in their callings; but as to this strict course
and the attending it many incommodities are incident; (For you must know the
Devil, World, Flesh, and it may be some of the household are no friends to it:)
So we must account all are for Ciphers for the furthering our accounts. These
strict accomptants must make this a part of their reckoning, that the Cross
will follow them; for the bearing whereof they must resolve upon selfe-denyall,
with the hatred of father and mother, wife and children, and life it self,
Col. 1. 21.
which shall be no disadvantage to them, for Christ's sake; and life and death
is to such advantage. Of the necessity of our summoning up of The necessity
hereof
ourselves, and our ways, the Apostle gives good reasons; Ephesians. 5. 15. 16.
First, we must walk strictly, not declining a hairs breadth from the mark:
Secondly the way is hard and difficult, that is also implied in the words:
Thirdly, the days are evil, nay sure never worse: Many stumbling blockings
and rubbes, much opposition both on the right hand and on the left, within and
without, when Trading grows hard, Wares grow slight, Pirates abound, Merchants
cheat their Chap-men, and Chapmen fill the earth with bankrupts, and the
Prisons with black smoke and beastliness, is it not very hard for a fair
trader to walk with a straight foot, to give every man his own, and to make
good his stock, and maintain his family? yes sure, every man averreth it: How
much harder is it in these woeful times, to make good this spiritual traffic;
wherein the Parents will defraud the children, the children cheat the parents,
the husband the wife, and the wife the husband, the brother the brother; yea, a
man will cheat and cozen his own soul? It stands every one therefore upon
it, to look to his own accounts; because every one must give an account for
himself. This task I must confess is somewhat hard to set upon, The
difficulty hereof.
the rather because it will not stand with neglect or intermission; but
assuredly the constant use of it shall make a man see better and more
comfortable days then ever heretofore he has seen: By this course he shall
be brought to see himself often as in a glass, and by the sight of his
failings, he shall be brought to softness of heart, to tenderness of
conscience, to deprecate the evil of commission and omission, and to supplicate
for power against future assaults: This shall make him watchful over his
ways, wary of his company, strict in his carriage, zealous for his God, and
holy and profitable in all manner of conversation. In a word, the experimental
utility of this practice will show such necessity of it, that thou will not
believe it till thou try it: Try then, and hold fast the practice, and it shall
never repent thee.

To this daily account join thy weekly account and thy account of more weeks,
Weekly and more general accounts.
before thou go to the sacrament, and by use of time thou may become an
excellent accomptant: The more thou attendest it, the less thou shall have to
do; yea, by the practicing by it, thou shall be the more willing to attend it;
though thou can not be like that Emperor, that attended suits till he had no
suitors (for thou shall always find enough to do,) yet thou shall find thy
self by Gods mercy much enabled to go cheerfully through with the work, and
if thou art faithful in thine accounts, thou shall every time find thy self a
gainer.

The eighth particular of the Spirit's evidence in Prayer, 8 The precious
promises.
is from that infallible ground of the faith of the Saints viz. The precious
promises of God. The same Spirit called the Spirit of supplication, is also
called the Spirit of promise, which does not only signify to us the residence
of the Spirit in the Saints, whereby they are distinguished and discerned from
the wicked, but also, after an Hebraisme or Hebrew Phrase, the assuring of them
of those great and precious promises, or things promised is understood: on
which the Prayers of the Saints make their stand and rise. These were the
supporters of David's faith; Psalm. 119. 49.
Remember thy word to thy servant, upon which thou have caused me to hope;
wherein is well observed by the Ancient, Ambrose.
that David in all his supplications had recourse to the promises of God. 2 Samuel 7. 25. 28.
And now Lord God (says the same Prophet) the word that thou have spoken
concerning thy servant, establish it. And again, thou art God and thy words
are true: whereupon shall the weak sights of a weary and overladen soul, and
the heavy groans of a loaded conscience cast themselves, but upon that sweet
and comfortable promise of our Savior, Mat. 11. 28.
Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy laden and I will refresh you!
How shall the poor distressed self condemning bankrupt press home his
earnest suit upon God with any confidence of discharge, but by putting God to
his promise of the new Covenant; I am he, Isay 43. 25.
I am he (says the Lord) that blotteth out thine iniquities, for my names
sake, and will not remember thy sins. The soul in Prayer may put God to
remembrance of his promise, not to remember sin. Also how should the soul
tyrannized over by the body of some corruption ever look by Prayer to prevail
against the power of it, but upon the promise of God, to put the power of the
word into the heart; whereby the heart is changed from a stony and rebellious
dispsition, Ier. 38.
into a soft, Ezech. 36.
pliable and obedient disposition. How shall the fainting soul support her
supplication in the day of distress; or how should she wrestle with God in the
time of calamity, when God by contending desires not only to be gone, but in
sense is already departed, except they have at hand that promise, Psalm. 50. 15.
Call upon me in the day of trouble, and I will deliver thee? Lastly, how shall
ever the soul attain by Prayer to rest it self upon the hope of glory, but
by interessing it self into the promise of the Crown of Glory, laid up for
him, and all them that love the appearing of the Lord Jesus Christ? So that
these promises are like Aaron and Hur holding up the hands and strengthening the
heart of Prayer; yea, as the remembrance and application of these, fails or
increases, so the Spirit of Prayer fails or increases. Prayers of the
regenerate and unregenerate differ.


And here lies a main difference, of the Prayers of the regenerate and
unregenerate: The Prayers of the former are upholden and supported from an
external principle, namely the promises of God that cannot fail but the
Prayers of the later lean upon the broken reed of something within themselves,
namely, some works of charity, equity or outside piety, the worth of their
Prayer it self, or the mud-wall of civil honesty; all which are but as a
rotten wall, whereupon the best Prayers that they build are but straw and
stubble, and both foundation and building being naught, they must be burnt with
fire.

If any object that Nehemiah Ob. 1. Nehem. 13. 14.
desires the Lord again and again to remember his works of Piety and
Justice, and that he would not wipe out the good deeds he had done, for the
house of his God, and for the offices thereof: So King Ezekias in his Prayer 1
King. 20. 3.
desires the Lord to remember his walking before the Lord, his integrity of
heart, and doing good before the Lord.

I answer, Ans.
that neither the zealous Ruler, nor the godly King did presume any whit upon
the worth of their works, as though thereby they should make their Prayers of
acceptance with God; but if the places be well observed, they cast themselves
wholly upon the mercies of God, and not upon the merit of their Prayers,
desiring God out of his promise made, to respect the integrity of the heart,
and the righteousness of the actions, to make good his promise; like unto that
in Job; He shall call upon God, and he will be favorable to him; and he shall
see his face with joy: For he will render unto man his righteousness. False
and forged then is that gloss of the Doctors of Doway, upon that place of
Nehemiah: Ajust man that has merited by good works, may pray with great
confidence of reward.

Further, Ob. 2.
if any object; If Prayer depend upon promises, what need men pray, since God
will acknowledge his promises, without our Prayers, for all his promises are
Yea and Amen?

For answer, Answ.
briefly, he that has promised to hear, has commanded us also to pray, and
without praying no promise to hear; yea, the Son of God himself, who doubted
not of his glorification, did notwithstanding pray, Father glorify thy Son.

Try then thy interest to the promises, by the laying hold, or desiring to lay
hold on the promises, and thereby thou may know, whether thou praiest in the
Spirit or no, keep always thine eye upon the promises; for as the load stone
keeps always the point of the needle toward the northpole, so the
lodestone of Gods promises keeps always the point of the Prayer touched
therewith, directly toward the Mercy seat of God: But as the unregenerate man
has no portion in the promises, so the promises are no point of that Compass
whereby his Prayers are guided. It is true indeed, that a wicked man out of the
darkness of his thoughts may charge God with such a promise as God never made,
by misconstruing of the promise; as for instance, His argument.
( Call upon me in the day of distress, and I will release thee: This promise
a wicked man may thus urge; Thou have bound thy self by promise (Lord) to
deliver all those that are troubled and call upon thee; but I am in trouble and
call upon thee; therefore thou have bound thy self by the promise to deliver
me; and so from thee I seek for deliverance.

The Argument is a sophisme Ans.
(as we speak) from the homonumie, or diverse significations of the word, all
which in the former proposition must be taken for calling upon the Lord in
truth; but in the later in cannot be so taken; for the wicked may prate and
babble, but he calls not upon the Lord, as I have showed, and therefore he
has no interest in the promise: He leaves out the maine evidence, namely,
the Glorifying of God, which a wicked man never does; so that he presumes
himself to do that he does not, and God to promise that which he never meant.

Again, a wicked man may obtain that which he pays for, as success,
honor, wealth, temporal deliverance, and the like; whereupon he presumes of
some interest to the premises; but it does not follow: For as God hears not
in every thing or always, the children of the promise, because they are not
fitted, or it is not good for them, or the the time is not come; so he often
gives the wicked things they crave, in his wrath, they having no ground to
ask or receive any thing from him, as a promise to them; for they are none of
the children of the promise: They have neither promise of the things of this
life nor a better; neither do they with patience wait the Will of God, that
they may receive the promise; but the childrens only care is to make good to
themselves some interest to the promises, and that by cleansing themselves from
all filthiness of flesh and spirit, and by doing the Will of God, waiting with
patience for the promises, endeavoring to bring them home by faith and
supplication without ceasing.

The ninth Evidence of the Spirit of Prayer, 9 the directing of Prayer.
is the directing of Prayer to God in the name of Christ: we are commanded thus
to do; for what is it to seek the Face of God according to his own
appointment, but to seek him in the Face of his anointed? Drawing near unto
God in Christ, has only the promise of hearing, witness Christ himself,
binding it with an asseveration, Verily, Ioh. 16. 25
verily I say unto you, what soever ye shall ask the Father in my name that
will I do; By no other, nor in no other can we speed, but in and by him; what
other can appease the wrath of God against us? Dare man by any other show his
face in Gods presence? In the worth of Christ only our Prayers find acceptance
with God in him as in a golden Censor, Rev. 8. 34.
all the Prayers of the Saints come to be fragrant and sweet smelling odors: He
is the only mediator as well of Intercession as Redemption: He is the Priest,
the golden Altar by whose virtue our Prayers come to be a Sacrifice. Did there
ever any prevail with God but in his name? Is there any way or access but by
his name? He is that high Priest going into the Sanctuary, carrying on his
shoulders, and also on his breast the twelve precious stones, representing the
twelve Tribes, or all the faithful. Hence it is clear that Papists go not to
God, going in the name of Saints and Angels; sometime in the name of Traitors
and godless persons! In the name (I say) of their own worth and merit: neither
does any reprobate go to God in the name of Christ, for Christ is no
Intercessor for him; I pray not for the world, Ioh. 17. 19
but for them which thou have granted me; for they are thine. A great rabble of
the unregenerate, as Hypocrites, carnal Gospellers, mere civil men, will
tell you they defy Popery; they hold it foolery and madness to pray to Saint
or Angel, and also robbery to go to God by them; and therefore they scorn
it, they acknowledge no other mediator of Intercession but Christ Jesus: All
this is well spoken, but what avails this them? They will tell you further, in
Christ his name they daily make their Prayers to God: This is not so, for they
have no interest to take his name in their mouths, or to make mention of it,
hating to be renewed. It is true they may speak of his name, and so egregiously
abuse it, as they that will allege it in the great day, that they prophesyed
and cast out Devils in his name, of whom he will profess (that is openly
proclaim) he knew them not: viz. he never acknowledged the^ for his, yea he
detesteth them and bids them away, as workers of iniquity; so shall it be
with all corrupt pleaders, usurping the name of Christ. They only that know
this name (as the Psalmist says) can trust in it, Psalm. 9. 11.
and fly unto it as a strong tower. They know the Lords name and the Lord
knows theirs; I say. 52. 6.
My people (says the Prophet) shall know my name, etc. And because he has
set his love upon me, or cleaves to me (as the Psalmist speaks,) therefore
I will deliver him: Psalm. 91. 14 15.
I will set him on high because he knows my name: He shall call upon me and
I will answer him.

Look then to it in all thy supplications to look toward God in Christ: The
necessity and benefit hereof
As Moses, desiring to see the face of God, was put by God in the Clift of the
rock, and covered with his hand till he passed by, that he might see his back
parts; so thou and thy prayers must be put in the Rock Christ Jesus, if ever
thou come to see the face of God in favor. As they that would make an echo
repair to some rocky place whereupon the words resound, so they that will have
an answer from God, must either ply their prayers upon the Rock Christ Jesus,
or no ccho, no answer at all: As they that are dim-sighted make the object more
apparent by the use of spectacles; or as some speak through a trunck that they
may be the better heard; So the Saints look through Christ, and speak through
Christ; that they may see God and hear God giving a gracious answer. As some
glass makes things presented by it, to be the same color; So God looking
upon us in Christ, sees us to be of the color of his Son, and we looking on
God through Christ, see God reconciled to us in Christ: Therefore whatsoever
we offer to God, let us present it to him through Christ; set always Christ
between thee and him; and whatsoever God gives to thee, labor to entertain
it always and through Christ: herein comfort shall abound to thee and honor
to God. As by some kind of Perspectives a man may bring two objects together;
So by the Perspective of faith, directing the prayer to God, in and by Christ,
thou may bring God and Christ and all the promises home to thy soul at one
sight.

The tenth evidence that a man prays by the Spirit, 10. Praying in a time of
trouble.
is the betaking of himself to it in the time of trouble, as to a rock of
defense, or the making of it his especial remedy in the time of misery. For
this indeed is the very best: as David said of Goliah's, there is none like
this; so there is no sword like unto the sword of the Spirit. This is a true
Panacea to heal all maladies, a balm for the wounded conscience, a precious
medicine for all diseases of the body, a plaster for all sores, a cordial
against all discomforts, arms invasive and defensive against all enemies: The
Apostle delivers all this in few words; If any be afflicted let him pray. It
is the safest guard against all evils of sin, Prayer an al sufficient remedy.
and evils of punishment, 1. Reason.
it is the only best means of deliverance from both these: witness first
that great Physician God himself (for so he calls himself) Exodus 15. 26.
I am Jehovah that heals thee, or I am thy healer or Physician: Now what
receipt gives he thee? this is it: call on me in the day of distress.

Secondly, 2. Reason
look but on the sovereign nature of the medicine it self, where in it
differenceth it self from all other means of life and godliness: All other
means are sanctified by this, but this is the immediate motion of the spirit,
of an unexpressible virtue and irresistible force.

Thirdly, 3. Reason
what glorious things in Gods book are spoken of this inestimable piece of
spiritual arms, witness S. James for all the rest, laying down the
excellency of prayer, first in general terms, The effectual fervent prayer
of a righteous man prevails much; Iam. 5. 16.
then he instanceth it in the prayers of Elias, what great effects were
wrought by it. The devout Ancients, hardly satisfy themselves in commending
this excellent piece: Bernard. de med. ^. 7.
There is nothing (says one) so sensibly sweet to the soul; nothing does
weane the mind so much from the love of all this world, nothing stirs up a
man to the exercise of all and every grace, nothing prevails so much against
evil of sin and evil of punishment, whether for preservation or deliverance,
nothing stands in better steed for the increase of Gods kingdom by the
conversion of souls; For as prayer brake Peter's fetters, set open the prison
door; so it shakes the chains of sin in pieces, opens or breaks up the
iron gates of a sinners heart, and offers violence to heaven for the entrance
of a sinner. One of the Ancients does attribute Paul's conversion to Stevens
prayer, Had not Steven prayed for Paul (says he) the Church should never have
had Paul for a teacher. In a word, nothing makes a man so amiable to his God,
so dear and faithful to his friend, so formidable to his foe, so contentfull
to himself, and so profitable to the place where he lives.

Fourthly, 4 Reason.
all the people of God in all their straits have made this their Masterpiece,
and prospered by plying it; were it famine, pestilence, sword, captivity,
contempt, persecution, or any other evil to be feared or inflicted, yea or
evil of sin whereby God was offended or the soul troubled, did they not
always fall hard on the work of petitioning; and did they ever in sincerity
so do and went away without a gracious answer? Instance Jacob, Moses,
Iehosophat, Ezekias, Manasses, Samuel, Eliah, the Cananitish woman, the
Publican, the Thief upon the Cross, with many others, known to the meanest
reader of the book of God. What was Moses his best fight when Amaleck charged
Israel? Prevailed not this sword of prayer, Neglect of prayer argues want of
the spirit.
more then the sword of Ioshuah. If this be so then of the excellency and
efficacy of prayer, why do not men run to it, and trust to it in the time of
need? Because the spirit dwells not in them: Every one that has but a show
of profession, yea and profane men too, will acknowledge the theory or
speculative truth thereof; but a woe it is to see how few confirm it by their
practice: The worser sort of men cannot do this, if they would, and the better
sort will not do it (to their shame be it spoken) in that measure and manner
they should, and as the troublesome times require it: How the hypocrite uses
prayer.
and for the hypocrite when he comes into any strait, he makes a fair
show in the flesh at the first onset, bearing the world in hand that he
esteems prayer above all the means in the world; but first his heart can
tell him that he relieth more upon subordinate means (which may and ought to
be used in their time and place) and uses prayer only for a trial of a
conclusion, which if it prove not according to their expectation, then farewell
prayer, they will have no more to do with it; they look for good of it and
find none, and not being acquainted with the virtue of it, they say of it as
the ignorant say of Christ, What is this so much extolled medicine more then
another medicine? Cant. 5. 9.
we have tried it and found no good in it, but rather hurt by neglecting the
means; and therefore we will use the means that most prevails amongst men;
and for prayer we will not altogether cast it out of doors, but we will lay
it up in some by-corner of the house, and reserve it till it come in request;
we will peruse it now and then, but this is not time to trust to it: In this
the hypocrite is like one laboring of an inveterate disease, who will try a
little of this man's skill and a little of the others, but will not set himself
to any constant course of physic, by which he might be perfectly cured, and
finding no good by this course, he resolves peremptorily never to take any
more Physic; yea further, desperately determines to forbear nothing, be it
never so hurtful, but use every thing that his mind gives him to: Just so
the hypocrite in his distress will have about with prayer, and fall very fresh
upon it for a fit or a start; but finding the event not immediately to answer
his desires, he falls a quarrelling with it and casheeres it, with a resolution
to attend it no further, yea and not only casts himself upon the subordinate
means, but imbraceth the worst means that the Devil will offer him: A
pregnant instance we have of this in Saul, who in his distress made a seeking
of God (for he is said to inquire of the Lord;) But he did it neither in
sincerity nor constancy; and therefore in another place he is said not to
enquire at all, he enquired not of the Lord; for not to enquire of the Lord in
truth, is not to enquire at all. But God not vouchsafing him an answer, he
comes from him to the Devil for an answer. Let every soul then put it self
to trial upon this point, whither do thou go in thy troubles? whereon do
thou stay thy self? do thou be take thy self to prayer? do thou walk
with this staff over the rocky, steep and invious mountains of thy
distressefull troubles? Then thou talkest by the spirit, thou walk by the
spirit, the spirit protecteth and directs thee; though thy feet stick fast in
the clay, and thy soul be sunk in the pit, the Lord will take thee out, and set
thy feet upon a rock. If thy troubles (as Job says) were more and heavier the^
the sand of the sea, yet the Lord will ease thee, and deliver thee: though all
the waves of the Lord go over thee, ply but the oars of prayer, in the boat
of faith, and they shall neither drown thee in the depth of despair, nor
split thee upon the rock of Apostasy: If all thine enemies conspire against
thee, and all thy friends for sake thee, be thou ever with God in prayer, and
God will ever be with thee to preserve thee; yea in life and death he will
never forsake thee; and this shall be an undeniable evidence in thy souls
deepest distress, that God is with thee: But if thou can be content in thy
trouble, only to make thy trial of prayer, and if thou find not present
success to prefer other means to this, and yet thou will use this but as if
thou used it not, then thou dealest in this case as Achas dealt with the Altar
of God, He brought in (as the History tells us) the Altar of Damascus, 2.
Kings from v. the 10. to 16.
whereon all his offerings, and the offerings of the people must be laid; but
the Altar of the Lord must have an inferior place, and be reserved only to
consult withal a little for fashion sake; So though thou can be content to
prate with prayer, having given it an inferior place and respect, yet all thy
sacrifices are for the subordinate means. As the Lord abhorred Achas, and his
offerings, so will he never look upon thee in this case, nor on thy prayers to
do thee any good: Therefore look to it as thou love to thrive: All lawful
means (as I have showed) thou may and must use, because the neglect of them
is a tempting of God, but be sure to use them in subordination to prayer, by
which they must be either sanctified or supported, or they will prove but
rotten and deceitful reeds. But here by the way, thou must observe a necessary
Caveat, Comfort for such as cannot or dare not pray.
that Gods dearest children may be so deaded with distress of soul, and
pressure of afflictions, that they cannot pray, or, as I have showed, so
distempered and distracted, that they dare not pray; but this may stay their
heart, that they would fain pray; their heart bears them witness, that they
prize nothing so much as prayer; if they had all the means in the world at
command, they will give none the place of prayer; yea they had rather pray then
be delivered. And there is great reason, why thus they should esteem of
prayer, above all other means, because the greatest thing that they can
effect, is but hearts desire, in things like the means themselves: but prayer,
over and besides, procures greater familiarity with God, which is the highest
honor and the richest profit, that the soul can attain unto. A notable
instance we have of this in Daniel, who though he understood by holy Writ,
that the time of Ierusalems deliverance was come; Dan. 9. 2. 23.
yet he falls hard to prayer, and that to his great rejoicing: for the Angel of
the Lord becomes the Herald of the Lords affliction toward him, calling him
a man of desires, or as it is translated, much beloved or desired of the Lord.
So if thou have assurance of the thing desired, yet thou should not cease to
desire it in prayer.

It is further true, that Gods dear people may in the damp of their distresses
look more to the subordinate means than they should, and less to prayer than
they ought, yea in this particular we may all lay our hands upon our mouths,
and with shame enough confess our faultiness. In this we labor of the
squintnesse of the eye of the soul; for as this is caused in the eye of the
body from looseness of the muscles or nerves, or from inversion of the
Christaline humor, or from the sudden sight some fearful object; So the
other of the soul, arises from the weakness of Faith, the terrors without
and the fears within, making us look a squint upon that which should help us,
and more directly to that which cannot help us: but the cause being removed,
and the sight being rectified they look streighter and more directly upon the
proper object: or if you will, we may be compared to unadvised patients, who
being in a direct and approved course of Physic, and not feeling such present
good as they look for, they fall presently upon some Emperick medicin, either
from a Mountebanck Foe or an ignorant Friend; the evil and disorder whereof
when they begin to feel, they confess their error and resolve thence forth
to walk by the rule: So the people of God in their brainsick fits count with
Naaman the rivers of Damascus more medicinable the^ the rivers of Israel: but
upon better consideration they conceive and find it to be true, that one
bucket full of Jordan, is better the^ all the rivers of Damascus; A few grains
of the spirit are of more force then all the friends and means whatsoever in
the world. And as a wise patie^t grown wise to his cost from foolery and
experimented evil of a hurtful Medicine, resolves hence forth to cleave to a
methodicall course, and to die or live by the Book; So the fooled and ashamed
Christian by relying too much upon subordinate means, recalleth his wits,
chideth himself for his foolery, and resolves for ever to make more account of
Prayer then all means that the whole world can afford him. Our neglect of
Prayer, relying on other means what evil it is unto us.
And thrice happy were the people of God at this time, if we could now at
length fall upon the second and sounder thoughts; for woeful experience has
taught how our more relying upon other means than Prayer, has made God's
Inheritance every where a prey to the enemy: When the troubles first began, we
took them to heart; we began togather our forces together, and importune God;
but God denying his ear (it may be not only for the faults of our persons and
Prayers, but also to try our perseverance) we quickly give over, leaving the
cause and the persons as buried in oblivion, caring little or nothing what
become of them or our selves: It is no evidence of the Spirit to begin to run,
and to break off in the mid way: Natural motions are the swifter, the nigher
they come to their end. Is not Prayer as powerful as ever it was to prevail
with God? Have we not to do with the same God that hears Prayer? Desires
he not to hear the voice of his own, as much as ever he did? Are not
suppliants now the men of his desire? Hates he not his enemies as much as
ever he did? Have we not the same command, the same promise? And shall it not
find the same entertainment? Yes verily. What is the cause then the Lord is so
far from us? Even because we are so far from him; we follow not to the
mark, we turn back in the day of battle; we endeavor not by wrestling to
stay the Lord, and not to let him go til he give us a blessing. And how should
the Lord be entreated of us? We are like to Iohas King of Israel in our
Prayers, who smote the ground (as the man of God commanded) with his arrows,
but not often enough, and therefore the man of God was wroth with him; for if
he had smitten often enough he should have smitten the Assyrians, till he had
consumed them: So had we followed the business in the power of the Spirit and
smitten often enough, we should have smitten the Babylonians til we had
consumed them; but we have not done it, and therefore they prevail: The
breaking off of Prayer, and the negligent performance of it, is a fearful
evidence that God will never honor us with being the means of their deliverance.

But to leave them in the pit, (for there they are like to be for us,) what
shall we say of our selves, or what shall we do for our selves? We look
indeed for peace, Ier. 8. 15.
(as the Prophet says) and for a time of health, and behold trouble; Deuteronomy. 22.
25.
And, to use Moses his words, Is not the day of our calamity near? And do not
the things that are threatened make have? And what remedy, namely this, to cry
mightily to God by continuance in Prayers: Iohas, though a wicked man, knew
reasonable well the worth of Prayer when he gave the Prophet this testimony on
his deathbed, weeping bitterly that he should depart, O my Father, the
Charriots and horsemen of Israel! By which speech, what other meant the King,
2 King. 13. 14.
then that the Prophet and his Prayers were of more worth for the good of the
state, then all the forces of the Kingdom. One of the Learned tells us, that
the sincere Prayers of an old, weak, godly woman, will prevail more with God
for help from heaven against the enemy, then thousands of armed Soldiers in
the field. But with woe and grief of soul we may say, where be the men that
stand up in the gappe to turn away the wrath? Exodus 32. 33.
Who, with Moses offers that violence to God, that God should say to him, let
me alone? Who will stay by the Lord as he did, and will not off, nor go one
foot till he have the Lord to go with us? O how that complaint of the
Prophet may pierce us to the very heart; Esaias 64. 7.
There is none that calls upon thy Name nor stirs up himself to take hold
on thee! And what follows? even that which partly is upon us, and partly like
to come upon the, Thou have hid thy face from us, and have consumed us because
of our iniquities. Who is it now, with the Spouse in the Canticles, that lays
hold upon Christ till he have brought him into his Mothers house? Cant. 3. 4.
Whereby is meant both the Heart and the Church, which is the house of God: For
there indeed is Gods dwelling. Let us awake then since now is the trouble some
time, and draw nigh to God; Hab. 2. 1.
yea, let us stay our selves upon the Tower, and stand upon the watch to see
what the Lord will say unto us: Though he be angry with our Prayers let us not
give over, but let us pray continually, not returning again to folly; and we
may be sure it shall go well with us in the day of trial.

Another Evidence of the Spirit on Prayer, 11 Respect to order and matter of
Prayer.
is a due respect had to the Matter and Order of Prayer: As to the former, when
they pray for nothing but that which is pleasing to God: Romans 8. 18.
We know not indeed of our selves what to pray for, nor how to pray, but the
Spirit teaches us in both; against that old and new Pelagian Heresy of man's
abilility in both duties, the Spirit teaches us to ask that, and nothing but
that, which is agreeable to his Will; for that has the promise and confidence
in the promises annexed unto it: 1 Ioh. 5. 14.
And this is the confidence that we have in him, that if we ask any thing
according to his will, he hears us: So that the Will of God must be the Rule
and Square of our Prayers; God gave Solomon his choice to ask what he would,
yet Solomon knew very well (as appears by his choice) that 1 King. 3. 5.
that was included according to will: So that place in Matthew is to be
understood, Mat. 7.
Ask and it shall be given you etc. For we must take heed (as it there
follows) that instead of bread we ask not stones, nor a Scorpion instead of
fish, that is, hurtful and not lawful things, instead of useful and lawful.
The man destitute of the Spirit of God asks ever amiss Iam. 4. 3.
(as S. James says) either for quantity or quality, or for ill ends; he
asks there that which is naught in it self; or if it be good it is not fit
for him; or if it might be fit for him, if he were such as he should be, yet
he is not fitted for it because he is not such as he should be. I must
confess upon woeful experience, that the Children of God in their Lunatic
fits, fall often foul upon these shelves or sands: As for asking things
unlawful; the Dilciples would have fire from heaven; Luke 9. 45. Mat. 20.
Zebedees sons would sit on the right hand, and on the left of Christ; Psalm. 55.
David would have the wings of a Dove that he might fly from his colors: and
so they ask things not fitting for the^, though to good intent, and often they
are not fitted for the things they ask. But thus they do in their have, the
Word of God checketh them; Gods Spirit and their own conscience diverteth them
from this course; and they endeavor to square their desires according to the
Will of God. But the wicked are like to Elies sons, They will have what they
will, if they perish for it. Try thy Prayer then by the object of thy desires;
if thou can heartily submit thy self to the Will of God in all things, then
thou have assurance of the guidance of the Spirit; but if thou will be both
beggar and chooser, thou art too saucy to be guided by the Spirit. The order to
be observed in Prayer.


Secondly, as for the Matter so they have due respect unto the Order: The
Spirit whereby they are guided, is a spirit of Order and not of confusion. They
first seek heaven and heavenly things, 1 Rule.
because they are heavenly minded, according to that rule of our Savior, Mat.
6. 33.
Seek ye first the Kingdom of God and his righteousness, and all these
things shall be added unto you: where by the Kingdom of God and his
righteousness is meant heaven and all the means of Gods appointment, that
bring us to heaven, which both for excellency and order we must seek and
esteem above and before all things; not but that we may and must seek earthly
things, for there is a necessity of them, we have the promises for them, but it
must be as they are necessary helps to the better things, giving them their due
time and place: A pattern for this our Savior gives us in that perfect
pattern of Prayer, wherein he teaches us first to pray for heavenly things,
and then for earthly things. Where if any object, Ob.
That the asking of daily bread is prefixed to the asking of forgiveness of
sins, the former being earthly, the later heavenly; Answer
I answer, it is not needful (with some of the Fathers and others) to expound
this bread of the sacramental bread, for the temporal bread is the bread of
the children (as one of them well observes) as well as the spiritual bread;
but the petition for Bread is put before the petition of Remission of sins, as
some think, because the former of petitions is for good, the later is in the
number of the deprecations for evil: Others, that from the sight of our
necessities of earthly things, we are led to a sight of our necessity of
heavenly things: According to this pattern is the practice of the Saints;
Salomo^ makes first choice for Wisdom, 1 King. 3. 9
and lets other things follow in their course; David first desires the
light of Iehovah's face or countenance, Psalm. 4.
and lets the corn, and the wine, and the oil follow in their order. But
it is nothing so with the wicked, they desire earthly things in the first place
because they are earthly minded, as for heavenly things, they never question
the attaining of them: Give Esau first his red pottage, and let him deal
afterward for the birthright as he can; let Saul be honored before the
people, and he will take his venture of the honor from God.

Again, 2 Rule.
we must ask heavenly things absolutely (I mean in their kinds, not in any
particular measure or quantity;) but for earthly things we must ask them
conditionally, for so they are promised; In some sort, namely, so far as they
are absolutely necessary for the maintaining us in Gods service, and making
good of his promises, so far we may crave them absolutely; for as we crave
the end, so we may crave the means that lead to that end.

Then try thy self by the right ordering of thy heart toward the object of
thy desires; if thy heart pant, and thy soul thirsts after the living God,
and the promises of God Christ Jesus: Do thou desire the loving kindness of
the Lord more then Life it self, then let this assure thee, though thou want
other assurance, that thy desires are the desires of the Spirit; for every
desire is of the nature of the thing desired: Beasts affect only sensual
objects, because their desires are merely sensual, and the natural man
desires natural things as the adequat object of his desires, though by some
sparkle of common instinct he may glance at better things, which he neither
knows, nor truly affects. So the Kingdom of God and his righteousness is
the adequat object of the spiritual man's desires, although the stomach may be
affected with the maukin, or such a disease as women with-child and men also
labor of, arising from an excrementious or venomous, humor, whereby they long
extremely for things hurtful, like the humor it self, and desire them more
then wholesome food: But as this is cured by vomiting, so the Lord by some cross
or other purges out his malignant menstrous humor, after which they come to
hate their own desires: David was taken with a longing 2 Samuel 23.
desire for the water of Bethlem, but not when he perceived it to be the price
of blood; by hazarding the lives of his worthies, he would not give it to his
desires. So when the Saints perceive their inordinate desires to hazard their
esteem and desire of Chirst, they say to them, as Ephraim to his Idols, get
you hence, what have I to do with you? Look to it then, for if thou set thine
ease, profit, pleasures, honor, or any thing else before Christ, thy desire is
not of Christ.

The last note of Evidence of the Spirit, 12 Expectation of the thing desired.
is the looking for an answer from him to whom we pray: The end of every
action, is first in intention. A man can never intend that which he looks not
to see in execution; the end of Prayer is to be heard: Hear (O Lord) the
Prayer of Judah, Deuteronomy. 33. 7.
and bring him unto his people: To hear is no other thing but to answer; he
who prays then intends to have answer, looks for an answer; it will
follow then by conversion, that he that looks not for an answer, prays not
at all. That speech of the blind man, Ioh. 9.
God hears sinners, carririeth these two things in it; First, as I have
showed, the living in any sin cannot stand with the Spirit of Prayer: This
has been the course of all the Saints: Jacob looked for a blessing, and he
would not away without a blessing; The Canaanitish Woman will not away til she
have somewhat, though it be but crummes; David will look out, that is, (as I
have showed) he will wait for an answer; My soul waits for Jehovah, Psalm.
136. 6.
more then a watchman for the morning: Psalm. 123. 2. 3.
As the eyes of servants are unto the hand of their Masters, or as the eyes of
a Maiden unto the hand of her Mistress; So our eyes are toward Jehovah, our
God, until that he be gracious unto us: The leads us unto this duty by the
very instinct of brutish creatures; The eyes of all look attentively to thee,
and thou give them their meat in due season. Plin. l. 2. c. 4.
The Humanists tell of Oryx a kind of Goat in Egypt, that it is so affected
with the fear of scorching heat at the rising of the dog-starre, that it
stands with tears in the eyes looking up to the heavens, as though it seemed
to deprecate the intolerable fervency thereof, and to thirst with an
unquenchable desire for some moisture from the heavens: So the soul taken up
with desire of that it prays for, will wait for it till it has it: And this
is more then an unregenerate man does or can do; he has not the promise,
which is the ground of the answer, nor cares he for the best things; how then
can he wait for an answer? He may conceit that God will answer him, yea that
he does answer him, because he obtains some earthly things, but his conceit
is grou^dlesse, for God answers not his prayers neither will he, though he
make many prayers, although it please God to cast those things upon him for the
further convincing and condemning of him: Put thy soul therefore to it in this
particular, and look on thy prayer with like or dislike, according to thy
looking or not looking for an answer. The Godly fail herein.
Our coming short of this makes us come short of our suits for our selves and
others; we are like the children that shoot their shafts, and never look after
them; or careless petitioners, who never look after an answer of their
petition: This is one maine cause of the Lords absence from his Church, and of
his standing out notwithstanding our prayers, in that we have not waited still
on God, and importuned him for an answer. Then let us set our selves upon the
wall continually, to watch and wait for it, and the Lord in his due time will
give a gracious answer.

If a wearied soul object Ob.
his waiting for an answer till his eyes has failed, and his heart fainted;

I answer, Answ.
if thy suit has the promise for its ground, thou shall have it, for God
denies not what he delayeth, yea in this he answers thee that he stays thy
heart to look for answer; for therein he answers the heart, though he
answers not the hand, he knitteth thy heart unto him that it do not depart
from him. But if thou have no promise for thy particular, then know, that
denial is the very best answer; for private blessings are every way as good as
positive.

Thus much I hope shall The Conclusion of this particular.
serve for the particular marks of the Groans of the Spirit, which in some
measure are in all Gods children. All these marks indeed, or, at the least,
some of them be very co^spicuous; yet through disuse or neglect the characters
may be mightily raced, and illegible, mossegrown with the cares of this life,
and the remnants of carnality, hypocrisy, and security, yet they are not quite
raced out, so that they are not there at all; but in the unregenerate they are
not at all, or in any measure. I have been the larger in the^, because of the
deceitfulness of the heart, the neglect of trial, the presumption of
hypocrites and profane men, and for stirring up of Gods people to look better
to it, that they may not only pray in the spirit in some measure, but also that
they may pray in sense of the spirit, which is the third Point in order to be
handled.

3. How the Sense of the Spirit in Prayer may be attained.
BEFORE I Quest.
come to open this particular, it shall not be amiss to answer a question
which I heard moved; Whether a man without the Spirit, especially understand
close hypocrites, may go frequently and ordinarily to God in secret, because
all other objects and by-respects removed, the soul comes in a more direct
aspect to talk with God? Answer


For answer hereunto, I must acknowledge, that as the prayer of the wicked is
never mentioned but with professed detestation of it, so I never read of any
prayer of the wicked in secret; But the Pharisees, the very picture of
hypocrites, are reproved for turning the course of secret prayer to public
ostentation: It is discovered in the Scripture to be the practice of the
Saints; Genesis 24. 63.
Isaac went out into the fields with deep meditation (for so the word
signifies.) It was Daniels ordinary practice to go into his chamber Dan. 6i
10.
three times a day to pray; So David, Ps. 55. 17. 33. 4.
evening and morning and at noone will I meditate; Act. 10. 9.
And at the sixth hour Peter went into prayer. Lastly, Luke 6. 12.
it was the frequent practice of Christ himself, the pattern of all goodness:
yet notwithstanding all these, a profane man may stumble now and then on his
knees before God, as a nightwalker may a dangerous way in his sleep, not
knowing what danger he is in, yea a close hypocrite may so harden his face
against the fear of Gods presence, or upon some selfe-fantasticall ground of
libertinisme, live in gross sins, one or more and go ordinarily to God in
secret, which the Lord in judgment does suffer for a time, that they may be
hardened in sin, and clothed with judgment as with a robe, but failing of their
ends, or their ends or their sin being discovered, they fall off from the
practice to open Profaneness, Apostasy of profession, or Terror of conscience,
which is the best that can befall them.

Now having answered this Question, I come directly to the point it self,
namely, The means of attaining the sense of the Spirit in prayer: For as many
think they pray, and yet pray not at all; so many pray indeed, and do not
believe they pray. As it is the highest happiness of the soul to converse with
God in prayer, so is it the heavenliest consolation of the soul, to know it
self to be conversant with God in prayer: Now for the attainment of this,
thou must,

1 First stir up and quicken the motion of the spirit: As in nature, Motion
stirs up natural heat, and natural heat maintains Motion, making the
part moved more sensible of liveliness, and activity; so the stirring up of
any spiritual faculty, makes it more active and agile, and the activity
thereof maintains the vigor of the faculty, and makes the subject more
sensible of its own activity: It is directly so in prayer; to this the Apostle
is very pertinent, 1. Tim. 1. 6
Stir up the gift that is in thee. The property of the word is to stir up the
sparkles of fire, covered as it were with ashes, and by laying fuel to them,
to kindle them up, and make them burn again. So that if thou would feel the
heat of the spirit, thou must by a devout endeavor and careful assiduity,
gather together the sparkles of the spiritual motions, raked up in the ashes
of corruption, and the rubbish of careless neglect, and by laying on the fuel
of the groans of the spirit, with the soft breath of the bellows of heavenly
meditations, thou must resuscitate and kindle up again that spiritual fire,
which is like to be extinguished. The neglect of this makes want of sense, and
want of sense want of comfort; and therefore (as the Apostle says) neglect
not, or be not careless of the gift that is in thee. If ever then thou would
have comfort from the sense of prayer, dig thy self out of thine own security,
dull not, neither drown thy precious thoughts in cares, pleasures, worldly
joys, or sorrows; be ever bringing the dispersed sparkles of the Spirit
together, and like a good workma^, look well to the fire, and then the Lord
will not only take notice of thy prayer, as he did of Paul's, but he will also
give thy soul to know, that it is such a prayer as he takes notice of; so
that thou may co^fidently aver with David, I have called upon thee, and
may urge it with an argument, Ps. 31. 18.
let me not be confounded.

2 The second Mean of procuring sense, is the removing of hindrances, as the
distemper of the body by intemperancy, the distemper of the soul by passion,
dividing cares or loose and unprofitable company; these be the rubbish of our
ruinous disposition, that keep us from the view of the strain of prayer in us:
These be the ashes that cover the sparkles of the Spirit, and keep us from the
sensible heat of them. Away then with these if thou desire the sense of the
vigor of the Spirit! First the soul follows the temperature of the body;
thou must labor, as much as may be, for a sound mind in a well tempered body:
The over-wearied, and over-toyled bodies, whereunto most men reserve their
families and secret duties, are unfit to organize the soul, or to vent the
soul's desires in prayer; It is good therefore to ply the duty in health, and
strength of body, that hence comfort may arise in time of sickness, and
weakness. As for the Passions or Perturbatio^s of the mind, if they be the
symptoms of evil affected bodies, the body must be brought in frame; but if
they be the more spiritual perturbations, or such turbulent commotions as we
call properly the sickness of the mind, as anguish, slavish fear, sadness,
and the like, these being of an aereall and subtle nature, do trouble and
miscarry the temper, as the wind does carry the calmest air and smoothest
water against the rocks: So that for want of smooth waters to move on (if you
will) a well-composed mind, the evidence of the Spirit, can neither be seen
nor heard. Therefore these perturbations must be alayed by their opposite.
Graces, (as I have showed) not quite taken away, with the Stoics, but they
must be so tempered and alaied by grace, above the temper of the Platonists,
that they may be as sinews to the motion of the Spirit, whereby evidence may
be furthered, and not hindered. As for instance; an angry or wrathful
disposition, is like choler, distasting or distempering the relish of the
Spirit; or as the unnatural heat does wast and consume the natural active
heat that comes from the heart; so the devouring heat of anger eats up the
evidence of the Spirit. The mind (as one says) must be at peace in it self,
if it look toward God: But if the heat of anger be turned into a holy zeal,
tempered with discretion, it will consume that rubbish that lies in the way of
sense, and will be like a coach to carry the evidence or feeling of the Spirit
to our Spirit in the time of prayer.

Secondly, And so a habit of dullness or pensive heaviness, dulleth and
flatteth the sense of the spirit in prayer, but a well set or moderate
mournfulnesse, is that sowing in tears, which makes us sensible in prayer to
reap in joy. Lastly distracting and slavish fear does weaken the sense of Gods
love toward us, but a reverent awe of the Majesty of God in prayer, will give
thy soul assurance, that he is thy Father, and that by the power of the
spirit, thou call him so.

Thirdly, As for the removeall of any reigning sin, I have spoke of it before,
for continuance in that cannot stand with the Spirit of prayer; yea I am of
that mind, that though David lost not the Spirit by his sin, it is probable
that he prayed not scarce all the time that he lay in his sin.

A third Mean to attain sense of the Spirit in prayer, is in thy disposition to
the duty, and desire to be guided by the spirit, and not by the flesh and
blood. In thine indisposition, or averse disposition, it will dissuade thee
from praying at all, and that upon some show of probable ground, as that thou
have not the Spirit, thou can not pray, God will not entertain it, If any be
by thou may shame thy self, and bewray thee to be a man of no gifts; So thou
had best let it alone till thou be fitted, God will accept of thy good
intention, and better not pray at all, then not to pray excellently: But these,
and the like be sophistical suggestions, whereunto if thou hearknest, thou
neglectest thy duty, thou weaknest thy prayer by thy neglect, thou
disacquaintest thy self with God, thou bewraiest a doting on thine own
ability, thou interceptest Gods opportunity of manifesting his strength in thy
weakness, thou give advantage to Satan, thou indangerest the very habit of
prayer as much as in thee lies; for from frequency of neglect thou may
derelinquish the duty, or bring it to a bare presumptory performance. Lastly,
there is nothing that weakneth, depriveth, and opposes sense more then this:
for as a sedentary life; or sleeping after meat, brings a fat cold body to a
Palsy or Lethargy, wherein sense and motion is often weakened or deprived; so
the neglect of duty may endanger sense to a man's dying day. Therefore if thou
can not pray as thou would, or as thou should, pray yet as thou can;
God may be there and thou not aware of it: and when thou art least able, thou
art most able; and when thou art most humble, thou art fittest for sense: and
take this as the direction of the Spirit in many places besides the practice of
the Saints: Ephesians. 6. 19.
Pray always; Col. 4. 2.
Continue in prayer: Romans 12. 12.
Watch and pray always: Luke 21. 36
The meaning of which places we must not mistake (after the example of
Euchytes the Psallian) that we must do nothing but pray, (for many evils
would then arise) but that upon all occasions we should have something to say
to God, especially as both ancient and modern observe, at the stinted times of
duty, which though we change, yet we must not neglect or omit, whether private
or secret. In a word, that of the Apostle in another case, though often by sin
abused, will serve well here, 2. Tim. 4. 2
Be instant in season and out of season; that is, whether it please or please
not: So whether thou art disposed or not disposed, go to, and do it; the Lord
has bidden thee.

The fourth Mean in Prayer to obtain sense, is the laboring in Prayer to
bring home Christ sensibly to the soul: This is the Spouses desire, I would
lead thee, I would bring thee into my mothers house: And thus she does indeed;
I held him and would not let him go until I brought him into my mothers house;
which is no other but to bring him into the heart, where he dwells by Faith.
As the Conduit-pipe brings home water from the Fountain to the Cisterne, so
the Conduit of Faith brings home the Fountain of living water, even Christ
himself, to the Cisterne of the heart. As the eye of Faith in Prayer looks
for Christ, so the hand of faith brings him home, for faith is a thrifty
grace, bringing all riches home to the soul. The want of this thrifty course
makes want of sense in our suits to God; for as the light of Gods truth
brings home to the soul the Mountain of his holiness, so the Spirit of
Prayer brings home the Lord to the soul of an humbled sinner. If a man could
fill the Censer with odors, and the heavens with Groane^s, and labor not in
particular for this Union or Contract between God and his Soul, God may be
there with little or no immediate sense of his presence: Look then to the plying
of this; for this will make thee to remove every thing that may displease the
faithful witness, or weaken sense.

A fifth Mean to procure sense, is a due notice-taking of God and our selves in
Prayer: The knowledge of our selves, Moral, Natural, and Spiritual, casts
us quite out of our selves, and leads us (as one says) as it were by the
hand to the knowledge of God; by which reflection or circular knowledge we come
to be vile in our own eyes: It casts out and keeps out sin, making the
Spirit rejoice to bear witness with our Spirits, that our Prayers are as
odors of incense in his nostrills. Again, the Spiritual knowledge of Gods
Excellency, Sovereignty, Al-sufficiency of all his Attributes and works,
works a lively sense in the Suitor, because the bare natural or
supernatural knowledge of God, be it as may be, will never beget any sense
without that anointing eye salve. This knowledge then of Gods Excellency will
countervail the sense of thine own unworthiness, his Sovereignty will command
the rebellion thereof: His All Sufficiency supplyeth thy wants; all his
attributes, yea, even his Justice (in Christ) serves for thy good; This
knowledge gives thee not only (with the heathen) some light to see God in his
Creatures. The truth of this passage appears plainly in Abraham his suite to
God for Sodom; I have taken upon me, or begun to speak unto the Lord, and I am
dust and ashes, whereby a reflective knowledge of God upon him self, he sees
and acknowledges himself to be nothing: yet by this is not discouraged but
rather encouraged to continue his request, renewing it to the number of nine
times, which he could never have done without the sense of the Spirits
approbation.

Our coming short herein makes us come short of sense in Prayer, for either
we examine not our selves, and empty not our selves of our selves as we should,
till we be vile in our own eyes, and therefore the Lord will not let us know
that he takes notice of us, till we take better notice of our selves; or on
the contrary, we fix both our eyes upon our own unworthiness, vileness,
and insufficiency, where finding no matter of feeling, we drench our selves in
tears of despair with S. John, because there is nothing found in us worthy to
give testimony: Rev. 5. 4.
But we look not up to the Lions power, nor the worth of the Lambs blood, by
which the sealed evidence of the Fathers good will is opened or broken up to
us, by whom the Odors or Prayers of the Saints are carried up to the Father,
and to the Fathers presence, and evidence of his presence is brought down into
the soul. And this is the means to make us sing that new song with triumphant
joy and melody in our heart, having God in Christ to be all in all unto us,
though we be nothing of our selves.

The sixth and last sense-procuring Mean, is a close and constant holy walking
with God in all our Thoughts, Words, and Actions, both in our general and
particular calling. The guidance of the Spirit, Praying by the Spirit, and
Evidence of the Spirit (in some measure) go usually together; (I say usually)
because sometime the two first may be without the last, and that for causes
best known to God, as some sin past, prevention of some sin, as spiritual
pride, or the like; or for the trial of the patience of the Saints, and their
continuance in Prayer, trusting in the Lord, although he should kill them: And
truly I may say for the comfort of such, that though it be not so sweet a
condition as that which is joined with sense, yet it is as happy and as sure a
condition as that which is carried by sense, if all means for sense be used.
Hither may I apply that saying of our Savior to Thomas, Ioh 20. 29.
Thou beleevest because thou see, blessed are those that have not seen and
yet have believed: So, blessed are those that continue in Prayer, though they
want the sense of assurance in Prayer.

But to the matter in hand, close obedience out of Prayer, brings good
Evidence in Prayer, not only as the effect, or as the fruit evidenceth the
tree, but it challenges the Spirit of promise to be with us in Prayer, to give
Evidence and Approbation to his own Work: For as remiss walking in a
Christian (though not absolutely loose) does in some sort quench the Spirit and
damp the evidence thereof in Prayer; so a close, strict, and holy walking with
God, does quicken and rejoice the Spirit, for that it is ready with
cheerfulness to give joyful evidence, when we go about its particular
business of Prayer. This walking with God (for which the Patriarchs and Saints
were commended) is nothing else (as the Author to the Hebrews expounds it)
but a pleasing of God by faith and obedience: Now when we thus please him, he
(according to his covenant made to Ahraham and his seed,) is with us in our
requests, by giving us contentment of assurance. But our want of this, makes
weakness of Prayer, and want of assurance: Many men's affections are led
captive and their judgments; we presume our ways to be Gods ways, when they
are none of his; by being strict in one of the Tables, we take liberty to
transgress the other: The harmony of the Spirit is distempered by our
disordered passions; we bear false witness against God in denying the Saints
their due, out of a partial humor, and therefore it is just with God to
withdraw his testimony from our requests, though we eagerly desire it. Lastly,
the hearts of the most professing, are so overcharged with the cares of this
life, that the Spirit also is overcharged with the dullness and deadness of
their Prayers, whereby the duty has small force with it and the evidence is
suppressed: Therefore look to thy walking in every particular, if ever thou
meanest to attain to assurance in thy Prayer.

Other means I might deliver for the obtaining of sense, as due Preparation to
Prayer, a Habit of holy ejaculations, but I have already spoke of the former,
and will only add this, Withdraw thy self from all impediments, and prepare
thy self with a reverent awe to meet thy God: And for the later, These holy
breathings, as air, keep and clear the fire upon the hearth, whereby sense
is kindled when thou set upon the work: Also for help in this particular,
the frequent use of secret Prayer will do well; David (as I have showed)
sought the Lord three times a day; we should of necessity be twice a day with
God at the least, besides going unto him upon other occasions, as hearing of
the Word, or others, remembirng also to double our Sacrifice on the Lord's Day.
And so much for the Means, which if the Lord dispose thy heart to use
conscionably, thou can not but obtain some good measure of assurance, that
thou praiest by the Holy Ghost.

4 How a man should hold on in the duty without the sense of the Spirit.
THe fourth particular head of of this Treatise, Quaest.
shall be the satisfying a demand: If one feel not the assurance of the Spirit
in Prayer, with what comfort or encouragement shall that party hold on in
Prayer, or should he resolve to give over Prayer, as Jeremy resolved to give
over preaching?

For answer, Ans.
let such a one neither resolve so nor do so: As for motives of encouragement
thereunto; First, thou must do it in conscience to the commandment, joined
with a promise, Call upon me in the day of trouble and I will deliver thee: What
greater trouble then to be without sense of assurance in Prayer, and when is
deliverance nigher then in great trouble?

Secondly, remember that he, to whom thou go, is a loving, kind, and
compassionate Father, who pittieth his children, and will not suffer them to
cry always without an answer, he will not hide his face for ever. If evil
parents will give good things to their children, yea, and that to evil children:
much more will he who is goodness it self give better things to such as he
has made partakers of his goodness.

Thirdly, take encouragement from earnest desire of Gods face that he has put
into thy heart which he never means to frustrate, for he grants the
desires of his children. Thou art as surely happy (as I have showed) though not
so sensibly happy, in hungring and thirsting after sense, as though thy soul
were filled with sense: These desires are his own, and he will crown his own
works with mercy and tender compassion; keep then but open thy mouth and heart
in Prayer, and assuredly as he has promised he will fill them with good things.

Fourthly, comfort thy self with this thy desertion or want of sense; it may
be it is not yet Gods opportunity to show himself in the Mount, it may come in
an hour which thou never did look for.

Fifthly, let the Wisdom of God stay thee in thy course, who has all times and
seasons in his hands, who knows when to shut and when to open: By which
drawing his presence, he makes thee to long the more after it, and the more
thou will value it when thou have it.

Sixthly, let the examples of all Gods children in this comfort thee: did thou
ever know or hear that ever any of them perished, but at length they found the
thing they sought for?

Lastly, let thine own experience teach thee to run thy race with patience,
till thou do obtain: For though thou have not the sense of his presence, yet
thou have other fruits of his presence, as Holiness, Humility, Patience,
Brotherly-love, Softness of heart, Tenderness of conscience, Psalm. 4.
Fear to displease, a Reverent awe of God, Hunger and Thirst after all
righteousness. These, it may be, or some of these thou have in a greater
measure the^ some that have sense: But howsoever, these be the harbingers of
sense, and where they take up the heart, there sense of assurance will be sure
to lodge: Thou have already that witness in thy self, namely the Spirit, and
that Spirit will make thee know the things that are of God.

5 How such as want the the Spirit of Prayer should labor for it.
THE fifth and last particular of this Treatise, is how men that want this
Spirit of Prayer shall attain unto it; For all men have it not, not the elect
till they be converted, although most think that every man in the face of the
Church can pray, yet nothing less. It is true indeed that our blessed Savior
makes intercession by his presence for the Elect, even before their
conversion, witness himself; neither pray I for these alone, Ioh. 17. 20
but for them also that shall believe on me through their word: where the
ancients observe, that Christ prayed not only for those that should hear the
Apostles (for neither Abraham nor the Theife heard) but he prayed for all them
that from the beginning of the world had believed or should believe: yet for
all this he prays in none before they have the Spirit. Though Paul, an elect
vessel, before his conversion had the Prayer of Christ, yet he prayed not for
himself till he was transformed by the Spirit into the Image of Christ, by
whose Spirit he began to pray, of the truth of whose Prayer Christ gives this
testimony; Act. 9. 10.
behold he prays: Unregenerate men may perhaps peruse this draught of Prayer,
whereby as they come to see the necessity of Prayer, so they may discern the
falacy of the flesh and Satan's suggestions, in persuading men that they pray
when they do nothing less, and hereupon they come to enquire, how they may
attain to the true gift of Prayer?

For answer, let them understand, first, that Prayer is no acquired gift by the
industry of man, but an infused ability of the Spirit (as I have showed,) which
God, out of the free motive of his love, powers upon all and every one of his
chosen, when he works that glorious change in them by the power of the
Gopell. The wind blows where it lists, and thou hear the sound thereof,
but can not tell whence it comes nor whither it goes: So is every one that
is borne of the Spirit. As this is spoken of the free and forcible mystery of
man's conversion, incomprehensible by man's capacity, yet understood of faith; so
this Spirit of supplication makes free and forcible entry upon the heart of a
convert, neither acquired, nor truly desired, nor understood by the best man in
his natural estate, or most complete endowments, before his conversion.

Further, since thou do enquire also in thy case with those that came to
Job, what thou should do, I answer, thou must know and ingeniously confess,
that thou can not pray at all; for men conceit that they can pray, when they
can do nothing less: And this reachcheth not only to carnal professors, who
hold it a heresy to doubt that they cannot pray to God, but also to close and
formal hypocrites, yea temporary professors in the highest degree, whose
hearts foully deceive the^ in this particular. The conceit of the proud Pharisee
amongst the rest of his faults, that he could pray and none like him, spoiled
him for ever from praying. To men so conceited that saying of the Physician
well agrees: When the minds of men are once taken up with falls opinions, they
make them not only deaf but also blind against the truth it self: yea further
says he, there is no tincture so indelible, staining the judgment of well
ruled reason; for their arrogance and ignorance combine themselves together:
Even just so it is with men in this particular; yea I dare avouch that this
conceit makes such further off from prayer then profane Infidells that never
offered to pray in all theit lives. It is related of a skillful Musician, that
he took twice as much for teaching those that were evil taught, as for those
that were not taught at all; because a false position in a science is a greater
hinderance to the attainment thereof, then the pure privation of it: if ever
then thou desire to pray, confess ingeniously that thou can not pray at
all; know that thou art stark blind and lame, that thou may receive thy
limbs and sight.

In the next place, thou must lay to heart and be sensible of thy miserable
and wretched condition, through want of this precious gift of prayer: this well
considered will make thee at thy wits end, and it will shake the sandy
foundation of all thy endeavors, it will batter and take the fort of all thy
vain confidence, it will cut the sinews of all thy self deceiving policy, it
will faint the heart, and dead the very soul of all thy pale-faced hopes, it
will imbitter the sweetness of al thy rats-bane pleasures, it will mar the
market of all thy possessions and treasures, it will bring off the hooks all
thy jollity and mirth, it will make thee behold, as in a true glass, all thy
jollity and mad mirth, it will let thee see the vanity of all thy great
friends, favorites, supporters, lovers, acquaintance, yea the Ioviall
companions. In a word, if thou will hold to it, it will give thee no rest till
thou have found some other footing for thy soul to rest on.

To make all good, let me a little expostulate the matter with thee: What can
thou do in the day of thy distress, when trouble comes upon thee, like pain
on a woman in childbirth? When thy conscience begins to roar, thy soul to
faint, thy state to wast or be taken from thee by violence? Whither can thou
go? Will thou know what thou can do? I know, and thou shall know it, thou
can do just nothing for thy self that good is. If thou can not pray, thou
can go no where at all out of thy self; to him thou can not go that has
eternal life, for thou art not acquainted with him, thou have no odours to
fill the Censer, and therefore he has nothing for thee but a Censer full of
fire from the Altar to consume thee: here thou may know (if thou will) that
thou art blind, and naked, miserable and wretched. But what is the remedy?
where is the refuge? who is thy shelter in this thy distress? Surely if thou
can not pray, thou may look about thee, within thee, above thee, beneath
thee, and find no remedy, refuge, or help: For thou have no promise of all
these in calling upon God, no promise of deliverance, as I have showed: yea
instead thereof, thou have the arrow of the Lords wrath drawn (even to the
head) against thee; Ps. 50. 15. 79. 6.
witness the Psalmist; power out thy wrathful heat against the heathen that
know thee not, and upon the kingdoms that call not upon thy name. The very same
phrase has Jeremy, calling them the Families that call not on thy name; Ier.
10. 25.
whether it be family, kingdom, or person, all is one. Further, what can
thou do for thy family, if famine, fire, plague* or fearful sickness come
amongst the^? If thou can pray just so much as thou can do for thy self,
yea if they were all running to hell, which is worse then the former, thou
neither can nor wilt stay them, but rather hasten them thither. Observe this
I beseech thee, as thou art husband or wife, parent or child, master or
servant; what can thou do for thy country, when the dismal day of calamity
thickens in upon it as a cloud, and the evil threatened makes have. Deuteronomy. 32.
35.
Though thou art the most civilized formalist in all the world, the closest
hypocrite, the most glistring moralist, yea the most potent grandie for state
and puissance in all the land, and yet can not pray, thou make many
breaches, and openest many gaps to the betraying of the state and kingdom but
thou canstnot for thy heart, by sword or counsel protect the State, from the
least ensuing danger. An evil man may by Gods employment be a fort or Cannon,
yet he has neither the promise nor any good by it: It is the poor wise man
that by his wisdom delivers the City, though no man regard him; for fools
can do no good; and fools are all such as cannot pray: for they spend all
time in learning strange language, but have never a word of the language of
Canaan. Misery in sickness, and death with out prayer.
Lastly, what can thou do when sickness seazeth on the, and death, the last
enemy looks ghastly in thy face? Then all thy worldly confidence, policy,
hopes, pleasures, profits, possessions, joviallity, mirth, favorers, friends
(and what not) shall forsake thee: then one groan or sigh from the spirit,
would bring thee better news from God, then if all the Princes Ambassadors in
in the world should salute thee Master, or their Sovereign and sole Monarch of
the world: But this Embassy of prayer being wanting, what woe will be wanting,
yea thou may wish the hills and mountains to overwhelme thee and cover thee
from the presence of him that sits upon the throne; but all in vain, if the
Lord put not words in thy mouth, whereby he may be entreated, thou shall
either dye desperately like Judas, or with thy heart dying within thee, like
Nabal: So consider this strait wherein thou art, and this may put thee further
on to set thine eyes toward the Lord.

But some desperately may object Ob.
(for such there be) if the sense of ones state that cannot pray, set him so
upon the rack, it were better for such a one to content himself with such
prayers as have served him hitherto, then by meddling after a new strain of
prayer to make life uncomfortable and death intolerable.

For answer, Answer
the remedy is worse then the disease; for if such a one see it not in time, he
shall see it will be one time or other, yea it may be out of time, greater
horror. I have been the larger in this particular, that the terror of a
non-suppliant estate might hasten him out of it, yea I think verily if such men
would look well upon it, it might be a mean to bring many out of it. Thou must
resolve in the third place if ever thou would pray to break off thy sins, and
to part with thy profaneness; for as I have showed, a sinful course and
familiarity with God cannot consist or stand together: A corrupt tongue or
leprous throat makes a harsh noise in the ear of God: Prove. 15. 29.
remember that the Lord is far from the wicked, and though they cry to him he
will not harken to them;

Fourthly, thou must avoid and abandon all profane, idle, and unprofitable
company; for as thy living in a corrupt air, or with contagious bodies, will
increase the habit of thy corrupt disposition, till thou be utterly consumed;
so lewd and wicked company will more and more contaminate thy soul, and
spirit, so that thy breath shall stink worser and worser in the nostrills of
God: As the soul in the Law that touched any abominable unclean thing, Lev. 21.
and ate of the sacrifice, was to be cut off from Gods people, so the
conversing and familiarity with unclean and cursed company, cutteth a soul
off, and keeps it off from familiarity with God in prayer; Prove. 4. 14
Therefore (says the wiseman) Enter not into the path of the wicked, and go
not into the way of evil men: Ps. 26. 5. 6.
The Prophet David, washing his hands in innocency, that he might compass the
Altar of the Lord, abandoneth all vain persons, and resolves not to sit or
converse with the wicked: for as thou must avoid evil company, and hate them
that regard lying vanities, Pro. 13. 20.
so thou must associate thy self to the godly. He that walks with the wise
shall be wise; hate the evil (says the Prophet) and love the good. Amos. 5. 14.
The merely moral man does counsel thee to converse with such as will make
thee better, as men by constant conversing with natives of a Nation do learn
the language of the nation; so by sorting thy self with beggars thou may
happily learn to beg.

Fifthly, thou must entreat the godly earnestly to pray for thee, and to beg
thee of the Lord, esteem much of their prayers, which be of that efficacy to
convert a sinner from his ways, and to save a soul from death, hiding a
multitude of sins. If thus thou do, and God affects the hearts of his
people to pray for thee, there is good hope that thou shall come to pray for
thy self and for others also; for the Son of many prayers ca^ hardly perish:
but so long as thou do scoff and mock at the prayers of the Saints, or have
them in light esteem, the spirit of prayer or supplication will not come nigh
thee. Yet with this begging of the prayers of the Saints, thou may learn to
beg thy self. The people of Israel desired Samuel to pray for them when they
had sinned; but they prayed also for themselves; but Pharaoh desired Moses to
pray again and again for him, but he would never learn to pray for
himself, neither did he at all desire Moses his prayer, Exodus 8. 8.
till the hand of God was the second time upon him, for at the first he did
not. A great many do never desire the prayers of Gods people; if they desire
them at all, it is not till Gods hand be so heavy upon the^, that they know not
what to do.

Sixthly, thou must attend the means of the word, read, preached and conferred
upon, for thou shall never learn to speak to God, except thou hear God
speak unto thee: he that turns away his ear from hearing the Law, even his
prayer shall be abomination; It is not a set manner in a secret corner, nor the
best penned prayer that thou can get by heart, without a diligent attendance
on the word, especially preached, that ever will teach or enable thee to pray:
For faith comes by hearing; And because we believe therefore we speak: As
the lame man in the Gospel lay still by the Poole of Bethesda (which was the
means appointed for recovery) till the power of God had wrought upon him, so
thou must still attend the means, till God smite the heart, unvail the eyes,
touch and untie the tongue to this duty of prayer.

Seventhly and lastly, enquire and learn of God's people, and they can tell
thee what unvaluable profit, what sweet pleasures, what unspeakable
consolation, what peace-passing understanding, what height of honor, what
heaven of happiness, they find in this familiar conference, with God; ask and
they will tell thee (as a Father observes) that of all virtues they can find
none but this compared to incense. Secondly, they can tell thee on experience,
that it is the best guard against all assaults of Sin and Satan. All kind of
Devils are kept out and cast out by this. When the evil Spirit came upon Saul,
1. Sam. 16. 23.
David alayed and abandoned it by playing on his harp; that harp, says one,
was devout Prayer: Thirdly, if thou would know what is the best trading, Gods
people will tell thee there is none like Prayer: For no state, time, place,
person, or opposition, can intercept thrift if thou art disposed to pray; thou
may ever be employing thy stock, and that with the return of increase; thou
may gain more by Prayer, in one hour (as one says well) then all the
Merchants in the world in a thousand years. Fourthly, will thou know what is
the very best physic? Gods people can tell thee by experience, that none is
like Prayer: It heals the infirmities of the body, and the diseases of the
soul, and the Prayers of the faithful shall save the Sickly, and the Lord
shall raise them up, Iam. 5. 15.
and if he have committed sins they shall be forgiven him: Fifthly, if it be
enquired what is the greatest honor that mortal man can obtain unto? Is it
not this, for a man to talk familiarly with God as with his friend? And such
honor have all the Saints, and they only: What honor were it for a poor,
mean, despicable man to come to be so inward with a great Monarch to have his
ear at his pleasure, and to go into the bedchamber when he list without
repulse or interruption of any? So is it with Gods favorites, how despicable,
and despised soever they be amongst men: He that will be inward with God
(says one) let him pray frequently; let him read diligently; for when we speak
with God, when we read or hear, God speaks to us. Sixthly, if thou would
be provided of the best arms against thine enemies, of the best, safest refuge
in distress, the speediest deliverance out of trouble, the Saints can assure
thee upon experience, that there is none like this: witness Moses, Hester,
Iehosaphat and the rest. Seventhly, would thou command all the arms of
creatures, as heaven and earth and all the creatures therein, yea, even the
Angels themselves, the people of God will teach thee, that Prayer is the only
word of command. By this Elijah did open and shut the heavens; By this Moses
tied and untied the hands of the Almighty; by this Jacob made the Lord to stay
with him, so that he could not depart till he had blessed him. Eighthly and
lastly in a word, would thou have a guide that might direct thee, and protect
thee, assist thee, and never leave thee till thou art brought through this
troublesome vale to the life of glory, the Saints can assure thee, that Prayer
is the only mean to bring the guidance of the Spirit into the heart, and there
to continue it, till thou come to thy journies end; these effects of Prayer
who can choose but affect?

Now if thou do fall in love with the Fruits, thou may happily endeavor to
get the Tree into the garden of thy soul, which will make all the ground
fruitful. These rules being observed by thee, and the motives considered, thou
art in a fair possibility, to come acquainted with God, by whose mercy and
guidance I have been led along in this little Treatise: desiring for the
Conclusion nothing but this, that God may have the honor, and his People the
profit.

FINIS.

