A most brief manner of Instruction, to the principles of Christian Religion.

By I. F.

Psalm. 34. Come ye children, and I will teach you the fear of the Lord.

1. Peter. 3.11. Let every one be ready to render an account of his Faith.

Imprinted at London by Hugh Singleton.

To the christian Reader, grace and peace in Christ.
THe short memories and dull wits, of many to conceive and remember, the most
brief and short sum of Christian Religion, has moved me to do this work;
and that because I see and perceive by daily proof and experience, that all
means and ways assaied, yet hardly we can prevail to settle, or beat into
the heads and hearts of youth, so necessary a matter, as is the instruction to
right understanding of the principles of Religion.

I have here therefore according to my capacity and small skill, drawn out a
few questions, with Aunsweres annexed and adioined, very fit for the simpler
sort, both of youth and age, that are so long and hard to learn. That it
greeueth my heart to think how careless and heedlesse, many, both young and
old be in so needful a matter, as concerns their salvation.

But the cause of so small effect taken of many, is this, partly by the
negligence both of Parents and their youth, both children and servants, the
Parents slacknesse in sending them to the Ministers; and their carelessness
when they do come, and heedlesse hearts in hearing and regarding; and their
mindlesnesse when the Ministers endeavor is in the best and plainest manner
bestowed among them.

And therefore, I pray God stir up the Magistrates hearts to have more care
of this so weighty a matter. And to see their articles concerning this point
better executed and put in practice; as well for careless and heedlesse, and
mindlesse youth, and ignorant aged persons; as for negligent Parents, and
Ministers, for the instruction of the one, and discharge of the other.

Thine in the Lord. I. F.

A very brief manner of Instruction, to the principles of Religion.
Question. WHat means this word, Catechism?


Answer. It is as much as to say, a Christian Instruction.


Q. What is the chief part of a Christian man's duty?


A. To know God.


Q. By what means may we best know God?


A. By his word, and by his works.


Q. By what means, is Gods will best made known unto us?


A. By these two parts of his word, namely, the Law and the Gospel.


Q. What learnest thou by the Law?


A. I learn three things.


Q. Which be they?


A First, I learn my miserable, wretched and woeful estate, and my corrupt and
most dampnable condition by nature.

Secondly, I learn thereby, both what Gods will is I should do, and what I
ought to do. And what Gods will is I should not do, and so, what I ought not
to do.

Thirdly, I am thereby taught, to fly to Christ for my salvation. Because I
see nothing but condemnation in the Law, and the dexterity, and righteousness
thereof. And this is the sum and effect of Gods Law in general.


Q. Show me then the brief sum of Gods Law in special?


A. You mean the commandments of almighty God, that he gave unto Moses in
the mount.


Q. Yea the same, how many be there?


A. There be ten commandments.


Q. If you can, I pray you declare them?


A. Yes that I can, they be the same which God spoke in the xx. Chapter of
Exodus, saying: Hear O Israel, I am the Lord thy God, that brought thee out of
the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage. 1. Thou shall have none other
Gods but me. 2. Thou shall not make to thy self any graven Image, nor the
likeness of any thing that is in heaven above, or in the earth beneath, nor in
the waters under the earth, thou shall not bow down to them nor worship them,
for I the Lord thy God am a gealous God, and visit the sins of the Fathers
upon the children, to the third and sowrth generation of them that hate me:
and show mercy unto thousands, in them that love me and keep my
commandments. 3. Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain,
for the Lord will not hold him guiltless that takes his name in vain. 4.
Remember thou keep holy the Sabbath day: six days shall thou labor and do
all that thou have to do, but the seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy
God, in it thou shall do no manner of work, thou and thy son, and thy
daughter, thy man servant, and thy maid servant: thy thy cattaile, and the
stranger that is within thy gates. For in six days the Lord made heaven and
earth, the sea and all that in them is, and rested the seventh day, wherefore
the Lord blessed the seventh day and hallowed it. 5. Honor thy Father and thy
Mother, that thy days may be long in the land, which the Lord thy God gives
thee. 6. Thou shall do no murder. 7. Thou shall not commit adultery. 8. Thou
shall not steal. 9. Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor.
10. Thou shall not covet thy neighbors house, thou shall not covet thy
neighbors wife, nor his servant, nor his maid, nor his ox, nor his ass, nor
any thing that is his.



Q. How many Tables be there in these ten commandments?


A. There be two Tables.


Q. How many commandments are there in the first Table?


A. There be four.


Q. How many in the second Table?


A. There be six.


Q. How many of these are commanded to be done, and how many are forbidden not
to be done?


A. There be two commandments to be done: and eight forbidden to be done.


Q. Which be they that be commanded to be done, and which not to be done?


A. The 4. and 5. commanded to be done, The 1 2. 3 of the first Table, And the
6.7. 8.9.10. of the second Table not to be done.


Q. Rehearse them?


A. 1. The sowrth and last commandment of the first Table, is commanded to
be done, namely: Remember thou keep holy the Sabbath day, etc.

2. So is the fifth commandment, being the first of the second Table, namely:
Honor thy father and thy Mother, etc.

3. All the rest are forbidden, and are discerned by these notes or tytles. As

4. Thou shall 1. Have none As in the 2. Not As in the 3. Do no As in the
First Table, three forbidden.
thou shall 1. Have none other Gods, etc. thou shall 2. Not make to thy self any
graven Image, etc. thou shall 3. Not take the name of ye Lord, etc.
In the second Table, five forbidden.
4. 6. Do no murder. 5. 7. Commit no adultery. 6. 8. Steal not. 7. 9. Bear
no false witness, etc. 8. 10. Court not thy neighbors house, nor his wife,
etc.



Q. So thou see how few God co^maunds to do?


A. Yea, and yet we do them not. And how many forbidden, etc. and yet we do
them.


Q But what learnest thou by this?


A. I learn and see hereby, two special things to be remembered. 1. First Gods
fatherly care, love and goodness toward us, in both warning us, and
teaching of us: Both what he would have done, and what he would not have done.
What we should do, and what we should not do. 2. Secondly again, I see first
how frail and untoward we are, either to do that he commands, or to
forbear that he forbids: such is our corrupt and sinful state and naughty
nature, and evil inclined disposition.



Q. Then thou have profited something hereby.


A. Yea, I thank God I know and have learned, both how graciously and
mercifully God has dealt with us in this, and all other his holy Scriptures.
And how far we are from doing his holy will, and how prone, ready, and
foreward we are to do the contrary: even our own will and heart lusts and
delights. And yet by this means I hope hereafter by Gods grace, to be put in
mind and remembrance to have more care to do Gods will, and less delight in
mine own will, then ever I had before.


Q. God grant it to thee and us all, to have such grace for Christ's sake.


A. Amen.


Q. Seeing we be in such a dangerous state of dampnation, what means have we
to obtain Gods mercy and pardon for our sins?


A. Ouely by faith in Christ Jesus.


Q. And nothing else but faith?


A. No, no other thing but faith in Christ, joined with true repentance and
Christian love and charity. And then folowes a zealous mind to the truth, ane a
hearty and an unfeigned purpose to amend, whatsoever is amiss before God and
man, etc.


Q. Rehearse the sum and effect of that faith, perticularly and distinctly.


A. 1. I believe in God ye Father almighty, maker of heaven and earth.

2. And in Jesus Christ his only son our Lord, which was conceived by the
holy Ghost, borne of the Uirgin Marie, suffered under Pontius Pilate, was
crucified dead and buried.

3. He descended into hell.

4. The third day he rose again from the dead.

5. He ascended into heaven, and sits on the right hand of God ye Father
almighty.

6. From thence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead.

7. I believe in the holy Ghost.

8. The holy Catholic Church.

9. The Communion of Saints.

10. The forgiveness of sins.

11. The resurrection of the body.

12. And the life everlasting.


Q. How many Articles be there?


A. Twelve.


Q. How many parts is the Creed to be divided into?


A. Into three in general. 1. As to God the Father and our creation, by him.
2. To God the son, and our redemption in him. 3. To God the holy Ghost, and
our sanctification and regeneration and new birth in him.



Q. Is there any more divisions used?


A. Yea, by some two other.


Q. Which be they?


A. 1. One of the Cotholique Church, and the Communion of Saints.

2. The other of these three Articles, specially to be noted, as the sum,
comfort, and effect of all our faith, etc.

And they be 1 The forgiveness of sins, 2 The resurrection of ye body. 3 And
the life everlasting.



Q. Are these the chief parts of our Creed or Articles of our Faith, both
general, special and particular?


A. Yea, this is the sum of our faith in the blessed Trinity, our creation,
redemption, and sanctification, and regeneration, and new birth wrought by Gods
spirit, in the hearts of every faithful creature, of the true Church of
Christ.


Q. How is this Faith obtained, increased, and established?


A. By three special means. 1. By our humble and hearty Prayer to God. 2. By
hearing of the word, and receiving of the Sacraments. 3. By the working of Gods
holy spirit in our hearts, in hearing of the same word, and receiving of the
same Sacraments, etc.



Q. What is the cheifest prayer, to obtain all things at Gods hand by?


A. The same which Christ has taught us, saying: when you pray, pray on this
manner, etc. Luke II.

O Our Father which art in Heaven.

1. Hallowed be thy name.

2. Thy kingdom come.

3. Thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven.

4. Give us this day our daily bread. etc.

5. And forgive us our trespasses as we forgive. etc.

6. And lead us not into temptation.

But deliver us from evil. etc.


Q. How many parts are contained in the prayer.


A. There be three parts in general. 1. The preface. 2. Six peticion. 3. The
conclusion.


But two parts special, etc. 1. The preface is, Our Father which art in
heaven. 2. The six peticions, be divided into two parts in special.


The first contains three peticions.

The second contains other three peticions.

The 1. co^taining ye glory of God.

The 2 co^taining ye necessity of me^.

The first three be, 1. Hallowed be thy name. 2. Thy kingdom come. 3. Thy will
be done in earth, as it is in heaven.


This consernes the glory of God.

The other three, 1. 4. Give us this day our daily bread. 2. 5. And forgive us
our trespasses, as we forgive them that, etc. 3. 6. And lead us not into
temptation, etc.


These concerns the necessity of men.


Q. Then I perceive this beginning, Our Father which art in heaven: is but a
preface or an entrance into the prayer, or a preparing Gods ear and our
hearts thereunto, And so the end but a conclusion, yielding all power and
glory to God?


A. You say very truly.


Q. I see also, that you understand both, what thou speak, and also what
thou prayest for?


A. Yea, that I do I thank God, and I give you thanks also, for your
freendly and Christian endeavor. And the Lord give me grace to use this prayer
and all other, a right. And so hartelie, reverently, faithfully, and
unfeignedly, as may be to Gods glory and my comfort.


Q. Amen. The Lord grant it to all men etc.


FINIS.

