A Sermon preached at the Christening of a certain Jew, at London, by John
Fox. Containing an exposition of the.xi. Chapter of S. Paul to the Romans.

Translated out of Latin into English by James Bell.

Imprinted at London by Christopher Barker, Printer to the Queens Majesty, at
the sign of the Tygres head in Pater Noster Row.

ANNO. 1578.

The Contents of this present book.
Wherein be discoursed and discussed the principal grounds and foundations of
our Christian faith, of the true and sincere church, of Christ our Messiah, of
the infinite glori^ and majesty of his kingdom, with a refutation of the
obstinate Jews, and lastly touching the final conversion of the same.

Also to the later end of this Sermon is joined the confession of Nathaniel
this baptized Jew, written first by him self in the Spanish tongue, and
now translated into English for the more benefit of the godly Reader.

To the Right honorable Sir Francis Walsingham Knight, principal Secretary to
her Majesty, and one of her highness most honorable prime council, Io. Fox
wishes all felicity in our Savior Jesus Christ.
PResuming not so much upon mine own head, as advised, or rather enfo^ced by
request, counsel, and persu^sion of one la^e^^^ most ^^unden servant to your
honor (whose^ name for diverse respects I conceal) a^^ therefore bold to
^duenture the offer of this small work to your honorable goodness: humbly
beseeching the same, not only to accept it well in worth, but also, if any such
thing occur in this m^ simple travail which may pleasure or profite^^on, to
^eelde all thanks to the Lord: if otherwise, to let the fault only rest upon
me. Albeit notwithstanding other causes also were not wanting, to admonish me
of my dutiful office in this behalf. First your manifold and grateful
benefits upon me bestowed: which as of your part well may beseem your
honorable benignity, so of my part very little have been deserved.

Furthermore, remembering with my self, at what time this sermon was first
preached, and you so earnestly required the sand matter again to be repeated
in your chamber being sick: certes this zealous desire of your so Christian
affection, requi^eth no less of duty, then the whole tractation hereof,
whatsoever it be, being now published in print, and with some more diligence
reuised, to be wholly entitled to your name.

Over and besides, an other cause here also falls in, of my part not to be
vnreme^bred. For if your bountiful and courteous beneficence never of me
provoked, less deserved, so liberally has refreshed my poo^e weak health,
with the wholesome fruit of your French grape, little could I do, and unkind were
I, if I would not remember you again with some part of recompense, in
requiting the wholesome fruit of your plentiful vineyard, with some branche of
this gladsome and Evangelical Olive tree: not as in equality of sufficient
recompense to satis^^e your de^ertes: but as testif^ing to you a mind not
ungrateful, nor unmindful, what he would do, if greater ability would serve.

To your good honor, both yours, and to the right worship^^l Lady your wi^e,
to the young little plants of your domestical Olive sitting about your table,
and to your good household I wish the grace of Christ long to keep y^u, his
mercy to nou^ish you, his counsel to direct you, his peace to comfort you,
his gifts to e^cre^se you, to the profit both of the Church and common wealth.
Land. A^^o. 1578.

Yours in Christ Jesus, John Fox.

The Preface to the Christian Reader, containing godly exhortation.
FOrasmuch as the sum, and absolute perfection of al our righteousness,
consists in the only faith and knowledge of Jesus Christ, without whom al
humane power, and puyssaunce is ineffectual: without whom, no provident
policy preuayleth: ne yet any force, or actiuitie of natural operation can
bring any thing to pass: no honorable ornament of virtue, no excellency of
exquisite learning, is auaylable: according to the testimony of the Lord
himself, Without me ye can do nothing: what ought we^ seely mortal wretches
regard more entierly, then that by due proceeding; in daily renewed increases
of this same faith, we not only cleave fast to this Jesus Christ, the assured
and undoubted chiefetaine and Prince of life? And co^ueying him into the very
intrailes of our souls, we thoroughly possess him, as fast enclosed in a
certain holy Oratorie: but also endeavor by all means possibly, to be most
nearly joined unto him, to be incorporate wholly in him, and made members of
his own body? For performance whereof behooves us, above all other, to be
guyded by his conduct and coun^el chiefly. Search the Scriptures (says he)
for they bear witness of me. Which saying S. Peter the Apostle does verify,
aduertizing us of the same faith: And we have (says he) a more s^re word of
the Prophets, whereunto whiles ye take heed, as unto a light that shines in
a dark place, ye do well, until the dawne of the day appear^, and the day
star arise in your hearts. Yea, the Lord him self in an other place sends
us back to the scholing of the Law and the Prophets, as unto infallible
precepts, and rules of pure and true doctrine. And albeit I may not deny that
testimony of S. Paul to be most true, where he says, That faith is a gift of
God, yssuing from his free mercy and bounty: yet does he not: thereby
meanewhyles exclude other lawful and ordinary means, taught for the better
attainement thereof. As where he says, Faith comes by hearing, and hearing
by the word of God. So that their error is so much the more blameworthy, Fides
implicita.
who contented with that intricate, and confused faith (as they term it) be
of opinion, that to the rude and unlettered people, suffices enough to believe
those things only, that all other men do believe. But this common faith seemed
not sufficient to the ancient fathers, in that purer age of the primitive and
Apostolic Church: who though mistrusted not the lessons and instructions of
the Apostles, yet were they also in this respect adjudged prayseworthy, because
they did confer the doctrine, which they received of the Apostles, with the
books of the Law, and the prophets: which observation of the elders was of no
small importance, to procure credit to the establishment of faith. But the
state of Christianity is now come (I know not to what pass) that this
Christian faith, which behooved to be most deeply engraven in the hearts of
every of us, is either not so well garnyshed in many of us, as it ought to be:
in others very faint and feeble: and in some others skarse any resemblaunce at
all appearing, which slender portion and sparkle of faith, be it never so
small, as is not altogether to be rejected, so neither is this wonderful
sluggishnes, and retcheles security of the men in our age, in any respect
tolerable: of whom some ouergreedily busied in worldly affairs, some feeding
their fancies upon fond delights, do either make no estimate at al, of that
inestimable Jewel of faith, which only enricheth to the inheritance of
eternal life, or at the least, are not so diligent searchers of the same, as
they ought to be. To clime unto honor, what attemptes and toil do some
undertake? how filthily do others turmoyle them selves, in raking riches
together? how dayntily some men besmeare them selves in perfumes, and
pleasures? who because they know, they can not live here for ever, and do
determine to live godly never, yield them selves wholly to live delicately and
wantonly. To be advanced in Court, to aspire to prelacie and ecclesiastical
dignity, and to be a magistrate over the multitude, who does not account it
matter most honorable? who adiudgeth not that man to be most fortunate, that by
hook or crook has cratcht wonderful possessions together? who thinks not
that man to be most happy, that lives most pleasurably? And what shall I say of
those arts and sciences, which procure gaineful lucre, and estimation of the
world? wherein whiles we sweat and swinke all our lives long, scarce one
minute can be spared, no thought employed to the things which lead unto
Christ. I speak not of them, who seem to savor of no sap of religion, nor
are endued with one drop of faith: who resembling rather Diagoristes and
Protagoristes, then Christians, are so utterly fallen from Christianisme, to
Atheism, that, measuring this life with the present pleasures thereof, they
do believe nothing holy, good, or worthy to be embraced, but those plausible
works and objects of nature, wherewith our eyes and senses are delyghted most.
There is also an other crewe and company, not much unlike to these other, who
perceiving Christian religion assaulted, rackt, and rent in sonder (as they
say) with sects, schisms and contrarieties of opinions, do persuade them
selves that religion to be best, that will acquaint it self with no religion
at all.

What shall I say of them, whereof the number is exceeding great, who with full
mouth do profess true religion it self, and will not deny, but that they do
believe in Jesus Christ: but being demanded, wherefore they do believe in him:
what the will of God the father in Christ is: what Grace is: what and how great
promises are laid up in stoare for us in Christ: how glorious the Majesty
and royalty of Christ's kingdom is: how inestimable the glory of his riches
be: what is the breadth, the length, the depth and the heyght thereof: how
wonderful the love of his knowledge is: how great the force and power of
faith is: and upon what principal pillars and foundations it is builded, they
can render scarce any reason at all. For as much therefore as the infallible
certeintie, and true understanding of these things can be attained unto
rightly, from no where else, then from the holy closets of sacred Scriptures: it
shall be very requisite and needful, that every of us employ al our senses and
powers of the mind, continually exercised in the same. For howsoever Christian
divinity is tossed, and turmoyled to and fro, with innumerable intricate
entangled and wandering questions, yet remains faith one self same
nevertheless both pure and simple: and as it is but one, so ought all men
necessarily be endued therewith wholly^ That is to say, that we all know
Christ, that we repose all our ankerholde of affiaunce in Christ, and that we
imprint Christ in the bowels of our soul, as we are commanded by the mouth
of God the father, seeing there is no name besides this name given under
heaven, in whom the treasure and hope of man's felicity may safely shroude it
self. Let Princes therefore learn to know this Christ: Let subjects attend
upon him: let ancient fathers take hold of him: Let young men embrace him: Let
the rich enlarge their treasury with this precious Jewel: and let the poor
seek their relief to be refreshed by him: who in deed ca^ else where by no
means be found more easily, then in the very sacred wellspringes of the
prophetical Scriptures: notwithstanding who so is desirous to procure this
joyful Jewel, must first of necessity make earnest and diligent search
therefore. For this precious pearl is not allotted to any, but unto them, that
will search for it: nor does this heavenly Manna feed any, but the hungry.
The soul must be very thirsty, that must taste of this liquour that gusheth
from out the co^duyte pipes of eternal life. This gate is not opened to the
lazy and slothful droane, but unto him that will knock. Knock (says he) and
it shall be opened unto you. Seek, and ye shall find. All persons without
exception are granted free access to the treasury of this kingdom: It is
laid open for all estates, but all catch it not, except such as scratche and
offer force for it: for what (I beseech you) is more forcible then faith? what
more mighty, if it be true faith, if it be lively faith, yea if it be true
Christian faith? as that which displaying banner under his captain Christ,
does fight in heaven, and combat in the air, against the princes and powers
of the air, against spiritual wickednesses from above: does keep continual
wars against infinite hazards in the earth, and in hell against Beelzebub,
against the furies and gates of the hells, yea against death fights for
eternal life, against the Law for righteousness, and against horror of
conscience for freedom and peace.

Therefore considering this faith is of such power and efficacy, yea so
necessary to be frequented in all the actions of man's life: what remains
from henceforth, but that all and every of us, cry out unto the same Christ,
and beseech him to impart unto us, the true knowledge and understanding of him
self, to enlighten the glimmering sight of our dazeled fleshly eyes, with the
most bright and orient beams of this gladsome says, and that he will vouchsafe
at length, to bring that to pass in us, that he used sometimes with his
Apostles, when as he discovered unto them upon the way, as they trauayled, the
holy Scriptures? For so we read, And he, began at Moses, and at all the
Prophets, and interpreted unto them in all the scriptures, the things which
were written of him. Luke.24.
And immediately after, Then opened he their understanding, that they might
know the Scriptures, and said unto them, Thus it is written. Whereby appears
plainly, the duty and office that is required in the expositours of the holy
Scriptures: To wit, that omitting all superfluous circumlocutions, and
unprofitable quiddities of questions, they instruct the people in those
principles, and rules of the Scriptures chiefly, which avail most to the
nourishment and increase of faith. In which kind of argument, forasmuch as in
this sermon behooved me to frame my simple skill, according to the estate of the
present matter, and opportunity of time, and that it seemed good to my
friends, to have this little treatise published in print, to the view of the
common people, as not altogether unworthy the reading: I have yielded to their
request, that it might be imprinted: And although my meaning was at the first,
to have the same directed to the behoof of the Jews chiefly, yet (I trust) it
vvil not be altogether unprofitable to the Christian readers. First, because it
may so be, yea I fear me, may also justly be feared, lest amongst the number
of the^, which say that they believe in Christ, some happily vvil be found, in
whose lips only this faith rolleth at large, and has not yet pierced any
deeper, nor taken root in their hearts, nor are as yet so sufficiently
learned, as (if matter come to trial and proof) they can render a true and
undoubted reason of this their faith. Moreover, admit that a man stand
assured and steadfast in the certeintie of his faith, yet what faith is there
so sure, constant and vnuanqui^^able, but may be made more stable and perfect?
For if S. Paul did see sometime as in a dark ryddle: if the Apostles
(notvvithstanding so many miracles wrought in their sight) needed yet the
interpretation of Scriptures: if those which received the word by the
preaching of Paul, Act.17.
did nevertheless co^ferre his doctrine with the Scriptures, to see, whether
they agreed together^ as is recorded in the Acts of the Apostles: what
should let us to do the like? that by this means, we also might increase
daily, from faith to faith. Finally for as much as our ancient and deadly
enemy does not more cruelly malign, nor more outragiously assail any one
thing, so much, as this our faith in Christ: surely I judge this above all
other most requisite, that every of us have especial regard, to be (as much as
is possible) armed and guarded with this target of faith, that we may
courageously encounter all attempts and assaults of the devil: whereunto
how auaylable this little Sermon will be, I know not: that let Christ our
Lord him self see unto, and give his merciful aid therein. I for my slender
capacity, have performed what I was able, and as much as the Lord granted
me: whom I most heartily beseech, to bless and increase thy holy studies
(godly Reader) and to direct the same to the honor and glory of his name. Amen.

A Sermon of the true and gladsome Olive tree, mentioned in the Epistle of
Saint Paul to the Romans, chap. xi. preached at London by a faithful
Minister of God, John Fox, at the christening of a certain Jew, translated
out of Latin into English.
FIrst, as duty requires, I do yield most humble thanks to our Lord and
Savior Christ Jesus, whom it has pleased of his unsearchable mercy and
bountiful love toward us, to minister so notable an occasion of our
assembly, this present day, and place: and so fruitful an argument for me to
empart unto you all. Secondly, I do no less heartily thank, then woorthily
commend in the Lord, all you that are present, who, according to your
accustomed manner, are so willingly and joyfully gathered together, enduced
hereunto, not through any vain delight of fond novelty, but of a seryons,
and studious zeal of godliness, not as gazers of frivolous fantastical
fables, but as willing witnesses of this great and inestimable benefit of
almighty God. Lastly, I do from the bottom of my heart rejoice in the behalf
of this person, for whose cause we are as now met here together, who being
transported from out the uttermost parts of Barbary into England, and
conversant amongst us, by the space of six whole years, renouncing now at
the last the natural contumacie of his native country, does with so earnest
bent affection of voluntary will, chearefully desire to become a member of Jesus
Christ, and to be made partaker of his holy congregation through faith, and
Baptism. And withal I most humbly beseech Almighty God, that he will not
only vouchsafe his gracious increase to this glorious work begun with this
Israelite stranger, but also to allure the whole remnant of the circumcised
Race, by this his example, to be desirous of the same communion: So that at the
length, all nations, as well Jews, as Gentiles, embracing the faith, and
Sacraments of Christ Jesus, acknowledging one Shephearde, united together in
one sheepefold, may with one voice, one soul, and one general agreement,
glo^ifie the only begotten son our savior Jesus Christ, and be glorified
again of him. And that it may please him of his singular clemency to grant
the same, as also to bless these our days with quiet calm, and joyful
tranquillity, which we do now enjoy under the government of our most
gracious Sovereign, and her most honorable Magistrates, I beseech you of your
charity, to join with me in heart and mind unto the eternal God father of
us all, with the same prayer which his only begotten son taught us in the
Gospel.

The Prayer, Our father. etc.
Forsamuch as in the administration of the Sacraments of the Church, I do well
perceive that both by the word of God, and by an ancient and solemn custom
amongst many, it has been an use to have somewhat, for the better instruction
of their auditories, read and expounded out of the books of holy scripture:
and deliberating likewise with my self, what course I might best keep at this
present, as well to serve the offered opportunity, as also to satisfy the
public commodity of you al chiefly: I could not determine upon any one text
of ye whole scripture to be opened unto you, more profitable for your learning,
more effectual for exhortation, more applyable to our age, and more agreeable
for this present occasion, then the sentence of S. Paul the Apostle, not very
long, but of wonderful force, taken out of the xi. chapter of his Epistle
written to the Romans. And to the end you may receive the same to your
greater comfort, it behooves you to yield earnest and heedefull attention, not
with your bodily ears only, but with the ears of your mind also, to these
things which I shall utter unto you. Hearken ye therefore to the words of the
Apostle even as him self has spoken them.

To the Romans the 11. chapter.
The theme out of the xi. to the Romans.
I speak unto you Gentiles in as much as I am the Apostle of the Gentiles, I
will magnify mine office, if by any meanes^ may provoke them which be my
flesh, and may save some of them, for if the casting away of them be the
receiving of the world, what shall the receiving of them be, but life from the
dead? For if the first fruits be holy, the whole mass is holy also: And if the
Root be holy, the branches will be holy also: And if some of the branches
be broken of, and thou being a wild Olive tree, wast graffed in amongst them,
and made partaker of the Root and fatness of the true and natural Olive
tree, boaste not thy self against the branches, for if thou do boaste, thou
bear not the root, but the root bears thee. Thou will say then, The
branches are broken of, that I may be engraffed in. Thou say well: for
unbelief sake they were broken of: and thou stoodest steadfast in faith. Be not
high minded therefore, but fear, for if God spared not the natural branches:
Take heed lest it come to pass, that he spare not thee. Behold the kindness
and rigor of God: upon them which fell, rigor: but kindness toward thee, if
thou persevere in kindness: Or else thou shall be hewn of, and they, if they
continue not still in unbelief, shall be engraffed in again. For God is of
power to graffe the^ in again. For if thou were cut out of a natural wild
Olive tree, and contrary to nature were engraffed into the true Olive tree, how
much rather shall the branches be graffed in again into their own Olive
tree? For I would not have you ignorant (brethren) of this mystery, lest you
should wax proud in your own conceytes, that blindness is partly happened
unto Israel, until the fulness of the Gentiles be accomplished, and so all
Israel shall be saved, as it is written, There shall come out of Sion one that
shall deliver, and shall take away ungodliness from Jacob. etc.

The summarie effect of Paul's discourse c^mpreh^nded in few words.
Dearly beloved, you have heard what the Apostle of the Gentiles does speak
unto us Gentiles, you have heard his discourse of the Jews, of their
unbelief, and of their reiection: you have heard the doctrine, and comparison
of S. Paul, touching the true Olive tree, and the wild Olive tree: touching
the natural branches, and the graftes: touching faith, and infidelity:
touching the mercy of God, and the severity of his justice: touching the
modesty, and constancy of the faithful: touching the fulness of the Gentiles:
finally, touching the last calling home and reclayming of the Jews. This is a
very large theme as ye see, and full of plentiful matter, which for the
difficulty, as it seems to surmount my weakness to reach unto, so requires
your more careful attention, that ye may duly conceive the same: in the
debating whereof it behooves me neither to say to little, neither is there any
vttera^ce of man else able, for ye largenes of the matter exceeding al
possibility, to speak sufficiently. Notwithstanding, sithence I have presumed
to enter upon this enterprise being of it self of wonderful importance, albeit
I may seem to folter and faint, as oppressed with the heavy burden thereof,
yet will I not retire, but will proceed with affiaunce as well as I may,
resting my self wholly upon the grace of Christ: and will (by your patience)
speak, though not so much, as the cause requires, yet as much as the goodness
of God will permit at this present.

The whole action of the sermon of Paul is divided into two special parts:
whereof the one concerns the Jews: the other apperteineth properly to us
Gentiles. In the behalf of the Jews, he lamenteth their fall, reproves their
unbelief, gives them unto us for an example to behold the severe rigor of
Gods justice, discovers the cause of gods wrath: and being careful for their
safety, does provoke them to an holy emulation: Finally, prophesying as it
were of their last reconcilement, does encourage the seely outcasts with hope
of recovery of Gods mercy again. As concerning the Gentiles, he commends
their faith: aduanceth the inestimable goodness of God toward them: calls
them back to remembrance of their former misery and despeired estate:
rejoices with them for their present felicity: entirely requesteth, and
earnestly exhorts them, that they swell not with pride^ disswadeth from
disdayneful triumphing upon forlorn abiects to modesty of mind: mitigateth
the hautie arrogancy of their hearts, with a most wholesome medicine: Finally,
setting down a perfect pattern of the Jews calamity, in manner of a
president, holds them back in a couenable fear: discloseth the wonderful
power, that almighty God uses in disposing and translating his benefits,
that by these means he may quallifie the insolency of the Gentiles, and so
retain them mean whiles within the limits of modest sobriety, until the
fulness of time being of all parts accomplished: each nation as well Jews as
Gentiles, through the most blessed operation of grace, may be united and
gathered together at the length into one society and partaking of one
congregation. And this much concerning the two parts of Paul's sermon, as I
told yon before.

The first is^ues of Gods promise.
The manner and kind of his instruction here, wherein he resembles the Church
of God to an Olive tree, is metaphorical, and prophetical. Which Olive tree
consists of three parts: The Olive tree consists of three members: the
root, the stock, and the branches.
Of the root, of the stock, and of the branches. Under the title of the
Root, he does note Abraham, and other holy Patriarchs unto us, because in
them appeared the first buddes and blossoms of Gods promise. By the stock or
body of the tree, he represents unto us the Church scattered upon the face of
the earth, a congregation gathered together, out of the whole number of the
faithful, which at the first, budding in small issues from out that holy root,
and so by little and little, increasing in strength, and obteining a
proportionable stature^ does at the length through the plentiful fatnes of
the bountiful root, with outstretched compass, spread abroad it self into
most beautiful branches and bows. By which plain demonstration, we have an
apparent view painted out, as it were, both of the old synagogue of the Jews,
and the new Church of the Gentiles. And because no man shall think that this
Olive tree is sprung up at al adventures, or planted by man's industry: he
calls it by the name of an holy issue, out of a holy Root. There is no man
made husbandman or woodward of this Olive t^ee, but almighty God him self
alone: who with all possible diligence, attends to the addressing, and
nourishing thereof, and will continually preserve the same. Howsoever this
Olive tree does alter the beauty of his blossoms, or change the hew of his
leaves, yet endures it still unremovable, nor is at any time ^ut clean away.
In like manner fares it with the Church of God: The Church how it stands and
grows.
which being wholly established upon the eternal foundation of Gods most sacred
promise, stands as it were in a certain eternity unvanquishable, and so
shall continue permanent beyond all ages, though the members and branches
thereof, remain not always in one estate, and although it happen many times,
that the first issues become the last, and contrariwise, the last made first:
the natural buddes yield place to the savage slippes, the proper and old
grown branches are cut of, and new taken in: and so by wonderful enterchange,
some grow, some stand at a stay, some increase, and some starve quite away,
as we see now and then come to pass in husbandry and gardening, whereas
plants and trees are many times pruned of unfruitful sproutes, sometimes
dispoyled altogether of bows, and the stoc^^ newly engraffed, to the end the
trees may become more fruitful. After the same manner that heavenly gardener,
woodward, or plant setter does many times prune this little Olive tree of his
Church, but never plucketh it up by the roots (as Augustine does witness)
cutting of eftsoons wyndshaken bows and starued branches, Augustine. putat,
non amputat.
that new plants may prosper the better. So that according to the saying of
the same Augustine, many ravening wolves possess the Church within, whiles
many sheep in the mean space stand without the doors. Which thing can be
verified by no one example more aptly, then by this comparison of the Jews and
Gentiles. Of whom let us hear what the Apostle speaks.

I speak (says he) unto you Gentiles, in as much as I am an Apostle of the
Gentiles, I will magnify mine office, etc. Forasmuch as in debating of any
matter in question whatsoever, two things are chiefly to be noted, To wit,
The person that speaks, and the matter that is spoken of: we will by Gods
assistance prosecute them both at this present. Let us first therefore consider
the person of him that speaks: then, as order of teaching requires, the
cause whereof he disputes. As to^ching the cause here debated, as no
reasonable man can make any just quarrel to doubt upon, so ought not the famous
and welknowen authority of the person be defrauded of any his due estimation:
The authority of the person that speaks.
for what authority can be of more force to purchase credit, or to procure
advancement to the function, then the name of an Apostle? And amongst the
Apostles them selves also, what one ought to be more entire, and of more
credit amongst the Gentiles, then the Apostle Paul? Who if being sent by man's
ordinance had come unto us, ought yet to be friendly enterteined for his
courtesy, so long as he teaches the sincere truth. I will magni^ie mine
office. Romans 11.
But whereas now he is by an especial calling peculiarly assigned, not from
men, nor by men, but by Christ Jesus him self, an Apostle to instruct us
Gentiles: how much more behooves us Gentiles his scholars, to attend our own
proper scholemaster and peculiar Apostle, in as much as he was especially
called and chosen for this only purpose, as he witnesses of him self, that we
should with all faithful chearefulnes of mind embrace his doctrine?
Wherefore proceed on in Gods name, my dear beloved brethren: be not ashamed
of your own scholemaster, s^thence himself shameth so little to acknowledge us
his scholars, as that accompting the same his greatest glory, therein aduanceth
his office so much the more, because he has obtained this title to be called
an Apostle of the Gentiles: and therefore says, that he magnifieth his
ministry. Which title notwithstanding he boasts not of upon any
vaineglorious ostentation, but compelled hereunto through necessity of
circumstances only to magnify his function. Neither is this any strange or new
kind of doctrine: for ye necessary order of teaching so requires oftentimes,
for the more credit of the doctrine that is taught, to extol and advance
as well the office of the teacher, as also the authority of the office: Galat. 5.
Even as in an other Epistle written to the Galathians we read, how he was
enforced to maintain his countenance against his adversaries with this only
Target and cognizance of his Apostleship. Behold (says he) I Paul speak unto
you, If you be circumcised, Christ does profit you nothing at al. Neither
does the Apostle differ much in this place, from that figurative phrase of
speech: to the end that having weighty matters ^o debate with us Gentiles, he
might win so much the more estimation thereby to beautify the authority of
his function. I speak (says he) unto you Gentiles, I will magnify mine
office, etc.

You have heard now of the person of the teacher, and of his lawful
authority: It follows to make manifest unto you the substantial and
material part of all whatsoever is here debated in this whole xi. chapter. An
exposition of the matters here treated upon.
And the same may be divided into three common places or parts chiefly.

The first part concerning the Jews and Gentiles.
The first whereof does concern the treaty of the casting away of the Jews,
and r^ceyuing of the Gentiles. In the first member whereof, which touches the
Jews, the severe Justice of God is noted unto us: in that other, that has
relation to the Gentiles, the unspeakable mercy and goodness of God is
disclosed unto us.

The second part concerning the reiection of the one, and receiving of the
other.
In the second part, the cause why they were rejected, and those other
admitted, is set down unto us.

In the third place the Apostle does foreshew, and by way of mystery, The
third part touchi^g the reco^cilement of the Jews in the end.
as it were, prophecy of the reconcilement of the Jews that should ensue,
and the full accomplishment of the Gentiles.

As concerning the reconcilement of the Jews, we will discourse upon, in fit
place for the same hereafter. In the mean space, touching that part that
apperteineth to the cas^ing away of the Jewish nation, as many things are
contained therein worthy not to be negligently ouerpassed, so this one caution
ought diligently to be marked: That no such thought enter into any our minds,
as though the Jews are so altogether forsaken of god, and dispoyled of ghostly
consolation, as that no sparkle of mercy is reserved in store for them to hope
upon: Neither that the whole stock of that Nation is so altogether supplanted,
that no remnant of all the root thereof, has any drop of moisture laid up
for them in the fountain of Gods free election. For both those opinions are
utterly refuted by the Apostle: the one in the beginning of the Chapter: that
other in the end thereof, as appears by ye very entrey of ye same chapter.

I say then: has God cast away his people? To the Romans 11. chapter.
God forbid, for I am also an Israelite, of the seed of Abraham, of the tribe
of Benjamin. God has not forsaken his people, whom he has foreknowen^ etc.
as though he would say, Albeit God has estranged t^^ greater part of his
people from himself, yet has he not so utterly extinguished the whole nation,
as though he had reserved to himself no couenable number of all the remnant of
that seed, like as we read what happened to Elias, who lamenting that he
alone was left, of all the true worshippers of God, was answered, that there
remained yet seven thousand men, that had not bowed the knee to the Idol Baal.

Reiection of the Jews.
And therefore concerning the multitude of them that fell away, as many things
ar^ worthy to be noted (as I said before) in the reiection of them: so this
one thing chiefly amongst ye rest, ought heedefully to be marked, according as
the Apostle him self here notes: To wit, that this their blindness happened
not unto them by hap hazard, by chance, and unawares, as though God by his
divine providence did not foresee the same before hand, and ordeyne the whole
course of this action before, by the unchangeable decree of his
incomprehensible wisdom: s^ otherwise, how could the Lord him self (...)
far distaunce of time prophecy before (...) the mouths of the Prophet
Esaie, and his se^^ant David, Esaias.6. Psalm 68.
That their eyes should be blinded, lest they should see: their backs should
be made crooked, lest they should yield: their ears should be stopped, lest
they should hear: if he had not foreseen the same at the first^ or how
could he foresee it, unless he had likewise decreed it: But now forasmuch as
God and nature do bring nothing to pass unadvisedly, by how much the more
grievously ye Jews were ouercharged with the severe rigor of Gods Justice (for
what could be more heavy, then to be razed out of the book of life?) so much
the more heinous must the canker be, that provoked this so sharp and bitter
corryzyue: which cankred contagion that wrought their perdition, is most
expressly declared by these wo^rdes of S. Paul, for their unbelief (says
he:) whereby all men may easily conjecture, how horrible an infectio^ this
fretting fistula, unbelief, is adjudged in the sight of God.

But first we must open unto you, the nature an^ substance of this unbelief.
Unbelief is a thing mearely opposite and adversary to belief: by which
contraposition you may easily perceive the right nature or definition of
unbelief. For if faith or belief be a certain infallible knowledge of Ies.
Christ the Son of God ensealed in our hearte^, What Faith is.
whereby we do embrace him as given (...) to us from God the Father, for us to
r^pose our whole affyaunce in the same, it is evident then by the same reason,
in wh^^ sort we ought to judge of unbelief. (...) whosoever has ascribed the
confidence of his salvation, and free remyssion of his sins to any other
person then unto Jesus Christ, or to any other creature the^ to the faith which
ought to be in Christ I^^su: the same may well be called an vnb^^lieuing
person. Unbelief, and the manifold difference of the same.
Moreover, as there be m^^nie degrees amongst the faithful: and lik^ as the
faith of some persons is more abun^daunt and plentyfull, in some others scarce
rype^ and less fruitful, in many skarse any blossom or issue at all
appearing: s^ is the manifold variety of vnbeliefe^ like^wise expressed in
the Scriptures, after ma^^^ie and sundry sorts. For there is a certain
unbelief, under the which, as under certain embers some sparkle of faith is
raked up, be it never so small: which is signified in that sentence of
Scripture, where it is said: I do believe Lord, Lord help^ thou my
unbelief. There is an other kind of unbelief, which although be as yet
ouerspread with a certain darkened myste of foggy Ignorance, and is tossed to
and fro, with many wandering clouds and doubtful vapoures, yet because it
peepeth now and then abroad, because it glyttereth and shyneth somewhat, and
endeavors by all means possible to express his o^yent and bright beams, it
seems not to rest in despayred estate. There is yet also an other ki^d of
unbelief, which the Lord does reprove, but forsakes not^ as was that,
whereof mention is ^ade in the Gospel, And he rebuked their unbelief. Thomas
Didymus believed not the Disciples, when they told him that the Lord was
risen again. A great unbelief, but not shaken of yet: There is also (...),
That is, s^al fay^h
and there is (...). No faith.
And it happens often times that the one is named, y^^ and reproched of the
other. The disciples themselves also were sometimes worthily rebuked for their
unbelief, to whom was said, O ye unfaithful and perverse generation. Matthew.
Peter was once yelden over to the v^ry ^^inke of drow^ing for none other
cause, but for his unbelief sake: yet our Lord stretching out his hand
afterward saved him. This was a dangerous unbelief. But that other example,
not of his distrust only, but of his faithless reuolting, was far more
peryll^us, when the same Peter not once or twice only, but three times in one
night, did not only not acknowledge, but also forsware his Lord and master:
yet was he not therefore depryued from his Apostleshippe. And it is not to be
doubted, but that many persons do entrude upon the possession of Christian
Title, which can gloriously vaunte of Christ with their tongues, but deny him
utterly in their deeds, believing nothing less in their hearts steadfastly,
then that whereof they carrye an outward resemblaunce in their talk
co^ragiously. And because this Serpigo rests within those persons, and
crauleth to no further infection of the congregation, they are not therefore
barred from partaking the Sacraments of this Church, which we ^all the visible
Church. And what shall be said of the^, who many times do accuse them selves of
their own unbelief, being valiannt soldiers nevertheless in the camp of
Christian faith: when as on the contrary part, many other do firmly believe
them selves ^^ ^e meare strangers to infidelity, whose faith if it should be
placed in the face of the enemy, will of very cowardice forthwith flee ye field?

And albeit al these examples of unbelief, whereof I have made mention, may
justly be reproved as blame worthy, and void of al color of defense, yet may
they be borne withal after a sort. But this kind of infidelity of al others is
most horrible and execrable, when as men do rushe headlong into such obstinate
resistance, that they will not only not acquaint themselves with the truth,
being laid open before their eyes, but will wittingly shut up their senses from
the beholding thereof, because they will not see it, and will spourne thereat
not in words and profession only, but will cruelly persecute the same also with al
manner of outrage, slaughter and blood, blasphemies and most despiteful
execrations. And this is that unbelief, which being more noisome then any
pestilent botch, may rightly and properly be called the Jewish Infidelity, and
seems after a certain manner their inheritable disease, who are after a
certain sort, from their mothers womb, naturally carried through perverse
frowardnes, into all malicious hatred, and contempt of Christ, and his
Christians. And for this cause especially, I suppose it came to pass, that
whereas God so many hundred years before, had continually pardoned their
wonderful and manifold wickedness and impiety, and after his wonted manner, had
from time to time endured, and winked at their horrible rebel^io^ and
idolatry, he could now no longer forbear their abominable cruelty, committed
against his welbe loved son, whom they traitorously murdered and hanged on
tree, but must needs avenge him upon the whole nation, and root out the
remnant of the whole race altogether. And not without great cause: for how
could it else be, after yt he was once reueyled unto the^, for whose cause only
all that common wealth of the Jews was instituted and erected? What cause
remained then, that the Iewishe synagogue should be of any longer continuance?
or to what purpose might it serve afterward? what? That they might persevere
still in sacrificing ye blood of goats and lambs to the Lord? And where
should this be done? in one family only? But God is not delighted with such
sacrifices, nor dwells he in Temples made by men, but even in the very hearts
of men: he takes no pleasure in external pomp, and outward obser^aunces,
nor gorgeous garnishinges of the body the vouchsafes those worshippers, which
do worship him in Spirit and truth. Joan. 4.
These old motheaten shadows had their time, and not their time only, but
their lawful use also: that so under shadows, types, and figures, they might
prefigure the certeintie, and truth of things to come. But after that he was
once manifested, who was the true holy of holy ones, who was the true and
lively Temple of God, who should displaye unto the world, the true
ryghteous^esse, who should be of power to give everlasting salvation, and
should be Lord and King of all Nations: what needed then any further
shadows? or how could the Lord endure their blyndenesse any longer, when as
after the coming of their Lord, they not only ceased not to abuse the
shadows of the Law, Why the earthly Jerusalem was abolished.
to other purposes then they were ordained for^ but also of a vain and false
persuasion, to the pernicious example of other nations, yea, not without the
manifest peril of the utter overthrow of the whole world, did likewise
teach, that true righteousness ought to be ascribed to the outward
obseruances of those shadows and ceremonies? The which thing the mercy of God
seems not only to have for^seene, but adjudged also by no means toler^ble:
for otherwise it might have come to pass, yt the safety of the Jews might
have been an estoppell to the receiving of the Gentiles, and so have procured
their vncouerable destruction, through false opinion of the doctrine of
righteousness perdie. But sithence there was none other mean or way for the
Gentiles, to have due access to true righteousness, but by cutting down that
carnal thicket of cer^moniall brambles and blooddy briars, hereupon ^ pleased
Almighty God, to dispose^ the enterchaunges and alterations of times, acco^^ing
to his unsearchable counsel: The casting aw^y of the Jews made the
reco^c^lement of the Gentiles.
That so the decay of the Jews might be the riches of the Gentiles: and the
casting away of that froward generation, might be the reconcilement of the
whole world. And thus much by the way of the cutting away of the Israelites i^
which albeit redounded to our inestimable benefit, may not therefore provoke us
to swell, and (...) pu^t up with pride: whereof S. Paul does wisely forewarne
us to be well advised.

And if some of the branches were broken of (says he) and thou being a wild
Olive tree wast engraffed in amongst them, and made partaker of the Root and
fatnes of the true natural Olive tree, boast not thy self against the
branches. etc. First whereas he alludeth and resembles the cutting away of
certain of the Jews to certain branches of the true natural Olive tree, it
appears hereby sufficiently, that this casting away apperteined not to the
whole nation of the Jews, but to some portion of them only: for there
remained as then many of the same kindred, amongst whom was S. Paul him self,
and the other Apostles, besides a very great portion of the remnant of the same
people, which did follow Christ, and did acknowledge him with all their faith.
Again the very first yssues of our Christian faith sprang out of that stock,
from whence we Gentiles must needs confess to have received the very entry and
fundation thereof. It appears therefore that this was not a general reiection,
neither that the whole race was drawn all together into the same gulf of
perdition, but a portion only, and the same Paul terms them to have been
cut of. Cut of.
And wherefore chose he to say that they were cut of, rather then that they did
fall away, namely since it is out of all question that the Jews deca^ proceeded
from their own default, an^ through unbelief? what moved the Apostle then to
use this figurative phrase of speech of cutting of rather, Ex^^ndi, to be cut
of.

Excidere, to (...) from.


saying that they were cut of, and fell not away of their own accord, that
they were plucked away, not that they brake of? forsoothe, because it is not al
one to be cut of, and to fall from. The things that are cut of can not choose
but fall away, but the things that fall away, are not always to be said to be
cut of properly. What is meant therefore by this word cutting of? Forsooth
nothing else, but to make us conceive, that the heavenly and unsearchable hand
of almighty God did overthrow this buylding: even the self same^hande, which
with wonderful workemanshippe does plant, prune, bind up, underprop,
adorn, order, and beautify this Olive tree of his Church, not after the
proportion of man's imagination, but after the direction of his own
determination and vnpenitrable wisdom. For, as a natural Olive tree and other
like trees, the buddes, yssues, twigges, and branches being either cut of or
newly engraffed, work not that of their own power, but receive the same by
the aid and industry of man: Even so in administering the functions of the
Church, if we seek for the original cause of the workman, by whose conduct,
all inferior causes are enduced to observe their due order and course: the
same must be adjudged to proceed from the force and efficacy of the
unmeasurable election of the heavenly workman only, who by wonderful
dispensation, makes choice where him likes, and refuses whom him lusts,
according to the testimony of the Scripture: Exodus 33.
I will take compassion on whom I will take compassion, and I will show mercy
to whom I will show mercy. Whereunto accords Saint Paul speaking after the
same manner: It is neither the willer, nor the runner, but God that takes
compassion. Romans 9.
Where fortune, and chance, may go play them perdie: no endeavors of man can
avail, much less can men's merits or deseruings be of any force, neither can
ought else bear palm here, but the only election of almighty God. The nature
and property of which election, we may learn else where out of the same Paul:
The remnaunt (says he) are saved through the election of gra^e, which grace
can not be said to be grace at all, if man's merits have preeminence before it^
for that which is given according to the proportion of deseruings, and not
according to grace, seems in Augustines judgment, Augustine in his 1. book
of Retracta. Cap. 13.
a reward rather of duty, then a free gift of promise. But a question may be
moved here perhaps, whether the Gentiles were not engraffed for their faiths
sake? and whether the Jews were not supplanted from the true Olive for their
unbelief? which enterchanged dispensation, what else does it explane unto us,
then a manifest demonstration as well of the meritorious desert, as well of
faith, as of unbelief?

The causes why the Gentiles were received and the Jews rejected.
The answer hereunto, first as concerning the faith of the Gentiles, and the
infidelity of the Jews. I confess in deed that these may seem to carry
some show in the eyes, and judgment of some to be deemed the very original
causes of the free acceptance of the Gent^les, and likewise of the repulse of
the Jews. But for all this we hear not yet, what were the causes of the faith
of the one, and of the unbelief of the other. And therefore if we will enter
into a deep and more especial inquiry after the principal causes of this
action, truly we shall never find them else where, then in the hidden and secret
closet of Gods election. For be it so admitted, that the Gentiles were for this
cause engraffed into the true Olive tree, because they did believe, yet if
question be moved, from whence their faith proceeded first, it may well be
answered, not from any their merits truly, neither in respect of any their
own worthiness more, then as the impes which do issue out of the natural wild
Olive tree, can boast of any their excellency, wherefore they ought to be
transplanted into the fatnes of the true Olive tree. The like answer in
senseable wise may suffice touching the Jews, when as if the cause of their
dismembring from their true natural Olive tree be enquired: I answer, For
their unbelief undoubtedly: And yet this answer does not satisfy the purpor^
of Paul's disputation. For sithence faith is an especial gift of God, issuing
from out the only mercy and grace of God, and not from man's free choice, the
question reboundeth back again from whence it began. What was the cause then
why the natural branches were so bereft of this singular gift after the
reueiling of their Meschias? whether because the barren unfruitful wild
Olive tree did furmount the true Olive in excellency of fatnes? to wit, in
integrity of life and merits? surely I think not so. Wherefore then were the
Jews forsaken, and the Gentiles received? S. Paul makes this answer. First,
that this repulse reached not to all the Israelites in general. Then, as
concerning the remnant whatsoever work was wrought in them, was not
administered without the singular counsel and foreknowledge of God: The
foreknowledge and decree of God in casting away the Jews.
which foreknowledge does evidently appear by the continual discourse of the
Prophets and Psalms: where the holy ghost foretells many hundredth years
before, of ye wilful blyndnes of the Jews. This counsel of God is made
notably discernable unto us by the sequel, and final cause, the Apostle not
only testifying most evidently, that God was ye worker of their blindness, but
also rendering the reason that enduced God thereunto: where disputing at large
of the rufull ruin of the Jews, and searching for the cause thereof: What
then? (says he) did they therefore offend, because they should be castaway?
Which were as much to say, as though God should be delited in their
destruction, God forbid. Nay rather, y^ by their fall salvation should happen to
the Gentiles: and that by their unbelief the Gentiles might obtain mercy.

But question will be moved here again, Objection.
whether it were not as easy for almighty god to have given mercy to the^ both,
if it had pleased him^ Mark what the Apostle says hereunto: Answer to the
objection.
Nay rather, for this cause only God did shut up al under unbelief, that he
might have mercy on al. For as it pleased almighty god to exercise his long and
severe rigor in old time against the heathenish castawayes, and wretched
abiects the Gentiles, until at length, with his merciful kindness unlooked for,
he had shaken of from their eyes, the foggy skales of darkened error, and
after their long infidelity, allured them at the last^ to the blessed
knowledge of his sacred Gospel: even the very same may we perceive to have
happened to the nation of the Israelites, by contrary enterchange of persons
and times: that so, those which sometimes were ye first, should now become the
last, and those which by so long continuance of inheritably discending race,
did lawfully enjoy the interest of the true Olive tree, as the true natural
ofsprings thereof, being now cut clean away from their holy root, must be
constrained to forsake their standing, and yield place to others, and may
learn now at the length to endure the grievous storms and cruel tempests of
Gods just vengeance, which the Gentiles before them had long time experime^ted
to their great dolor and sorrow, until at length having subdued their
disdaynefull pride, and tamed the natural stiffeneckednes of their hearts,
they may obtain the self same mercy together with the Gentiles, not for any
their deserts, but through the free mercy and bounty of almighty God only,
and so be restored at length to the ancient inheritance o^ their first
possessed root. And this is it, tha^ S. Paul seems here to prophecy in this
mystical Oracle, and most comfortable me^^sage, concerning the reclayming of ye
Jews to come.

Whereby it may easily appear, how that there is no one thing, in all the
actions of man's life, so plausible, whereby man may be puffed up to stand to
much in his own conceit, or disdainefully tread down the infirmity of his
weak brethren, whether he have regard to the lenity of Gods free mercy, or
attentively behold the severity of his justice. For so ye Apostle has here
set them out both unto us, to be diligently considered. Behold (says he) the
mercy, and wrath of God: The severity and bounty of God.
wrath, toward them that fell: but toward thee that do persist in faith,
mercy. etc. And thus does the Apostle right well advertise us: but that we for
our part may be able to comprehend them both, the especial assistance of God
had need to enlighten our understanding: for there are no final number of
people, whose senses, either through ignorance, or else through negligence, are
dazeled and darkened in the right comprehending thereof. Amongst the which
ignorant sort of people, first may the Jews be rightly placed, who being
deluded with a preposterous opinion of sinister judgment, The preposterous
opinion of many touching the severity and bounty of God.
do interpret this bounty of God to be there, from whence they ought have
feared his terrible indignation. Secondly, amongst the negligent number may be
rekoned the Gentiles, of whom many are over slow, and sluggish to enter into
due consideration of Gods goodness, but quicksighted enough, to pearce into his
wrathful severity. Of those two sorts of people, I do purpose by Gods
assistance to discourse somewhat, so far as ye time will permit, to the end I
may profit them both, if it be possible, or at least offer inconvenience to
neither of them, as I trust.

And first, I can never wonder sufficiently enough at the Jews, for that many
years and ages enduring yt sharp and severe scourge of Gods dreadful
displeasure, they could notwithstanding have never any feeling of their own
calamity, nor perseverance of the heavy clogge of Gods grievous vengeance, ne
yet any affection to be disbourdened of their infidelity, sweetly beguiling
them selves, with a glauering show of a false shadow, flattering them selves
likewise, with a fantastical hope of a terrene kingdom, whereof they had
never any one word promised by God, and awayting for the coming of such a
Messhias, whom never any of ye Prophets knew. Finally so far forth prevailed
the deceit of this error to confound the sensible part of their understanding
mind, that being otherwise a people most abhorred of God, and men, they would
nevertheless most arrogantly vaunt them selves to be more esteemed, and more
precious in the sight of God, then all other nations, people and tongues: and
that they were his only darlings, and therefore could not by any means be
defrauded of the power of his promise, nor be sequestered from the true Olive
tree, whereof they were the natural branches, wallowing continually in a most
filthy puddle of pestilent error, not much unlike to the Romish Synagogue in
this our age, whose senses seem to be tippled with the same dolldreanche:
which kind of people being of all other nations most needy of the mercy of
God, it is a wonder notwithstanding, to see how trimly they play wylye beguilie
with themselves in the dispensation of pardons, whereof they falsely challenge
to themselves chief stewardship under the title of the Church, and inheritable
succession of Peter's chair, The i^h^ritable succession of Saint Peter.
which they have established at Rome for ever and ever: persuading to
themselves to have obtained the sole and singular prerogative of all
ecclesiastical superiority, such as can never be abolished by any continuance
of consuming time, but must remain inviolable world^ without end, nor can ever
be dissolved by breach of succession, nor at any time be destitute and void of
ye favor of God. But if you demand of the^ yt cause of this so inestimable a
blessing, what will they answer? forsooth: has not god (say they) promised,
that he will never forsake his Church? what then? Have not the keys lyneally
descended unto us from blessed S. Peter, ever hitherto, being the chief head
of the Apostles, which the Lord has promised shall never be taken away? Is
there any more yet? what? is it possible for Gods truth it self to defraude
the credit of his covenant, whereunto he has bound him self with a most
sacred oath?

Uery well now. And whereupon does the blind arrogancy of the Jewish Nation
magnify their race? do we not derive our petigree (say they) lyneally from our
most holy father Abraham? Are we not borne, and named Israelites, by the name
of our great graundsier Israel, the Patriarch? did not the Lord credit us only
with the safe custody of the Arc of his covenant? Have not we a promise from
God by the mouth of his Prophets, of a Messhias and Savior to come? Has not
god prepared an everlasting throne for the kingdom of our Messhias? Is not he
of power to make his covenant inviolable, that with so many oaths has ratified
ye same? Nor will he not perform the oaths which he has made? Surely I will
not much gainsay, that it is in deed no final matter, whereof each party
debateth so largely of the promises of almighty God. Yet all this
notwithstanding, all things depend not so always upon Gods promises made, but
due consideration ought also be had of the mind and intent of him that makes
the promise in the scriptures: and the same well weighed and compared with the
due circumstances and other places of the scripture, if we will be accounted
true and sincere interpretoures of Gods holy scriptures: that is to say, It
behooves us duly and orderly to define and dispose all and every thing apart
by it self, not those things only which are promised, but must withal
respect the persons, the place, the cause and consideration, and al other
circumstances of the promises. And therefore albeit we do grant unto them that
all those promises are true, whereupon they brag so much, touching the
succession of the Patriarchs and Apostles, yet shall they never be able to
win this at our hands, To wit, that this ordinary descent according to the
law of the flesh, is a sufficient fundation to buyld the Church of God upon.
Succession i^ the Church
In the which if we behold nothing else besides the outward ^ourme of succession
only, who can be so pore-blinde, as not to be able to discern the manifol^e
alterations of orders, and obseruances, which the Lord from time to time has
changed and disposed, contrary to the first constitutions: As for example, when
as God in stead of Cain, Esau, Ismael, Saul, to whom of right apperteineth the
ordinary succession and descent of the Priesthode, of the birthright, and
inheritance of the kingdom, he made especial choice of Abel, Isaac, Jacob, and
David, who had no interest at all in the right of succession. In like manner
forsaking the Jews, he accepted the Gentiles contrary to all order. Neither is
it so much material to know where, or by what means, the^ Church of Christians
sprang up at the first: so that it hold fast the synceritie of the p^re word,
of vnde^iled faith, James.1.
Ephe 5.
and the due administration of the Sacraments, by which three thing^s the
Church is preserved and sanctified.

As concerning the promises of God therefore, this is undoubtedly to be holden,
that the promises be in their own nature simply true: yet in such wise true
notwithstanding, as God has not always chained them to time, place or persons
of men: which albeit were tied fast to place and persons, yet are the proud
and high minded shaken of, the promises remaining still in their force. Even so
the Jews, although they prescribe upon a promised place in Sion, Psalm 132:
Here will I build my Tabernacle, because I have chosen it. Esaias.31.
Again in the Prophet Esaias. This is my furnace, this is my fire. etc. And
although they have also a promise of the persons, when as the blessing is
promised to Abraham, and to his seed for ever, yet this withstandeth nothing
at all, but that rebels are punished by God, the Temple consumed by fire, the
altar thrown down, and the city put to the sack and destroyed. And yet the
mean whiles almighty God continues st^dfast in his promise nevertheless,
but by a far other mean, then man's capacity is able to conceive. Whereupon
that holy and melodious Psalmist, not without great reason, does cry out in a
certain place of his mystical Sonets in this wise: Psalm. 117
And it is marvelous in our eyes. Even so do I judge convenient to esteem of
the counterfaite succession of the Apostolic and Romish See, which if our
prelates enforce so narrowly to be straighted to the limits of place and
persons, they must needs bewray their double error therein, being not only
absurdely injurious to holy scriptures, but fo^dly careless in breaking ye rules
of Logic. For in their arguing, they do commonly thrust more into the
conclusion, then in their former propositions. As if a man would frame an
argument after this manner: The perpetuity of the promised succession is
granted to Peter and his successors. The Romish Prelates do succeed in Peter's
chair or place. Ergo: The Romish Prelates are ye only successors of Peter:
the only universal Bishops: the only Princes of ye Church: whose faith can
never faint.

But we have sufficiently enough discovered the maskings and iuglings of this
Romish counterfaite else where. And therefore lest we roaue too much abroad from
the mark, Extra oleas.
and wander from the Olives (as ye proverb says) we will return again to
Paul's Olive tree, and the branches of the same: whereupon we promised before
to discourse. Of the which branches, how some were broken of, and some others
engrafted again into the true Olive tree, we have already opened somewhat
unto you out of the Apostle. And not only out of the Apostle this is opened,
but the same was also set down at large long time before the Apostle, by the
prophet Esaias: out of which place of Esaias, it seems that the Apostle took
occasion of all this discourse. Let us Gentiles therefore mark well what Esaias
does prophecy of the Jews. Let the Jews also attend to the preaching of
their own Prophet, who agrees herein altogether with our Apostle touching
the Jews. Esaias. cap. 10.
Behold (says he) the Lord of hosts shall break down the bow with power,
and shall hew down the proud, and the high minded shall he fell down. And
there shall arise an issue out of the root of less. etc. And lest the Jews
may cavil, that these speeches do nothing concern them, let them harken
again to the same Prophet, not only prophesying of them, but also poynting
unto the Jews with the finger as it were the 17 chapter: Esaias. cap. 17.
And in that day it shall come to pass, that the glory of Jacob shall be made
very thynne, and the fatness of his flesh shall wax lean. And immediately
after. Some gathering in deed shall be left in it. Even as in the shaking of
an Olive tree, whereupon remains two o^ three berries in the top of the
uppermost row, and four or five in the broad fruitful branches thereof
says the Lord God of Israel, etc. And again in an other place: Esaias. cap. 24.
For it shall come to pass in the mids of the land, even in the mids of
the people, as the shaking of an Olive tree. And as the grapes are, when the
wine harvest is finished. And yet again much more plainly in the 63. Chapter:
Esaias. cap. 63.
Thus says the Lord: Like as when sweet juice is found in the cluster, and
one says, Lose it not, for there is blessing in it. Even so will I do for my
servants sake, that I may not destroy them all, etc.

Now for as much as these things are so plain and so manifest, that they may
be easily felt and handeled as it were with the fyngers: what answer do
thou make thou froward nation of the Jews? what can thou bring? what can
thou allege, if not to defend, yet to color at the lest thy obstinate
stubbornness? Have thou any Scriptures? No surely. For nothing makes more
against thee, not only with open mouth exclayming even to thy teeth, against
thy blundered blyndenesse, wherewich thou have been so long overwhelmed, but
also have long sithence by manifest tokens foretold how the same should come
to pass. Wylt thou vouche the promises and couenauntes which God made unto
thee of old? And what other thing did he promise thee at any time, then the
same which thou do so disdaynefully pursue? Neither yet cease you to run
onwarde, still gaping after, I know not after what Messhias to come. What? Has
he not yet been sufficiently enough looked for by your progenitors, who waited
for his coming by the space of two thousand years before he came? Go ye to
then: how long will ye yet continue gazing, seeing these things are past
already? How long will ye yield yo^^ selves a mockery not to God only, bu^
a Jesting stock also to all other nations of the world? sythence all people
and tongues do so plainly conceive, that all things are long sythence
accomplished in the person of Christ Jesus, whatsoever al your prophets did
prophecy of the Messhias: And sithence the whole discourse of the holy
scriptures does so manifestly teach also, that there is none other Christ,
but ye same that the whole world does confess and worship?

But this one thing perhaps does raise up your crestes, The vain brag of the
Jews standing upon the nobility of their offspring.
and puff you up with pride, because you do conueye unto your selves so long
a descent of your genealogies and kindred from so famous Auncestoures: because
ye fetch your petigree and families from Abraham, and the holy Patriarchs,
and in that respect you do reprochefully disdain all other nations, as though
God had created them to no purpose at all. But let us see by what reason, with
what conscience you are enduced hereunto. If you judge this a matter of so
great importance, that ye can rehearse in a long ^eadroll of names, your
Generations descended out of the loins of Abraham: what? And can not Ismael,
Esau, Saul, can not Dathan and Abyron, and all that other rascal rabble of
Hebrews, who made insurrection against Moses: finally, can not many wicked
kings amongst you, false prophets, horrible church robbers, and Idolaters even
amiddes amongst you, vaunte upon the self same race and parentage, whereupon
you brave your selves so gloriously? Whereupon appears plainly, that this
outward descent of blood, and fleshly progeny, does not avail so much for
your challenge: but that there is some other thing that makes a kindly
generation, and the true offspring of Abraham, in the sight of God. Moreover if
it may be lawful to glory in the ancient stock, what may be thought of
Christ him self, whom we do worship? in whom if ye require who was his
father, he came not in deed from man, but descended from God. But if you
demand of his mother: he is on the mothers side a Jew borne, according to
the flesh, the son of Abraham, an issue of the same seed that you are, whose
children you challenge your self to be according to the flesh. And wherefore
then do you so cruelly detest him? Why do your brethren so hatefully envy and
malign your natural brother? And being Jews borne your selves, why do you
so vylanously persecute your natural kinseman, being likewise a Jew borne,
and why have you slain him so cruelly?

And what has he committed at any time, The Jews ca^ render no cause of their
cruel murdering of Christ.
worthy of this so monstrous rancor and cankered despite? Was it because he
did profess him self to be the Son of God? Albeit he did never speak any
thing in his own commendation without singular modesty, neither boasted in
his speech further of him self, then that he was the son of man: yet if this
same he, were not the very true vndoubte^ son of God, do ye then nominate
some one man upon ^arth, whom you may justify was his father, and condemn the
whole history of the new Testament to be lies, if you can. What trow you,
would his Apostles, and other his disciples, being daily and hourly conversant
with him self, his mother, and his mothers husband, so thoroughly accompanied,
and acquainted with all the actions of his life, have bin so wilfully, and
foolishly blinded, as to give such credit unto him, and to believe in him?
would they have settled the whole affyaunce of their salvation in him? would
they so courageously have undertaken so many perilous hazardes of life?
Testimony of the A^ostles.
would they so constantly have yielded their carcasses to all manner of horrible
tortures, not in words only, but with loss of life also, ratifiyng and
test^fiyng the thing, which they knew to be in him most assured, and that with
effusion of their blood, if they had seen naught else in him beyond the
natural substance of man, and not rather conceyuing thoroughly in him a secret
divinity, The Divine miracles of Christ.
that was hydden under the veyle of the flesh bodily? But if these things
shall be but of small credit with you, what will you answer to those so great
and manifold tokens of wonderful virtue, to such supernatural and prodigious
wonders of his? what say ye to so great force of his divine operation, to so
great power of his miracles, not wrought by him alone, but by his Apostles also
through the virtue of his name only, Miracles in the name of Christ by his
Apostles.
yea, and long sythence now and then openly wrought in his Church, through the
effectual operation of his glorious name? What will you say to his so great
majesty in word, innocence of life, certeintie in prophesying? And besides
al these, his marvelous signs and tokens expressed in his own person? What
will you say to that his incomprehensible glorious resurrection, his
unspeakable ascension into the heavens: lastly, to those his most gracious
gifts of the holy Ghost powered upon us from the heavens? What can you answer,
I say, that all these so manifold, so wonderful, yea so heavenly graces
might import else, then that there was in him a certain superexcellent
Divinity, beyond all measure surmounting all reach, and capacity of man's
understanding?

All which things being approved with the testimony of so many witnesses,
viewed and beholden with so many eyes, practiced by the daily experience of so
many Jews, ensealed with so many hands and wrytings, published to us Gentiles
by manifold reports of so many your Rabbynes and great Doctors of your own
nation, if all these things I say, shall yet seem to you but colorable, feigned
and unworthy of credit: why do ye not with as good reason condemn for false
liars, all, and every your own prophets, Patriarchs, your own Law, yea and
the Psalms also, and raze them out of remembrance, because they did many
hundred years before most expressly foreshewe and prognosticate evidently,
that all those things ingenerall should come to pass, even in the same manner
and order, as they have been already accomplished? Amongst whom let Esaias the
Prophet be adjudged a liar, because in the name of this Christ he promises
health to the blind, Esaias. cap. 35.
Cap. 43.
Cap. 61.
Cap. 9.
Cap. 42.
to the lame, to the halte, and to the maimed: because he comfort the
Ostriches and venomous beasts of the field with praise and glory that
should happen unto them, because he prophecyeth hope of freedom to them that
were in chains, to prisoners liberty, plenty and fullness to the needy and
hungry: light to them that sit in the shadow of death: bountiful fruit
fullness to fields that were otherwise by nature barren, and through want of
Tyllage ouerspread with briars and br^mbles, uncomely, yea and filthy by reason
of their huge desolation: to ouerflowing ryuers, drynes and emptines: finally,
to the Jews them selves extreme blindness.

Let the Prophet Osee be accounted a liar also, Ose. cap. 1.^.
who prophecyeth likewise that a people which was not a people, should be
called, and obtain mercy, through the inestimable blessing of that heavenly
Jewel. Let Jonas the Prophet be adjudged a liar also, Jonas.
yea and that Elias likewise, Elias.
that was advanced into heaven in the fiery charryote: the first of which two
did prefigure Christ's glorious rising again the third day after his death,
the other of his ineffable ascension into the heavens, the fourtieth day after
his passion: also of the comfortable consolation and sending of the holy Ghost,
by the letting down of the cloak from out his triumphaunt charryote, the
fifty day called Pentecost. Besides all these moreover, let John Baptist the
Prophet, John Baptist.
yea more then a prophet, be condemned for a liar, who did not in word only
acknowledge him, but poynting toward him with the finger, pronounced boldly,
That he w^^ the very Lamb of God, that should take away the sins of the
world. Finally, let all ye whole authority of the Prophetical Scriptures be
cancelled for untruth, because the greater part thereof does nothing else,
but foreshew, and make report, that all those things should come to pass,
which the Evangelical history does expressly pronounce to be already
accomplished.

Briefly, if as yet your eyes be withholden with so gross amazed obscurity,
that the things which are more resplendisant then the Sun in midday, and so
thoroughly known in all the parts of the world, do so far e^ceede the
common capacity of your blundered senses, and seem so incredible unto you,
that ye can by no means comprehend them, nor will suffer so many notable
testimonies of Christ's resurrection prevail to work so much creditte in your
hearts, as ye may believe in our Lord Jesus Christ risen from the dead as well
as we: why do ye not pr^duce then his buried carcass, if you can? or at the
least, bring forth some rame, or fragme^t of his precious body, be it never so
small? Or if you think I demand an impossible request of you, how happens
that none of all your progenitors could show the same? But if neither you, nor
any of all your ancestors were able to do this, why do ye not then join
together with us, and worship him that is risen again? Why do ye not honor
and magnify his name, who reigns in eternity, sitting in the heavens at the
right hand of God the Father? Whereunto if love of religion can not induce
you, let natural reason yet obtain so far forth with you, to grant that,
which no reason can deny? Whereat make ye stay? is not my request reasonable?
do I not give you wholesome counsel? And lest that which I have spoken, run
in at one ear with you, and out of the other, taking no root in your hearts:
I will for your better remembrance repete once agai^ne the words that I have
spoken.

If he, whom ye have slain, be not the very son of God, if ye believe
verily, that he, whom ye deryde, and skorne at with that your reprochefull and
despitefull name, Talui, Talui in Hebrew, is as much as hanged or crucified.
Cant 4^
were but a very natural man, why do ye not therefore restore his dead body
unto us? or why do not your soldiers and hired watchemen yield his corpse
again, for the garding whereof they received from you so special a charge? If
they can not, what else emporteth the grave being found empty? What else
signified the horror and amase^nesse of your armed watchemen, who being
terrifyed with strangeness of fearful sightes fled away so tymorously,
but that ye may be enforced will ye, nyll ye, to confess this Christ Jesus to
be very Messchias, who having entered upon the possession of the kingdom of
David, Esaias. 9.
as in the right of his own peculiar inheritance, raygneth now in all
eternity, and having vanquished all power of death, sytteth now tryumphantly
upon the throne of his Father David, to order and establishe his Fathers
kingdom, with judgment and Justice from henceforth even for ever and ever? I
would feign learn now, what that your obstinate rebellion is able once to
mutter against this? First, where no mistrust of peril is feared, there is no
guard usually charged: And what suspicion of danger might your forefathers
conceive of him after they had murdered him? Debate the matter with your
selves somewhat more substantially, why any such fear might grow in the dead
body of this one seely person more then in any other. But I will not urge you
any more herein: only in this point I would feign be resolved. How happened
that the sepulcher being so strongly covered with a stone of so huge weight, so
firmly ensealed with the seal of the high Priest, so strayghtly fenced with
the force of armed knights, was so shortly found empty? You will say, That
his disciples crept thither privily, and stale away the body of Jesus perdie,
whiles your soldiers were snorting in a deep and sound slumber. Well then.
And who I pray you saw the disciples the mean time whiles your watchmen
slept so soundly? If their eye lyddes were ouerladen with such a dead slumber,
that they could not perceive this: with what face shame you to affirm, that
your watchemen saw them no^? If they did see them, how chanced that being
harnessed, they withstood not such seely unarmed wretches? And why did not your
forefathers lay this theft to the Disciples charge, since they saw them daily
preaching in the Temple afterward? O monstrous cankered liars: as though the
stone wherewith it was covered, were not of greater quantity, the^ could be
removed by a few? or by any means might be rolled away without perceiuera^c^
of your soldiers? Well yet, how happened that these seely caytiue petyt
thieves fled no^ away immediately after they had committed this robbery? How
durst they be daily conversant amongst men^ and preach openly in your Temple?
Nay rather to tell you the truth simply: with what better or more probable
argument could the world have been induced to believe, yt Christ was risen
again to ye sure establishment of their faith, then this your wicked curious
diligence, which your forefathers so carefully employed in watching the
Sepulcher?

Forasmuch therefore as al these things are so most assured, so manifest, so
unreprovable, approved with so many witnesses and proph^ts, ratified with so
many reasons and evident proofs, discovered by ye evident testimony not only
of Angels, but established also with the heavenly Oracle of ye holy ghost him
self, embraced and believed by the faith of all nations of ye world, what one
probability ca^ al your generation of Hebrews allege for color to the
contrary? If ye perceive therefore that this is the ver^ true Messhias, why do
ye not relent at the last, and forsake and abandone your stifnecked rebellion,
and join with us in profession? If as yet ye do not acknowledge him, declare
the cause then that breeds this misliking in you, and troubles your
consciences. Is it because he lived in poor and beggarly estate amongst the
impouerished, and them yt were worth nothing? But your prophet Zachary long
before he was revealed, reported that he should be eue^ such a one: Zach. 9.
Behold (says he) thy king comes unto thee righteous and just, a savior, he
is poor, and riding upon an ass, etc. And it behooved truly, that he which
should come to overthrow ye high minded and rich of this world, and to enrich
ye poor, should be him self embased and poor.

What else then? is it because he was seen to walk in base and simple
apparel, and was despised amongst you? Even such a one does the prophet Esaias
paynte out unto us in his 53. chapter: Esaias. 53.
We beheld him (says he) and he had neither form nor beauty, we held him
despised, and esteemed him for an outcast of men. You have seen him now of no
reputation, an abject, the poorest of men, whom your hautines did disdain.
Mark now under this vile and contemptible baseness, more then a kingly royalty,
whereunto you ought all t^ prostrate your selves, Esaias. cap. 53.
and do honor unto. Surely he has borne our infirmities, and carried our
sorrows, he was taken out of prison, and from Judgment, and who shall declare
his age? by the knowledge of him self, my servant shall justify many: for he
shall bear their iniquities. The will of the Lord shall prosper in his hands,
and he shall divide the spoil with the strong. The kings shall shut their
mouths at him. You have now therefore heard, how he should be poor and
deformed, according to the outward show of the flesh, even such a one as our
Gospel has described him. And briefly to be plain, if he had not thus been
poor, and rejected from amongst you, he could not have been the right Messhias
in deed. Uerily such a one he seemed to you once, when it was, according to
the outward countenance of the flesh, before he had obtained the power of the
kingdom upon the cross: But having then forthwith received y^ throne of his
kingdom, in what triu^phant majesty he sits and reigns now in heaven,
let ye mystical Psalmist David make report, who in spirit foresaw him, sitting
at the right hand of the Lord. Let their witness be heard also, who were
beholders of the whole action of his asce^sion, and with their bodily eyes saw
the same whom David beheld in spirit, even with their carnal eyes I say gazing
upon him, whiles yet he was lifted up in their sight into heaven, and did
perfectly discern him also sitting at the right hand of the majesty. Let them
also record the same, whose inward feeling and minds of the soul he does
inlighten with heavenly effectual operation, and vouchsafes daily to
enterparten him self unto. And I would to God it might please the same to open
your eyes also, that once at the length you might thoroughly enjoy the
inestimable glory, and unspeakable majesty of his everlasting kingdom. In
the mean space, ye may easily conceive a taste and feeling as it were of the
truth, by groping the shadows and prefigured tokens of the scriptures, except
ye had rather wilfully and wittingly shut fast your eyes from so manifest
demonstration of infallible certainetie.

First, what one thing was of more royalty, then the kingdom of David? And
yet what one thing was more entangled and streighted, whiles as yet like a
seely moath he kept his fathers sheep? whiles he was tossed in turmoyle with
most cruel persecution? At what time Joseph being circumuented by the injury
of his brethren, became carraine lean in a lothesome dungeon: when as Abraham
was commanded to abandone his native country, and to become a banished outcast
from his kindred and his fathers house: whiles Jacob was constrained to
redouble his service under his v^ckle Laban: what time Moses was by Gods
calling translated from an exiled outlawe to be a guide and leader of y^
Israelites: from how great baseness and misery were all these advanced to
wonderful estimation and dignity? And what was the meaning of the holy ghost
else, then under the shadows and figures of those persons, to represent unto us
ye very pattern and image of the son of God? And yet if you duly consider
the estate of Christ's outward baseness, what wanted he at any time, to the
necessary furniture of his liuelihode, notwithstanding this show of extreme
penury? Nay what want at all could molest him, who with a very few crustes
could feed so great a crewe of thousands in so deserte a wilderness? Or how
could he be termed poor, at whose beck and word of mouth, heaven and earth
did obey, the seas and winds, life and death, finally all the degrees of
creation were subject unto?

But that writing and title called by the name of a Nazarite does encumber you
perhaps: Jesus Nazare^us.
because it behooved that Messhias should be borne in Bethleem the city of
David. If he were not borne in Bethleem, I report me to the Chronicles and
Records of the time of his birth, and the circumstances thereof. Let the
testimonies of the angels, shepherds, wise men, his own mother, Joseph, and
all the Evangelists be examined. Moreover, what emported that horrible
slaughter of all the suckling Babes of Bethleem, only by the cruel proclamation
of Herod, without any molestation of the infants of Nazareth: unless Herod
the king had been thoroughly persuaded, that above that instant of time, wherein
Christ was borne, the same very king of the Jews was then borne in the city
of Bethleem? What else is it then that troubles you? because he dyed the death?
The death of Christ.
What do I hear? what? Have you always awaited for a Messhias that could not
be bereft of life? How then should this Messhias deliver Jacob his people from
their iniquities, when as no remission of sins could be without slaughter
and blood, according to the infallible testimonies, and continual sacrifices of
your own law? Briefly, if it were not requisite that Messhias should dye
the death, then did all the Prophets lie, Zachary, Daniel, David, Esaias, did
lie: which have not only made mention of his death, but have most learnedly
also set down the cause of his death. For this we read in Daniel, Daniel. ca.
9.
That wickedness (says he) may finish, and sins be sealed up, iniquity
reconciled, and everlasting righteousness may be brought in. And proceeding a
little further in the same Chapter, does expressly declare that Christ ought to
be slain. In like manner the Prophet Esaias: Esaias. ca. 53.
If he shall make his soul an offering for sin, says he. The very same thing
does Moses also prefigure unto us under certain ceremonies of sacrifices,
types and figures not altogether obscure. What say you to Esaye the Prophet:
who does not only discover the cause, but the manner also of his death, his
spittings, scourging, wounds, plagues, buffetings and reproaches? What say you
to Zachary, who mencioneth the pearcing of his side with a spear? What say
you to David, who describes the nayling of his hands and feet, the sponge
full of vinegar, the rending his flesh from the bones, the casting lots for his
garment? What say you to Moses also, who under ye title of the Brazen serpent,
does prognosticate his lifting up on the Cross?

But here again some froward person amongst you will murmr again in this
wise. The Jews objection answered.
In what sort can Christ be said in the scriptures to be everlasting, if he
must of necessity be slain? This scrupule no man can more effectually
unloose, then the Prophet David in his mystical Psalm: Psalm. 1^.
Thou shall not leave my soul (says he) in the grave, nor suffer thy holy one
to see corruption. Where you hear his soul laid in the grave, you must
understand that to be spoken of his death and burial. Again, when you hear,
that he is risen again from his sepulcher, you must interpret the same of his
infinite eternity, and vnperishable freedom, exempt from all manner of
corruption. Whereby appears notably discerneable unto you, each condition in
one self person: That is to say: That he is both a mortal man, and an
eternal God. In the one whereof the infirmity of his manhood is palpable: in
the other the glory of his resurrection is most evidently prouable. What? And
do ye expect yet an other everlasting Messhias besides this? Messiah when he
comes must not be received of the Jews.
What a fantasy is this? As though when the true Messhias is come, he may
obtain any courteous entertainment amongst you? Truly none at all^ For even
so say the Prophets of your own nation. Or else what means that saying of
David, that ye read in the Psalm? The stone which the builders refused, the
same is made the head of the corner. And who be they that are called the
buylders, but even your selves the Jews? The Jews look for their Messiah in
vain: who, when so ever the true Messiah comes, will not receive him. And if
he be a false Messiah, he seru^th them to no purpose.
What is this stone, but Messhias? whom if ye will so long gape after, until
you find your selves pliable to embrace and honor him, it will come to pass,
that your long lingering will be prolo^ged beyond all compass of time: because
according to the saying of your own. Prophets, you will never dutifully allow
of the coming of the true Messhias, but that ye will continually remain in an
uncertain expectation of some other. For if he be accepted by the general
consent of you al without exception, surely he can not possibly be ye true
Messhias. Again, if he be refused from amongst you, how long will you hang in
suspense of his coming?

Even in like manner your forefathers did look for a Messhias to come long
before the birth of Christ almost two thousand years: but after that he was
come in deed, and that the Lord of Lords, Malac. 3.
who^ they sought, was entered into his temple, and the angel of the promised
testament whom they wished for, was amid^ amongst them, yet did not his own
receive him. What manner o^ Messiah do the Jews look for.
And why so? because they judged that he would come after an other sort, their
the Prophets had foretold them. For ye Prophets did describe his coming to be
poor, simple and beggarly: but these lusty gallants do gaze for a certain
trim earthly Emperor awayted upon with some famous troop of princely guard.
The Prophets did promise a seely meek lamb, whose voice should not be heard
to bleat in the streets. These courageous champions attend for some Lion and
victorious Monarch. They did foreshew that he should be slain, tormented and
hanged on tree, who should not avenge him of ye injuries of his people with
displaied ba^ner of bloody battle, but with sheading of his own precious blood
should redeem ye sins and wicked transgressions of his people, should not with
viole^^^ rush upon ye crown of ye Empire, nor with force of arms deliver his
people from the thraldom of Caesar, but should restore freedom to his nation
from the bondage of sin, and the tyranny of death, and the devil, with all
the p^testates and principalities thereof: and so establish to him self a
kingdom, not transitory and earthly in this world, but heavenly and endless
for ever and ever. On the contrary part, these fellows stroking themselves
with a fantastical opinion of worldly pomp, and measuring all things
according to the glorious glitering show of some terrestrial dominion, do yet
fondly believe, that some other puissant and victorious conqueror shall come
in some notably advanced manner. Whereupon being worthily deluded of their own
frivolous fond expectation, they can neither truly acknowledge their own
heavenly Messhias: nor did accept of him when he was come. Neither was it any
marvel if they could not find in their hearts to entertain him being in this
beggarly plight: when as their own Prophets did long before pronounce, that
the Messhias should be persecuted with none so savage and unmerciful en^mie^,
as the people of his own lineage: and did also under most manifest oracles, and
apparent veiles of shadowish signs prognosticate that he should be slain
through the treacherous treason of his own people.

After the same sort was the blood of Abel spilt by the embrued hand of his
bloody brother Cain: Gene. 4.
Joseph entrapped and sold by the smister practice and procurement of his
brother Judah: Gene. 37.
The lamb of the passover slain and devoured peecemeale in the houses of
them, which were delivered by the blood of the same: Exodus 12.
So was Moses oftentimes contemptuously entreated, Exodus 32.
and disdainefully railed upon amongst his own kinsfolks: Numer. 16.
King David cruelly assaulted not of Saul only, 1. Reg. 18.19
but (which is more horrible) of the folk of his own family, of his
neighbors, citizens and subjects. What else does the several calamities of all
these purport, then that Messhias should be slain by the butcherie of his own
people? What does that stone of offense mentioned in Esaias, Esaias. 8.
and that Rock to fall upon to both houses of Israel, and as a snare and a net
to the inhabitants of Jerusalem signify other, then that the Lord him self
should suffer death by the murtherous practice of his own nation? Otherwise
why is he called a rock to fall upon and stone of offense, if there were
nothing in him whereupon the adversaries might stumble at? And to pass over
other sharp and horrible prophesies uttered directly against this viperous
generation by the mouth of their own Prophets in the book of Deuteronomie the
xxxi. and xxxii. Chapters, so likewise in the 65. and 66. of Esaias, and many
others besides of their own Prophets, peruse who lists the books of
Malachie and Zachary with diligence and heedefulnes, Mala. 1.3.4.
what does Malachie else in all that his preaching almost, then explane the
order, and manner of Christ's passion, yea, and that so lively, that scarce any
portion seems ouerskipped, that may seem to apperteine to the sum and
argument of all that whole Tragedy? Zach. 9.
Not their king him self riding upon an Ass, not the breaking of the bow of
battle, and preaching peace unto the Gentiles: not the loosing of prisoners out
of the pit, wherein was no water, whose outstretched power extends from sea
to sea, from the floods to the uttermost parts of the earth, raising up the
children of Israel above the children of Greece: not the thirty siluerlings of
the traitor Judas for the which he sold Christ: not the wounds of his
pierced body: not the print of the nails in his hands and feet: not the
scattering of the disciples the Shepherd being stricken: not the city severed
into three factions, whereof the third part only remained sound and served the
Lord, yet so that the same was brought to trial by fire: not the destruction
of Jerusalem by the assault of the Gentiles: not the overthrow and subversion
of their houses: not the deflowring of their virgins: not the breaking in
sunder the veyle of the Temple under the figure of the mount Oliuete: not the
darkened Eclipse of the Sun the same day in the which Christ suffered his
passion: Cap. 14.
And there shall be a day (says he,) it is well known to the Lord, neither
day nor night, but about the evening time it shall be light: And it shall come
to pass in the same day, that the waters of life shall go out from Jerusalem,
and the half of them toward the East sea, and half of them toward the
uttermost sea, and shall be both in winter and summer. And immediately in the
same Chapter, prophesying of our Savior Jesus Christ hanging upon the Cross:
And that which shall be there above the brydles of the horses shall be called holy
unto the Lord, and the pottes in the Lords house shall be like the bowls before
the Altar. etc.

What answer will you make now to these so notable and manifest testimonies?
and whereupon depends the hope of that you look for, or in what points
does it chiefly consist? Will ye flee back again to your rotten wormeaten
poesies? we are the seed of Abraham, and were never subject to any other:
well we may wander, but we can never perish. The holy Patriarchs are our
progenitors: we are the issue of an holy root: we have a God in whom we do
believe: we have the law wherein we are instructed, the temple, the
priesthode: the sacrifices and ceremonies are committed unto our safe keeping,
we have also Prophets, and promises of the Prophets, wherein we put our
confidence. Nay rather you were once invested in all these, but now through your
traiterous treachery you are berest, and despoyled of them all. You had
sometime Abraham unto your father, upon whom you so gloriously vaunt your
selves. Even so had Esau, Ismael, and Saul also as well as yt. And even this
self same so noble a gentleman whom you account for your father, if he were
present now in these our days, or had lived then also when Christ was
conversant upon the earth, and had seen all those your frantic outragies,
and traiterous devises, conceived of such despitefull rancor, and canckred
malice: if he had beholden your reproachful tauntes, contum^li^us mockeries,
and furious madness, yo^ ^xecrable injuries, and horrible tyrannies provoked by
no desert of his: your unquenchable malicious cruelty, in deriding, scorning,
and murdering that most mild son of God Christ Jesus, the most puissant and
mighty Lord of glory, having in all respects so bountifully deserved of you:
and had been present at that unspeakable mad outrage, and exclamation when ye
cried out, Crucify him, Crucify him: his blood be upon us and our children:
we have none other king but Caesar. Moreover if he had seen your vnappeaceable
disorder without all remorse of mercy in persecuting his disciples: Christen
men's children here in Engl^nde crucified by the Jews Anno. 11^9. and anno.
114^ at Norwiche. etc.
your intolerable Scorpionlike sauagenes, so furiously boiling against the
innocent infants of the Christian Gentiles: and the rest of your heinous
abominations, insatiable butcheries, treasons, frensies, and madness: If I say,
this most godly and mild Patriarche Abraham were alive, to hear, and behold
the same, with the same eyes wherewith long sithence he beheld the day of
Christ Jesus, and reioysed, would he ever have accounted you for his sons? or
ever have acknowledged such impes to have proceeded out of his loins? Nay
rather, who can dout of this, that he would have agreed with John Baptist
rather, and cried out with open mouth against you, O ye generation of vipers,
and children of the devil: I do utterly det^st you, and your poisoned deeds,
and imaginations.

But ye do believe in God, whom only you do worship and honor: so do the
Turks, Sarracenes, Moors, and Scythians as well as ye. And where is there
any one nation under the coape of heaven, so savage and beastly, that does
not profess, confess, and worship one God only? And what is this to the
purpose? Albeit ye esteem never so much of that your worshipping the great
God, if yet in mean whiles ye persecute his messengers and Ambassadors whom
he sends, if you kill his Prophets, if ye murder his Apostles, Martyrs, and
Preachers: Finally if you put to the most slanderous death of the Cross the
dear entierly beloved and only begotten son of God him self, being
tormented with all kind of horrible tortures, to the unspeakable reproach of
the same your own God, with what shameless visage can you brag that God to
be your father, whose son you have so shamefully crucified? Yea, what were
this to the purpose, or what might it avail you, to seem to your selves that
the same God is your father, if he do not reknowledge you for his children?
Take this for an undoubted truth, that no kind of people can be adjudged to
be the people of the living God, but in respect of his dear son Christ
Jesus. Which if your blundered senses can not comprehend as yet: what mean
those words of Osee I beseech you? and of whom were they spoken? For ye
be not my people, therefore will I not be yours. Osee.1.
And it shall come to pass in the place where it was said unto them, you are
not my people, it shall be said unto them, you are the sons of the living
God. You do persist still obstinately in the opinion of Gods Law, and quite
contrary to the Law of God, without all law, equity and conscience, hanged
and racked upon tree the very same person of whom the whole Law did prophecy
before, notwithstanding so many strange and wonderful miracles wrought by
him, so many brotherly benefits employed upon you: yea, finding also no manner
of cause worthy of death in him: You ^o vaunt your selves lustily in speech of
the circumcision of your fores kinnes, and your uncircumcised hearts ouerflowe
with spyderlike poison: The preposterous religion and cruel malice of the I^wes.
you brag of keeping the Sabbath day whiles you take your bodily repast
only: but the right use of the Sabbath of the Lord is to have a quiet mind,
free from all jar of envy and malice. This Sabbath you do profane
continually, but then chiefly most wickedly, when ye murdered the Lord him
self, neither seem as yet satisfied therewith, nor ye will relent any jot at
al from your ca^ckred con^umacie: you profess in words the letter of the
law, but utterly disclayme from the spiritual meaning of the law in your
deeds. You cry ^ut, The Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord: and yet
you abhor the Church of Christ, being the true Temple of the Lord: you
challenge to your selves a wonderful hautie prerogative of the blood offerings,
of the Priesthood, of the Sacrifices and ceremonies of the Law, which in deed
carry a certain gallaunt resemblance of true religion.

But these outward shadows and ceremonies had their time and place long ago,
and were not instituted to the end they should continue irreuocable, but for a
season, to represent as it were a superficial view unto us of more excellent
things. Even as the kingly Throne of David, and all that politic gouer^ement
of the Israelites did prefigure nothing else unto us, but the everlasting
kingdom of Christ, and were as certain principles, wherewith the minds of
the beholders might be raised up to a more deep consideration of far high
mysteries: in so much that the very same, which was but figured in king David,
we plainly perceive to have been expressly discovered in the king of the new
Jerusalem, which is the Church of Christ. The same which was prefigured in
Abel, in Noah, in Abraham, Melchisedech, Joseph, Moses, Aaron, Iosuah,
Sampson, David, Elias, Jonas, Jesus the great Priest, ^he end of ^he Law and of
^he prophets and types, is Christ.
in the Paschall Lamb, in the brazen Serpent, in the Rock, in Manna, in the
feast of Pentecoste: briefly whatsoever exercises were practiced in shadows,
types and figures, we do unfeignedly acknowledge to have met, co^curred, and been
accomplished in one body. And this body truly is Christ Jesus, who is also ye
end and consummation of all the whole Law. In like manner the sacrifices and
ceremonies, trimminges and deckings of the old Law, contained in them selves
no sound nor permanent matter, but were shadows and forerunners of more
excellent graces. For what is he so poreblinde in this our age, that knows
not, that God does not dwell in Temples made by men's hands? that consciences
are not clea^sed from sins with the blood of goats and of bulls? But these
bloody offerings obtained a certain resemblance only of the true purging of
sins. What does the commandment of the prophet emply, when in your
Passover he charged a lamb of a year old, clean and undefiled to be slain
by families and tribes? Can your senses be so blockishe to think, that so
great and effectual operation lurketh in the blood of beasts, as may avail to
deliver you from cruel thraldom, and translate you to the land of promise
flowing with milk and honey, if there were no cornell of deeper mystery
enclosed within the outward shell of the letter?

It remains now, The promises contained in the Prophets.
that we treat of the promises of the Prophets, whereupon you boaste so much,
and raise all your building, which only thing of all others, does vnioynte
and shyuer in pieces all the strong bulwarks of your unbelief, even to the
very bottom of the foundation. And to the end I may make this appear more
evidently, I will combat a crashe with you in your own castle, whereunto I
will use none other furniture, but your own weapons, I mean the very words
and known sentences of your own prophets. And I will so deal with you in this
conflict by the aid and assistance of God, as not heaping together out of all
the Prophets in general their whole armorie of proof that I know, for that
were unmeasurable. But I will choose rather out of certain of the^, not a
multitude, to surcharge you with number, but certain especial testimonies, with
the which as with choice shot and powder, I will so batter y^ bulwarks of your
blu^dered unbelief, that you shall not be able by any means possible to
delude the matter with caffling, nor escape by denial, nor with any subtle
legerdemayne of litterall exposition, cast a myste before mine eyes, nor
untwine your selves out of the meashe by any crooked conueyaunce, as you are
wont to do, though ye would never so feign, but either you shall be peruinced
willingly to come to reason, or else against your wills to be confounded
altogether with the manifest light of the truth.

And to begin first with the prophet Esaias, what answer can all the offspring
of the Hebrews make to these words written in the ninth chapter of his
prophecy? ^say. 9.
For the yoke of their burden, and the staff of their shoulder, and the rod
of their oppressor have thou broken, as in the day of Mydian. You have heard
a very honorable promise of the Prophet, wherein he pron^^^ceth a wonderful
triumphaunt victory to all them that walk in the night of darkness, and in
the shadow of death, prophesying likewise, that it will come to pass, that
the chains of cruel captivity being cracked asunder, and yoke of servile
bondage being crushed in pieces, they shall once at the length enjoy most
happy calm of gladsome freedom. Well then. To whom was this promise made? to
the Jews alone? is he not also the God of the Gentiles? Then by what means
shall this victory be obtained? by any foreign power, or warlike broile? No.
The Prophet does utterly deny that, pronouncing these words forthwith:
Because every spoil (says he) of the warryour that is with noise, and with
tumbling of garments in blood, shall be abolished with burning and consuming
fire, even as in the victory that Gedeon obtained against the Madianites, the
conquest was achieved by the only hand of God, and the presence of Gedeon,
man's force and power little auayling thereunto. In like manner the prophet by
like comparison persuades us to believe, that this victory and freedom must
be purchased by the only blessing of God, and not by any force or policy of
man: and that this blessing of God is sufficiently effectual of it self,
without all force of bloody battle, to establish assured and v^doubted peace
and everlasting freedom to all creatures. Go ye to now, let me this demand
of you, when, and from whence this so great blessedness shall happen? The Prophet
him self makes answer, By the birth of a child (says he) and by gyuing a
son unto us. For unto us a child is borne (says he) and unto us a son is
given, and the Judgment is upon his shoulders. etc. Such is the excellent
dignity of the son, so great is the majesty of his nature, proceeding from
so notable a father, that he needs none other aid in the world, to the
attainement of absolute perfection of most blessed felicity. For what can be
of more excellent effectual operation to the through cleansing away of all
filthy contagion of corrupt nature, or more presently auaylable to remove all
matter of brabble and contention, then to receive the very son of God him
self into the fellowship of this our mortal nature, being a Prince of so
great and superexcellent Majesty, The place of Esaias. cap 9. expounded.
as that he may not seem to be borne an inheritour of a kingdom, to rule as a
king, but that the kingdom may seem rather to spryng up and be erected
together with his birth? For so he says, The government is laid upon his
shoulders, not purchased by any his industry or travail, but laid upon his
back, even from his first entry into this world, and growyng up together with
him, even from his very swathling clo^tes. And the same being so great an
authority or principality, raised up by so much above the compass of all
earthly empires, by how much he obtained to be advanced and called by a more
excellent title and name above all the princes of the world. And now if you
be desirous to know the name of this famous Prince, the Prophet him self
will forthwith declare unto you: A child is borne unto us. etc. Esaias.^
His name (says he) shall be called Wonderful, a Counselor, The mighty God,
The everlasting Father, The Prince of peace, The increase of his government and
peace shall have none end. etc. Where you see mention made of the kingdom of
peace and patience, you may easily discern, not a kingdom only, but a
distinct manner of kingly preeminence, far unlike to an earthly or worldly
government. Now hearken where the place and nation is, over which this King
must exercise his dominion. He shall sit upon the Throne of David, and upon
his kingdom, to order and establyshe it with Judgment and with Justice.
Behold here under these Tytles, Judgment and Justice, is excluded all blooddye
tyranny. And now listen to the perpetuity of thi^ kingdom, From henceforth
(says he) even for ever and ever.

Was ever man so froward of judgment, as to wreste and rack this place of the
Prophet, of releasing the yoke of the burdens, of breaking the rod of the
oppressor, to any other purpose appliable (though he endeavor to the contrary
never so much) then to the very coming of Christ Jesus the son of God, in
whom we do believe, who was sent of God the father, and given unto us for an
everlasting king? For where is it possible to find a king yssuing from out so
notable a parentage, and of such an undefiled life, who by dying the death
could crush in pieces the tyranny of death, and after he had tasted the death
could of his own power revive, and raise him self up, to the glorious
majesty of everlasting kingdom, this one Meschias only except, before whom
all nations of ye earth do and shall bow the knee? Well now. And what buzzing
will those Thal^^de glosers keep in the gloss, or what exposition will they
fetch out of their Thargum? Will they refer this intolerable yoke of thraldom
unto their servitude endured in the time of Sennacher^^? He would in deed
have charged the shoulders of the Jews with this yoke of burden and rod of
oppressor, but he never pinched the^ so much therewith. Will they interpret
the same of the captivity of Babylon? Neither will this hang together by any
means. For albeit it pleased that mighty king of Babylon Cyrus of his
bountiful mercy, to grant free passage to ye Israelites, to return into their
own country: yet was not he able to unloose this prophetical yoke, and
establishe a peace that could never be dissolved, for that he was not only a
mere stranger, but also void of all color to claim the throne of his
father David, by any manner of descent from him.

Moreover, whereas the prophet Esaias does note here especially, The Jews in
their own exposition contrary to themselves.
the utter taking away of all occasions of warlike fury from amongst worldly
men, and of restoring a kingdom of peace, and the same also to be endurable
beyond all ages: who does not see, that by no shyft of forged circumstaunce,
these sayings may be translated to your fleshly bondage, sith your selves also
(which do believe and expect for an end of this brittle life, and a rising
again at the last day as well as we) neither will ne can deny, but that all
manner things in this world, either private or public, must have an end? Then
if this be true, how dare ye mortal men flatter your selves with a
possession of an immortal kingdom in this world? For that which is
immortal, is not limited within any compass of time. Again, by what argument
can ye persuade, that the thing which is everlasting, may have a last day and
determined end of time? Forasmuch therefore as this kingdom of Meschias and
David, The kingdom of Me^sias how it is everlasting, and the peace thereof to
have no end.
is pronounced by the mouth of the prophets, to be an everlasting throne, and
the peace thereof without all end: you must of necessity yield unto us, that
this peace apperteineth not to the external tra^quillitie of this earthly and
terrestrial policy, but to the quiet calm, and peaceable rest of inward
conscience and soul, in the sight of almighty God: which peace began the^ to
appear, when as this child was borne: of whom the Angels of heaven did
certify the shepherds in their melodious song: Glory be to God on high, and in
earth peace, and unto men a good will. Otherwise how will this reason of yours
agree in it self, or accord with the Prophets? For if you aw^yt as yet for
the coming of some warlike courageous Champion, who having subdued the Empire
of the Gentiles, may with fire and sword force a recovery of your country,
what shall become of this burning and devouring with fire, all warlike force
and tumbling of garments in blood? Where is that Meschias, of whom Esaias makes
mention, Zachar. 9. Esaias.42.
which shall proclayme peace, not war, to the Gentiles? Where is that Prince,
whose voice shall not he heard to make any noise in the streets? Where is he,
that shall not bruyse the broken rod? and shall convert the weapons of steel
into ashes? On ye other side: if ye awayte for a peaceable king, such a one, as
the Prophets do describe, what conquest then shall there be of Gentiles and
nations? Ponder these things in your minds well, and advisedly, and see how
these matters being contrary and repugnant each to other, they may be framed to
agree together.

There be an infinite number of the like prophecies in Esaias, The manifest
prophecies of Esaias of Christ.
concerning the Meschias that should be slain for the sy^nes of the people
and rejected of you: of his long lasting seed, Cap. 53.
and unspeakable generation: of the casting away of your whole race, and
engraffing the Gentiles in your place: Cap. 65.
of blinding the eyes of them that did see: Esaias 6.
of the book delivered to the ignorant and unlettered: Cap. 35. Cap. 43. Cap.
49. Cap. 65.
of healing the blind and the lame: of Ostryches and Dragons glorifiyng God: of
floodes to be translated into the wilderness: of the salvation of God to be
proclaimed from Sion to the uttermost parts of the world: of the small
portion of Jews that shall be saved: Finally of the rooting out of your nation,
together with the exchange of your name also. And you shall leave your name
(says he) as a curse unto my chosen: for the Lord shall slaye you, and call
his servants by an other name. And again, My servant shall drink, and you
shall be thirsty: Behold, my servants shall rejoice, and you shall be ashamed. I
am not very inquisitiue here to learn, with what iuggling after your woonted
guise and determined malice, ye will corrupt and deprave those places, as you
do all other for the most part. Nay rather I will give you full scope to
wreathe and wrest them with whatsoever crabbed cauillations ye can suggest, and
after whatsoever sensual interpretation ye can devise: yet shall ye never
prevail so far forth against the manifest truth, but that she will be able
to stop your mouth, and convince your shameless impudency, considering that
the very orderly course of natural causes, will not permit these sayings to be
tossed and tumbled else where, then into the person of Christ Jesus, whom you
have crucified.

I will pass over Esaias, after I have cyted one only place out of the xl.
chapter of his prophecy, speaking in this wise: Esaias. cap. 4^.
Comfort ye, comfort your selves, my people, will your Lord God say. Speak
co^fortably to Jerusalem, and cry unto her, that her warfare is accomplished,
and her iniquity is pardoned, for she has received at the Lords hands
double for her sins. etc.

What is this to us, will ye say? I will tell you, if you will vouchsafe to
yield your diligent consideration thereunto, and compare the same with the
rest that does ensue in the prophet. A voice (says he) cries in the
wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the Lord: make straight in the desert a pathe
for your God. etc. What can be more clear the^ the brightness of this
prophecy? what sentence more manifest? what more fruitful consolation? Wherein
as many things seem worthy to be remembered, so three things chiefly are to
be noted therein. Namely, The sins of the people
The sins and wickedness of the people, in the first place: The wrath and
vengeance of Almyghtie God, in the second place: The stroke of Gods severe
justice.
in the third and last place, a most sweet and comfortable consolation, The
consolation of grace.
after many bitter and grievous punishments. In the part that treats of
sins, the obstinate and unvanquishable rebellion of the Jews against God and
his Laws: In the second part, where the wrath of God is spoken of, the
Justice of God may be discerned, which will not suffer the wickedness of his
people to escape long unpunished. The comfortable consolation proceeds wholly
from his loving kindness an^ gracious mercy: whereupon the trumpe of those
sweet and amiable promises is hearkened unto: wherewith the sovereign bounty
of God qualifiyng the fretting corrosiue of his former displeasure, with mild
and medicinable salve, does make an infallible covenant with them, that after
they have once passed over many vexations, adversities and streightes,
wherewith they were long time turmoyled and vexed, they should from thenceforth
never feel so sharp a scourge in reue^ging their sins. And hereof comes
this most delicate voice full of all spiritual comfort, which the Lord him self
pronou^ceth here by the mouth of his prophet, speaking co^fortably to
Jerusalem, Esaias.40.
Thy warfare is accomplished, and thine iniquities are pardoned, for thou have
received at the Lords hands double for thy sins, etc. The place of Esaias.40.
paraphrastically expounded.
As if this were the natural sense and meaning of the words: whereas I have
hitherto showed my self a severe Judge against you in scourging your
ungodliness with cruel plagues, this did I, eue^ according to the desert of
your own deeds. In your miserable and continual calamity, in your manifold
bondage and captivity yt you have endured first under ye Egyptians, then under
the Assyrians, next under the Syrians, and lastly under king Herod the
stranger, you have hitherto felt ye smart of Gods justice. But now it has
pleased ye Lord to alter his determination conceived against you, not to whet
ye edge of his rigorous ve^gea^ce any more to your destruction, not to deliver
you as vassals and bo^dslaues to your enemies, but entercha^ging mercy for
wrath, to embrace you with al lenity, and make an end of your sorrows and
warfare: so that from he^ceforth you shall not need to fear any more invasion
of cruel enemies, any leading away into direful captivity, any dreadful
punishment of your heinous impiety. For the time shall come, when the Lord
will no more reward your iniquities with horrible scourges and plagues, but of
his inestimable clemency shall couche you within the blessed bowels of his
bottomless mercy. And if you be desirous to know the time wherein these glad
tidings shall be performed amongst you, take this for a sign and token, whereby
you may discern the time, whereof I do foretell you. A voice crying in the
wilderness. Esaias.40.
A voice shall be heard crying in the widernes, Prepare ye the way of the Lord,
make straight in the desert a pathe for your God. Every valley shall be
exalted, and every mountain and hill shall be made low. etc. And the voice
proceeding yet forward, and demanding what he should cry: Say unto the
cities of Judah (says he) Behold your God, behold the Lord God will come with
power, and his arm shall rule for him, and his reward is with him. etc. When
the sound of this trumpe out of the huge desert wilderness shall pearce into your
ears and be seen with your eyes, this shall be a sign for you to know, that
he is not far from the gates, that shall redeem you from your captivity.

I have disclosed unto you the meaning and sense of the Prophet, if I be not
deceived: wherein two especial notes are to be considered: namely the
punishment of sin, and the voice of a crier in the wilderness. Both which
notes, who does not easily perceive to have been accomplished in the persons
of Christ Jesus, and of John Baptist? yea, and so accomplished in them, as no
gappe nor starting hole may possibly be found for you to escape, but that this
place must be of necessity applied to Christ our anointed king and Savior.
For what else imported the voice of John Baptist crying in the wilderness, but to
prepare a way ready for the coming of the Lord? And what else has the whole
doctrine of the new Testament taught and daily does teach us also, but an
everlasting forgiveness of sins, in the manner of a continual vacation from
the term of the law? for as long as the law and Gods justice did combat
against sins, the warfare could never be broken up: The war between Gods
justice, and y^ sins of man.
but the enemy being once subdued, and the dominion of the law brought into
captivity, our warfare must needs be at an end. For as soon as the sinner
begins to be no longer under the Law, but under grace, nor finds any
adversary to wtstand him, but has caught the victory into his own hands
once, The end of our warfare by the Prophet, Esai. cap. 40.
what remains but he may ioyously triumph and keep holy day, being now
delivered from all fear of further controlment.

Iere. 23.
Next unto Esaias let us annexe the testimony of Jeremy, who after he had
prophesied much of the return of the Jews from the captivity of Babylon,
does encourage them again at the last with this kind of consolation: that
from thenceforth they should never be carried from their own country into
bondage again, speaking thus in the xxiii. chapter of his prophecy. And I
will gather the remnant of my sheep out of all countries, whither I shall
drive them, and will bring them again to their foldes, and they shall grow
and increase: And I will raise up shepherds over them which shall feed them:
And they shall dread no more to be afraid: nor shall any of them be lacking
says the Lord. Iere. 23.
And immediately after: Behold the dais come, says the Lord, that I will raise
unto David a righteous branche, and a king shall reign and prosper, and shall
execute judgment and justice in the earth. In his days Judah shall be saved,
and Israel shall dwell in safety. And this is the name whereby they shall call
him, The Lord our righteousness. etc. And again in the xxiiii. of his
prophecy: Iere. 24.
Like as these good figs, so will I know them that are carried away captive
out of ^udah to be good, whom I have sent out of this place into the land of
the Chaldeans: for I will set mine eyes upon them for good, and I will bring
them again into this land, and I will build them and not destroy them, and
I will plant them, and not root them out. etc. And again in the xxxi.
Chapter: Cap. 31.
Behold, I will bring them from the North country, and gather them from the
coasts of the world, with the blind and the lame amongst them, with the
woman with child, and her that is delivered also: A great company shall
return hither. And they shall come and rejoice in the height of Sion, and
their soul shall be as a watered Garden, and they shall hunger no more: for I
will forgive their iniquities, and will remember their sins no more. And the
seed of Israel shall not cease for not being a nation before me for ever. And
the places shall be buylt, and shall be al holy unto the Lord, neither shall they
be plucked up nor destroyed any more for ever. And again in his xxxii. Chapter,
Cap. 32.
Thus has the Lord God of Israel spoken concerning the city, whereof you say,
it shall be delivered into the hand of the king of Babel by the sword, by
famine, and by pestilence, Behold, I will gather them out of all countries,
wherein I have scattered them in mine anger, and will bring them again into
this place, and will cause them to dwell in safety. And they shall be my people,
and I will be their God. And I will give them one heart and one way, that they
may fear me for ever. Cap 33.
And proceeding forward in ye chapter ensuing, Because the people of Jerusalem
did not submit them selves unto the Chaldees, but resisted them with force,
therefore were their bulwarks filled with dead bodies, But behold, I will give
it health and amendment, and I will cure them, and will reueile unto them
abundance of peace and truth. And there shall be heard in this place of which
you say that it shall be desolate, even in the streets of Jerusalem that are
desolate, and without any inhabitant, there shall be the voice of joy and
gladness. Behold, the days come, says the Lord, that I will perform that
good thing, which I have promised unto the house of Israel, and to the house of
Judah. In those days I will cause the branch of righteousness to grow up unto
David, and he shall execute judgment and righteousness in the land. In those
days shall Judah be saved, and Israel shall dwell in safety. And this shall
they call her, The Lord is our righteousness: For thus says the Lord, David
shall never want a man to sit upon the throne of the house of Israel. Neither
shall the Priests and Levites want a man before me to offer burnt offerings, and
to do sacrifice continually. And afterward again in the l. chapter: Cap. 50
Thus says the God of Israel, Behold, I will visit the king of Babel and his
la^d, as I have visited the king of Assure. And I will bring Israel again to his
habitation, he shall be fed, and his soul shall be satisfied in his due time,
says the Lord. In those days shall the iniquity of Israel be sought for, and
there shall be none: and the sins of Judah, and they shall not be found: for I
will be merciful unto them whom I do reserve. etc.

Hereunto may be added the like testimony of Baruch in his v. chapter: Baruch.
^.
Put of thy mourning garments, O Jerusalem, and thin^ affliction, and deck
thee with worship and honor, because everlasting glory comes unto thee from
God. Put on the garment of righteousness that comes from God, and set a crown
upon thy head of the glory of the everlasting: for God will declare thy
brightness unto every country under the heavens, and God will name thee by his
name for ever. etc.

The meaning of the prophets speaking of the kingdom of David, must ne^des be
spiritually understood.
What can be of more efficacy, then the testimonies of the foresaid scriptures?
in the which forasmuch as two things are set down chiefly to be noted, ye must
yield to the one of them of very necessity: either that this kingdom of
Israel shall never decay again, after their return from ye Babylonical
captivity: which being construed after the carnal sense of the letter, is most
false, as you may plainly perceive: or else, if the kingdom of Israel be
overthrown and have an end, and so the^ the Prophets to lie: which is the most
absurd thing that may be spoken.

Whereby appears most evidently, that all those sayings wherein the Prophets
have foretold of the royalty of David's throne, and of the everlasting glory
thereof, must have a certain mystical and spiritual interpretation. For you
are not ignorant your selves of that which happened to that fleshly and worldly
estate of this kingdom, and into how narowe streightes and extremities it was
forced, when as your city was besieged and razed by ye Romans, your Temple
consumed with fire, and all things in the city devoured, and ransacked, even
to the rooting out of all your nation almost: So that the circumstances of the
times, being duly weighed, will plainly convince you, that these promises made
touching the perpetual establishment of the kingdom of David, must be far
otherwise understood, and that your selves either lie shamefully in the order
of your exposition, or else that your own Prophets did prophecy contrary to ye
truth. Dilemma.
Since therefore one of these two must of necessity be granted, choose which you
will, or else discover some way how you may escape out of this Labyrinth. First I
suppose no man will condemn ye Prophets for liers, for they delivered nothing
unto us, but yt which by wonderful inspiratio^ they received of ye holy ghost,
yea, ye same also infallibly true, as approved from time to time by the
circumstances, and sequel of the time.

For they foresawe (as truth was) being infourmed by the holy ghost, first, ye
delivery of the remnant of that nation in the transmigration of Babylon: and it
came to pass: they foresawe also, that this captivity should endure no less
the^ lxx years. This also came to pass. Finally, they foresawe that after the
full expiration of this exile and banishment, a prince should come, and a son
should be given in the fulness of time, which should possess the throne of his
father David, and take upon him the government of the kingdom, and should
establishe the same in a permanent and vnperishable course of continuance,
peace and tranquillity for ever. And this also was performed even then
accordingly, when as the son of God was borne in the city of David: Esaias.9.
that woonderful counsailour, the mighty God, the prince of peace: who albeit
died once according to the flesh, and seemed to be vanquished, yet was he not
holden of death above three days, but suruiued of his own power, and lives
for ever and ever: and in dying has obtained an ^ndlesse conquest of death,
Judge. 16.
and triumphs now (not much unlike unto Sampson) victoriously over death,
has rent in sunder the iron gates of sin, has crushed the tyranny of the
devil in pieces, and purchased everlasting life for his elect, not perishable
by any assault of hautie adversary, nor vanquishable by any power of worldly
policy. For as to that, After the captivity of Babylon god promises
perpetual continuance unto the Jews.
that the city was put to the sack by the puissant army of the Romans, the
Temple burnt and razed to the ground, all this nothing at al diminishes the
credit of the Prophet touching the establishment of the glory of that throne,
but rather confirms, and does argue it to be of much more estimation. The
rebel Jews, and traiterous murderers of Christ were overcome in battle: but
Christ him self Prince of that kingdom with his Church could not be brought
under subjection, neither shall at any time, but has conquered, lives, and
triumphs daily. And although you can not yet conceive this invincible
Majesty of that everlasting king, yet your Prophets saw it, yea, your father
Abraham saw it, and rejoiced: Esaias saw it, witnessing the same with an oath:
Esaias.62.
The Lord has sworn by his right hand, and by the strength of his arm.
Surely I will no more give thy corn to be meat for thine enemies, and surely
the sons of the strangers shall not drink the wine for the which thou have
labored: but they that have gathered it shall eat thereof, and shall praise
the Lord. And the gatherers thereof shall drink it in the courts of my
Sanctuary. etc. Esaias.60.
Again the same Esaias speaking unto Jerusalem as though she were prisoner in
Babylon: Whereas thou have been forsaken, so that no man went by thee, I will
make thee an eternal glory, and a joy from generation to generation. etc.
Esaias.54.
Moreover in the 54. Chapter: For a moment in mine anger I hid my face from
thee for a little season, but with everlasting mercy have I had compassion upon
thee, says the Lord thy redeemer: for this is unto me as in the waters of
Noah, to whom as I have sworn, that I would no more go over the earth with
waters, so have I sworn, that I would no more be angry with thee nor rebuke
thee. For the mountains shall remove, and the hills shall fall down, but my
mercy shall not depart from thee, neither shall the covenant of my peace fall
away, says the Lord, that has compassion on thee. Esaias.48.
And again in another place. Go ye out of Babel, flee ye from the Chaldeans
with a voice of joy, tell and declare this, show it forth to the ends of the
earth. Say ye, the Lord has redeemed his servant Jacob. And within a little
after: Esaias.49.
It is a small thing that thou should be my servant to raise up the tribes
of Jacob, and to restore the desol^tion of Israel. I will give thee also for a
light to the Gentiles, that thou may be my salvation unto the end of the
world. Behold, I have graven thee upon the palm of my hand: thy walls are
ever in my sight. Thy buylders make haste, thy destroyers and they that made
thee waste, are departed from thee. etc.

Neither did Esaias see these things alone: The other Prophets, Patriarchs, and
holy ones also did awayte for the royal excellency of this kingdom, before
it was come. The Angels signified out of heaven that he was presently come, his
miraculous works do ratify the same, his rising again at the feast of Easter
confirms it, yea, the devils them selves felt it, and did tremble for fear.
The holy company of Apostles, and Martyrs do confess it: all tongues and
Nations do speak of his glory, bow the knees, and worship him. Finally,
the holy Ghost through wonderful s^crete operation does daily and hourly
enlarge, and ensea^e the infallible assurance thereof in the hearts of the
faithful. Lastly you also, even you that are Jews, albeit as yet it be not
reueiled unto you, shall know and acknowledge once at the length (I trust) the
inestimable treasure and incomparable riches of this kingdom, ye inuin^ible
everlasting power of this king, Daniel.2.
who shall break and overthrow all other kingdoms of the world, and shall
not possibly be destroyed it self, neither shall have any end, Daniel.2.

But as this greatness of power is not car^^^, nor can be discerned with ^^rnall
eyes, ^^^oeth it not wrestle with (...) and blood with carnal weapons. T^^
^on^^est of this ^^^nce do^th extend it self (...) a far more ^^^stre^thed
vnmeasurablenes, creeps not ^^^ng the ground like a worm: but pear^^^ the
height of the heavens, does not pro^^^e men to bloody battle: but assaulteth
^^e Prince of this world, even the devil him self, and being advanced into
heaven, has thrown headlong out of heaven the ancient Arche enemy and
accuser of mankind, yea, and slain him with the sword of his Majesty, has
removed away wrath, has blotted out the curse of the Law, has cured the
canker of sin, has trodden death under his feet, has taken into his own
government the power of all judgment, in so much that the Prophet Esaias
seems astonished, Esa. 63.
amazedly wondering at the marvelous course of his incomprehensible power: who
having vanquished incomparable enemies, does likewise emparten his faithful
servants with very rich spoils, not transitory and soon vanishing away, but
enduring beyond all ages. Will ye yet hear more concerning ye power of this
mighty Monarche? Listen then a while to the testimony of the verity it self
in the Gospel. John.6.
This is the will of my father, that sent me, that every man which sees the
son, and believes on him shall have everlasting life. What can be more
princely then this? And I will raise him up at the last day. What can be of
more power? For as the father has life in him self, so likewise has he
given to the son to have life in him self, and to give life unto him unto
whom he will, and has given him power also to execute judgment. What can be
more heavenly? Neither does the father judge any man, but has given all the
judgment unto the son. What can be more admirable? John.5. Mat. vltime^
Unto whom all power is given in heaven and in earth. What can be required
more? Moreover that ye may be assured that the son of man is of power to
forgive sins upon earth, behold a sign wrought upon the sick of the
palsy: Take up thy bed and walk. Again: As the living father has sent me,
even so do I send yo: whosoever sins ye forgive, shall be forgiven them.
Besides all this, let us hear what Peter speaks of him: Acts.10.
To him (says he) all the Prophets do give witness that through his name all
that believe in him, shall receive remission of sins. What can be more
marvelous? When the son of man shall be exalted, I will draw all things unto
my self. What can be more glorious?

Let us adioyne herewith the t^stimonie of Saint Paul: Who has reconciled all
things in heaven and in earth: who undertook in his own person all the hatred
and enmity betwixt God and men: who with a beck of his countenance reli^ueth
the afflicted consciences humbled even to hell gates, who does refreshe and
comfort them with his spirit, heals with a word of his mouth, loses them
that are fettered with the chains of sin, discharges from all fear of
judgment and death, acquiteth from the tyranny of the devil. What may be
comparable to the Majesty of this Empire? and withal what can be more amiable
then the same Majesty, at the naming of whom all knees in heaven, earth, and
hell, Phil^p. 2. Esa. 35.55.6^
do fall prostrate and worship? Yea, the devils themselves do tremble and quake
for fear, the dead arise again, maladies are healed, prisoners are loosed,
Mat. 11.
the hungry are filled, the oppressed with labor are refreshed and
disburdened, mourners, and such as pyne away with sorrow and anguish are
recomforted, Esaias.25.35^
death is subdued, tears are wyped away, sorrow and sadness is turned into
mirth and gladness, Esaias.9.40.
enterchange is made from the lowest to the highest, mountains are thrown
down, hidden things are discovered, rough and crabbed things are made plain
and straight, Mat. 20.
the first become the last, and the last are made the first.

All which heavenly graces, albeit you miserable Hebrews will not acknowledge,
and most disdainfully do blaspheme in your synagogs, ye angel of ye everlasting
testament, having regard to y^ part of him only, wherein he seems weak
according to the utter appearance and dispensation of the flesh by reason of his
death and burial: The majesty of Christ's kingdom.
yet we for our part beholding his heavenly divinity, unseparably united
together with the baseness of his humanity, and comparing his miraculous life,
death and resurrection, yea, the whole course and actions of his life with the
reports of the Prophets: and being established in faith with infallible
testimonies of the sacred scriptures, instructed hereunto by ye guyding of the
holy ghost, persuaded by the assured promises of the Prophets, and casting
ankerholde in the assured haven of his wonderful miracles: do firmly believe,
and with unshaken faith confess, that this is the very same Messhias whom you
do yet expect and look for. Finally, reposing all our trust and affiaunce upon
his mighty power, guarded with the invincible protection of so great Majesty,
do with so valiant forwardnes of mind, raise up the undaunted courage of our
hearts against all assaults and battrie of the world, against all storms of
fretting adversity, that now neither the raging railing of your blasphemous
mouth, nor fearful delusions of wyly Satan, not ye dreadful sight of hell gates,
nor ye tyrannous threatenings thereof: not ye griesely countenance of gastful
death, be it never so terrible, nor the cruel curse and continual accusations
of the Law (which is more horrible then all the rest) can in any respect
appall and terrify our settled consciences. For why should that person tremble
or be amazed with the threatninges of the Law, whose Lord and master Christ
Jesus is Judge and ruler over the Law? Why should he dread death, or the devil
him self procurer of death, or all the furious champions of the devil, for
the safety of whose life, and assured raising from death to life, ye very
son of God Christ Jesus is become surety and pledge? who sitting at the right
hand of the Father, Psalm. 109.
does keep the keys of death and hell, and therewith alone shuts, and no
man opens, Apoc. 1. ^^
sets wide open, and no man shuts, restrayning and disposing al things in
heaven and earth with an only beck of his countenance.

And hereof arises that wonderful constancy of our Martyrs and Apostles,
The mighti^ power of Christ in keeping his Church.
in yielding their bodies to tortures and death: hereof springs that
invincible force of Christian faith: hereupon is grounded that vnpenetrable
Rock of Christ's Church, which being so often undermined by your subtle
pyoners, circumuented with so many traitorous sleights and devises, vexed with so
many furious outrages of Gentiles and Jews, attempted with so many cruel
crampes of the prince of darkness, assaulted with all kind of torments and
persecutions, could notwithstanding never hitherto be discomfited with any kind
of battry, or shaken with engine, neither shall be overthrown at any time,
whiles the world does endure. The unvanquishable continuance whereof if you
would but indifferently without al partiality ponder in your hearts, what else
does it argue then an heavenly an^ unspeakable power of her captain Christ
Jesus? But as the power of this captain is spiritual, so it is not discernable,
but by spiritual insight, raised up (as I said before) not to strive against
mankind, but to subdue the tyranny of Satan, The power of Christ is
spiritual, set up not against man, but for man, to fight against ye spiritual
operation of Satan.
the mighty prince of this world, and to despoyle and force him out of his
kingdom. And this may every sensible man easily conceive, if he will enter
into somewhat a more deep consideration of his miraculous works: so that this
marvelous victory of this triumphaunt conqueror, can by no argument and
proof appear more manifestly, then even in this one overthrow of that
ancient archenemie. For if that conquest be so much the more praise worthy, by
how much the force of the vanquished is more notorious, what ought we the^ to
judge of him, who only and alone, undertaking the challenge, not against man's
power, Christ's victory, not against man, but for man.
but in the behalf and defense of mankind rather, against al those mighty
and invisible adversaries of mankind, vnuanquisheable otherwise by any policy
of men, against all those spiritual furies and incessaunt accusers of mankind
before the throne of God, against al those princes and pote^tates, and rulers
of darkness, against the poisoned darts of death, against the intolerable
burden of sin, against the dreadful curse of the Law, and wrath of Gods
vengeance, against the force and gates of hell, was able by his only prowess
to tread down, and triumph over them all, without all aid and help of man,
yea and which is most to be marueiled at, without all strength, without al
sleyght and policy of resistance, far unlike the warlike attemptes and
martial affairs: where it comes always to pass, that the most notable and
famous enterprises are never achieved without huge troops of courageous
soldiers, or subtle practice of politic governors. For here beyond all
reach of man's understanding, I know not how miraculously this marvelous
victory was obtained, without force of arms, industry and policy, through
the only plain and open conduct of simple truth. For what simplicity can be
greater, then to yield to the will of the adversary in humility and patience?
And what could be more void of hope to recovery? The victory of Christ by
what means it was gotten.
And yet by this means it came to pass, that pompous Pride through humility
was brought into subjection: glory of riches confounded by baseness of poverty:
hautie arrogancy of the world suppressed with humble infirmity: the curse of
the Law rased out by undefiled innocence: sins forgiven: the mouth of the
enemy stopped up, through meek taciturnitie: victory obtained by yielding:
finally, death by dying vanquished, and life everlasting purchased.

And yet to confess the truth frankly and simply, this glorious conquest
wanted not his singular dexterity and artificial policy, being nevertheless
both heavenly, holy and achieved by most upright Justice: not to the end to
betraye in snare, or seduce any good man from the right path of truth, but to
intrappe that crafty enemy the Devil only. And that not without great
cause. For what could be more agreeable with reason, The evylyne^ of the old
serpent, taken in his own snare.
then the same old wily serpent (which had beguiled mankind first with
subtlety and lies) should be encountered again with a certain heavenly
policy, (yet void of all color of lying) and so entrapped and entangled with
sleyghts and deceites of his own forge, should be caught in his own pytfall,
and bereft of his place? What could be more convenient, then to strangle the
most horrible deceyuer with his own halter, and by most just law to
disfraunchise the most unjust intruder from his unjust possession?

Wherefore go to, what say thou now Satan, Satan kindly deluded by Christ
our Savior.
thou cursed imaginer and practizer of all mischief, allege somewhat at
length if thou can: what say thou? Do thou not see yt all thy practizes
are discovered through that heavenly light? Do thou not feel infirmity of
the flesh, treading now upon thine own head, whiles thou wast devising
mischief against infirmity of weak flesh? Thou had swallowed down a bayte,
but art enforced to cast ye same out again of thy gorge. Thou did awayte
for the destruction of mankind, but withal did accelerate his safety. Thou
did enforce the innocent to the death of the cross, such was thy cankred
malice, or such rather was thy lewd folly. Thou did undermine the Son of
God: wherein albeit thou did scarce pynche him, yet have thou slain thy
self thereby, and blessed us for ever. For thou have not fastened him upon the
cross alone, but nailed all our sins also together with him, which being now
thoroughly clea^sed with that only sacrifice, has delivered us from everlasting
torments, and recoyled them back upon thine own head unrecoverable for
evermore. The brazen serpent might have been a good president unto thee, to
have made thee more wary and advised, which, if it had not bin hanged on tree,
could not have healed the wounds of them yt were plagued. The valiant Sampson
being a type and figure of our Lord Jesus, might have forewarned thee: and that
mystical immaculate Lamb, above all the rest: the sleying of the which was no
less dreadful to the enemy, then comfortable to the godly. Neither happens
it otherwise to thee, Satan overcome and spoiled.
and thine at this present. Thou did endeavor to establishe thine empire,
and art despoyled of thine empire. What? wast thou ignorant, yt he whom thou
did assail, was the son of God? Why then did thou confess him so to be?
And if thou know it, with what shameless impudency could thou attempt so
execrable impiety? But he seemed weak in thine eye perdy, being clad with
p^^^e beggarly baseness of the flesh: and thy meaning perhaps was to try,
whether he could be slain, and therefore thou did rush upon him so sternely,
and murdered him so horribly. Well, and why dydst thou not hold him fast,
when thou had slain him? How chanced that he slypt out of thy paws? and
being escaped, whyther went he from thee? and where does he now remain? O
cruel cursed manqueller, do thou not perceive, into what streightes thy
savage bloodthirstinesse has driven thee at ye last? Do thou not
acknowledge yt the very same tree, and that That is, the cross of co^tumelie.
(...), which by the ministry of thy cha^pions, thou gave to him for food,
is turned into thy poison, and for us into the bread of life? Do thou not
remember how y^ famous and solemn feast day, Coloss. 2.
wherein he did triu^phe over death, when he spoiled principalities and powers,
and made a show of them openly, triumphing over them in his own person,
wherein thou thy self with thy mates dydst rejoice by the space of two days,
was erected to us for a perpetual monument of eternal joy and freedom? At
the very naming wher^of, the whole rabble of thy adherentes do tr^^ble and
quake for fear. Philip^ 2
Do thou not acknowledge now at the length, y^ glorious name yt was given
him above al names, the power whereof thou do feel now and then among, to
thy great grief? and whereunto all the furies of hell confederats of thy
malice are compelled to yield maugre their teeth? Does not this victorious
conqueror by contrary enterchaunge of times, tread down thy cowardice
deservedly, as saying thus, Ose. 13.
Death where is thy sting? Death where is thy victory? And what avails thee
being altogether vanquished, and brought into thralldome, to kick against the
conqueror, inciting and provoking the Pharisees and kings of the Gentiles, so
furiously to rage against the godly Martyrs? Go to, and what have thou won
by their imprisonme^ts, chains, stoning to death, scourgings, torme^tings by
fiery enflamed plates, tortures and rackings, burning, broylinges and
skorchinges, by all kinds of horror and cruelty, and by so many their
slaughters? I will tell thee. Thou have confirmed the faith of Christ, thou
have established and enlarged the kingdom of Christ, and have heaped upon thy
self and thy brood double torments of unquenchable flames. And herein we
are somewhat beho^^ing to thee, for that through this deadly madness, it comes
to pass, that throughout the whole world, the name of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ is magnified and renowned, and also because thou ceasest not to lie
in wait against his heel daily as yet: but he that is in heaven does skorne
at thy malicious devises, he derydeth thy subtle sleyghtes, that has skill to
convert thy despite and outrage to the benefit of his elect, and to the
glorious increase of their eternal felicity.

But I return to the prophets again, out of every of whom I do not purpose
to set down all that they write touching my purpose: but I will give you a
taste of a few special sentences, taken out of an infinite number
skatteringly here and there, and will gather them together to f^t our present
matter: that ye shall neither be able with shifte or cauillation whatsoever, to
delude the manifest proofs concerning Christ Jesus our Lord, unless you
disclaim wholly from your own prophets: nor yet allow of your pr^phets,
unless you do admit withal our savior Jesus Christ. Amongst whom, (because I
will not be long) to omit the notable prophecies of Ezechiel, very much
auaylable to this our discourse, wherein he foretells of the return of the
dispersed Jews, from Babylon to their own city, and the second buylding up
of their temple, which from thenceforth should stand unshaken, and never
peryshe any more, nor be molested by any invasion of the enemy. For even to
that effect does the prophet treat very largely, in the xxviii. of his
prophecy, saying: Ezech. 28.
And they shall dwell in their la^d with all security, and they shall buyld
houses, and shall plant vineyards, and shall inhabit the land confidently, when
I shall execute judgment against all the^, that shall stand against them round
about them. etc. And again in the 34. chapter thus he says: Cap. 34.
And they shall be safe in their land, and they shall no more be spoiled of the
heathen, neither shall the beasts of the land devour them, but they shall
dwell confidently, and none shall make them afraid. And I will raise up for
them a plant of renown. And they shall no more be consumed with hunger in the
land, neither bear the reproach of the Heathen any more, etc. And in his
xxxvi. chapter, speaking to the mountains of Israel: Ezech. 36.
And I will bring my people again, (says he) unto them: and you shall be
their inheritance, and they shall possess you. Thou shall not waste thy
people from henceforth. And I will cause no more to hear in thee the shame of
the Heathen any way: neither shall thou bear the reproach of the people any
more. etc. And immediately in the chapter next ensuyng: Cap. 37.
And they shall be no more two people, neither be divided any more from
henceforth into kingdoms: neither shall they be polluted any more with their
Idolles, nor with any of their transgressions: But they shall dwell upon their
land them selves, even their sons, and their sons sons for ever. And my
servant David shall be their Prince for ever. And I will make a covenant of
peace with them, it shall be an everlasting covenant with them. And I will
multyplye them, and will place my Sanctuary among them for evermore. And in an
other chapter a little before: Cap. 36.
And I will call for corn, and I will increase it, and lay no famine upon
you. etc. Now considering and conferring with this, the great famine that not
long after ensued, the city being besieged by the Romans, when as mothers
were enforced through famine to slay their suckling babes, yea and the city
besides were almost starued and pyned up with hunger, I can not see how that
saying can be verified, unless you understand it, as having relation to the
spiritual kingdom of Israel, and not to the carnal.

But to pass over these, because we shall not be able to stand upon all their
testimonies spoken to this effect, (as I have said before) we will proceed to
others. And first let us consider the place taken out of the ix. chapter of
Daniel his prophecy, because it fitteth this purpose more notably, then any
other: where the heavenly Prophet does in few words comprehend the whole
estate of your common weal, from your return out of the Babylonicall
captivity, even to the uttermost point of your desolation, describing withal
in the same chapter, the death of the Messhias, the end and consummation of
sin, together with the utter abolishment of the obseruances and sacrifices of
the ceremonial Law, by such special marks and tokens so evidently, that it can
by no means possible be gainsayde. Wherefore let us with good advise ponder
the words of the prophet, and with no less diligence, the^ the matter
requires. For in this wise the Angel Gabriel does call upon Daniel, whiles he
was praying, and speaks the words ensuing.

At the beginning of thy supplications, Dan. 9.
(says he) the commandment came forth. And I am come to show thee, for thou
art greatly beloved. Therefore understand the matter, and consider the vision.
Seventy weeks are shortened, (or determined) upon thy people, and upon thy
holy city, to finish the wickedness, and to seal up the sins, and to
reco^cile the iniquity, and to bring in the righteousness of the world to
come, (or everlasting) and to seal up the vision, and the prophet (or
prophecy) and to annoint the most holy, (or the holiness of the sanctified.)
And thou shall know and understand, that from the going forth of the
commandment, to bring again the people, and to build Jerusalem, unto
Meschias the Prince, shall be seven weeks, and three score and two weeks. And
the streets, and the wall (or trenches) shall be buylt again in the streights
of times. And after three score and two weeks shall Meschias be slain,
(anointed) and shall have nothing, (shall be bereft of his life.) And the people
of the Prince that shall come, (coming) shall destroy the city, and the
Sanctuary, and the end thereof shall be in (with) a flood: and to the end of
the battle the desolation shall be determined (the end of desolations.) And he
shall confirm the covenant with many for one week: and in the mids of the
week shall cause to rest (cease) the sacrifice and oblation (Minha.) And upon
the wyng (or as some say for the ouerspreading) of the abominations, there
shall be desolation, (he shall make it desolate) even until the consummation
determined (determined desolation) shall be powered upon the desolate.

The same after the common translation.
Seventy weeks shall be shortened upon thy people, The common translation.
and upon thy holy city, that wickedness may be finished, and sin may take an
end, and iniquity wiped out, and everlasting righteousness may be brought in,
and the vision and prophecy may be fulfilled, and the holy of holy ones may be
anointed. Know therefore and understand, that from the going forth of the
commandment, that Jerusalem shall be builded again, even to Christ the prince
seven weeks, and three score two weeks shall be. And the streets shall be builded
again, and the walls in straitnes of times. And after three score two weeks
shall Christ be slain, and that shall not be his people which will deny him.
And the people with the prince that shall come, shall destroy the city and the
Sanctuary, and the end shall be destruction, and after the end of the war
determined desolation. But he shall confirm his covenant to many in one week,
and in the mids of the week the offering and sacrifice shall cease, and there
shall be in the Temple abomination of desolation, and even to the consummation
and end shall the desolation continue.

Munster his translation.
Seventy weeks are determined upon thy people, The translation of M^nster.
and upon thy holy hill, to finishe wickedness, and seal up sins, and to
cleanse iniquity, and to bring in the righteousness of the worlds, to seal
the vision and the prophet, and to annoint the holy of holy ones. And thou
shall know and consider from the going out of the commandment, for
therepayring and buylding again of Jerusalem unto Messhias the prince, shall be
seven weeks and three score two weeks, but the street shall be restored and
builded again, and the trenche, but in strayghtes of times. And after three
score two weeks, shall the anointed be cut of, and nothing shall be of him. And
the people of the Prince coming, shall destroy the city, and the Sanctuary,
and the end thereof shall be in ouerflowing, and to the end of the battle
determined desolation. And he shall make strong a covenant with many for one
week, and in the mids of the week he shall make to cease the sacrifice,
and the offering Minha. And for the ouerspreading of abominations shall be
desolation, and to the consummation and determined banishment shall be povvred
upon (the people) which is subject to desolation.

The translation of Pagninus and Vatablus.
Seventy vveeks are cut of upon thy people, and upon thy holy city, to finish
wickedness, to consume sin, and to purge iniquity, and to bring in the
righteousness of the worlds, and to finish the vision, and the prophet, and to
anoint the holy of the holy. Know therefore and understand, that from the
going forth of the commandment, for the bringing back of the people, and the
buylding of Jerusalem unto Christ the prince, shall be seven weeks, and
threescore two weeks, and he shall come again, and the street and the wall
shall be builded again in the streightes of times. But after threescore two
weeks, Christ shall be cut of, and there shall be none (to help him) and the
people of the prince that shall come shall destroy the city and Sanctuary,
and the end thereof with a floode, and to the end of the battle it shall be
cut of with desolations. And he shall strengthen a covenant with many one
week, and in the mids of the week he shall cause to cease the sacrifice and
oblation, and for the ouerspreading of abomination, he shall make desolate
until the consummation, and (truly) being cut of shall be powered upon the
wonderer.

Caluines translation.
Seventy weeks are finished upon thy people and upon thy holy city, to shut
up wickedness, and to seal up sin, and to purge iniquity, and to bring in
everlasting righteousness, and to seal up the vision and the prophecy, and to
anoint the holy of holy ones. Thou shall therefore know and understand, from
the going out of the commandment of the return and buylding again of
Jerusalem unto Christ the prince, to be threescore two weeks, and (the
people) shall be brought again. And the street and the wall shall be builded
again, and that in the streightes of times. And after threescore two weeks,
Christ shall be cut of, and shall be nothing. And the people of the prince coming
shall destroy the city and the Sanctuary, and the end thereof shall be with a
flood. And to the end of the battle determination of desolations. And he
shall strengthen a covenant with many for a week, and in the mids of the
week, he shall cause the sacrifice and oblation to rest, and over the
destruction or ouerspreading shall be amazed, (or cause to be amazed) and at the
end and determination shall power out upon the amazed.

Melancthons translation.
Seventy weeks are cut of upon thy people, and upon thy holy city. And
iniquity shall be purged, and everlasting righteousness shall come. And the
prophecy, and the vision shall be sealed, and the holy of holy ones shall be
anointed. And thou shall know, and understand from the going forth of the
commandment, and the restoring and buylding again of Jerusalem unto Christ
the prince in seven weeks, and in seventy two weeks. And the street and
wall shall be builded again in the streightes of times. And after threescore two
weeks Christ shall be cut of, and there shall be no people for him. And the people
of the prince coming shall destroy the city, and the Sanctuary. And the end
thereof shall be a flood. And to the end of the battle may be finished as
though an appointed desolation or banishment. And he shall confirm a covenant,
even as a testament to many for one week, and in the mids of the week he
shall cause the sacrifice and oblation to cease. And upon the wing, the
abomination of desolation, and unto the determined consummation shall power out
upon the desolation. And upon the wing shall be abomination of desolation.

Vrbane Rhegius differing very little from the common translation, has written
as ensues.
Seventy weeks are shortened (or finished, determined) upon thy people and
upon thy holy city, that wickedness may be finished (or transgression shall be
restrained or driven away) and sin may come to an end (or sin then shall be
shut up or covered) and iniquity wyped away (or purged) and everlasting
righteousness brought in, and the vision or prophecy may be fulfilled (or
ensealed) and the holy of holy ones may be anointed. Know therefore and
understand, from the going forth of the commandment (that is to say, from the
time wherein the commandment was published) that Jerusalem shall be builded
again, even to Christ the prince, are seven weeks and threescore and two
weeks, and the streets and the wall shall be builded again in the streightes
of times. And after threescore and two weeks Christ shall be slain, and that
shall not be his people which will deny him (or that will not know him, or
will forsake him.) And the people of the prince shall come and shall scatter
abroad the city and the Sanctuary (destroy) and the end thereof destruction
(or the end thereof with a tempest, or with a flood) and after the end of the
battle appointed desolation (or after the battle all shall remain desolate)
he shall confirm a covenant with many in one week, and in the half of the
week the offering and sacrifice shall decay, and in the temple shall be
abomination of desolation (or upon the wing or wings shall stand the
abomination of desolation) And even unto the end and consummation shall
desolation continue, (or it is decreed that the desolation shall continue even
unto the end.)

Ye men and Hebrews, you hear in this prophecy many strange and wonderful
things, which do convince your errors very singularly. First, where he says
that your Messhias shall come whiles your common wealth flori^heth in most
prosperous estate. If this be true, what hope induces you to believe that your
Messhias shall come now, your common wealth being utterly defaced and
scattered? Then, mention is made of the benefits of your Messhias, wherein is
foreshewed that he shall be slain, yea, the time also wherein he shall be
slain, is expressly set down. And after threescore two weeks (says he)
Messhias shall be cut of Veein lo) that is as much to say, in short speech of
Hebrew, And his life shall be taken from him.
Veein lo. And first herein the Jews do agree together with us, that these
weeks are not to be nombred by limitation of days, but of years.

Wherefore these threescore two weeks spoken of by the Prophet are by
computatio^ accounted to amount to 436. years. After ye end of which threescore
two weeks, Messhias shall establish his covenant by his doctrine, death, and
resurrection in the other week next ensuing. In the half whereof he shall by
his own only sacrifice and oblation, wherein he shall offer him self to God
the father in his cross and passion, dissolve and utterly abolish all your
sacrifices and offerings.

But here arise in the mean space many scrupules to be resolved: first, to
know at what time those weeks took their beginning, and so also when they
ended. For herein the learned expositors seem to be variable in judgment.
Some are of opinion that the beginning of the weeks entered first, when as the
seventy years of their captivity were finished: That is to say, from the
second year of the reign of Darius Histaspes. And of this mind are Clement of
Alexandria, Clemens in libris strom.
Theodorete, Eusebius, Jerome and Augustine, Eusebius, (...) chronicis.

Theodoret^^ in cap. 1. Zachariae.

Hieronymus in procemio super Aggaeum cap. 1.

Augustinus de ciuitate. lib. 18.


grounding as it seems upon the words of Zachary in the first Chapter of
his prophecy.

Again many do deny this utterly, supposing that the weeks began first at
the going forth of the commandment: That is to say, when proclamation was
made by the commandment of Cyrus in the first year of his reign, that the
Jews should be released, and sent home into their country again. In like
manner they do vary also, about the end and finishing of the said weeks. For
some that reckone the beginning of ye weeks from the first of Cyrus reign, do
ascribe ye end of the same to the time of Christ's birth in the reign of
Augustus the Emperor of Rome. Some others do draw them longer to the Baptism
and passion of Christ. Others also accompting from Darius, do begin at the
second year of his reign: many at the sixth, some others at the twentieth year
thereof. Some writers also mislyking the former opinions, do make their
reckoning otherwise. Besides this scrupule many seem to be encumbred much
about the intricate and confused supputation of the years and reigns of the
kings which succeeded Cyrus and continued until the coming of Alexander,
which thing chiefly above all the rest entangleth the account most by reason
of the uncertain limitatio^ of those times. There is also no less
disagreement in the order and observation of the years, betwixt them which do
number from the reign of Cyrus: amongst whom those which apply to the birth
of Christ, do recompt the number of years to be 540: some reckone 501: some
otherwise either more or less. Finally, albeit the most approved writers do
verify that fourteen Persian kings, or at the lest thirteen succeeded each
other in the kingdom of Persia until the conquest of Alexander, yet the Jews
make account of four only. But these buzzards unacquainted altogether with
foreign gouernements, are to be rejected utterly as unmeet arbyters of this
controversy.

Some be of opinion, that Cyrus, after the conquest of Babylon reigned twenty
years, some others seven years only. Some report that betwixt Cyrus and Darius
the Assyrian, only Cambyses reigned, and that by the space of twenty years.
There be others, that making no mention of Cambyses at all, do enterlace
betwixt Cyrus and Darius one named Assuerus, and unto him they allow twenty
years of holding the kingdom likewise. So great is the variety of opinion
also concerning the continuance of the Persian Empire, yea even amongst ye
learned: whiles some do attribute to that government under the Persia^ Kings
130. years full: others 200 lacking two: some other there be which otherwise
make their calculation.

But as concerning the succession of the Persian kings, The variety of writers
in counting the weeks of Daniel.
many of our writers suppose that the Temple began to be builded at Jerusalem
in the reign of Longimanus, who as they say was ye fourth after Cyrus in
success^on: which fourth place Jerome ascribes to Darius, and drives this
Longimanus to be the seventh in number after Cyrus. Briefly there is no one
thing amongst ye Historiographers, that moves more doutful matter of
controversy, as well among the Grecians as ye Latinists. Wherein as it would
seem troublesome to recite the names of all the authors that write of this
matter: so would it be over tedious to recompt al their several opinions and
reasons alleged thereunto. Neither will I take upon me to determine any
certainty in this co^fuse variety of wits, nor do I think it necessary:
namely sithe^ce this our later age has raised up many learned men, who by
exquisite comparing of ye ancient Chronicles, have left to the posterity
commendable testimony of their studious industry: who albeit express no
small disagreement in some certain points, yet receiving much light from the
ancient Chronicles, seem to approach somewhat near the mark.

Philip Melancthon.
Philip Melancthon, as in all liberal sciences singularly studied, so through
wonderful travail in the careful conference of histories atchieuing a more
ripe and sound judgment, sets down a double order of reckoning: in the one
whereof he nombreth the weeks to begin in the reign of Cyrus, and so until
the birth of Christ: in the other he takes the original of the weeks in ye
time of Longimanus, and so proceeds unto ye time of Christ's death and
resurrection, yielding herein to the judgment of ye learned, to make their
choice, whether of them they list to approve. But Io. Calvin seems to allow
neither of the^, Io. Calvin.
induced as it seems with this reason, that ye beginning of ye computation
ought not to enter in ye reign of Longimanus, nor y^ end thereof to be
determined at the birth of Christ, as he supposes: which thing truly is very
well noted by Io. Calvin, according to the singular dexterity of his learning
and capacity.

For as it behooved these weeks to comprehend the fulness of time, from the free
manumission of the captives, to ye last purging and clensing of sins, which
should come to pass by the only oblation of Mes^hias our savior: it is out of
al question, that neither the reign of Cyrus is exempted from this abatement
of weeks, namely since the Prophet Esaias in y^ 45. cha. of his prophecy,
Esai.45.
does note Cyrus by e^pecial name to be ye only deliverer of ye people from
their captivity: neither those weeks could be finished before ye whole exploit
of our redemption were of al parts accomplished. And therefore I. Calvin does
not without some probability dissent from them, who derive ye entrye of ye said
weeks from the second year of Darius his reign only. So would I likewise
contentedly ye^ld to his judgment herein, if he had made a full and distinct
computatio^ of all yt m^ane process of time, which passed over betw^xt y^
going forth of the commandment from Cyrus, to the passion of Christ according
to the true and just proportion of ye weeks. But forasmuch as those years
which were betwixt the going forth of the commandment and the passion of
Christ, being duly accompte^ do amount above 530 years, as appears by
collation of Chronicles: therefore some dout also may be made here, how
Caluines reckoning may be appliable to this account. For resolution whereof,
Matthewe Beroaldus.
Matthew Beroalde in his Chronographicall demonstration will help us somewhat:
who beginning his number at the reign of Cyrus also, proceeding onward until
y^ ascension of Christ, does reduce those years which were accomptable
betwixt whiles, to the seventy weeks mentioned in Daniel, to wit, to 490
years, or to te^ Iubiles, very well agreeable with Caluines reckoning. The same
also does Gerardus Mercator^ very late writer testify, Gerardus Mercator.
if credit may be given to their report.

But what answer will those men make on the other side, to ye other
Historiographers? to Constantine Phrygio, Constantinus Phrygio.
who nombreth ye years from the reign of Cyrus unto the passion of Christ 544?
to Io. Lucidus and Io. Functius? Joan Lucidus

Joan Fu^ctius


whereof the one far otherwise measuring y^ weeks after the death of Cyrus
from the xx. year of Darius, the other from the vii. year of his reign, do
recompt ye same to be 490. And to p^sse over infinite of the like disagreme^ts,
Theodorus Bibliander also seems to be of like opinion to them, Theodorus
Bibliander.
that make account of more years betwixt the reign of Cyrus and the blessed
passion of Christ, then are recorded by Beroalde and others. But whether this
computation be right, yea or nay, I am not to determine at this present.

Well the^ may some man say, what certainty can be agreed upon in this so great
co^trarietie and disagreement of opinions? For ye discharge of which subtle
question, I do answer in few words. First the infallible testimony of gods
truth does not depend upon man's determination: howsoever men be carried hither
and thither in conceit, and their opinions like clockes whirled about upon
wheels, that never sound in one minute of time, yet does not the day alter
his appointed course: no more will the certainty of Gods promise be any time
unsteadfast or deceivable. And albeit ancient Chroniclers do sometimes wander
in precise, and exact observation of minutes, and small moments of days, or
years, or utter their several judgments therein, according to their several
capacities: yet this contrariety withstandeth not so much, but there may be a
general consent in the substance of the matter debated: nor is this to be
marueiled at, considering the great antiquity of foreworne years, and the
unmeasurable blindness, and ignorance in the same: so also how variable ^oeuer
the opinions of many seem discrepant each from other, yet this contrariety,
as it is not altogether void of truth, so does it not much prejudice the
cause, which is here in controversy. For whether the account of seventy
weeks be derived from the reign of Cyrus, as some will have it, or from
Darius, as others do think, to continue either until the nativity of
Christ, or to his death and passion: or whither the same were the Assyrian
Darius, or Longimanus, in the sixte year of whose government, the buylding of
the Temple was resumed, and finished: yet in this one point, all and every the
Historiographers, as well aunci^nt, as late writers, with one general consent
do conclude, and agree togethers, that these seventy weeks can not by any
application be ascribed to any other person, then to Christ Jesus, the true
Messhias, even the same Messhias, (I say) which was borne of the virgin, ^n
the time of Augustus the Emperor, and was afterward crucified under Pontius
Pi^ate, and which was restored again to life, the third day after his death.

And thus much touching the diversity of judgment in the computation of the
learned: who notwithstanding differ not so much in the state, and ground of
the question. Only the controversy aryseth upon the application of the time:
as whether the account of the weeks ought to be referred to the birth of
Christ, or to his passion. But what is this to the purpose: This groundwoorke
remains yet unshaken, and ratyfyed by most approved testimony of general
consent, which apperteyneth chiefly to the sentence of the Prophet, and the
material part of his prophecy: to wit, that no one sentence throughout the
whole Scriptures, does more manifestly convince your error touching your
Messhias, and more substauncially establish our faith, then this one testimony
of the Prophet Daniel, wherein the mystery of the seventy weeks most
manifestly is here determined upon that nation, and people of yours. The which
same weeks the Angel gathering again together, deuideth into three several
distinct orders. The first order comprehends seven weeks: the second, three
score two weeks: the third, one week only, which was the last, and the
seuentieth in number. In which last week, he signifies that it should come to
pass, that the holy of holy ones should be anointed, slain, and make an
end of sin, and sin offerings appointed in the law of Moses: which things
being accomplished, and the full number of years completed and finished, the
city afterward should come to utter ruin and destruction. And because the
Prophet should the better conceive the very disposition, and distinct
proportion of times, in which those things should be brought to pass, the
Angel does, as it were leading by the hand, instruct him by this divided
partition of weeks: as if this were the purport of the prophecy.

The ex^osition of the place of Daniel in his 9. Chapter.
For so much (O Daniel greatly beloved of God) as thou art so careful, and
zealous for the estate and safety of thy people; it pleased Almighty God to
hear thee, even in the beginning of thy prayers, and withal to empart his
heavenly will unto thee, by me his messenger, sent to this effect, to make
thee understand the things that apperteine to thy nation, and the whole estate
of that kingdom. For the Lord has so decreed by his secret determination,
that this people being now in captivity, shall return again into their
native country, and the city and Sanctuary shall be restored, and advanced to
his ancient dignity and estimation. And if after the restitution and
establishment thereof, thou wylt further enquire of the continuance and
durance of the same: and withal what great enterprises, and manifold successes
shall happen therein, understand thou: That seventy weeks are concluded, and
determined upon this people, which being recompted by the Sabbathes of years,
or reduced into ten Iubiles, will make the number of seven times seventy, to
wit, 490. years: for so many years fully shall that common wealth prosper,
until wickedness be finished, all curse of sin be removed, al sin offerings
abolished, and everlasting righteousness be brought in, and all things be
accomplished, whatsoever were foretold by ye prophets and visions: finally
until the holy of holy ones be anointed.

For as the administration of that common wealth was erected at the first for
the Messhias his sake, it could not be, that kingdom utterly to be abolished,
before the same Messhias was manifested in the flesh.

The weeks must be distinguished.
I have somewhat declared unto you concerning the seventy weeks. For the
better perceiuera^ce of the orderly proceedings and enterchaunged successes
whereof, a threefold distinction of times ought severally to be considered.
Namely: Seven weeks, then three score two weeks, and one week. In the first
seven weeks, The seven weeks.
all that intercourse of time is comprehended, that must grow betwixt the
laying the fundation of the second temple and building thereof, until ye full
finishing of the same: for so many years are accounted from the first year of
Cyrus reign, unto the vii. or viii. year of Darius, before ye buylding of the
Temple was thoroughly performed: which will amount to 49. years. The lxii.
weeks.
Again the three score two weeks do note unto us, the remnant of the time,
wherein Messhias the Lord should be borne in the city of David, after that
ye city and Temple were repaired and buylt again: which building was
co^pleted in the 32. year of ye reign of Darius the Assyrian, or Artaxerxes.
Now that other one week which remained, The one week.
does signify unto us the annoynting, preaching, revealing and suffering of
the same Meschias: and of those other things, which were to ensue after his
death. In the middle part of which week, The half of the week.
shall Meschias be slain: to wit, three years and an half, after his baptism
and anointing. By which death he shall accomplish the mystery of man's
redemption, whereof the prophets did so often prophecy and prognosticate, long
time before.

The residue of the week does appertain to the preaching of the Apostles, to
ye calling of the Gentiles, to the establishing of the covenant with many, to the
abolishing of the old circumcision, and external sacrifices of ye ceremonial
Law, to ye confirmation of free remission of sins, and to the performance of ye
promise of rising again, and life everlasting. All which were of al parts
co^pleted, and ended in y^ last week: that is to say, in those 7. latter
years, wherein the Meschias shall be anointed, slain, rise from death to life,
ascend up into heaven, endue his Church with the inestimable benefits of the
holy Ghost, and allure the Gentiles to the free mercy pronounced by his
Gospel: which week being added to the former, will make the just number of 70.
weeks, to wit, 490. years.

For so many years did the merciful God of Israel, of his unspeakable bounty
preserve that nation in peaceable tranquillity, not for any their deseruings,
but for his dear sons sake only, which was to issue out of that seed and
generation. It remains now, that we make a proportionable comparison of the
number of those years, with the records of the continual proceedinges and
successes thereof. First, this is a matter confessed: That the delivery of the
Jews from their captivity, was by the Proclamation of Cyrus, the first year
of his reign, at what time the fundation of the Temple was laid, The building
of the Temple.
which being hindered with sundry interruptions, was yet at the last brought to
full perfection, in the sixth or seventh year of Darius reygne. The Temple
being thus perfited in all fourniture, ^^ Esdr. 1.2.
commission was given at length to Nehemias, in the xx. year of the reygne of
the same Darius, with absolute authority to repair their city again. The
same year in the 25. day of the month Elul, the wall was erected and
finished: the whole doing whereof lasted 52. days only, as Esdras reports in
his sixth chapter. 2. Esdr. 6.7.
But houses were not builded as yet, as appears in the seventh chapter: for
accomplishment whereof were allowed xii. years more, as appears plainly in
the fifth chapter of the same, where you may hear what Nehemias him self
speaks after this manner: 2. Esdr. ^.
From the twentieth year (says he) even to the xxxii. year of king Artaxerxes,
that is xii. year, I and my brethren have not eaten the bread of the governor,
etc. So that it is evident, that whiles the city was buylding, so many years
passed over. 2. Esd. ^.
For so we read, the Nehemias gave his promise to return to the king and
queen, as soon as the work was finished.

Thus much touching the ix. chapter of Daniel: neither is this all that Daniel
reports of the Messhias, for besides this, many other his prophecies do
foreshewe, and as it were directly lead us by the hand, to the kingdom of
Messhias, yea to the very distinct time thereof: Daniel. ^
as is that of the Stone, which being hewn out of a great hill without ma^s
hand, smote the image that represented the four Monarchies of the world, and
brake his head, his breast, his legs, and his feet in pieces, that no place
was found for them, but the stone it self became a great mountain, and
filled the whole earth.

But what is the purport of al these things? And first, what is meant by the
stone hewn down without hands, and falling from a great hill? what by that
striking and breaking the image in pieces? by that huge mountain? by that
exceeding increase of the stone into an unmeasurable quantity: the incredible
greatness whereof overthrowing all other kingdoms of the earth, should
possess the whole world besides? Wheru^to tend al these? what do they import?
what do they represent unto us else, the^ the same which we perceive most
plainly was accomplished in the son of God? who desce^ding from the highest
heavens into the wo^^e of a base virgin, and borne of his mother without al
carnal knowledge, who alone coming into the world, without all aid of
natural generation, did vanquishe all power and pomp of the world and the
devil, by holding his peace only: brake the gates of hell in sunder with
suffering only: overcame death with dying only, and purchased thereby an
everlasting kingdom of perpetual felicity for his chosen and elect, which
kingdom shall endure in immovable eternity, above, and beyond all other
kingdoms and empires of the world. For all other empires standing in most
fickle estate, by enterchaunge of elder years wax transitory and vanishe
away, and with mutual emnitie do pursue each other to utter destruction. The
only kingdom of Christ above all other is everlasting.
This only kingdom raised up without hands by the eternal God, can not be
shyuered with any vyolence, or wax old with any process of time, nor be
subdued by any force or polycie of man, but with his vnperysheable perpetuity
shall crushe in pieces and wear out all other kingdoms, and it self persiste
nevertheless vnuanquisheable, for ever and ever. And this so incomprehensible
Maiestis of this kingdom, the Prophet does not in one place alone prophecy
should come, nor does he promise it only, but discovers also the very
mynute and instant of time, wherein this kingdom should flouryshe: so that
the commendation, wherewith your Joseph does so hyghly advance this Prophet,
Joseph in his 10 book of Antiquities cap 14.
is not unaptly applied: To wit, that he does not only foreshewe the events
and successes to times, (as other prophets do) but with a most plain view,
as it were, does point with the finger to the time it self, in which all these
things should come, that should ensue. etc.

I could vouche out of the same Daniel sundry sentences, many also out of
other prophets, to the like effect: for what else does the whole prophetical
history of the Bible, even from the beginning to the end thereof describe unto
us, then Christ Jesus, and his kingdom, very base and simple in the eye and
judgment of carnal capacity, but to the spiritual beholders, most beautiful
and glorious? What does the delivery of Jonas out of the whales belly the
third day, prefigure unto us other, then the resurrection of Christ? What
does the translating of Elias into heaven in a fiery chariot, signify other,
then the ascension of Christ? What does that brazen serpent foreshewe other,
then Christ crucified upon the cross? What do the manifold afflictions of
king David represent, but the continual persecution of Christ in this world?
What does Moses signify, but a deliverer? Iosuah, but the victorious conquest
of Christ over all his enemies? What does the rule and government of Joseph,
with a certain royal majesty over the Egyptians emply, but the kingdom of
Messhias, at whose b^^ks all things in earth and heaven should be obedient and
subject? It would require a long discourse, t^ ouerrunne all the mystical
s^yings of the prophets. I will add hereunto one or two places out of the
prophet Malachie.

Malachie being of one mind and judgment that Daniel and our Paul were of,
Malachie.
dot^ not only foretell the casting away of your ^^^ion, but renders also the
reason, that procured Gods wrath against your people. For Malachie and Daniel
do both agree in this point: The cause why it was necessary to dissolve the
Jewish common wealth.
that the vtt^r destruction of that nation was decreed upon by the secret
counsel of God, to the end they should beco^e a president; whereby the
wicked might be forewar^ed of the severe Justice of God: as also for this cause
chiefly, by reason that else the vain ^ersuasion, that has taken root so
long in the hearts of the people, touching the righteousness of the Law,
touching ^^rcumcision, (...) to offerings, and sacrifices, could not be rased
out of their minds, if the ceremonial Law should continue in her former
authority. And therefore it pleased Almighty God, to make manifest to all
men, that th^se e^t^^nall rytes, shadows, and Cerem^^ie^, were not auaylable
to procure true ryghto^^nesse: and that the rygh^eousnesse of the Law was not
that pure ryghte^u^snes, wher^unto the promyses did direct them. But let us
hear: ^he words of Malachie: Malachi.1.
I have no pleasure in you, (^ayeth the Lord of hosts) n^yther will I accept
of^ring at your hande^^ ^or from the rising of the Sun, unto (...) going
down of the same, my name is great among the Gentiles. And in every (...)
offered unto my name, for my name is great among the Gent^les, says the Lord
of hostes^ Amongst m^^^ things w^^^thie (...) be noted in th^^ saying of the
P^rophete, there are ^hre^ spec^all (...) to ^ee con^^^ered: Three things to be
noted in the words of Malachy.

1. The people. 2. the sacrifices. 3. the place.

Namely^ the one concerning you that are Iew^s: secondly, concer^^^^ your
Sacrifices: lastly, the pl^c^ it self, where offryng shalb^ made. For the
(...) had promised, that he would alter (...) ^enew^ eu^ry of these; to the
end (...) thereby despoyle you of all matter to glory upon: as upon your
parentage, (...) ^o^shippings, yea your temple it self, your offerings and
Sacrifices. And why^s because he had determined to make an innovation of them
(as ye do hear) and to translate them from you to others: which thing the
same holy Ghost does manifestly set down in an other place in like words,
by his Prophet Esaias: Esaias.65.
Behold (says he) I will create new heavens, and a new earth, and the
former shall not be remembered, nor come into mind. And again in an other
place: And the Lord shall kill thee, and shall call his servants by an other
name, etc. The words are somewhat unlike, but the sense is all one, nothing
differyng from the saying of Malachie, The place of Malachie expounded.
I have no pleasure in you, etc. Do thou not perceive in these words, how
thou shall ^e cast away, thou proud generation^ And because you shall know^
that God will nevertheless not be destitute of a people, that shall glorify
his name though you be clean ^ewen of from the Olive tree, My name (says he)
is great among the Gentiles.

I have declared unto you, what shall become of your nation and people. Now will
I proceed to explane unto you of your Temple, and place of prayer, whereupon
you vaunt your selves so much. The Prophet therefore goes forward: In all
places shall pure offerings be offered unto my name, from the rising of the
Sun, even to the going down of the same. As if God would say, You Jews
are so addicted to that only Sanctuary and Temple of the Lord, which he did
erect amongst you long ago, as though he ought not be woorshipped in any
place else, and as though no nation in the whole earth might offer sacrifice
unto the Lord, except you alone. And under color of this prerogative, being
pufte up with pride, you swell with immeasurable vain glorious persuasion of
fleshly courage, and set all other nations at naught, as though you alone
were the only inheritance of the Lord, and as though you held him fa^^tyed
to your generation, with an inseparable chain of privileged bounty and
favor, and so fast locked within the walls of your Temple, that he could not
be of power to depart from you, nor would not for any cause sequester him
self from your Temple. But to the end your blundered senses may no longer
lumper in darkness, stroaking your selves with vain and counterfayte
confidence of falsely conceived opinion, I will by way of friendly
advertisement pronounce, and even now do denounce and forewarne you, That the
calling upon the name of the Lord, is not unseparably bound to place, time or
persons: but that the largess of his mercy is extended also upon all people,
nations and tongues, whether they be Jews, or Gentiles, Scythians or Indians:
God is not boun^, neither to the pl^ce nor person of nations.
and that this his loving kindness, wherewith he embraces all mankind, will
reject no person from his fatherly protection: whersoeuer his name is feared,
and his Majesty worshipped, there he does indifferently distribute the gifts
of his grace toward al persons, without parcialitie. Yea and because you shall
understand my saying more plainly, behold, I do protest unto you in the word
of the Lord, that it shall come to pass, that you your selves being Jews,
and your whole race for the most part being cast away, and this your
Sanctuary (whereupon you boast so much) being utterly rejected, the Lord will
transpose his loving countenance, not into one angle of the world among the
Jews only, but will be magnified, and have ye glory of his name called upon,
in every place throughout all nations and tongues, wheresoever s^^^^tered over
the face of the earth, from the r^sing of the sun, to the going down of the
^ame. For my name is great among the Gentiles, says the Lord of hosts.
Hitherto yo^ have heard the words of Malachie used toward your people.

It remains lastly, that we speak of y^ sacrifices. For the Prophet does
evidently ^^clare, that innovation shall ensue of the Sacrifices also, speaking
in this wise: Among the Gentiles, and in every place, incense and a pure
offering shall be offered unto my name. Well now: what manner of offerings be these
of the Gentiles, which the Prophet does commend so hyghly? Be they
sacrifices of goat^, or calves? They be sacrifices of calves truly, but such
as the Prophet Osee me^tioneth in his prophecy. And we will render (says
he) the Calves of our lips. Osee.14.
Ueri^^ these be the calues^ where with the Lord is now well delyghted. These
calves do we off^r, when reknowledging our v^rygh^^ousnesse, we yield humble
thanke^ to the gracious goodness of God, who cleansing our wickedness with the
fountain of the blood, and death of his dearly beloved son Christ I^su,
does endue us with the inheritance of everlasting life. These be the spiritual
offerings of the Gentiles, differing very much from the sa^rifices of the Jews:
for these are the pure offringes of the Spirit, that consist not in bloody
broyling of brute beasts, nor in smelling of flesh, nor are offered with the
hands of Priests embrewed with goare. And for that cause, the Prophet does
call them clean. What Sacrifices are clean, and what are unclean.
Well then: and why are these offerings called clean, rather then the Iewishe
Sacrifices? What? shall we say, that their blood offerings are unclean, and
their sacrifices defiled then? Uerily, albeit the Prophet does not in
express words verify the same, yet who so shall duly ponder the
substance, and pyth of his talk, shall easily discern, that the Prophet by
secret implication, does condemn the Iewishe sacrifices, as polluted, and
profane in the respect of offringes of the heathen.

But here will one of your sect urge again, An objection
and demand, whether these Sacrifices were not instituted by God at the
first, and the ordinances of the same prescribed unto us by Moses? whether in
them also were not contained the calves of thankesgyuing, and purging of
sins? whether God could be the author of any o^seruaunces and ceremonies,
tha^ were not of all pa^tes sincere, pure and without blemyshe? The answer
For answer whereof, we d^ not deny, that those Sacrifices were instituted
for your behoof, by special commandment and sufferaunce of the hyghe^ and
most excellent Lawemaker Almyghtie God. But consideration must be had of the
meaning, purpose, end and time, wherein they were to be frequented. No^ that
they were of value of their own nature, to purchase true righteousness, but to
direct and lead us to the righteousness, that was to come: not that you should
account them as infallible ple^ges of perfect piety, but that almighty God
might train and instruct you with these, as with certain principles
meanwhiles, until you might be made apt to receive higher mysteri^s. Not
because that great Lord and father of Spirits was delyghted with the
slaughter of brute beasts, of bloody go^re of his creatures: but his good
pleasure was under these shadows, types, and figures, to prefigure the death
of his only son: The death of Christ prefigured by the Legal Sacrifices.
who by his bloodsheadding should be of power to wash men's consciences clean
from all filth and corruption of sin: not because you should always lie
no^zeling in these, and proceed n^ further, but to nourture your childhode,
for a time were they delivered, least by pursuing the error of the Gentiles, ye
should either rush headlong into the idolatrous abominations of the heathen,
or at the least restrain you in stead of a scholemaster, in some orderly
comelines for a time, until the clear day should appear, wherein better
things should be reueiled, and the truth it self should shut up, and abolish
those shadows and sacrifices.

Briefly to satisfy this matter in two words, two notes are chiefly to be
observed in these kinds of sacrifices: Two things to be noted in the Jewish
sacrifices.

The use. 1. The time. 2.

namely, the use, and the time. As concerning the use: Truly the due
observation of those sacrifices was not of force by their own nature, to make
a chosen and beloved people of God: but to be rules and principles, for that
people whom Moses had gathered to minister in his synagogue: not because they
were able of them selves to give eternal salvation: The use of ^ old sacrifices
but that they should foreshewe the coming of him, in whom rested true
safety, and withal should represent an outward shadow of inward holiness and
cleannes of mind. And for that cause provision was made for such beasts
only, that were clean, unspotted and undefiled: hereby enducing the people of
y^ old Sinagogue to learn, how they ought to be have the^ selves in their daily
conversation unblameable. As to that which apperteineth to the consideration of
the time, The time wherein sacrifices were exercised must be con^^dered.
this ought to be holde^ for certain, that those blood offerings of the
Ceremonial law, were not delivered, because they should never cease, even as
neither the Temple was builded, to the end it should never be rased, and
destroyed: or as though the overthrow thereof, should forthwith extinguish al
worshipping of god withal, but were given for a time only, not to continue for
ever, but transitory rather, and remoueable, remayn^ng in use as certain
exercises and introductions of outward discipline, until the blessed seed
should come, in whom the promise took effect. And therefore almighty God
did with great care, long time as it were allow the Sacrifices, to nourtour
the weak capacity of the people of that rude age: by means whereof the said
sacrifices had th^n their certain use and estimation, nor were adjudged
unclean, during that season. But as now, the estate of the time being altered,
sithence the truth it self does ouerspread the world with wonderful
lightsomnesse, and the Sun of righteousness displayeth his clear and
palpable brightness: these carnall^ Sacrifices and blood offerings do utterly
cease, and are altogether discharged from further use.

For what avails to gaze after shadows, where ye body is present to be
beholden plainly? What senseless man will burn candle, or light a torche, in
sunneshine at midday? who will groape for darkness in open light? or seek for
night in clearest day? The cause why that butcherie of siely beasts was
permitted you for a time, was to enfourme your grossness, and tame the
hardenesse of your hearts: that so, by view of visible signs, and
representations of spectable shadows, the Lord might train you along, to the
true and pure clensing of sins, which was then to come. But now, sithence
we are come to the truth it self (whereof ye other were but shadows) it is a
necessary consequent, yt those things which were sometime esteemed for clean,
ye very same again through alteration of time, may be accounted not only
unclean, and defiled, but filthy also, and abominable.

Jewish sacrifices abolish^d.
Which things being undoubted true (ye men of Israel) as may most manifestly
appear unto you by the testimoni^, and discourse of Malachie and other
Prophets, what e^treme madness is this in you, to persevere still in so deep a
slumber, dreaming yet about your old rotten tabernacles, your forlorn Temple,
your carnal worshippings, and motheaten sacrifices? But let us imagine and
grant by way of a case put, that you may recover your Jerusalem again: which
notwi^hstanding will never come to pass, (unless God himself and all his
Prophets do lie) I would feign learn of you then what you would do there.
First you will procure your Temple to be built up again. And why so? because
ye may offer incense and sacrifice to God after your accustomed manner? As
though that general Lord of all nations can not be worshipped else where, then
in a blind angle of the world, at Jerusalem perdy? And how then will the
saying of the Prophet Malachie be verifi^d? The true worshipping of God not
bound to place or persons.
who says that the time should come, when the Lord of hosts should be
worshipped in all places, and incense offered unto him throughout all the world,
from the rising of the sun, to the going down thereof. If you will so
straight and restrain^ all worship due unto God, within the walls of your
Temple only, as it were, locked fast in some closet, then I demand of you
further, with what kind of sacrifice you will pacify your God, within that
Temple? forsooth with blood and butcherie of beasts. But where is then that
pure and undefiled offering mentioned by Malachie, which is not embrued with
sl^ughter, I suppose, but performed by spiritual sacrifices?

Finally, with what argument can you pers^ade that the living God ought to be
worshipped more properly and peculiarly of you Jews, then of all other
nations, namely since you are so plainly convinced with the express testimony
of Malachie^ who making no mention of the Jews, does prophecy, that the name
of God shall be had in great admiration amongst the Gen^iles. What answer^ will
you make also to that promise of ye same Malachie, in the Chapter following:
where foretelling the signs and tokens that should go before the coming of
the Messhias: to wit, Malach. 3.
That his forerunner should come first and prepare the way before the face of
the Lord? And immediately sayeth^. And (...) Lord whom ye seek, shall
speedily come to his holy Temple, even the Angel of the ^ouena^t whom you
desire and^^ What^ came not that same forerunner^ that was promised? Was not
his voice heard also in the desert according to the prophecy of Esay^ Esai.46.
crying out as loud as he could, to the end you should prepare the way of the
Lord, and should make straight in the desert ^ path for your God. Why did you
no^ (...) preparation then? Why did you not receive the Angel of the Covenant,
whom ye desired, coming into his holy Temple? Nay rather, why did you banish
him from out your Synagogue? why did you daily exclude him from thence, railing
continually upon the Lord with outrageous reproaches, and taunting blasphemies?
What punishment or torture may ^e imagined horrible enough to counteruaile so
execrable outragies?

Malac. 4.
Also by the way here is not to be passed over in silence, the saying of the
same prophet, annexed in the end of the same chap. concerning ye dreadful and
terrible day of the Lord, wherewith he will ouerwhelm the proud and wicked doers,
whom that hot scorching day, eue^ as an hot burning oven should devour, as
flame consumes the stubble, leaving neither branche nor root of them.

But you will say, that this threatening does concern others, and apperteineth
nothing at al to you. Yes truly, the very order, proceeding and event of the
matter, do most manifestly convince, that this diref^l threatening was
denou^ced against you chiefly: whose words that ensue hereupon immediately, are
these: Behold (says he) I will send you Elias the prophet, before the coming
of the great and fearful day of the Lord, and he shall turn the hearts of the
fathers to the children, and the hearts of the children to the fathers, lest
happly I come and smite the earth with cursing. And to whom (...) this Elias be
sent, but unto you? and therefore, what land shall be accursed but you? Finally,
what signifies the word anathema, but a certain final destruction of all
mankind; except those persons only who^^ Elias should reduce to amendment of
conversation? For God has not so utterly rejected his people, y^ no remnant
thereof shall be saved, as I declared before unto you out of s. Paul.

But I will surcease to surcharge you with more testimonies, adding only one or
two places: first out of the book of Genesis, an^ then out of the Prophet
Osee: wherein it shall not be needeful to use long discourse. For who is so
ignorant in the holy scriptures, that understands not, what is meant by that
scepter which the Patriarche Jacob enspired by divine oracle, did boldly
pronounce, should never be removed from the tribe of Judah? Gene. 49.
And who is he at the length, but even ye same whom the Prophet Esaias
describes, saying, I have given him for a governor, and teacher of the
Gentiles? Which sentence ye holy Patriarche inspired with the same holy ghost,
did long before, in the same sense profess, though in other words: And the
Gentiles shall be gathered unto him. But as then was not the scepter yet of power
in Israel. But ye godly grayheaded father foreseing long before, the events of
things to come, did prophecy of Judah in this wise: The Scepter or Mace of the
empire shall not depart from Judah, nor a Lawgiuer from between his feet,
until Silo come, and the gathering of the Gentiles shall be unto him. Howsoever
some rascal Thalmudistes do practice to pervert this place with most frivolous
cauillatio^s: yea though all the start up Rabbines would burst in sunder, yet
can this sentence by no violent wrest be framed appliable otherwise, but that
two special matters must necessarily be grounded thereupon. First, that Judah
and his tribe should be invested in the title, and the interest of the
kingdom. Next, that this prerogative should endure immovable, until Mes^hias
did come, unto whom the Gentiles should gather them selves. And to the same
effect tends the interpretation of Ionathas and others, Thargum
Hierosolymi^tanum, written by Ionathas^ upon the 49 chap of Genesis.
who lived long before the age of Christ, whose words, who lists to hear,
are these: The kings seat shall not be taken or depart from the house of Judah:
neither shall Lawgiuers want of their childrens children until the time that
Messhias shall come, to whom the kingdom does belong. And all the kings of the
earth shall become his vassalles. How beautiful is this Messhias, that shall
come to continue in the house of Judah? he shall girde up his loins and go
forth to battle against his enemies, and the kings and their princes shall be
slain. He shall die the ri^ers red with the blood of the slain: his teeth
shall be ordered with knowledge, lest he partake the fruits of their spoils,
and wrong doings. The hills shall look red with their vines, and their
winepresses with the wine: the fields shall be adorned with beautiful blossom
by reason of the abundance of fruits of beasts and sheep etc. Thus much
thought I good to rehearse out of Ionathas: yet have we no need (praised be
God) to vouche any commentaries of the Jews, to manifest the mysteries of the
holy Scripture, namely since there can be no better interpreter of the
prophetical scriptures then time, and approved experience of the successes
thereof.

The testimony that I thought good to borow out of Osee; Osee against Israel.
most worthy to be noted of you that are Jews, is that, which he sets down
in the first Chapter of his prophecy: where the Prophet inueighing against
Israel uses this speech: Call his name (^aieth he) not my people, because you
are not my people, therefore will I not be yours. etc.Whereby you may plainly
perceive the saying of S. Paul confirmed by the Prophet, to wit: The same which
he teaches concerning the natural branches, which he said were hewn of from
the Olive tree. And now (ye men of Israel) where is that your arrogant vain
glorious vaint of the offspring of your kindred? If to be issued of the race of
Abraham be prised so highly in the sight of God, what means then this casting
away of the Israelites, mentioned by the Prophet? what signifies that special
choice, and calling of the Gentiles, and the wild Olive tree to be planted in
their place? for so we read the promise set down by the Prophet: Osee.1.
And the number of the children of Israel (says he) shall be as the sand of
the sea, which can not be measured and told. And in the place where it was
said, ye are not my people, it shall be said unto them, you are the sons of
the living God It was a singular prerogative for them not being Israelites
borne, to be named and nombred amongst the true children of Israel. But that
other did far surmount, that being before the brood of the devil, they
should now be called the sons of ye living God. The calling of the Gentiles,
according to Osee the Prophet.
And to whom (I beseech you) is this unspeakable benefit promised? forsooth
neither to the Israelites nor to ye Jews, nor to the^ which seemed to
apperteine unto God, but unto the^ which were altogether severed, and estranged
from God: ye very abject, and rascal Gentiles, barbarous and uncircumcised
heathen perdie, whom the incomprehensible mercy of God will join near unto
him self, and will engraffe them into the root of his own natural Olive
tree, having first sawed of the natural branches, in whose stead he shall
gather the Gentiles together, from out a wild Olive tree, in such plentiful
abundance and infinite heaps, as will not be comprehended within the
territory of Palestine only, but like unto the sands of the sea, The
multitude of the co^uerts Gentiles, after ye testimony of ye Prophets.
will replenish the whole world, far and wide from the rising of the sun,
to the going down of the same.

Ye have heard the mind and purport of the Prophet, which if ye suppose to be
as yet not accomplished for your behoof, through the Gospel of Messhias, our
Lord and Savior, open your eyeliddes, (if you be not blind) and behold the
innumerable multitude of people, and tongues, which every where throughout all
the world, do profess the true worshipping of God: number them, if you be
able: but if the quantity be so infinite, as the sand of the sea, exceeding
all reach and compass of number, you may easily conjecture thereby (ye men of
Israel) into what streightes your wilf^ll ignorance forces you, and how
perilous that froward blindness of yours is, and withall^bethinke your selves
in time, what were best for you to embrace from henceforth: nay rather, how
foolishly you have behaved your selves heretofore. God did send his only
begotten son into the world, the seed of a woman, and borne of a virgin,
whose parentage and kindred, from whence he issued, because you did not know,
and nevertheless were amazed to behold his heavenly power in doing miracles,
his wonderful clemency employed to the cure of all manner diseases, and
casting out of devils, yet being swallowed up of extreme madness, and
overwhelmed with blind rancour, and ca^ckred malice, you did most cruelly
despoyle him of life, and spilt his guiltless blood, without all cause of
offense. For why may I not justly accuse you, as partetakers of the same crime,
sithence ye do with whole bent affection of hateful despite, pursue the
embrued steps of your bloody sires, and gladly allow of that execrable
murder?

And therefore (thou cursed Jew) thou art duly charged with ye guilt of
innocent blood: englut therefore thy greedy guts with goare. Thou did receive
Caesar to be thy king, refusing Christ: continue his bondslaue sti^. Yet this
works no grace in thee, nor allur^t^ thee to abandone thy doting error: for
thou do as yet breathe out villainy against the king of the Jews, whose
name we have in greatest estimation. But what think thou to gain by kicking
against the prick? Do thou not perceive, how God has made frustrate all
thy devises contrary to thine expectation? Do thou not see, how thy
mischievous practices recoyle back upon thine own head? Do thou not feel
thy downfall into the pit which thy self have digged^ Thou see the Temple so
razed and overthrown to the ground, that no stone thereof can be found: thou
do see thy religion utterly abolished, the priesthode, the Law, the
kingdom, your cities, your nation, your race and, kindred wholly extinguished:
brie^ely thou can recompt no one thing remaining, but a few wretched roages,
and contemptuous runnagates, true monuments of the outrageous insolency, and
miserable calamity of their forlorn forefathers: yea, that seely small
portion also, enduring through none other privilege, then by this commendation
of Paul, and the gentle suffer^^ce of the Christians. And being thus
continually^ turmoyled with sundry miseries, notwithstanding Gods just
judgment does daily execute new increases of his severe wrath against you:
yet are your minds so intoxicate with the poisoned do^^oreanche of bewitched
ignorance, that these wonderful scourges can plie your hearts to no better
grace, persisting still in perverse frowardnes, as yt these pinching plagues
(y^ horror whereof might have prevailed to procure amendment) seem rather to
stir and provoke you to further cruelty. For albeit^ you do plainly
perceive, and can not deny, but that all whatsoever your own Prophets have
foretold of the Messhias, is absolutely accomplished in the person of Christ
Jesus: albeit you may easily learn out of the holy Scriptures, and by
continual experience and successes of times, that there is none other Christ,
but even the same whom the whole world does worship at this present:
albeit you sensibly feel that you are become a mockery, not to almighty God
only, but accounted also no better then rascalles and runnagates of al nations
of y^ world: Th ho^ribl^ ca^a^^^i^ o^ the Jews.
yet do ye curse Christ in your synagogues daily, and expect yet an other
Messhias (I know not whom) which you shall never see, but in that terrible and
dreadful day of wrath, Zach 12.
at what time maugte your teeth, you shall behold him whom you have cruelly
crucified. What monstrous hardness of heart is this (ye men and Hebrews) that
so many^ heavenly oracles of so many your own Prophets, so many manifest
testimonies of sacred scriptures, so many horrible punishments, so many
unmerciful plagues wherewith your nation is, and has been continually
tormented, can not enduce you to conceive some sparkle, of true repentance? The
Romans did ^ansacke you with such outrage in their conquest, that they spared
neither young nor old, men, women, nor infants, neither left one stone standing
upon an other of your whole city. Finally, your habitations are become waste
and desolate, ye have now neither city nor temple, kingdom nor priesthode,
people nor Prophet, and (which of all other is most lamentable) you have eyes
that can not see, ears that can not hear, nor hearts that can understand,
whereby you may repent, and be converted to your liege Lord and ^^u^reigne king.

Bu^ go ye to: let all that which is past, An exhortation to the Jews.
be imputed either to your ignorance, or to the wrathful vengeance of God for
your unbelief sake, because ye knew not the time of your visitation. And
being allured and stirred up to better remembrance, by so manifold examples,
learn now at the length by the preaching of the Gospel, to acknowledge our
Christ^Iesu ye Lord of peace, of meekenes, and of humility, to be the only
Messhias, sent from God the father: in whose name all nations of the earth
shall be saved, and to whom all knees in heaven and earth ought to bow down,
and prostrate them selves. There was sometimes an vnsa^orie season of darkened
ignorance, when as our Temples also were polluted with filthy Idolatry: but
now sithence all clouds of foggy superstition are for the more part scattered
and vanished out of sight, and the clear dawning of the lightsome truth of
Christ's Gospel displayeth his orient beams, tread no longer the dyrty tracke
of superstitiouse mismases: but return with us, and be made partakers of the
lively welspring of sincere and pure doctrine. The same Christ, whom you do
persecute, must be worshipped: whose doctrine you do practice to root out,
even he does offer you salvation freely and fr^nkely. The same whom you
contemptuously entreated as a man, is woorshipped in all the world both God
and man, howsoever ye despised him (as Joseph was sometime rejected of his
brethren) yet reygneth he in the glory of his father: whom you mortal men
belee^ed to dye the natural death, the same revived again immortal, and
shall live in immortality for ever. Whom your forefathers embased under the
rascal rabble of the people, and accounted for an abject, and outcast of all
men, even to his Majesty do all the lofty estates, and stately powers of
heaven and earth prostrate and humble them selves: that the saying of Esaias may
aptly be verified in this place, Esaias.62.
The kings of the earth shall stop their mouths before him. Whom you
reproched with the most shameful death of the cross, the very same cross is
turned into his glory, to our salvation, to the judgment of the world, to the
destruction of his enemies, and everlasting consolation of them that be
redeemed. So that here again the prophecy of Esaias may seem to take effect^
Esaias.35.
And everlasting joy shall be upon their heads, and sorrow and mourning shall
flee away. Finally, whose name your forefathers hoped to have been razed out of
all men's memory, the very same name has God magnified above all the glory of
Angels and men: at the calling upon whose name, the dead arise again, maladies
are cured, devils do tremble and quake for fear, unclean spirits are
tormented, and flee away: yea the whole Ierarchie of Angels do bow down and
worship. Now for as much as these things are so manifest, that no man can
be ignorant of them, I do wonder much what reason you can allege, to
color your obstinate contumacie, who being taught by so many examples, can
content your selves nevertheless to lie still snorting and slumbring in
vanishing shadows: and neglecting the very natural son of God, can gro^e
like buzzards, after ase^selesse imaginatiue shape, of I know not what
Meschias: when as your true Meschias is already come^ or besides him else shall
never any one come: unless al your own prophets were liars, who have described
unto you none other Meschias, but this one only person.

But this matter happily may offend you, A stombling block to the Jews.
(to repete again somewhat of yt I have spoken) because his coming was
contemptible, base and of no reputation, because he was condemned to death,
because he was crueified on the cross, because he dyed and was buried. But if
every of these had not met, and been concurra^t together in this one person,
he could never have been the true Messhias: neither would my self have
acknowledged him. But you tarry gaping still after some gaye glorious king.
Well: and what wanted in this person (I beseech you) to the absolute measure
of highest royalty? whom the Lord did so advance to the right hand of his
omnipotent power: at yt bryghtnes of whole majesty you saw the sun lose his
light, the earth quake: you saw graves opened, you saw stones crack in
sunder, you saw al^o the veil of the Temple rent in pieces. Or if you did not
see it with your own eyes, your forefathers beheld them all, whereof they
could never deny any one title. So did they see him poor and base, you will
say: I confess no less, what then? Yet they conceived not the power and force
of that his baseness, nor how honorable that reproach was. In like manner they
saw him dead, yet they co^^^aued not the mystery of his death: they conceiue^
^ot (I say) how it pleased the Lord by the death of this one man, to open a
way for salvation to all people. They conceived not that the tyranny of the
devil was vanquished by the ignominy of the cross, and that all sacrifices and
shadows were finished by this only sacrifice. But so it pleased God the
father to give his son unto us, for a pattern of perfect humility, and by
this means to glorify his only begotten. The brightness of whose glory, if
you do acknowledge, there remains matter enough to save you: but if you will
not acknowledge him, this is also matter enough to condemn you. And will ye,
or nill ye, you shall be forced to confess, that no counsel, policy, or device
of man, is able to counteruayle the counsel of God, neither any force and power
of men, is able to withstand the power of CHRIST.

But I hope well of your amendment: for why should I not hope, when as I find
S. Paul to conceive so well of your return again? Wherefore ye men and Jews,
seeing ^^^eare the name of Jews, (which by interpretation is called
Confessors) pluck up your hearts, raise up your minds, persevere no l^nger
in your woont^d obstinacy against your own Prophets: withstand not from
henceforth the manifest light of the Gospel. Let the profession of your faith
be sound, sincere, and pure at the length, learn to understand the Law of
God after the spiritual meaning, and sense of the holy Ghost: so shall ye
begin to be accounted, according to the nature of your names, pure professors
of the truth. Be not dismayed with despair to attain everlasting life,
because you crucified the son of God: your error only procured this
mischief. God will not the death of a sinner, but that he may be converted,
li^e and be saved. The most horrible crime that may be imagined, can be no
estoppell to salvation against him that will believe. Only acknow^ledge your
wickedness, and repose your trust in the free promises of the Gospel, and ye
shall freely receive the reward of eternal felicity, freely offered unto you.
It is an heinous reproach against the glory of God, to be disobedient to ye
prophets: it is much more heinous to persecute, and murder them. But to rack
the savior of the world upon the cross, is ^f all other most execrable. Yet
has the Lord promised to forget all these injuries, if ye will but repent you
of them: neither requires he the blood of beasts at your hands, to purge
those offenses. Christ is the perfect Sacrifi^e offered for the sins of all
people. Only acknowledge your sins, brag no more of your own righteousness
from henceforth, believe only in the son of the living God. If he were not
the son of God, declare the^ unto us, who was his father in earth, if you
can. If he were not a Prophet, The nature of Christ.
how could he, not only conceive in mind, but in words also foretell and
express the destruction of your na^ion, the disme^bring of your co^mo^wealth,
the abomination standing in the holy place: yea, every of them orderly as they
en^ued? How could he prophecy of his own rising again the third day, The
prophecies of Christ
and of the sending of the holy Ghost? How could he know the ce^^aintie of the
calling of the Gentiles, the denying of Peter, and of many other things, partly
come to pass already, partly to be accomplished hereafter? And if he uttered
any one untruth in any of al these, condemn him for a liar: But if experience
and approved e^idence of the orderly successes and events thereof, have openly
denounced his words to be true, what should stay and hinder you from the
truth? For to speak nothing of his miraculous works, tell us yet, if you did
ever hear of the like, Christ's miracles.
or if any skill, policy, or industry of man might possibly reach unto the
like. But if this so great and incredible power did so far surmounte all
ability of man's strength and capacity: hereof may you suff^ciently gather,
how you ought to judge of the inestimable power of his Divine nature.

But for as much as the excellency of heavenly things are of their own
nature unsearchable, nor can be attained unto by man's policy, or worldly
wisdom, but must be discovered by the only operation of Almighty God: A
prayer for the Jews.
I do most humbly pray and beseec^e the same God the father of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, for his dear sons sake, that as he has long sithence,
according to his just judgment, executed his wrath against your unbelief, by
cutting you off from your natural root, so it may please him of his i^finite
mercy (whereby he is of power to pl^^t you into your former dignity again)
that your hearts being delivered from the thick clouds of obstinate
infidelity, our Lord and savior Christ Jesus, the only and undoubted
Messhias, may enlighten your souls, and gather you home again to your natural
root: That is to say, that he will vouchsafe to reduce you again into his own
family, with his elect Saints, and make you partakers of his gladsome Gospel,
and everlasting felicity: That as the root is holy, so the branches also
recovering the natural verdure of their honorable stock, may be engraffed
again by faith, from whence they revolted through vnbelie^e. For performance
whereof, to remove away all mistrust of well conceauing hope, as also to be of
assured confidence, that the time of your recovery is eue^ at hand, S. Paul
does minister special matter of comfort, who in the self same sermon which he
preached concerning the falling away of the Jews, does not only set down
his own judgment thereof, but also very plainly disclose that high mystery
touching that blessed and joyful return of the Jews, revealed as it were
unto him, by the secret counsel, and determination of almighty God.

Of the which I will speak more hereafter by the help of Christ, An
exhortation to the Gentiles and Christians.
after that I have debated somewhat with the Gentiles (whom the Lord has
called) and have in few words exhorted my dearly beloved brethren in Christ,
to be myndeful of those things, according to my simple understanding. And yet I
see no cause, why I should spend any long time herein: for I do firmly trust,
that all those sayings are already noted by you, yea and deeply imprinted in
your minds, which the Apostle does teach here, touching the due observation of
our calling, so that mine exhortation shall not be much needeful in this place.
First, I suppose that you are not ignorant of the great rigor that God executed
upon his people, wherewith if he would have punished you, what might have let
him I pray you? Yea rather what was the cause, why he did not punish you? Do ye
think that any of you were endued with any such excellency, as ye might
thereby challenge any preeminence above the Iewishe nation? Were not we
sometimes even in the same plyght, that many Jews remain in at this day: to
wit, unfaithful unbelievers in the sight of God? Then if God excluded the
Jews for their unbelief (as he did) what argument might enduce him to have
more compassion upon the Gentiles, who were sometimes as void of faith, as
they are now? Whereby you may perceive (my dear brethren) how the
inestimable mercy of God does miraculously work in man's election, beyond
all hope and capacity of man, who has compassion on whom it pleases him,
and hardens the hearts of whom him lysteth. That it may ryghtly be said,
That it consists neither in the power of the wylling, nor of the running to
obtain mercy, but in the merciful God. If this be not yet apparaunt unto
you, look upon those Israelites, that are yet forsaken of God: who were
sometimes in his favor, and you admitted in their stead. What was the cause
thereof, I pray you? Thou wyle say, that the Natural branches were broken
off, that I might be engraffed in. It is true in deed, they were broken off,
as thou say. But good sir, this was not done for thy sake, but for their
own unbelief sake. And yet it followed hereupon, that we were planted in:
neither is this false, that thou speak. But this is not ye point I seek for:
there is yet an other thing, to wit, not whether the Jews were broken off:
But I would feign know, what virtue was in thee, that might procure thee to
be engraffed in their place. And wherefore should they, being natural branches,
be hewn off? If you compare with them in auncienty of race, they did far
excel you in auncientie of birth, and dignity of parentage. For they were
your elders far, by which title they might lawfully challenge the preeminence
of the birthright. If you stand with them upon deseruinges, how precisely did
they pursue the prescript rule of righteousness? whereof thou dydst take no
regard at all, although in truth they were never able to attain the
perfection they sought for. If thou contend with them in excellency of zeal,
they wanted not very fervent and entier zeal, albeit their earnest bent
affection wa^ted true understanding. If thou boast upon thy vpryghtnesse of
life, surely we Gentiles were in no respect comparable unto them in
conversation of life. If thou have regard to the paynefulnes of the toil, or
estate of the calling, they did bear the brunt and heat of the sun, and
were then first, when as thou came into the vineyarde skarsely amongst the
last, even at the last cast. All which notwithstanding thou do plainly
perceive, that they are rent off from the natural stock, whereupon they
grew, and thy self being otherwise a starueling boughe of a wild Olive tree,
and of an unfruitful stock, art adopted into the inheritance of the sons
of God.

What shall we say then? Is God to be accused of ingratitude, because he
departed from his own? or of inconstancy, for making innovation of his
ancient coue^aunt? God forbydde. For he did never constrayne the perfourmaunce
of his promise to any place or people. The promises of God are not bound to
place, nor persons.
He made a promise to Abraham only, that out of his seed a sprought should
issue, in whom all nations and kynredes of the earth should be blessed. For he
does not say, In thee all nations shall be blessed: but in thy seed: in
whom all men truly should be rewarded with life everlasting, as many as
would receive him: as on the other side, he that did refuse him, should
obtain no mercy nor favor at Gods hands. And it is not to be doubted, that
this seed is the very Son of God, whom if the Jews would once at the last
lovingly embrace, they should no more be excluded from the benefit of the
promise. But for as much as they do yet not only refuse him, but continue
also their cancred outrage against him with execrable cursings, and cruel
spoiling this seed in his members so horribly: there is no cause, why they
should presume to challenge any prerogatyue of the promise, since the person
could not prescribe upon the promise as made unto him, but in respect of the
seed. But why was not this bene^ite of faith and belief in Christ impartened
to the Jews, as well as to the Gentiles indifferently? Some question in deed
might be moved herein, if the same had not already been discussed by his
Prophets sufficiently: to wit, That the Jews them selves should loathe,
reject, yea and procure the death of their own Messhias. And if yet any person
will seem so captious, to be further inquisitiue to learn why the Jews are
not able to comprehend that, which is laid open to the Gentiles, the same may
be satisfied with this ^itte and reasonable answer: Whereas the Jews were
thoroughly persuaded in mind, and confirmed in conscience, by custom of long
continuance, A necessary cause, why the ^ewishe common wealth should be
abolished.
that no righteousness was acceptable in the sight of God, but that which
consisted in perfourming the works of the Law, and celebrating the
Sacrifices, and ceremonies of the same, and that this false conceived opinion,
so deeply rooted in the hearts of men, could by no means else be extirped and
plucked out, but by the undermining, and utter overthrow of the name of that
nation, the whole common wealth thereof, together with all the Sacrifices and
ceremonies appertayning thereunto. Hereof sprang all that blyndenesse, and
subversion of the Jews, albeit the same blyndnes infected not all in general,
nor the same destruction was allotted unto them, to endure for ever.

But by this example it may happily be thought, that God did execute too much
cruelty and rigor against those seely wretches the Jews. Admit in deed,
that it was so. This was therefore a good lesson to forewarne us, according to
Saint Paul's advertisement, that we should duly, and with careful
consideration, exactly examine the severity of God: The se^eritie of God
and not his severity only, but his bountyfull goodness withal: That so
through the often remembrance of the one, we might be restrained in a
couenable fear, and through the daily recordyng of the other, we might be
raised to thankfulness and duetyfull love toward God. A very lively example
truly of Gods severity is here expressed in the Jews, who being fallen
from their ancient dignity, were overwhelmed with such blyndenes, that
notwithstanding Christ (whose coming they looked for many hundred years) was
come already, and conuersaunt amongst them, they should yet pursue him with
contumelious reproaches, rail upon him, The lenity of God.
and persecute him. The like president of Gods lenity and gentleness, appeared
in us that are Gentiles, manifestly: whom of his free mercy, he freely
vouchsafed to associate into the fellowship of such inestimable blessedness,
which was neither due to our parentage, nor could be purchased by any our
deseruinges. Sythence this is most true, what remains, (ye men and brethren
beloved in our Lord and savior Jesus Christ) but that according to the
counsel of the Apostle, An exhorta^ion to the Gentiles.
premeditatyng and continually recording the example of the Jews, we become
more circumspecte, and learn by their ruin, what we ought to fear, and what
we ought to eschew? First, That being taught by the Jews unbelief, we
endeavor by all means possible with earnest and hearty supplications and
prayers, to escape that dangerous gulf of incredulous unbelief. But ye will
demand what kind of unbelief that was wherewith they were blinded. Do they
not believe in one God maker of heaven and earth? An objection
do they not confess as well as we, that the same God is most mighty, most
merciful, yea a most righteous judge, and rewarder of deeds? The answer is
ready. The solucio^^
If we were Angels or such kind of men, as could not possibly decline out of
the way, or had never fallen into error, then would this faith have been a
sufficient cover to shroude us, in that we might need no further mediator.
But now being altogether sinful, borne of sinful parents, environed with the
whole body of sin, what do we else when we call upon God without regard of
the mediator, A perilous thing to seek God without the mediator.
then raise his wrath, sharpen his vengeance, and provoke him to aggrauate the
judgment of our damnation, and (to speak the words of Esaias) procure our
dwelling with devouring fire, Esaias.33.
and make our habitations in everlasting flames? For what can be more dreadful
for man's weak nature, then to debate with God without Christ? From yt which I
beseech our savior Christ to preserve us al.

The other is, left we should foolishly flatter our selves at other men's
harms. Faith is the gift of God, and consists not in any demonstration of
man's imagination: whereunto if it were possible to attain by force of nature,
by works, by dew deseruings of the Law, by ceremonies, by parentage, or
nobility of race: surely the Jews as they were our ancients in years, so
approached nearer the election then we. No man ought to be proud of his faith.
But considering this faith depends upon the free mercy of God only, and the
free distribution of his especial election: and thou through the only kindness
of the Lord, art endued with that blessing, that is denied to others, thou
may worthily rejoice in this thy felicity. But beware that this singular
felicity suggest not matter of pride, as may make thee tread down, and
scorn the calamities of the afflicted: but learn rather by their example,
what thou may fear thy self. Wherein no man can enstruct thee more
piththily, then saint Paul: Be not proud in mind (says he) but fear: for
if God spared not the natural bran^hes, take heed least he spare not thee. For
thou, whosoever thou be, that sta^dest in faith, do not stand so assured,
that thou may not fall: neither is their unbelief such, as is ouerspread over
them all, or such as shall endure for ever, and is unrecoverable. For as there
are very many Jews (as I said before) which do confess and profess Christ
(as is this one Jew whom ye see here present at this time) so is the Lord
mighty, and of power to have compassion upon the remnant, and raise them up,
which are yet forsaken, and trodden under foot.

And that ye may the better understand, that God is of power able to do the
same, as also his determined purpose herein, and what he wills us to conceive
thereof, I will declare unto you the judgment, and hope of S. Paul touching
the same, where of he does also under a certain secret mystery make us
partakers. And to this purpose it seemed good to s. Paul to advertise us that
are Gentiles, that we should be well advised, least being puffed up with pride,
and swelling with a vain arrogant persuasion of our own strength, we
conceive better of our selves then is requisite, because we seem to stand in
better estimation then the Jews: therefore he would not have us ignorant of
this great blindness of the Jews, as the which neither happened to all the
Nation in general, but in part, upon Israel: nor that the same was past
recovery, but should endure only so long, until the full number of the
Gentiles were accomplished. And then (says he) it shall come to pass, that all
the people of Israel shall be saved: which testimony of the Apostle is a
sufficient argument to declare, that the Jews shall be restored again, if I be
not deceived. But when that return of the Jews shall be, the divines are not
fully agreed upon. The prophecy of S. Paul concerning ye ^eturne of ^he Jews.
When the fulness of the Gentiles shall come (says S. Paul.) But when that
fulness shall come, is known only unto him, whose words in the gospel are
these. Act.1.
It is not for you to know the signs and the seasons, which the father has
put in his own power. Unless peradventure we will interpret this fulness in
this wise: that the Jews shall continue so long in blindenes, as the Gentiles
did in unbelief, whiles the Jews remained in belief: and that the fulness of
the Gentiles shall seem to be accomplished, The fulness of the Gen^iles.
when as the Gentiles may prescribe as long continuance in the possession of
Gods Church without the Jews, as the Jews did first enjoy their synagogue without
ye Gentiles. The number of which years will not vary much, if ye computation be
proportionably made. For, if according to this rule, ye derive your number from
the first institution of the Jews common wealth, unto the utter subversion of
the same, ye shall find 1564. the course of which years if ye compare with the
calling of the Gentiles, that is to say, from the time that the holy ghost was
sent, until this present time, the number of years will not be far unequal.
And yet in my judgment it shall not be amiss, if a man make his calculation,
having relation to those times whereof the Lord him self made mention in the
Evangelist Luke. Luke. 21.
And Jerusalem (says he) shall be trodden under foot of the Gentiles, until
the time of the Gentiles be fulfilled.

But the knowledge of the certain moments and appointed minutes of that time,
we commit unto the Lord. This only we learn most assured out of S. Paul,
that God has decreed upon an infallible certainty of time, wherein the
Gentiles shall mount to their fulness, and the Jews also after that fulness of
time shall return unto the faith. For speedy and good success whereof, this
one thing does minister plentiful matter of good hope, yt our Lord Jesus Christ
has vouchsafed to cleanse his Churches every where almost so happily in these
our days, and purged them from al offenses and stumbling blocks, which
occasioned ye Jews to withdraw themselves so long from the participation of
our faith.

A complaint against idolatry used in Christian Churches.
And here I might use offered opportunity, to exclame against the presumptuous
boldness of those persons whatsoever they were, which presumed to thrust into
Temples and Churches of Christians, images, and counterfaites of he saints
and she saints at the first, and to conueye the pure worshipping of ye
invisible God, to the representations of visible things, contrary to the
prescript ordinance of ye Law of God, contrary to reason and nature, contrary
to ye approved custom of ye elders, and contrary to al example of ye
Patriarchs, Prophets and Apostles: out of which puddle as issued wonderful
stench, so amongst al other, nothing more noisome the^ those pestilent Botches
of imageworship, breadworship, wineworship, crosseworship, signs and
pourtraictes of visible creatures, ye view whereof caused the true and sincere
profession of ye christians to be loathsome to ye Jews, to their great
hindera^ce and prejudice. For what marvel was it if the Jews (yt were taught
by ye prescript rule of gods law to abhor worshipping of images) entering into
ye churches of christians, and beholding ye walls, pillars, and al ye corners
^hereof, bedawbed with painted, and carved idols, besides innumerable other
bables of imagery, perceiving also open market to be made, not only of ye
picture of ye cross, but of the sacrament of bread and wine also, displayed
and blazed abroad not after ye manner of communicating, but gloriously vaunted
with singular magnificence to be honored and kneeled unto: what marvel was it (I
say) if they being offended with this open idolatry, did so long refrain from
us, and from the discipline of our faith?

But it is well now, thanked be Christ, A good beginning of a reformed Church
amongst Christians.
yt these offensive baggage and image worshippings are for yt more part defaced
and scraped out of christian churches, and the ancient purity of christian
profession, is begun to take so good footing, yt now amongst us remain no
dregs in our temples, in our religion, nor in our doctrine, that may minister
just occasion of offense to the Jews, or any other enemies, though they
inueigh our religion never so much. And I would to God, al other that profess
ye name of christians, would yield their like endeavor to the abolishment of al
corruptions of religion, and inciuilitie of living out of their co^gregations,
which may breed any further lothsomnes to ye Jews. Truly this is much to be
lamented, that our adversaries can find no blemish of just quarrel in the
person of Christ Jesus, whose name we would seem to profess: and on the other
side, to wit, in us nothing consonant, and agreeable to the true touchstone of
Gods holy word, and Christ's religion, whereof we bear the name, but all
things repugnant and unlike the pure and first pattern thereof.

But I will not adventure further upon this quauemire: the sincke is deeper the^
can be in this place, or at this time scowred or lanched. But sithence our
present purpose is now to treat only of the conversion of the Jews: of the
good success whereof, as there is no hope at all else then by purging and
cleansing the filthy puddles of our superstitions, the unsavory stenche
whereof the Jews can by no means digest: what remains for us to do (my
dear brethren and honorable fathers in the Lord) but that every of us in our
vocation, employe all our endeavor, faculty and power, that nothing may be
committed amongst us, in our default from henceforth, whereby the true religion
of Christ (which he gave most pure without spot or blemish) may be defiled, and
brought into hatred and obloquie, and blasphemed amongst the Jews, Turks,
Pagans, and unbelieving infidels. My meaning here tends not to ye determining
of controversies in sects, nor of doutful controversies debated in schools:
the censure whereof, I commit to the great masters, and doctors in divinity:
Only my request at this time is, that those gross monuments of manifest
idolatry, those fantastical devises and frivolous forgeries of signs and
Images, and those stagelike gestures and pelting trumperies, frequented in
Churches, as are the praying for the dead, worshipping of creatures and signs,
forbidding priests marriages, and such like pieuish absurdities (wherewith the
Jews were never acqua^n^ed) which are manifestly repugnant to ye (...) word of
God, yea and contrary to common reason almost, may be rooted out and vanished
from Christian Churches and congregat^ons: that so we may open an entry to the
Jews and Turks, to conceive an inward desire to be joined to the son of
God: or if we will not do this for the Jews sake, let us yet at the least have
due regard to our own estate. We have been plagued sufficiently enough by the
Turks and Saracenes for our idolatry, if we respect the sundry overthrows,
famines, slaughters, and alterations of kingdoms, wherewith the Christians
have been miserably tormented many hundred years, to the great delight of the
Jews: neither is any hope almost of redress from great calamities, like to
ensue, unless we cast away this worshipping of idols out of Christian
congregations and Temples, (as I said before) and by this means enter upon a
new course of better conversation and purer worshipping of God.

But forasmuch as this notable enterprise of reformation of life, and purer
discipline, has over many adversaries at this day, such as will by no
persuasion suffer themselves to be allured from their accustomed impiety: and
that this wicked age ministers no hope of recovery by exhortation, and that
nothing can avail now to bring this to pass, but supplications and prayers:
Let every of us most humbly join together in earnest and hearty prayer, to
the eternal God, father of our Lord Jesus Christ: beseeching him for his
dearly beloved sons sake, that as he has shut up all under unbelief,
because he will have compassion on all, so he will vouchsafe to deliver the
Jews from their infidelity, all Christians from superstition and idolatry,
and withal govern and sanctify his Church in the same pure synceritie,
wherewith he did beautify it at the beginning. For which cause we humbly
beseech thee also, most mylde Savior, Esaias.59.
which art appointed King over thy holy hill Sion to manifest thy self a
redeemer unto thy people out of that thy holy hill Sion, Romans 11.
and to turn away ungodliness from Jacob. Then shall that come to pass which
thou did promise long ago by the mouth of the Prophet, that the children of
Judah, and the children of Israel being gathered together under one head,
Ose^.1.
shall al together with us, with one soul, one voice, and one mouth,
acknowledge thee to be the true son of the living God, shall magnify thee
our redeemer, and attain eternal salvation of body and soul, together with
us, in thy everlasting kingdom, through thee, our Lord and Savior, Amen.

FINIS.
Imprinted at London, by Christopher Barker, Printer to the Queens Majesty.

ANNO. 1578.



The confession of faith, which Nathanael a lewe borne, made before the
Congregation in the Parish church of Alhallowes in Lombard street at London,
whereupon he was according to his desire, received into the number of the
faithful and so baptized the first of April. 1577.
MEn and brethren, to whom God has revealed in these later days the secret
of his son which was hidden from you many ages, it is not unknown unto you
how that in the days of our forefathers God chose us to be a precious people
unto himself above all the people that are upon the earth: Deuteronomy. 7.6.
and he loved us and chose us, not because we were mo in number then any
people: for we were the fewest of all people: but he chose us only because
he loved us, and because he would keep the oath which he had sworn unto our
fathers Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. By virtue of which promise the same our Lord
and God, whose name is Jehovah, brought our fathers by a mighty hand and
delivered them out of the house of bondage from the hand of Pharaoh King of
Egypt, that they might know that the Lord their God is the God in deed, the
faithful God which keeps covenant and mercy unto the^ that love him and
keep his commandments, even to a thousand generations. According to which
great and unspeakable loving kindness, he kept, and preserved our fathers in
the land of Israel, which he had given them under the obedience of his Law in
such service of sacrifices and other rites, as he had appointed them to be done
and practiced all the days of their lives in the city of Jerusalem, where was
his Temple built upon the mount Sion, so long as they kept them selves in
obedience to the same Law and ordinances. But when they forsaked the Lord
their God, and cleaued unto false gods, he rewarded them to their face because
they hated him, and brought them to destruction by delivering them into the
hands of many enemies: as into the hands of Nabuchadnezer, by whom they were
carried into captivity to Babylon, and there remained the days foretold them
by our Prophet Jeremy: Fulfilling thereby the words of our Prophet Moseh
foretelling us that it should so be, if we forsook the Lord our God: and
leaving us their posterity an example thereby, that, if we followed like
iniquity, like severity of punishment should overtake us: As it came to
pass, and is fulfilled in the eyes of all the world by this captivity which
we are now in and have been in, we and our forefathers, ever since the death of
that righteous man Jesus Christ: whom the Scribes and Pharisees and Elders of
our people delivered into the hands of Pontius Pilate to be put to death,
being before betrayed into their hands by one of his own disciples that son
of perdition Judas Ishcarioth. As our forefathers then pronounced against them
selves, Let his blood be upon our heads and upon our children: so it is come to
pass by the righteous judgment of that mighty and dreadful God. For even
from those days unto this present the whole house of Israel, that is, we yt
come of the stock of Abraham after the flesh, is and are strangers out of the
land of Israel our own country without Law or Prophets, without all exercise
of his statutes and ordinances concerning his worship prescribed unto us by
the hand of his servant Moseh. This long and weariesome captivity has
consumed a great number of our forefathers, and has caused some of us from
time to time, through the grace and love of God wherewith he loves us for the
promise sake, to think upon our promised Messhiach: conferring these days of
sorrow and calamity with our former captiuities of our fathers, which were
nothing so many in number of years, nor so grievous for want of our Prophets.
These fiftene hundredth years have we been strangers, and these fiftene hundredth
years have we lacked our Prophets: a thing not seen at any time before when we
and our fathers were carried into a strange land. For in Egypt they had Mosheh
and Aaron: and in Babylon they had Jeremy and Daniel, besides Ezra, Nechemiah,
and many other: only in this captivity is Israel left desolate and our
Prophets clean gone. Whereof when it pleased God I should have consideration,
I was lead to think that our Messhiach is come, and that our long looking for
an other was but in vain: And yt rather, for that I see ye words of Jacob our
father accomplished where he says, Genesis 49.10
The Scepter shall not depart from Judah, nor a lawegiuer from between his
feet until Shiloh come: and the people shall be gathered unto him. For the
Scepter and government was continued in the house of Judah, as our fathers
accord, until the coming of this man Jesus: in whom if it were not continued
according to the words of our scriptures, it has failed and wanted ever
since. For since the days of that just man there has been no Scepter amongst
us, neither have we or do we run for judgments unto Jerusalem: So that if ye
words of our father Jacob be true, That the Scepter should not depart from the
house of Judah until Shilo came, and there is no Scepter nor Lawegiuer now in
that house: then must it needs be that this man Jesus, who^ you confess and
believe, is that Shilo which was to come: and is that child of whom one or our
Prophets says, Esa. 9.6.
Unto us a child is borne, and unto us a son is given, and the government
is upon his shoulder, And he shall call his name Wonderful, Counselor, The
mighty God, The everlasting Father, the Prince of peace, the increase of his
government and peace shall have none end, he shall sit upon the throne of
David and upon his kingdom to order it and to stablish it with judgment and
justice from henceforth, even for ever. The zeal of the Lord of hosts will
perform this. This man then no doubt is that Messhiach which was looked for
according to promise, and our fathers and people acknowledge not, fulfilling in
them selves the words of their own mouth, His blood be upon our heads. In
deed it seemed strange to me, and does to the rest of my brethren according to
the flesh, eue^ unto this day, in whom this blindness and hardness of heart
is in part continued through occasion given by them that profess the name of
this man Jesus: And not only in us which are of the house of Israel, but in
other, as the Turks and Mahomets which are of the race of Ishmael. For had it
not been for the great and manifold Idolatry that is committed and used
amongst the Christians almost in all places where his Name is professed, many
of our nation had repented in sackcloth and ashes, and had come to this man
Jesus their brother after the flesh, from whom they are now estranged and go
astraye. But well is it written in your Law, Woe be unto him by whom offense
comes: according as it is written in our Law, Cursed be the man that lays
a stumbling block in the way of his neighbor, and all the people shall say
Amen. But when it pleased God to bring me into this land, which I must for the
same cause call a blessed land, and I saw therein no such impediment as
holds our eyes blinded in other places: It was a means, I must needs
confess, that made me more deeply to enter into the former consideration of
our long captivity, and better to think of the words of our Prophets, and
the promises set down by them touching our Messhiach. For the wall that makes
a separation between our nation the stock of Abraham, and you the Gentiles,
is in your respect and in your behalf broken down: so that I can not justly
say of you, as we and our fathers and Elders say of all other, using in all
our books and writings to call and account of them by no other name but Baale
abodazara Idolatrous masters, and lords of strange worship: A thing so
detestable unto us, as nothing more concerning our Law, being in deed the
first and chiefest of our commandments given us by the hand of Mosheh, and so
often repeated unto us, as no one thing more in all our scriptures: Besides the
manifest anger of God showed against it, Deu. 9.16.
in punishing the trespass therein committed by our forefathers in the absence
of Mosheh, when he was gone up into ye mount to fetch the Law. When our
fathers were to enter into the land of promise, the first and principal point
required of them was this: Deuteronomy. 7,1. 3.4.5.6.7.
When the Lord thy God shall bring thee into the land whither thou go to
possess it, and shall root out many nations before thee, the Hittites, and
the Girgashites, and the Ammonites, and the Canaanites, and the Perizzites, and
the Hiuites, and the Iebusites, seven nations mightier and greater than thou,
and the Lord thy God shall give them before thee: then shall thou smite them,
thou shall utterly destroy them, thou shall make no covenant with them nor have
compassion on them, neither shall thou make mar^ages with them, neither give
thy daughter unto his son, nor take his daughter unto thy son: for they
will cause thy son to turn away from me, and to serve other gods: then will
the wrath of the Lord wax whotte against you, and destroy thee suddenly: Deu.
12,2. 3.
But thus you shall deal with them, you shall overthrow their altars, and
break down their pillars, and you shall cut down their groves and burn
their graue^ images with fire.

The severity of this Law and the false worship that we and our fathers
behold in them that profess the name of this man Jesus, withholdeth us from
coming to make any covenant of peace with you, from joining hands with you,
and entering into that familiarity with you, which should be between them that
worship one God. Deu. 22,10
We are commanded in our Law not to plowe with an ox and an ass, neither to
wear any garment of linsie wolsie: we understand it so, that we may not join
God and Idols together: we may not serve our Lord otherwise than he has
commanded us, saying, Deuteronomy. 5,32
Turn not aside to the right hand nor to the left. For he is a iealouse God,
and we are chosen to be an holy people unto him: which we are taught we can
not be, unless we keep this commandment, Thou shall have none other Gods but
one: and this, Thou shall not make to thy self any graven image, nor the
likeness of any thing. And because they do so, we have been withholden by the
commandment of our God from making any covenant with them, or hearkening unto
any of their Prophets and teachers: for that were but to make Israel to sin,
and to provoke the holy one to anger. When they talk with us, they say they
are not such as our Prophets speak of, who worshipped beasts and other
creatures, as the sun and the moon: but they worship only the creature of
man, who was made to the image of God, and by whom God has wrought great and
marvelous works upon the earth. To whom we answer by ye words of our Law,
that all idolatry is forbidden us: the commandment forbids not one thing
more than an other, neither gives greater liberty for one thing, than for an
other: but says in these words, Thou shall not make the likeness of any
thing that is in heaven above or in the earth beneath, or in the water under
the earth, thou shall not bow down to them nor serve the^. Whatsoever it be,
it is forbidden by our commandment. And if any creature might be worshipped,
reason would the sun and moon should have that honor done them: for they
serve us to greatest purposes, and by them we reap daily profit. Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob: Mosheh, Samuel, and Elizahu with the rest of the Prophets
were good men, and by them God wrought wonderful things, and yet we never
worshipped any of them. And we can not think that this wisdom was or should
have been hidden from all them, and all our fathers, if it had been so great
wisdom in the sight of our God. They say unto us oftentimes, that they do not
worship them as Gods, but they worship God in them. Neither are the Heathen,
we say, that are round about us so blinded with the imagination of their
hearts, as that they think that the stocks and stones carved, or the tables
which they paint them selves, to be God: but they are persuaded that the living
God may be worshipped and served in them. And as for the creature that is
worshipped, or in whom the living God is worshipped, whether it be better than
an other and more to be accounted of than an other, that is not it that makes
false worship: but the commandment which says, Thou shall not make the
likeness of any thing. And yet those common Christians go very far: for the
Christians of Spain and Portugal have it written in their books, as in one
which they call Contemplationes del Idiota ala virgen Maria, That that virgin
is the Lords treasure, and that she bestows gifts and graces upon her
servants to make them worthy dwelling houses for her blessed son and the
holy Ghost: that her mercy often time pardons them, whom the justice of her
son might condemn: that she does plentifully enriche the^ that serve her
with the holy Ghost, and defends them most mightily from the enemy: to
wit, from the world, the f^esh and the devil: and that our salvation lies
in her hands. But our Law teaches us that our God Jehovah is all sufficient,
and that all treasures are in his hands: he gives to whom he lists: and
from whom he lists he holds back. He says he will not give his glory to
an other, and what is more glorious to him than to be acknowledged of his
creatures to be the only fountain of all goodness, to be our lightening and
salvation, that we may dwell confidently under the shadow of hi^ wings, who
will be called upon in the day of our necessity and he will hear us.

And therefore as that doctrine is contrary to the doctrine of our Prophet,
and is cast away of you which in this country believe in the man Jesus: So I
have more willingly and with a more ready mind hearkened to the words of
your teachers, and learned by Gods good working to know more of our promised
Messhiach, tha^ our fathers believe: but no more than our scriptures most truly
contain: Being assured that, seeing you have the words of our Prophets, and do
not follow strange gods, you are to be hearkened unto. For by our Law no
Prophet may be rejected but the false prophet, who seeks to turn us away
from the Lord our God to serve other gods. And therefore as I have learned by
the words of your teachers, conferring them with our Law and Prophets, that
our promised King and Messhiach is not a Prince of this world, as one that
has to establishe a temporal kingdom amongst us: but a spiritual, whose
power and might consists in governing us by his Spirit, and forgiving the
sins of Israel, and taking away the iniquities of Jacob, bearing in his own
body the chastisement of our peace, that is, the chastiseme^t that works and
gets us peace as our Prophets tell us: So I confess and acknowledge that he
is already come, and that it is he of whom our Prophet spoke, Behold the days
come, says the Lord, Iere. 23.5,6
that I will raise unto David a righteous branche, and a King shall reign and
prosper, and shall execute judgment and justice in the earth: in his days
Judah shall be saved and Israel shall dwell safely, and this is the name whereby
they shall call him, The Lord our righteousness. And therefore being heartily
sorry for my so long going astraye from the faith of this man Jesus after the
evil leading of my country men and kinsmen after the flesh, for whose speedy
turning to the Lord I most earnestly pray, and giving the God of Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, hearty thanks for the working of his grace in me, by
bringing me from the darkness, wherein my fathers have walked these fifteen
hundredth years, into his marvelous light, to behold the face of his Christ
our true and only Meshiach: I protest unto you, that I utterly forsake my
former ways and the steps that my nation walks in, leaving with them not
only that false looking for an other Christ, but my name also which was given
me at my circumcision (being Iehuda) though in it self it be honorable:
desiring that as I have received a new gift from the Lord, so in token thereof
I may be called Nathanael: the sum of which gift, so far forth as he has
as yet revealed unto me, I here confess and acknowledge before you, that you
may be witnesses with me of my faith in Christ that Meshiach, whom you believe
in, and I receive for my redeemer.

I confess with my mouth and believe from my heart, that the man Jesus Christ
borne of the virgin Marie (according to the foretelling of our Prophets) and
so, by the flesh he took of her, descending of the seed and stock of David
for the continuance of his kingdom for ever over his people Israel, is the
undoubted Meshiach promised to our fathers for the redemption and delivery of
us his people out of the captivity we are in: which is not the captivity of
Egypt or Babylon, or the captivity of the Romans Empire, which we have justly
deserved by the shedding of his innocent blood through betraying and delivering
him into the hands of the wicked to be crucified: but the captivity of sin,
death, and damnation, prefigured unto us by our Prophets under the shadow of
the foresaid captiuities of Egypt and Babylon. Which things because our fathers
understood not through ignorance of our scriptures, they did all those things
which they wrought, against that holy one our only redeemer and savior: and
have by that means estranged them selves and their posterity from the common
wealth in deed of Israel, that is to say, from the communion of the saints
and children of God which make p^^fession of this man's name, and believe in
truth that he is the very Christ and only anoynte^ savior of the world which
was so forepromised from the beginning of the world.

And therefore in full assurance of this full and perfect and last delivery
wrought for all them that are both nigh and far of, that is, for all that
believe by that man Jesus whom our Prophets forenamed Immanuel, which is by
interpretation, God with us, resting and reposing my self in this horn of
salvation, I look for no other Messhiach and Christ to come hereafter, as the
rest of my kindred an^ people do, blinded through unbelief: being my self
thoroughly persuaded by the Prophets that this is that Shiloh which was to come,
that Angel of the Lord whom Elias, the Thesbite as we call him, was to go
before, that is to say, John the Baptist: whom so^e of our Prophets call the
voice in the wilderness sent to prepare the ways of this our King and holy
one our redeemer, converting by his preaching the fathers hearts unto the
children, and the simple and unbelievers to the obedience of the righteous: For
which cause also (as our words mean) he was by our fathers called Thesby,
which is by interpretation, the servant of God to work repentance by.

And because this man, who was appointed from the beginning to be our redeemer
and deliverer out of the captivity of sin, was to work that great and
marvelous redemption by his own death (as was prefigured unto us by our
Passover and all our sacrifices, and also declared by our Prophets) which he
performed in his time appointed, being delivered into the hands of Pontius
Pilate by our Scribes and Pharisees to be put to that shameful death of the
Cross, whereof it is written in our law, Cursed be the man that hangs on
the tree: which is so well known to all the house of Israel, that they call him
even to this day in despite Talui, which is by interpretation, Hanged.
Therefore I also confess and believe that our sacrifices commanded in our Law,
by the hand of Mosheh, are at an end and not to be used any more: being in
deed but shadows of this body and truth which was performed in and by this
our Immanuel, God with us. And therefore I most willingly and freely renounce
that doctrine of our Elders, which teaches us that our delivery forespoken
(...) by our Prophets is or shall be a restoring (...) us into our country and
land of Judea, the^ to keep such ordinances and statutes to^ching sacrifices
of goats and calves as were commanded us by the hand of Mosheh: being assured
by the scriptures that the Jerusalem, which we shall be restored unto, is the
kingdom of heaven from which we were cast through unbelief, and are again
restored unto it as many of us as believe in this our Immanuel, by the same
God with vs^ whose blood has opened us the way, an^ not the blood of our
goats and calves which were figures of this true and perfect sacrifice wrought
by this man upon the cross, by virtue whereof they were auaylable to so many
of our fathers, as did believe, for the remiss^ of sins and delivery out of
that thraldo^^ of the soul: and not out of the captivity ^^ther of Egypt, or
Babylon, or this wher^^ we and our forefathers have justly been eu^^ since the
unrighteous shedding of this ri^^^teous man's blood.

Moreover I confess with my mouth (...) believe in my heart that this same
man Jesus, the son of that virgin, is not only (...) but God, both God and
man: so called by our Prophets, Immanuel, God with us: God not made in time,
nor after a season, but God from the beginning and without beginning, who was
before the sun and shall be after the sun (as our Prophet David says) by
who^ ^s al things were made from the beginning, so are they preserved by his
mighty power, and of his kingdom there shall be none end: Who as he is called
the word of God his father, so were all the Prophets given and sent ^y him the
only true interpreter and messenger of his Fathers will: which he reuea^^d
from time to time to his people by the hands of his Prophets, as he thought
best: ordering the measure of the revelation of him self, as might best stand
with the time of his coming when he was to be presented unto the world. And
therefore he opened him self unto our fathers in the times and days of ^ur
Prophets, but darkely under types and ^igures, laying a veil as it were over
our eyes, to the end we should be more earnest and painful in seeking after
him. But in the ful^es of time, when the season appointed hy his Father was
come, then he revealed him self fully and plainly, preaching both him self
the kingdom of heaven, and sending forth his Apostles to do the same: upon
whom therefore he powered out the holy Ghost, which is called his Spirit, so
performing that which our Elders set down as a proper mark of the coming of
our Meshiach: to wit, that in that day our Prophets should cease and the
holy Ghost should be given to ignorant an^ unlearned men, which we have seen
fulfilled in the eyes of all Israel. And therefore I receive this word of God,
which has been from those days called the New Testament, as the true and
undoubted word of God uttered by y^ same Spirit, which spoke in our Prophets.

Again I confess with my mouth and believe in my hea^te that that holy
Ghost and Spirit, who was the directour of all our Prophets, and was also
promised by this m^^^ Jesus our Immanuel to be always with (...) people, to
lead them into all truth unto (...) worlds end, is also very God, one in
s^^^stance and nature with God the Father (...) God the Son: but an other in
persone^ (...) the Father and the Son differ in person. (...) that there are
not three Gods, but one Go^^ neither one only person, but three person^^ Which
person of the holy Ghost, as he has been from the beginning of the world by
the everlasting counsel and determinate purpose of God the directour and
governor of his Church, that is to say, the assembly and company of his
people agreeing together in unity of faith and doctrine, and did therefore for
the bringing and maintenance of them into the unity of this faith and doctrine
deliver them from God diverse rites and ceremonies: diverse in outward show, but
one self same in effect and substance, having only for their ground and
matter this man and God Jesus Christ our Immanuel: So does he continue still to
nourishe us up in the same, and therefore commends to us to be kept for (...)
everlasting covenant two sacraments, the one of Baptism, the other of the
Lords supper: which two the will of our Lord and God was and is, should be in
place of the circumcision and Passover commanded to our forefathers. Which I
steadfastly believe and religiously confess, and therefore renouncing the
former (as also al other rites and ceremonies of the Law) being but shadows
of the body which is now performed and come, I most humbly desire to be
received into the fellowship of these Sacraments: that as it has pleased our
Lord God and heavenly (...) there, to reveal his son unto me, and to (...) me
again into the stock of my father Ab^^^ham (from whence I was cast out
thro^^^ unbelief with my forefathers, the stifneck (...) and disobedient) So I
may through B^^tisme be received and taken for a membe^ (...) this our
Meshiach: whom I confess and (...) knowledge to be the ^^^ly promised Chr^^ in
whom whosoever will have life must (...) saved: whereof I ^^^ke and trust to
be (...) taker in the (...) of the righteou^ which shall (...) the (...) agai^^
of this our Imman^el when he sha^ come to judge the ^u^cke and the ^ea^.

FINIS.
To his beloved Mother, I. K. sends greeting in the Lord.
THE desire that I have to hear of your continuance, which Christ Jesus in the
day of this his battle which shortly shall end to the confusion of his proud
enemies, neither by tongue, neither yet by pen can I express, beloved Mother.
Assuredly it is such that it vanquisheth, and overcomes all remembrance and
solicitude, which the flesh uses to take for feeding and defense of herself.
For in every realm and nation God will stir up some one or other to minister
those things that appertain to this wretched life, and if men will cease to
do their office, yet will he send his ravens: so that in every place,
perchance I may find some feathers to my body. But alas where I shall find
children to be begotten unto God by the word of life, that can I not presently
consider. And therefore the spiritual life of such as sometime boldly pro^essed
Christ (god knows) is to my heart more dear then all the glory, riches, and
honor in the earth. And the falling back of such men, as I hear daily


