AN HISTORICAL COLLECTION, OF THE MOST MEMORABLE ACCIDENTS, and Tragical
Massacres of France, under the Reigns of HENRY. 2. FRANCIS. 2. CHARLES. 9.
HENRY. 3. HENRY. 4.
now living.

Containing all the troubles therein happened, during the said Kings times,
until this present year, 1598.

Wherein we may behold the wonderful and strange alterations of our age.

Translated out of French into English.

Imprinted at London by Thomas Creed. 1598.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE GEORGE EARL OF CVMBERLAND, BARON OF CLIFFORD, LORD OF
Westmerland, Skipton, Vipont, Bromflet, and Vessy, Knight of the most
honorable Order of the Garter, all health and happiness.
AMong many that have taken in hand (Right Honorable and my very good Lord) to
write the Stories of ancient times, the wars and worthy deeds of famous
Princes, it was my lot (though unworthy) to be called to the translating of
these last troubles of France, which by the Author, was in the French tongue
very learnedly and eloquently set down. And since the matter therein contained,
meriteth to be well regarded, and duly considered of all noble and honorable
personages: and the knowledge thereof, profitable to be imparted unto all
Christian kingdoms, it was thought very meet and requisite, to have the same
turned into our English tongue, for the profit and benefit of all such
Englishmen, as are not skillful in the other language: what sweetness of
phrase it has lost, being thus stripped out of it own attire, I beseech your
good Lordship to pardon; considering that the French in phrase, carries a
peculiar grace in it self, which cannot always in an other speech be expressed.
Not what I would, but what I could I have done in the translation, wishing in
my heart (for your Lordships sake) that my skill could have stretched to my good
will. Nevertheless, for the saluing of all imperfections therein, and the
intier affection which I bear to your honorable virtues, In all humility I
commend my Book to your Lordships patronage, that your worthiness may supply
what is wanting in me, and shield my book from the envy of Satyricall
carpers: who beholding your Lordship to be a Protector of my simple labor,
will rather blush at their own peevishness, then proceed any further in their
malice. Thus building on hope of your honorable favor, I humbly rest.

Your Lordships in all duty.

TO THE COURTEOUS AND FRIENDLY READER.
SVch is the plenty of fine wits in this our age (right gentle and courteous
Reader) that nothing can pass current without control, except it be rare in
conceit, or excellent for Art: for my own part, I cannot boast of either: yet
have I been (like blind Bayard) bold to deal in the translating of this
book, which I confess might have well beseemed a man of greater skill:
notwithstanding being called thereunto, I have done my best to satisfy the
world, submitting my self to the correction of the learned. Many faults have
escaped herein, some by my own oversight, some through the Printers
negligence, which I would desire the skillful, courteously to correct with
their pen, or friendly to pardon through their courtesy. For such as are
used to the Press, are privy to this, that few books goes clear without an
Erata: yet thus much I dare presume, that to my knowledge, no fault herein
committed, has either spoiled the sense, or mangled the Story. Therefore in
so great a labor as this is, think not a small fault a great prejudice. So
shall you bind me by your courtesy, to be ready hereafter both to correct
this, and to procure some other thing, that may be more to your content.

Yours in all courtesy.

THE CONTENTS OF THE MOST PRINCIPAL POINTS CONTAINED IN THIS HISTORY.
HENRY THE SECOND.
Henry the second, contains the alteration of the Court, by the death of
Francis the first. Wars in Scotland. Practices wrought at Rome against the
Emperor. Revolt in Guyenne: because of exactions made upon Salt. Persecutions
against those of the religion. Bullen. The notable actions of Merindol and
Cabrieres. The reestablishment of Guyenne. Picardie. Trent. The Edict against
the abuses of the Court of Rome. Continuance of persecutions against those of
the religion. Lorraine. Councels and agreements between the King and the
Protestant Princes, to cross the Emperors proceedings in Almaine and
elsewhere. The taking of Metz, an Imperial Town, brought under the King of
France his subjection. Wars in Luxemburg. The Conquest of the Duchy of
Bouillon. The Emperor agrees with the Almaines to besiege Metz, and ouerrun
Picardie. The issue of the siege of Metz. Terouenne. Hesden sacked. The
overthrow and taking of the Duke of Arscot. Picardie. Bains among others is
burnt. The encounter at Renty. The overthrow of the Army of Frenchmen in
Picardie. Wars in Piedmont and Sauoy. The French Army conducted by Strossy,
overthrown, and Siene yielded. Wars in Picardie, and the Isle of Corsie.
Rome. The Duke of Guise marches with an army for the king to aid the Pope,
who makes peace with the Spaniard. Mean time, the Constable loses the
battle of Saint Lawrence. Saint Quintin taken by assault, and many other
places won from the Frenchmen in Picardie.

The king assayeth to recompense his losses, Calais and the County of Oye:
after that, Theouuille and others. On the other side, the Earl of Egmont
overthrew the Marshall de Terms hard by Grauelines. A speech of peace, in the
mean time Charles the fifth, Elenor, and Mary Queen of England died. In the
end the two Kings agreed together, and the King of France began to persecute
those of the religion more then ever he did: but while he plaide his part,
death seized upon him, and laid him on the ground, by a blow with a Lance.
Whereby ensued a marvelous alteration in France.

FRANCIS THE SECOND.
THe Court in a moment is wholly altered and changed by the practices of the
house of Guise, that withstood all men, executing Anne de Bourg, an excellent
person, under the authority of a Prince of the blood. Information is made
against them, and the Barron de la Renaudie, in the name of a great part of the
Nobility, and third estate, undertakes the commission to take the Duke of
Guise, and the Cardinal of Lorraine prisoners What order was holden therein by
Monsieur de Renaudie, which in the end was discovered, Amboise. The Prince of
Conde valiantly maintains his innocence, and shows the cowardly tyranny of
his enemies, where it was openly proclaimed throughout the Provinces.

The Guisarts not content with the troubles in France, move wars in
Scotland, but to their own confusion. The religion multiplieth in France, even
in the middle of their persecutions, and next after God, submit themselves
under the protection of the Princes of the blood, determining to oppose
themselves against the house of Guise, who by diverse subtilties receive and
award their blows, discover the enterprise wrought against them, cause the
principal Nobility of the Realm to be assembled at Fontainbleau, where the
Admiral galleth them on all sides. This assembly produced an advise and
consent of a Parliament, to be holden in the end of that year. The Princes are
summoned to come unto the Court, and all subtle practices used to get them
thither: being arrived at Orleans, where the Court was holden, They were stayed
as prisoners, specially the Prince of Conde, the house of Guise practicing the
total ruin of the Princes, and all others of the religion, leave no means
vndeuised, which by the sequel is well perceived. While these actions were in
hand, the king fell sick: in the end the Queen his mother got the Regencie,
with the aid of the house of Guise and the king of Navarre: the Prince of
Conde, and those of the religion, are relieved by the kings death.

CHARLES THE NINTH.
I Account the reign of Charles the ninth, to be the time of wonders in
France, Guise began to practice against the estate, many edicts were made to
pacify the troubles. The Queen Mother uses practices that overthrew the laws
of the realm, to satisfy those of the religion: an assembly was holden at
Poissy, which ended in words, and no resolutions, and lastly with mutinies in
Parris. The Edict of January was made, Guise undertook to commit the massacre
at Vassy, inducing the king of Navarre to consent with him: he seizes both of
Parris and the king, which bred the first civil wars, which on the one side,
contain infinite exployts of wars, as battles, incounters, assiegings,
defenses, and taking of places: on the other side, spoils and horrible
murders of those of the religion in all the Provinces of the Realm. The
troubles being ended by the death of the Duke of Guise, Orleans, the first
Edict of pacification (abolishing that of January) was established. After the
peace, the Englishmen were driven out of New-hauen, the king is declared to be
of age to govern without a Protector, and causes diverse Edicts to be made.
Bayonne, diverse Citadels builded, many Towns unwalled, those of the religion
sacked and spoiled in many places, leagues made against them, Edicts reuoking
those that had been granted unto them. The shameful entry of the Cardinal of
Lorraine in Paris: Bayonne: the kings progress throughout France. Guise and
Chastillon: the miserable state of France: a notable process at Paris, between
the University and the Jesuits. Under pretense of a passage to be granted to
the Spaniards to pass into the low Countries, preparation was made to ouerrun
those of the religion, Conde and his associates, to seek to defend themselves:
whereof ensued the second eiuill wars, set down with the most notable
accidents therein happened. Guyenne, followed by diverse others. The Princes
first exployts: edicts against those of the religion: many warlike exployts
between the contrary armies. Wars began to be in greater force in the year
1569. then ever they were before. The Prince was slain after the battle of
Bassac: Navarre declared general of the army, and the Prince of Conde
assistant. A puissant army of Almaines under the conduction of the Duke de
Deux Ponts comes to aid them: the encounter of la Roche la Belle: the wars
of Bearne: the siege of Poictiers and Chastelleraud: the battle of Moncontour.
What both the armies did after that. The siege of S. John d'Angely overthrown,
the army victorious. Diverse exployts of wars in Poictou, Guyenne, Xaintongne,
Angoulmois: a great voyage through the Provinces, after the battle of
Moncontour: continuance of wars, which is ended by the third edict of
pacification and about the end of the year, the king married the Emperors
daughter: a voyage made unto the Queen of Navarre, for the marriage of her son
with the king of France his sister. Councels among those of the religion:
Chastillon. The marriage aforesaid agreed upon, wars were pretended against
the Spaniard: the secret of the Court discovered, Navarre went to Parris, where
she died: the Princes and the Admiral came thither. Contracts and espousals of
the king of Navarre: most horrible, bloody, and cruel councels and massacres
of the Admiral and thirty thousand of the religion in Parris, and in many
other Towns: all the circumstances precedent and following, set down at
large. Many devises to destroy those that were resting of the religion, who in
Rochel, Sancerre, Languedoc, and other places, resolved to stand in a just
defense of their cause: the assieging and yielding of Sancerre. A notable
discourse of the siege of Rochel, Quercy, Languedoc, and other Provinces, where
they overthrew their enemies, and presently after, reduced the king to such a
stay, that he was forced to begin again, who fell sick as his brother went
into Poland. A devise not over good for those of the religion, Rochel: and
began the fifth by the enterprises against Rochel and Languedoc. The wonderful
practices of the Queene-mother, to maintain her actions, and to serve her
turn by her third son against those of the religion. The estate of diverse
provinces, specially of Normandy, where Monsieur was taken prisoner. Wars in
Poictou against those of the religion. The Prince of Conde goes into Almaine.
The sickness and death of the king.

HENRY THE THIRD.
THe Regents dealings during the wars in Normandy. The estate of Languedoc,
Viuarais, and Dauphine. Montgommery beheaded in Parris. The Prince of Conde
chosen general by those of Languedoc. War in Poictou. The arrival of the
new king, escaped out of Poland. Lusignen. Wars in Dauphine. Practices
against those of Languedoc. The death of Charles Cardinal of Lorraine. The
memorable siege of Liuron. Conquests in Languedoc and elsewhere. Negotiation of
peace, which procured wars. Notable exployts of Mombrun, with the end
thereof. The state of Xaintongue. New practices invented against those of the
religion. The Duke of Alencon the kings brother leaves the Court, and
promises wonders. Accord between the Prince of Conde and the Duke Casimir,
overthrown by the Queen Mother. France. The king of Nauarres departure from
the Court. After, the D. of Alencon is made general of the army. A peace is
propounded, which in the end is fully agreed: thereupon the fifth Edict of
pacification was made, which like the rest, hatched the sixth civil war.
Foundations of the league begun by the house of Guise. Preparations and
beginnings of new war. A summarie of the king his Oration to the estates. The
intention of the same estates discovered. What the king of Navarre and Prince
of Conde answered to the Deputies of the same estates. Entrance to the sixth
civil war, and the most memorable things of the same, Guise, which began to
stir, and constrained the King of Navarre to look to himself, but chiefly
after the death of the Duke d'Alencon, which served for an infantation or
production of the league in Paris and elsewhere: the progressions whereof are
declared. Pretext of the leaguers mutiny, whom the king attempteth to
disvnite. The King of Navarre manifests himself against them. The
Queene-mother makes her self a necessary Agent herein, and causes the King
to yield unto the leaguers more then they hoped for: so that he abolished the
last edict of pacification, prepares for war, and demands money. The Pope
excommunicateth the King of Navarre and Prince of Conde, the which the
Parliament of Parris disliketh: yet nevertheless the king formally proclaims
himself against those of the religion: who prepare to make resistance. The
Duke de Maine his exploits for the league: and then those of Duke de Mercoeur.
The memorable expedition of the Prince of Conde toward Angers. What those of
the religion did for their defense in Poictou, Xaintongue, and other places:
and the King of Navarre against four armies of the league. The first and last
exployts of the Duke de Ioyeuse for the league, against the King of Navarre.
Battle of Coutras. Discourse of the journey and overthrow of the Rutters
army, about the end of the year 1587. A summarie recital of the attempts of
the league against the Duke de Bouillon in those seasons. Sedan. The death of
the Prince of Conde. The Duke of Guise comes to Parris, upon which ensues
the battle of Barricadoes. The Kings retrait, and the beginning of extreme
evils in France. Proceedings of the King and Leaguers. Assignation of the
estates at Blois. An edict of union in the month of July. War ordained against
such of the religion as intended those estates. Attempts of the Duke of Sauoy
against France. Assembly of the Estates, and that which proceeds the ouerture
of the same. The Kings Oration, who would confirm his Edict of Union. The Duke
of Guise his progressions discovered, whereupon ensues the putting to death of
him and his brother. Warlike exployts by the K. of Navarre, for his own
defense: and of the army of the league, in buse Poictou. Niort taken from the
league. Restitution of Ganache. Dissipation of the leaguers army.

France. Death of the Queen Mother. Behavior of the king, the league, and king
of Navarre, during these beginnings. Truce between the two kings. Diverse
exployts and enterprises of the leaguers, who are discomfited in Normandy,
Beausse, and in the Isle of France. The king with a puissant army, having
brought in diverse places of importance, drew near Parris, where a Iacobin
Moonke, subborned of long time for the same purpose, traitorously gave him a
wound with a knife* whereof after some certain hours he died, and in him
failed the race of the French kings, of the line of Valois.

HENRY THE FOVRTH.
DIsposition of the French, after the Kings death. Councels of the league.
Order given for the affairs of his army, by the new King, being Henry the
fourth, lawful successor to the Crown. His genealogy. His proceedings and
notable exployts in Normandy, near to Arques. From thence he comes toward
Paris, takes the subburbes, assayeth to draw the leaguers to fight: takes
Estampes, Vendosme, Man's, reduces many Provinces to his obedience, and
martyreth Normandy, whereupon the Parliament rises against him.

90. Stratagems of the League, for maintenance of themselves. Exployts by the
king in Normandy. Battle of Parris. Attempts of the Parliament of Roan and the
Parisia^s, against the K. The siege of Paris. A strange division of the Order
of Sorbo^ne, from their sovereign Lord within the Realm. Famine oppresses the
Parisians, who desire peace, and cannot obtain it, through the false devises
of the heads of the league, who goes about to deciue the king and people. As
for the king, he goes forward against his enemies, who are sauoured by the
Duke of Parma, the king of Spain his Lieftenant, who being resolved not to
couple with the Frenchmen, entrench in a strong place, and make themselves
Masters of Lani upon Marne. Their intrenchment and avoiding of fight, is an
occasion that the king dismisseth his army: whereupon ensues the entry of
the Duke of Parma into Paris. The taking and reprisall of Corbeil, with the
shameful retrait of the Spaniards and Wallons.

91. Parris is besieged, as before. Dauphine reconquered to the king. The Pope
fortifieth the league. Cheualier d'Aumale is slain. Stratagems of the
Spaniards for defacing of Parris. Romish attempts against the king, who takes
Chartres by composition, and by his Lieftenants discomfiteth the league in
Province and Poictou. Afterward he publishes Edicts, for the retention of
two religions in his Realm. The Parlaments of Tours and Chaalons, condemn the
bulls, the Popes Nuntio, and Legate. In the mean while, the Duke of Guise
escapes out of prison. On the other side, the king besieges and takes Noyon.
Overthrows the army of Sauoy at Pontcharra: enters into Normandy, whither
he draws the Duke of Parma: when in the mean while the mutinous Parisians
hang up Brisson, Archer, and Tardif. For revenge of whose death, four of the
principal seditious were dispatched out of the way.

92. Arrest and decree of the Parliament of Roane against the king. Discourse
of the siege of Roane. Disposition of the leaguers army: it is joined and
fought withal, being put to flight, both by sea and land. The ignominious
retrait of the Duke of Parma. Attempts by the league in diverse parts. Bayon in
vain assailed by the Spaniards. Amblize and the Lorraine leaguers, discomfited
by the Duke of Bouillon. Ioyeuse overthrown with his army before Villemur.
Complaint by members of the league, and resistance made by the heads. Arrest of
the Parliament of Chaalons against the Popes bull: and assembly of the estates
of the league. Proceedings of the heads of the same. Death of the Duke of
Parma. Attempts of the Duke of Maine after his death. His declaration against
the king.

93. The king makes answer to the Duke. And his Council offer a proposition
to the estates of the league, who are turned aside out of the way of peace, by
the Popes Legate and Spanish Ambassador. The king is solicited to go to Mass:
whereunto the leaguers apply all their policies, ouerthrown before by the
Parliament of Parris. The king makes profession of the Roman religion:
whereupon ensues a general truce and new practice of the leaguers, to
withdraw the people from acknowledging him. In the mean while, the tragedies
of Peter Barriere are a playing, who desirous to have a part in the league,
conspired against the life of the king, and Duke de Nemours.

The leaguers turn themselves on every hand for there own maintenance, and to
ruinate those of the religion. Stratagems of certain Politicians against the
king: who expresses his good will to those of the religion, and loses that
which he had conquered in Piedmont.

94. He brings the league under subjection: enforces rebellious towns to
their former obedience, namely Parris: where the Parliament opposes it self
against the Spanyardes. After certain goings too and fro to Rome, the less
desperate Leaguers are received to favor. Amongst others, the Parisians, who
are wont to chase away the ancient enemies of France, published a decree or
arrest against the league and the Duke de Maine.

What ensued upon a favorable declaration of the king, who in Picardie pursued
the remainders of this union. During this, the University prosecuted the
Jesuits. War is noysed in Britain, and toward the low Countries. About
the end of the year, a disciple of the Jesuits attempted to kill the king.

95. Process against the Jesuits, and their secret complots discovered. War
proclaimed against the king of Spain. Leaguers of Soisson hewn in pieces.
Spaniards discomfited, in the Dukedom of Luxembourg. War in Franch-Countie.
Beaune surrendered to the king. Memorable explopts, both of one and other part.
Duke d'Aumale executed in his image and portrature. The siege of Fere. The king
obtains absolution from the Pope. Estates of Picardie.

96. Marseilles reduced under the kings obedience. The Cardinal of Austria
releeueth Fere, and by force of arms takes Callais and Ardes. Nevertheless,
Fere is by composition delivered into the kings hands. Afterward Marshall
Biron made diverse incoursions into Artois. And the amity between the king,
the Queen of England, and the united Provinces of the low Countries, was
confirmed. The king conuocateth the estates at Roan, discovering briefly unto
them, his intention.

Henry the second.
M. D. XLVII.
HENRY the second of that name, and the 59. King of France, Pharamond, the only
son of Francis the first, that died upon the 30. day of the month of March,
in the year of our Lord 1547. succeeded in the Crown by order of succession,
according to the ancient salicque law of the land. He while the Nobility
were busied to provide for the obsequie and funerals of his deceased father,
and staying for his sacrying and anointing, in the month of April following,
made and ordained an edict, An edict against blasphemers.
to be published against blasphemers of the name of God: which action made
show of a notable and commendable beginning: yet, that so laudable a work
continued no longer in force, then many others had done before it.
Nevertheless, it wrought this effect, that thereby it evidently appears,
that succession, and not the sacrying and annoynting of a Prince, is the chief
original of royal authority.

The 16. of Iulie, the Court was much troubled by a contention, and memorable
action that happened between Messieurs de Iarnac, and Chastegneraye, gentlemen
of great account, that had defied each other, by reason of certain words used
by one of them, which had procured the other to give the lie. The King in
stead of ending their cause, by advise of his Council, and to constrain the
offender, to satisfy the offended, granted them the combat: whereupon,
according to the Kings appointment, they appeared upon the day aforesaid, at S.
Germans in Lay: where, in the presence of the King, Princes, Lords, and
others, they entered into the lists. There Monsieur Iarnac, who by all the
company was esteemed the weaker, by reason he was newly recovered of a certain
sickness, withal despised and little favored, overcame the other (to whom
before they entered into the combat, every man adjudged the victory:) and
wounded him in such sort, that not long after he died, to the Kings great
grief: who upon that occasion, expressly forbadde all combats whatsoever: in
this manner he began with a bloody tragedy, and ended with the like, as
hereafter you shall hear. The King sacred at Reims.


The 27. of Iulie, after he was sacried and anointed at Reims, with all the
ancient and accustomed ceremonies thereunto belonging, in the presence of
twelve Peers, spiritual and temporal. The spiritual, were the Archbishop of
Reims, the Bishop of Langres, Beauuais, Noyon, Laon, and Challons: the
temporal, the Duke of Bourgongne, Normandy, and Guyenne, the Earls of
Champagne, Flaunders, and Thoulouse. Most part of the Princes and Nobility of
the Realm being likewise present, with diverse Ambassadors of strange
nations. But the Ambassadors of Florence, Mantoue, and Ferrare, came not, by
reason of a controversy that fell out between them, concerning their
pre-eminence of places, and for that they could not agree therevppon, they
absented themselves, till the cause was further debated.

The Constable exalted.
Anne de Montmorency, Constable of France, who certain years before had been
bannished the Court, and secretly held at Chantilly: as soon as Francis the
first died, was repealed again, and the new king committed the principal
charge of the affairs of the Realm unto him, which at that time were executed
by the Cardinal de Tournon, and the Admiral Annebaut, who as then had good
leisure to repose themselves, yielding their place to him, whom the king termed
his Gossep, one that in times past had done him many services, as afterward he
did. Mesieurs de Longueual, d'Espars, de Boncour, de Framezelle, de Antipe, the
Barron de la Guard, the General Bayard, and others, were narrowly sought and
pursued, for diverse secret causes, in such sort, that some of them were forced
to save themselves by the gilded Gate, others by means of their friends.

Wars in in Scotland.
The king having made a Progress into Picardie, went further into the Realm,
and caused an Army to be levied under the conduct of Monsieur D'esse, to aid
the Queen Dowager of Scotland, against the Englishmen, causing her to be
safely conducted into Scotland, to the end, to impeach the union of both those
Realms, which might be to the prejudice of France, and thereby to maintain
the ancient amity, that had long continued between the countries of France
and Scotland. Monsieur Pierre Strossie, Coronell of certain Italian companies,
Monsieur D'andelot, Coronell of the French Infanterie, and the Rhingraue,
General of the Lansquenets, accompanied Monsieur D'esse. And while they with
their Troops kept the Englishmen from inuading Scotland by land, Leon Strossi,
Prior of Capoue, with his Galleys, and certain French ships, came close under
the Castle of S. Andrew, which he entered by force: and taking all that he
found therein, returned into France. D'esse presently after drove the
Englishmen out of a Fort, by them erected, hard by that Castle: but before the
fire waxed greater, by meeting of Ambassadors on both sides, the peace before
spoken of, and propounded at Ardies, between the kings of England and France,
was made and concluded, whereby that war ceased.

The rest of this year, passed over without any matter of importance done in
France. The king having taken such order in Guyenne, touching the Impost of
Salt, and other customs, that in fine, it proved the spring and beginning of
those insupportable exactions, that bred and produced the seditions of the
year ensuing.

Ordinances for custom of Salt, and other things.
Autome and all the rest of the year, was much troubled with showers of reign,
whereof ensued great ouerflowings and inundations of waters, foreshewings and
prescriptions of the troubles, that after ensued both within and without the
Realm.

The house of Guise being insinuated into the kings good favor, by means of
Diane de Poictiers, Duches of Valentinois, that wholly ruled him, he gave the
Arch-Bishoppricke Bishoppricke of Reims to Charles, younger brother to the Duke
of Guise, to whom not long before, Pope Paul Farnese, had sent the Cardinals
Hat: this was, The Cardinal of Lorraine solicited the Pope to take part with
the king of France.
that great and so much renowned Cardinal of Lorraine, that lived in such fame
in the times of the Kings successors to Henry the second. Charles of Burbon,
brother to Henry Duke of Vandosine, and after King of Navarre, was also made
Cardinal at the same time. But the difference was great between these two
Cardinals. The Lorraine, a man of great judgment, and one that seemed to be
borne only to stir up strife within the Realm, was as then sent and
employed in Embassage unto the Pope, to draw and persuade him to favor the
King of Francis part, and wholly to dissuade him from the Emperor, against
whom as then he was much incensed, because his Lieftenant in Italy had ceased
upon the town of Plaisance, after the murder of Pierre Louis the Popes
son, slain by the conspiracy of his own subjects, the 10. of September
1547.

The Emperor and the King sent unto the Council.
The Emperor sent his Ambassadors to the Council, as then holden in Bologne,
to protest against such as were assembled in that place, thereby to induce them
to return again unto Trent. The King likewise sent his Ambassadors thither,
to exhort the^ to look unto themselves, and to provide for their affairs.
These practices and devises, in time proved the sparkles of the fire of
vengeance, and desire of reenterie into wars, enclosed within the hearts and
breasts of those two Princes, specially of the King, who partly provoked by the
opinion of his means, and partly solicited by such as knowing his nature much
inclined to the delights and pleasures of the Court, and of a soft spirit,
little practiced or broken with matters of estate, thought to fish in a
troubled water, as the common saying is: not being able to distress the peace
made with the Emperor at Cresoy, in the year of our Lord 1544. complaining
against the animositie of the Emperor, used toward France: and among other
examples to prick him, alleging the death of Coronel Vogelsberg, beheaded at
Ausbourge, at his return from the wars of Scotland, where he had served the
King.

While the King made preparation to ride on progress throughout his Realm,
Gasper de Colligny sieur de Chastillon, sent into Picardie, The Fort of
Chastillon.
caused a fort to be erected near unto Bullen, that as then was holden by the
Englishmen, which after annoyed them much. The King being in Bourgongne, made
his entry into most part of the Towns, and having visited La Bresse, Sauoye
and Piedemont, returned unto Lions, where he held a feast for the Knights of
the order of S. Michaell.

Commotions in Guyenne by reason of exactions.
During his voyage into Sauoye and Piedemont, the commons of Guyenne, Saintonge,
and Angoulmois, rose up in arms, because of the extortions used by those that
had farmed the impost of salt, and in short space assembled to the number of
40000. men well armed, besides those of the ylands, and by common consent, set
upon the farmers of Salt: and although in the beginning, the king of Navarre
had sought by all means to dissuade them, nevertheless, they held firm, and
earnestly pursued their enterprise against those of the farmers, upon whom
they might lay hands. The commons of Gascoigne likewise rose up and followed
the pernicious examples of the rest, whereof ensued the massacring of many of
the Kings officers in diverse places of the country, who abusing their offices,
had been the causes of that mutiny.

Fault of the Governor and the Iurats of Bourdeaux.
The Mayor and Iurates, having charge within the City of Bourdeaux, the
parliment of Guyenne, and Monsieur de Monneins, that therein commanded as
Lieftenant for the King, in stead of remedying and taking order for those
tumults, defended it too long: specially Monsieur de Monneins, who not
reproouing the insolency of one of the principal leaders of those troops,
named La Vergne, made him become so bold and impudent, that not long after, he
presumed to raise and call the people together by sound of bell: besides this,
he committed an other fault, which is, that being fearful, and having
withdrawn himself into the Castle of du Ha, thereby, as he supposed, to put
the people in some doubt. He sent out diverse Caliuers, at several times, to
repress their insolency, but it fell out contrary to his intent. For that
this issuing of the Soldiers, set the people in such a rage, that having
found mutinous companions for the purpose: as La Vergne, l'Estonnac, Maquanan,
and others, presently they fought, where the farmers and their partakers, were
put to flight, and many gentlemen's houses (under pretense of searching for the
exactors of Imposts, whom they affirmed to be hidden therein) were robbed and
spoiled. Disorder in the capital Town of Guyenne.
The commons entered into the Town, where they rung a bell to assemble the
people, no man daring to pass through the streets, unless he were armed, and
in company of the Nobles, otherwise they were cruelly massacred and murdered,
by such as met them. The Councellers of the Court of parliment, were
constrained to put off their gowns, and in their dubblets and hose, with
Sailors cappes, to bear pikes, and so to march with this mutinous company,
that constrained two brethren, called Messieurs de Saulx, one a Captain of the
Town, the other of the Castle called Trompette, to be their Leaders, and to
assist them at the spoiling and robbing of diverse houses of the Citizens their
friends, whom they massacred before their eyes. Tho sacking of the
towne-house, and massacring of the Governor.
The Towne-house, wherein there lay great quantity of armor was sacked, and
Monsieur de Monneins, being so ill advised to leave the Castle of Du Ha,
(where he was in safety) to go out to entreat and persuade the people, was
cruelly murdered with diverse wounds, both before and after his death: a
Locke-smith giving him the first blow, and the Friars, that within 3. hours
after in the nightime, sought to take up his body, all filthy and moyled
with dirt, and lying in the streets with a gentlemen called Monteluen, were in
danger of massacring, because they buried them within that Temple. But the
principal Leaders of this mutiny, longing to put water into their wine, and
such as had made their pray by spoiling houses, Execution of justice against
the mutinous.
having withdrawn themselves, some in one place, some into another, the
parliament being strengthened and assisted, by honest and peaceable Citizens,
began to show his authority, and caused some of the notablest companions
amongst them, to be taken, whom they executed: namely, La Vergne, that was
drawn in pieces by four horses.

The Constable with all rigor punished those of Bordeaux
The king being certified thereof, wrote unto the commons, assuring them with
all speed to take order therein, commanding them to lay down their arms,
which was the cause that every man withdrew himself. But in the mean time, an
army was prepared, to enter into Saintonge, and Quiennie, Monsieur de la
Deuese, ceased upon the Castle Trompette, and put out l'Estonnac and his
adherents. The Constable had commission to punnish those of Guyenne, followed
by Francis de Lorraine Count d'Anmalle, after Duke of Guise, much renowned in
the reigns of Francis the second, and Charles the ninth. This Earl conducting
4000. Lansquenets, and great numbers of French Horsemen, entered into Saintonge,
which he pacified without resistance, not punishing them for their offenses
past, minding to obtain the name of a mild and gentle Prince, and leaving the
report of cruelty and severity unto the Constable, who being accompanied with
all the forces, and both the arms joined in one, entered into Bourdeaux all
armed, giving most hard speeches unto the Captain of the town, that at his
entry, presented him with the keys of the town, that at his entry presented
him with the keys of the City, beseeching him to be favorable unto the
citizens: but he being master of the town, without blow given, bereaved the
citizens of al their titles, registers, privileges, and franchises, deprived
them of all honors, burnt all their privileges, caused the Court of
Parliament to cease, wholly disarmed the citizens, pulled down their belles,
and constrained the principallest of the city, to the number of seven score,
to go to the Friars, there to fetch the body of Monsieur de Monneins, and to
convey it to the Church of S. Andrews, where it should be buried: each of them
with a wax candle lited in his hands, having first before the Constables
lodging, asked mercy both of God and the king, and Justice, Estonnoc, the two
brethren du Saul, and others had their heads stricken off. He forgot not
likewise those that had been assistant at the murdering of the Governor, and
the sacking of the houses, a Provost Marshall with a great number of soldiers
went through Bourdeaux, Baradois, and Agenois, executing such as had rung the
belles, and in the end, he took the two chief Leaders of the Commons, named
Talemagne and Galaffie, who were broken upon a wheel, having first been
crowned with a Crown of Iron burning hot, for their punishment in usurping the
sovereign Majesty.

Pastime in the Court.
This Tragedy, ended in Comedies at the court, for Anthony de Burbon, Duke de
Vandosine, espoused Ieane d'Albert Princess of Navarre, and Francis de
Lorraine, Duke d'Aumalle, the daughter of the Duke of Ferrare. But among those
sweet and pleasant conceits, they mixed a most rigorous and bitter ordinance,
establishing within Parris an extraordinary chamber, Persecutions against those
of the religion.
therein to proceed against those of the religion, as then called Lutherans,
whom they burnt to death, if they remained constant in their profession.

The coronation of the Queen.
The pleasures of the Court increased more by the delivery of the Queen of a
young son, and great part of this year was passed over in plays and
sumptuous sports. The Q. being crowned at S. Dennis, upon the 10. of June, and
the 16. of the same month, the king made his magnificall entry into Parris, and
there ran at tilt, to show some pleasure to the Ladies and Gentlewomen, which
being ended, he sat openly in the Court of Parliment, where in presence of the
Princes and Peers of his Realm, he gave judgment in diverse causes, according
to the ancient custom of his predecessors. Difference between the kings in
times past, and those of our time.
For the ancient kings of France, were careful, and used ordinarily to hear
the complaints of their subjects, but of late years they referred that manner
of exercise unto the consciences of their Officers, seeing by other men's eyes
almost concerning all their affairs, which is neither good nor comfortable for
the people, nor yet any means to further Justice. And since this carelessness
has entered into the majesty of our kings, the estate of the realm has bin
weakened, and the majesty royal imbased: so that in the end, the people have
not refused to rise against the person of the king, and sometimes to murder
him. But remedy herein will be had, when our kings abstain from shameful
actions, and only do that whereunto God has called them.

A general procession.
After many sports and devises, the king caused a general and solemn
procession to be made in the month of July, wherein he was present, assisted
by the Queen, the Princes of the blood, Lords, Cardinals, Orders, Estates and
dignities of Parris, and at his return from the Bishops Palace, where he had
dyned, he would see and behold the burning of certain Christians, detesting
the errors and abuses maintained and holden by the Papists and their Doctors.
Among the which was a Tailor, where not long before, A notable Tailor.
by the force and virtue of the spirit of God, had made answer and given
notice of his says and religion, in presence of the king and diverse Courtiers,
where he sung a wonderful lesson unto the Duches de Valentimois, of whom I
spoke before: saying unto her, that she ought to content her self, to have so
much infected France, without mixing her venom and filthiniesse, with so holy
and sacred a thing as is the religion, and the truth of the son of God: and
that it was to be feared, that for the same occasion God would send a grievous
plague and punishment both upon the King and his Realm. But the King being
moved and sore grieved with such exhortations, which touched her to the quick
to whom they were spoken, Punishments of those of the religion.
having commanded that his judgment should speedily be given, said he would
in person behold the execution of his Tailor, and the better to do it, he went
unto the house of Monsieur de la Rochpot, in Saint Anthonies street, before
Saint Catherins Church, right against the scaffold where the Tailor showed most
singular and constant patience: and having espied the king, he beheld him with
so steadfast a countenance, that by no means he would look of, and the sire
being put unto him, he had his eyes so steadfastly fixed upon him, that the
king was constrained to leave the window and to withdraw himself, being so
moved thereat, that he confessed that he thought the shadow of the Tailor
followed him, and with the apprehension of that spectacle, for the space of
certain nights after, it still represented it self before his eyes, in such
manner, that he made an oath and protested, that he would never see nor hear
any more of those Lutherians. The Kings protestation.
But not remembering the same, about ten years after, he heard that which he
ought to have given better respect unto, and pretending to see the person of a
man of great estimation burnt, he lost both his sight and his life, as when
time serves you shall read.

Orders for apparel, made in paper.
At that time excess of apparel was so great in every man, by reason of the
pomp and magnificence of the Court, that it bred a dearth and scarcity of all
things, so that cloth of gold, silks, lace, and imbroydery, were forbidden to
be worn by diverse persons, every estate being appointed what he should wear.
But this was but an ordinance made in paper, and of little continuance, and the
greatest example shown by the king himself, who ordinarily went plain in his
apparel, the rest of the Court using what apparel they would.

Estate of Scotland.
Monsieur de Terms, knight of the order, was sent into Scotland, to supply the
place of Monsieur de Esse, there to continue the wars, Mary Queen of Scots
being of the age of six or seven years, having the year before been conveyed
into France, Monsieur d'Esse before his departure, having given the English men
an overthrow before Hedungton, and taken the Isle of Horses, left the rest of
his affairs unto his successor, that behaved himself most bravely, and with
great honor.

Hard dealing used against Monsier du Biez, because of Bullen.
For the recovering of Bullen holden by the Englishmen, the king commanded his
Nobility and Captains to assemble themselves, by the first of September next
after ensuing, before Bullen. In the month of June, Jacques de Couci Lord of
Veruin, had been beheaded in Parris, and Edward du Biez, Marishall of France,
his father in law, after a long imprisonment, degraded of his estate.

The Marishall was accused to have unadvisedly placed his son in law within
Bullen, and the other for having yielded up a place so impregnable and well
furnished, unto the enemy, to the which end, diverse witnesses and
Commissaries were appointed and procured, by such as had credit about the
king, so that not very long after, it was plainly and manifestly seen, and
openly known, that the innocence of those gentlemen, had been falsely
accused and condemned, by the envy of certain Courtiers, that ruled the king.
who acknowledged the fault by him therein committed, but remedied it not, the
condemnation against Monsieur de Veruin, continuing still in force, until the
year of our Lord 1575. that his son and heir, by petition made to king
Henry the third, besought the king to restore the name and honor of his
Father, and Grandfather by the mothers side, and commandment was given unto
one of the Heraults, to be assistant at the funerals of those two Lords, which
were solemnly holde^ at Bulle^, in the month of June. 1577.

War at Bullen.
But to return to the wars of Bullen, the king being arrived at Monstrueil,
upon the sea, the 17. of August, caused his army to march toward Bonlamberg,
and having taken the Fort of Selaque, where Monsieur de Chastillon entered by
force, and that of Blaconnet by composition. The Englishmen left Bonlamberg,
which was presently repaired, after that, they besieged the Tower of Order: but
by reason of the winter time, the Forts being garnished with men and victuals,
the king dismissed his army, and withdrew himself till spring time. This
year the process of Merindol, was pleaded in the Court of Parliament at Parris,
being the 50. time that it had been heard, which was thus. The notable process
of Merindol and Cabrieres
In the month of September 1540. the parliament of Prouence, had by default
condemned 17. persons of Merindol, to be burned for religion, and that the
Village of Merindol should be rased, and all the trees cut down within 200.
paces round about it: this judgment for a time continued in suspense, although
both the Bishops, and Spirituality of the country, were very earnest to have
it executed, but many Gentlemen and others of good account, stayed the rigor
thereof: and about five months after, king Francis, first Earl of Prouence,
sent a pardon to those of Merindol and others surnamed Vandois, upon
condition, that within three years after, they should abjure and renounce
their errors. They accordingly made their appearance in the Court of
Parliament, requiring to let them see the Coppie of their accusations, (which
was denied them) touching the points that accused them to have maintained and
published certain errors, and that they should by the word of God, be better
instructed: which done, they said they would be ready and most willing, to
follow al good counsel whatsoever. And because their error was ntot showed
unto them, and that they only sought their blood, they in open Parliament
presented the confession of their faith, with a most ample and large
declaration and answer, unto the false reports and untruths, imposed and
devised against them, desiring therein, either to be maintained and vpholden,
or otherwise to be heard and permitted to speak in their own defenses. From
that time, till the year of our Lord 1544. there was diverse practices used to
oppress and overthrow those poor people, but while their enemies contented
themselves to assault them by words and threatenings, they solicited and
besought the king, that it would please his Majesty, to call the hearing of
that arrest of contumacie before himself. The President Chassane, a man of
indifferent judgment, being dead, one John Menier succeeding in his place, who
having forcibly taken the goods of certain husbandmen of the village of
Oppede, whereof he was Lord, under pretense of religion, was become a mortal
enemy unto those of Cabrieres and Merindol, where those husbandmen dwelt, who
in harvest time, in despite of Menier, reaped the corn which as then they
found upon their ground, which he held from them by force: so that as then the
execution was pursued. And thereupon the Parliament at the instant request of M
nier, sent an huissier, to the Cardinal de Tournon, at whose request king
Francis the first, sent letters pattents to the parliament, for the execution
of that first sentence, and by that means in the month of April 1545. Menier
naming himself Lieftenant to Monsieur de Grignan, Governor of Prouence,
having assembled an army of thieves, and being accompanied by Monsieur de la
Guard, set fire in diverse villages about Merindol, sent great numbers of poor
Countrie-men into the Galleys, and caused a young man to be openly
harquebushed, and finding no man within Merindol, pilled, sacked, burnt, and
rased all the houses, and having besieged, battered, and by composition taken
the little Town of Cabrieres, in stead of holding his promise made unto them,
he chose out 25. or 30. men, such as pleased him, that were cut and massaced to
pieces, in a Medowe that lay under the Town, and about 40. women, whereof most
of them were great with child, were burnt within a barn, and many being
found hidden in their Cellors, were tied two and two together, and so led
into the Hall of the Castle of Cabrieres, where they were most cruelly
murdered. Within the Church, many old women, young maids, and children, that
had saved themselves, were all put to the sword. The number of the slain and
massacred, amounting unto 800. persons and more. The Barron de la Guard led
above 800. persons away, and put them into the Galleys, where the most part of
them died in great misery. Many women and maids were deflowred, and great
numbers led prisoners to Marseille, Aix, and Auignon. Diverse villages being
wholly burnt and consumed by fire, whereby the desolation and misery of that
country was exceeding great. But king Francis being sick, for the space of
certain years after that cruel massacre, and urged in conscience with a
remorse of that mischief, whereof he had partly been the cause, and sorry
before his death he could not execute open punishment upon those that abusing
his name and authority, had committed so horrible a mischief among his
subjects of Prouence, expressly charged his son Henry, not to defer that
punishment, saying: that if he put it in oblivion, God would be revenged
thereof against him, and that their memory would remain in horror and
execration unto all strangers, if the persons that had committed so notable a
crime, should be suffered to escape unpunished. This clause expressly set down
within the Kings testament, advanced the discredit on the Cardinal of Tournon,
and put Grignan and la Guard in great pain: but to conclude, they had more
fear then hurt, for the king by his letters patents of the 17. of March, 5549.
caused the matter to be heard by the Court of Parliament in Parris, where
Menier and three others his companions, appeared in person, the rest of the
Counselors by their Atturneyes. And there, after long process, in stead of
punishment, one man only, called Guerin, a Councellor, less culpable then the
rest, was hanged in Parris: Menier, principal of that massacre escaped, and
falling out of his wits died, being ceased with a secret fire within his
body, in the open sight and knowledge of all the country of Prouence. The
rest of the matter vanished (as it were in a smoke) before the sight of men:
but God made both the king, his Council, and all his Realm, to know and well
perceive, that the blood of so many innocent persons, and others that were put
to death, both before and after that time, for the confession of the Gospel,
is most precious in his sight: as the things that happened and fell out in the
years ensuing have well declared, which we must in order set down, as time
and place shall serve.

The death of Margaret Queen of Navarre.
Margaret de Orleans, Queen of Navarre, sister to king Francis the first, a
most noble and famous Princess, and of as notable a spirit, as any that lived
in her time.

In the beginning of this year, the king suppressed and abolished the
imposition of salt, in the country of Guyenne, with all the officers that had
the execution thereof, for the sum of 450000. frankes, with the countries of
of Poicton, Saintonge, Angoulmois, Perigort, high and low Limosin, and high
and low Marthe, should pay unto him, with 25000. frankes to the officers for
their charges. Touching those of Bourdeaux, in the month of October before,
they had procured and obtained a general pardon, upon condition, that they and
their successors, should always keep two ships furnished for the wars, ready
to put to sea, and to serve under whomsoever it should please the king to
command, and to receive into the Castles of Trompette and du Ha, such
garrison, as the king should send into them, and to victual them with all
sorts of victuals, which they should yearly furnish and renew, taking away
the old. And thereupon, in the month of January after, the king
reestablished the parliament, and their Town was reduced into the former
estate, they that had been beaten making the amends.

Three Presidents in Parris displaced, and after reestablished, only Liset.
At that time, three Presidents of Parris, not well thought of, by the house of
Guise, as then being in great credit, were displaced out of their offices: but
not long after, S. Andre, and Minard, having promised to become good seruitors,
were restored again. Liset was made Abbot of S. Victor, that an other of less
judgment then himself, might have his place. And so he took upon him to
deal in matters of divinity, wherein he sped so hardly, and of a good
practition, he became so ignoranta sophister, that falling in a great
laughter, he was suddenly taken with a disease and so died. He showed
himself a sworn and perpetual enemy to those of the religion, thinking to
advance himself by cruel inventions: but he was cut off by the way: thereby
serving for an example, to many better men then himself, not to bandie against
him vho is able to surprise and intrappe the subtillest in their fond
inventions, and against whom the wisdom and force of man, is nothing but
mere beastliness and vanity.

Remedies for false and clipped money.
This year because that most of the money in France was found to be clipped, by
the kings edict, al such money was commanded to be cut in pieces and molten,
and many of that occupation, among the which were diverse quoyners executed.

Bullen restored to the King.
In the months of February and March, a peace was agreed upon, between the
kings of England and France, whereupon the 25. of April ensuing, Bullen was
delivered into the hands of the king of France, who made his entry into it
upon the 25. of May after.

About that time died Claude de Lorraine, first Duke of Guise, and John
Cardinal of Lorraine, both being poisoned, with Humieres, the Cardinal of
Amboise, and John of Caracciol, Prince of Melphe, Lieftenant general for the
King in Piedemont, and Marshall of France, after whom succeeded Charles de
Cosse, Barron de Brissac, in his time a most valiant Captain. Now we enter
into wars, Occasion of wars begun between France and Spain.
as hotly begun, as ever they were, between the Frenchmen and the Spaniards.
The king from time to time casting his eyes upon the Duchy of Millan, and
withal, remembering the titles thereunto pretended, by the house of Orleans,
whereunto they never renounced, being no less sorry for that which had
happened in Plaisance, in regard of Pierre Louis, son to Pope Paul Fernese,
who therein had been slain by his houshold-seruants. For besides that, the
report went, that it had been done and practiced by the subtle means of
Ferdinand de Gonzague, Lieftenant for the Emperor in Lombardie, thereby to
advance his masters affairs, he had ceased upon Plaisance. The Pope desirous
to revenge himself, and having not an arm as strong as his heart, had sent
Camille Vrsin to keep and defend Parma, and accepted the offer by the king, in
aid unto him: which was to receive the family of Farneses, and al their lands
and goods into his protection. The Pope had given Parma unto his Nephew
Octauian, who not long after was invested therewith by Julius, the third
successor unto Paul: but the Emperor pretending, that the Title of protector,
belonged better to him, then to the King, that had nothing to do in Italy:
and perceiving that accord between the king and the Pope, to be as a thorn
within his foot, determined to assure himself of Parma, and wrought in such
manner, that Pope Julius abandoned his vassal Octauian, that had espoused the
Emperors Bastard-daughter. Octauian repaired to the king, that named himself
Protector of the lands of the Church, and of the Ferneses: and Pope Julius
being solicited to take order therein, made no account thereof, whereupon the
king determined to aid Octauian: and not long after Gonzague besieged Parma,
which caused the king to command the Marishall of Brissac, his Lieftenant in
Peidemont, to fortify and strengthen Mirandole, but Gonzague having discovered
the enterprise, surprised the Soldiers that Marshiall Brissac sent thither,
and caused them to stay. On the other side, the Pope began to threaten the
king, because he had received Octauian into his protection, and said he would
excommunicate him, and all the Realm of France. To cool the Popes chollor,
the king expressly forbadde all his subjects, not to carry any money to Rome,
neither yet to go thither for any cause whatsoever: ordaining the Metropolitans
of his Realm, to supply their default therein, until further order should be
taken. This was no small blow unto the Court of Rome: and surely if the king
had still continued in that mind, the Popes had never pilled France in such
manner, as afterward they did, but thereby they had been taught to become wise.
Which had surely been a beginning of reformation throughout Christendom: but
it being grounded only upon temporal considerations and commodities, it
proceeded to no good end. Octauian was declared a rebel unto the Sea of Rome,
and presently war was proclaimed against him: Gonzague entering by arms into
the territories of Parma.

Beginning of wars beyond the Mountains.
On the other side, the king dispatched new forces into Piedemont, commanding
the Marshall of Brissac to aid those of Parma, and Mirandole. From whence
proceeded the taking of Quiers, S. Damian, with certain Forts and Castles in
the Marquisall of Montferrat. Whereby Gonzague was constrained to leave Parma,
to defend the Millannois. At that time the Emperor found himself much busied
with many important affairs, having to do both with the king of Fance, the
Turks, and Africa, besides the troubles which as then were not fully ended in
Almaine.

The Histories are very diverse, touching the breach of this peace, between the
Emperor and the king: but it must be understood by this new commotion,
happened between two so puissant Princes, for asmall matter, as it outwardly
appeared, that they sought some former quarrel, whereinto both of them most
willingly entered, under pretense of their new war, for Parma: but above all
things, the just judgment of God minding to scourge Christendom, as then
filled with all disorders, and culpable of grievous crimes, was the only cause
thereof.

Preparation for wars in Picardie.
In the beginning of the year 1551. Marie, Queen of Hungaria, sister to the
Emperor, and Governor in the low Countries, made great preparations for
wars, both by sea and land. And understanding that the Marshall de S. Andre,
was ready to sail into England, to bear the order of France, unto Edward
king of England, sent certain ships to lie between Dover and Calis, to take
the Marshal, who taking ship at Deep, held an other course, and so performed
his voyage. And for his security, he caused certain Flemish ships to be
stayed at Deep, which were presently released as soon as they understood of
his arrival in England.

On the other side, Queen Marie caused an arest to be made of all French
Merchants ships, that as then were in any Port within the low Countries,
wherewith diverse Merchants were not very well pleased, by reason of the
disorders and losses, that commonly happen by such arrests. Monsieur de
Villebon, minding to refresh Turouenne, wherein he commanded, with new
victuals. Monsieur du Reux, a great adversary to France, sent certain
Soldiers to lie in Ambuscado, and to impeach that enterprise, but in the end
he was constrained to retire, without effecting that they went for. Irons in
this sort being heated, commandment was given to the Ambassadors on both
parts to depart. The Queen of Hungaria stayed the Ambassador of France
prisoner in a certain Castle, with a great guard, where he stayed for a time.

The kings proceedings toward the Pope, the Emperor, and the Council of
Trent.
But before further proceeding unto wars, the king sent Monsieur de Terms to
Pope Julius, to excuse himself, in respect of that which he had done in the
behalf of Octauian Fernese: he likewise showed unto the Emperor, what reason
moved him to take arms, and sent the Abbot of Bellosanne, to signify unto
the council of Trent, that he could not send the Bishops of his Realm unto
such a Council, neither yet esteem that assembly to be a general Council,
that they should respect the animositie of the Pope, against the Realm of
France, and the eldest son of the Church: and therefore that they should not
find it strange, if he seemed not to show obedience to that assembly, not
made for the common benefit of Christendom, but only for the particular
profit and commodity of some special men: not that thereby he pretended to
leave or forsake papisticall religion, but protesting only to do it, that he
might not be surprised, by such as under pretense of religion, and reformation
of abuses, sought to imbase his kingly estate and dignity, which he hoped to
impeach by all just and reasonable means that possible he might. An edict
against small dates, and other abuses in the Court of Rome.


After this protestation, he published an edict made the year before,
touching the obtaining of Benefices: against the deceites of petty dates, and
other abuses used the Court of Rome, and also touching the ancient arrests and
edicts, made against Annates, and abuses of reseruations and exactions invented
by the Popes: forbidding his subjects not to go to Rome for Annates, nor any
other occasions touching or concerning Benefices, appoynting them to be
disposed and ordered by the ordinaries: certifying into all places, what wrong
Pope Julius did, both to him, and to Octauian Fernese, Duke of Parma, whom he
deprived of the place wherein he had been solemnly invested.

The Cardinals and others of the Popes creatures in France, fearing least this
edict (whereupon Charles de Moulin a Council of great understanding, wrote a
most learned Co^mentary, in the which he discovered many terrible practices in
Rome) would give a hard push unto the Papasie, with earnest suit, procured the
King to publish and ordain, far straighter and seuerer edicts, then ever he
did against the religion: to the end that Iules and the Cardinals on ye other
side of the mountains, might assure themselves of him to be their friend, as
long as they seemed to agree with him. Those ordinances were followed by diverse
cruel and terrible executions in many places of the Realm, against great
numbers of the religion that were burned for most boldly confessing the truth
of the Gospel, rejecting man's traditions induced and brought into the Church
and service of God. Those that were assembled at Trent, wrote unto the king, to
induce him to accept and allow the decrees of their council, and to send the
Bishops of his Realm unto them, as also to entreat him to be a means unto
the Switzers, to send thither likewise: but war being open in all places,
and the Emperor having sent for the Spaniards that were in Almaine, to make
war in Italy against Parma, the pursuit of the Council of Trent, hung still
upon the field.

Preparation for war in Lorraine.
Wars in this sort being kindled, the King determined to assure himself of
Lorraine, being in some suspicion of the Duchess, that as then was Dowagar,
and having sent certain companies into the frontiers, the Emperor also
strengthened all his fortes and places, the one beholding the other with
several intents, whereof in time the effects appeared.

The Princes of Almaine take counsel, to deliver themselves from servitude.
Because the Emperor proceeced with the Almaine Prince, in such sort as seemed
inconvenient, they not being acquainted with any such kind of servitude, much
less to be in subjection of the Spaniards, perceiving that the King made
preparation to set upon the Emperor, esteemed it a most fit and good occasion,
for them to serve their turns, which King Henry of France, thereby to abash
the Emperor Charles, and so to procure the means of better and more friendly
usage toward them on his behalf, or else wholly to leave them. And
therevppon entered into secret conference with the King, to beseech him, that it
would please his Majesty to employ his means to procure the ancient liberty
of the Germans. He thinking to have found an entry and means to attain unto
most high and hautie enterprises, thereby to abase the greatness and pride of
his most glorious enemy, and by that means to erect the honor of France,
willingly gave ear unto the Almaines, and to the same end, about the beginning
of the year, he sent the Bishop of Bayonne, Tho Kings letters to the
Protestant Prince.
unto the Princes Electors, with letters importing many protestations, and
offers of amity, as also showing and declaring the many and great wrongs by
the Emperor done unto the Princes and town of Almaine, protesting that he
was fully resolved for their cause to employ both his forces, and his person,
to defend their rights and privileges, not exspecting any recompense, but
only honor, to have thereby deserved the good will and liking of so puissant
a country as that of German. And therewith assuring them by the faith of a
Prince, that his only intent and meaning was, to deliver all the estates of
German from the oppressions of the Emperor and his Spaniards, which he
likewise meant to do, particularly in the behalf of his loving Cousin, John
Duke of Saxon, and Philip, Lant-graue of Hessen, as then detained and kept in
miserable servitude by the Emperor, contrary to his oath and promise. And in
the end of the letter he added these words: We will promise you likewise by the
living God, and before all the Kings, Princes, and Potentates of Christendom,
that our intent is not in any sort whatsoever, to permit that either you in
general, or any of you in particular, of what estate or condition soever he
be, shall suffer or endure any wrong or injury, and much less will we (that
bear the name of most Christian king) permit that any damage or hurt shall be
offered or committed, either to the persons or goods of your most reverend
Prelates, Abbots, and other Ecclesiastical persons, as our aduersries have
most wrongfully given forth, but rather mean to take and receive you into our
protection and sauegarde, so you will acknowledge it both unto us, and to our
allies, and therein certify us of your whole and full intents: hoping for the
good and reunion of the Church, which is to be expected by the recovery of
public and ancient liberty, wherein GOD willing we will imploye all our
force and means whatsoever. Which most reverend Prelates, most noble Princes,
and other estates of the holy Empire, we thought good to certify unto you, to
the end you should not be ignorant of the cause of this our wars, whereby
we mean to pursue the Emperor, both with fire and sword, and (although to our
great disliking) to cut him off (as a putrified member) from the body of the
Commonwealth, or at the least, constrain him from henceforth, from further
molesting or troubling of your estate.

Effects contrary to words.
While the king in this sort termed himself the Protector of Almaine, and
defendor of the Country and nation of the holy Empire, giving a great hope of
the reunion of the Church, his Officers in many places of the realm, burnt
such as they called Lutherians, and that agreed and consented to the doctrine
holden and believed by most of the Princes and Towns of Almaine, open enemies
to the traditions and ceremonies of the Pope. On the other side, he made great
preparations for a voyage into Almaine, whereby he showed as if he would
have driven the Emperor and all his adherents out of those Countries: And
minding to go thither in person, in the month of March, he being in the Court
of Parliament in Parris, named and ordained Catherin de Medicis his wife,
Regent of the Realm, The first Regency of Catherin de Medicis.
making many Edicts concerning pollitique Government, the ordering of
Soldiers, and the observation of military discipline, thereby reforming both
the abuse of the Leaders, and the insolency of the soldiers: so that as then
you might have seen both good and commendable orders among all the soldiers,
as well on this side as beyond the Mountains. France likewise abounded with
Princes, Lords, Gentlemen, and soldiers, well ordered and governed, in respect
of that which after was seen in the time of Henry his son. The Constable
Genenall of the army, A good order and policy among soldiers, but not long
observed.
assisted by the Princes of the blood, and other Noblemen of France, marched
toward Victry, where the Army was to assemble, and besides the new and old
companies of French soldiers, there came twenty of the old companies of
Piedemont, such as might compare both with the Phalangees of the Macedonians,
and the ancient Romans, those of Gascoigne seconded them, the companies of
Monsieur de Duras, for the most part being composed of Gentlemen and old
Soldiers, every man able to command. Of all this Infantery, next to the
Admiral, Monsieur Chastillon was Coronell, besides 10000. Lansquenets in
twenty Companies, and divided into two Regiments, conducted by Recrod and
Rhingraue their Coronels: with a great number of horsemen sent unto the king,
by the Protestant Princes, under the conduct of Coronell Chartel.

The French horsemen (whereof Claude de Lorraine, Duke of d'Aumalle youngest
son of the house of Guise, was Leader) were 1500. men of arms, every man
having two Archers with him, all made 4500. horses, 2000. light horse, and as
many caliuers on horseback. Of voluntary soldiers, both Gentlemen and
others, there were so great numbers, that all the country was covered with
horses: but now we must see what all these troops effected.

The Duke and the country of Lorraine, put into the kings hands.
The Constable being near to Thoul, Chrestienne, Duches Dowager of Lorraine,
came unto the king, byding at Ginuille, there to excuse her self of the
suspicions imposed upon her, because the Emperor was her near kinsman, and
considering the tempest that as then threatened Lorraine, she committed her
self, and Charles her son, into the protection of the king, who sent the
young Prince unto the Dauphin his son, where he was brought up, and after
married a daughter of France.

Mean time, Thoul yielded unto the Constable: which done, he parlied with the
Town of Metz, an imperial and fair City: they offered to serve the army
with victuals for their money: and to permit the king with all his Princes,
free passage through the Town, as at other times they had done unto the
Emperor: but the Constable having partly persuaded them by promises, and then
using some threatenings, Metz an imperial Town, surprised and brought under
the French king.
in great chollor, said unto the^: that the king would have a passage, and
repassage through their Town, without any conditions, and that it were best
for them, not to hazard the contrary, if they minded to obtain the kings good
will and favor, without the hurt and discommoditie of his army.

Those of Metz would gladly have resisted, both by word and deed, but not
having in time provided for themselves, they were constrained to bid their
liberty farewell, and to open their gates to two companies of foot, which
drew so long a tail after them, that in fine, all means of resistance was
wholly taken from them, for that all the valiantest sousdiers in France were
there in person: and upon the 10. of April, the Constable accompanied with
diverse Princes and great Lords, stayed the coming of the king, who within
eight days after, made his entry into the Town, with all his army, where he
stayed three days to take order for their affairs, received oath and
fidelity of the Citizens: he likewise swearing both to them, and those of
Thoul, to defend them against all men, and to preserve their rights and
privileges, and franchises in all things whatsoever: also to provide for the
strength and fortification of (...) place, which as then he fully pretended to
make one of the principal bullwarkes and Frontier-townes of France, wherein
he left as Governor, Monsieur de Gonnort, brother to the Marshal de Brissac,
giving him in charge to look unto the citadell, and other fortifications of
the Town.

The French army goes toward Strasbourg.
Metz yielded to the king, the army being composed of 30000. men, marched
into Almaine, and in the beginning of May, stayed two days upon the plain of
Sauerne: the horsemen going within a mile of the town of Strasbourg, the
Citizens whereof, being taught by the misfortune of Metz, wroght with more
policy for themselves: sending certain victuals unto the army, wherewith
the Constable seemed not well content, thinking to put them in some fear, and
as soon as Pierre Sturne, Goteshem, and Sleidam, their Deputies, were departed,
he sent two Gentlemen to the Council of the Town, to know their answer,
where, in a long time and eloquent discourse, they showed The Constables
proceedings with those of Strasbourg.
the kings good will and meaning unto the country of Almaine, the causes why
he had raised an army, and been at so great charges, requiring that the
soldiers might enter into the Town, to buy such necessaries as they wanted:
but the Council of the Town using delays, the next day the Constable used
many speeches unto the Deputies, threatening them very hardly.

But whatsoever he said, it little auayled, for those of Strasbourg put a
strong Garrison into their Town, preparing themselves unto resistance, if any
pretense were offered: mean time, not refusing to furnish the camp with
victuals, and all other necessaries whatsoever: but the army doing nothing,
marched toward Hagenaw, and VVisbourg, where the Deputies of three of the
Electors next adjoining, as also of other Princes, The request of the Almaine
Princes to the king.
came to beseech the King, to pity the poor pesants, to impeach the spoil of
the country, and not to pass any further, but rather to hearken unto a peace,
without pressing them to a perpetual alliance, considering their bounden
duties unto the Emperor, withal, making a specially request for the sauegard
of the territories of Strasbourg.

Letters of Duke Maurice.
At the same time being the eleventh of May, Duke Maurice, Elector of Saxon,
sent letters unto the King, containing the effect of the treaty made at Lints,
wherein a peace had been propounded, which the Emperor seemed to hearken
unto, concerning Almaine, desiring the King (if his meaning were to be
comprehended herein,) to declare and show upon what conditions he intended
to compound, and make agreement with the Emperor. The kings answer to the
Princes


The King perceiving, that by means of his great army, the Protestant Princes
had brought the Emperor to some reason: and on the other side, understanding
that the Queen of Hungary with her forces, was entered into the field, left
the Almaines, and at his departure, made answer unto the Princes, that he
contented himself, to be esteemed the cause whereby the Princes that were
prisoners, should shortly be delivered, and the country of Almaine, enjoy a
happy peace: and that, if thereafter it should have cause to use his help, he
would not spare what means soever he had, to do them good.

Mean time, the army fed upon the poor pesants, and the country belonging
to those of Strasbourg (that stood upon their guard) was nothing spared. The
Leaders notwithstanding repressing the insolency of the Soldiers, as much as
possibly they might, but in so great a multitude it is impossible, that some
disorder should not be committed. The meeting at Passau, where the French
Ambassador was present.


Duke Maurice having driven the Emperor out of Almaine, and thereby procured an
assembly and meeting to be holden at Passau, there to take order touching the
reducing of the Country of Almaine into her an^^er (...), Ambassadors for the
Emperor, the Electors, and diverse ^^aces of Germany met together.

Where the Bishop of Bayonne, Ambassador for the King, failed not to come and
upon the 3. of June, in a learned Oration, he showed the ancient and long
conjunction of the countries of Almaine and France: the affection that the His
Oration.
king bare unto the Empire, as then hardly and evil governed by the Spaniards
and their adherents, finding it good for the Protestant-Princes, to agree and
make an accord with the Emperor, so the prisoners might be delivered, the
ancient alliance of France, with the Empire, and the last capitilation made
with the Princes, ratified and confirmed, that the Emperor should do him
reason, and that his whole desire was, to consent and agree with them all, and
particularly with Duke Mauris: the answer thereunto, was composed with many
thanks and declarations, couched in such sort, that neither the Emperor nor
the king, Their answer.
could in any sort be discontent therewith. Touching the renewing of ancient
alliances, they said, that a matter of so great weight and importance, required
great and more ample assembly: mean time, they desired that the amity always
holden and continued between the two nations, might still remain in force, and
that the controversies between the Emperor and the king, might be appeased:
promising therein to employ all means possible: mean time, they desired the
king to show what wrong he could pretend had been in any sort offered unto him
by the Emperor, to whom they would not fail to write, that thereby some end
and final agreement might be made.

VVarres in the Duchy of Luxenbourg, with diverse exployts, spotles, and pilling
of places.
During this assembly, the Queen of Hungary having commanded the Marshall of
Cleueland, to enter into the Duchy of Luxenberg, with an army of 3000. foot,
and 600. horse, caused them to join with the companies of the low countries,
in such sort, that their army being compassed of 12000. foot, and 3000.
horse, began to work many exployts, and having taken Stenay upon Meuse, a
small Town belonging to the Duchy of Lorraine, they enterprised against other
places, but not to any effect, only that they burnt certain villages and
small hamblets, but the kings army approaching, they began to retire, which
made the Council to determine upon the conquest of the Duchy of Luxenbourg,
wherewith they first set upon a strong Castle called Roc de Mars, which was
presently taken and spoiled. The like was done to Mont S. John, Solieure, and
other places. The Emperors, and the kings forces, skirmishing before
Thionuille, and the army passing by it, made toward d'Auuille, which being
battered, and yielded unto the king, the Captains were kept prisoners, and the
Soldiers suffered to depart without arms, only a white stick in their
hands. Iuoy was likewise battered, and after yielded upon the like condition.
The Governor being sent prisoner unto Parris, all the spoil was given unto
the Constable, who distributed the greatest part thereof among his troops, and
particularly to that of his eldest son: whereat the Soldiers of the old
companies began to mutiny: next Iuoy, they took Monmedy, and while they were
employed therein, the Marshall Sedan, heir unto the house la Marshe, obtained
certain companies of the King, wherewith he recovered the Town and Castle of
Bouillon, with all the places depending and belonging to the Duchy: VVinning
of the Duchy of Bouillon.
which done, the Castles of Lumes, Treton, Glaion, and others, were taken and
overthrown, and to please the old Soldiers, they had the spoil of Cimay, a
Town and Castle belonging unto the Duke d'Arscot, given unto them. Where the
assieged having withdrawn themselves into the Castle, and desiring to make
some composition, were mined under the gate, and other places of the Castle, by
the great fury of the assailantes, (wholly famished and thirsting after
spoil,) whereunto they ran with so great haste, that some of their Matches
fell into a certain quantity of powder, The Castle and Town of Cimay burnt.
whereby about six score of the most forwardest of them were burnt and blown
up into the air, and to conclude, the fury of war burnt both the Town and
Castle, but because the Army began to diminish, and to weaken, some being laden
with spoil, and the greatest part sick and not well at ease, about the end
of July, such as were left, were placed in Garrisons, there to attend the
Emperors resolution, who having to do both with the Protestant Princes and the
King, determined to agree and compound with the Princes, by their means to
aid himself against the King: and upon the last of July, he made and
concluded a peace with Almaine, Peace in Almaine.
to begin his wars with France. The King was much moved at that agreement:
yet he discharged the Hostages of Duke Maurice, who likewise released his,
being the Earls of Nantueil and Iametz.

The Emperors enterprises for the recovery of Metz, Thoul, and Verdun.
After this appointment with the Almaines, the Emperor used such means that the
Princes and Towns of Almaine, by little and little agreed to furnish him with
men, money, and Artillery, therewith to drive the King out of Metz, Thoul, and
Verdum, imperial Towns: to the which end, he gathered an Army of 50000.
foot, and 20000. horse, with a great number of Artillery, and while he was
preparing this army, Albert Marquess of Brandenburge, who in the Kings name
had made most cruel war upon many Towns and Bishopprickes in Almaine, being
secretly reconciled unto the Emperor, having to the number of 2000. horse, and
8000. foot, with certain artillery, approached the Frontiers of Luxembourge,
and of Lorraine, where for a long time he held the King in hope, to follow the
wars for him, and all that time his troops ouerranne the plain country, and
there forraged themselves after most strange manner: but in the end, he found
the means to withdraw himself from the Kings army, and having impeached
those of Metz from victuals, he departed with all his troops.

Difficulty of the siege of Mets.
Winter approaching, many were of opinion that the Emperor would not hazard so
puissant an army, as he then had, unprofitably to fight and strive against the
cold and the Ice, and by that means, constrain it of it self to be
dispearsed, and miserably overthrown. But the hope he had to recover the Town
of Metz, wherein were many Princes, Lords, and Gentlemen, caused him to reject
all other apprehensions whatsoever, in such sort, that his Forces began to
march and set forward toward the country of Lorraine: mean time, the Duke
de Neuers fortified Stenay, and constrained the Burgonian Garrison of Vireton,
to yield themselves to him. A company of the old bands being in Roc de Mars,
were drawn from thence: Those that commanded in Verdun, Iuoy, Danuille, and
Monmedy, strengthened themselves, and made provision for their own defense:
not long after, the Emperor came to Sarbruch, The Emperors approach
a Town lying within seven miles of the City of Metz, from whence he sent
the Duke of Alue, his Lieftenant General, and the Marquess of Marignan, with
4000. foot, 4000. horse, and six field pieces, unto the Town to view it, and
to choose the most commodious places wherein to lodge his men about it. The Duke
of Guise being Lieftenant General for the King within the Town, caused
certain troops to issue forth, that skirmished with the Emperors Forces, A
skirmish.
wherein the Duke of Alue lost above 150. men: on the French part, there was
five soldiers slain, and one Gentleman of Picardie, named Marigni, and two
Captains hurt, that died not long after.

The King being at Rheims, was advertised by the Duke d'Aumalle, touching The
Marquess of Brandebourg overthrows the Duke d'Aumalle, and takes him
prisoner.
the practices of the Marquis of Brandebourg, with the Emperor, and required to
send some forces of 200. men of arms, with whose help, and the rest of his
troops, he said he doubted not, but easily to overthrow the Marquis: to the
which end, Monsisur de Bourdillon was sent thither, but the Duke for that time
sent him back again: esteeming that ye Marquis as then having past the Meuse,
meant to join with the Emperors army: but about the end of October, the Duke
being advertised that the Marquis began to dislodge, placed himself in
order of battle, with all his horsemen, upon a plain called la Croix du
Monstier, to see what way the Marquis held, who having intelligence that the
country people, and certain Frenchmen, skirmished and spoiled some of his
footmen: would himself in person go to see what they were, and went so near,
that his Interpreter was slain with a caliuer, standing close by him, who
therewith re^urning in great chollor, appointed his horsemen to advance
themselves, and to set upon the enemy: and so in great fury charged the Dukes
companies, who as then thought to retire. At the first onset, the Marquis set
upon a great troup of Pages, and others that were placed there to make a show,
who were presently dispearsed. The second charge was made upon a squadron of
Light Horse and Argolets, who in a manner made no resistance, and so all the
strength fell upon the Lanciers, who presently by the Rutters Pistols, were
forced to retire, being ill provided of Lances to make resistance. The Duke
perceiving his horsemen to be disranked, and flying to save themselves, and
the Marquis at hand-blowes with diverse of his Leaders, rancked himself in
order again, with some few of his men, and entered into the skirmish, where
his principal Gentlemen having been slain before his eyes, the rest hurt,
beaten down, and taken prisoners, and all his men put to flight and chased,
himself being hurt in two places, and his horse slain under him, in the end
was taken prisoner, and all his company in a manner overthrown. The Vicount of
Rohan, slain by them that took him, and many Cornets, Captains, and
Gentlemen, to the number of two hundredth and more, slain in the field: the
number of the prisoners being many more, this Josse of so many Gentlemen, was
a mends for the happy success, which the king had about a month after,
against the Emperor.

The Marquis being victorious, sent the Duke d'Aumalle his prisoner, into
Almaine, for whom afterward he got 50000. Crowns for a ransom, which the
king paid, at the instant request of the Duches de Valentinois, mother in law
unto the prisoner: which done, he went unto the Emperor, as then being before
Metz with all his camp, at the same time. The Count de Reux, Lieftenant
general for the Emperor in the low Countries, entered into Picardie with a
great army, Taking of the town and Castle of Hesdin from the King, and the
spoiling of Picardie by the Emperors army.
where he burnt Noyon, Nesse, Chauni, Roye, and the pleasant Castle of
Foulenbray, with more then 800. Villages: which done, he besieged Hesdin, the
Town being taken, they enclosed the Castle, having beaten down a great Tower
that stood on the Park side, and caused a great piece of a wall to be
undermined, filling the ditches with the rubbish thereof, which served the
assaulters for a bridge to pass over, to make the assault, wherewith the
defendants were stricken in such fear, that without further resistance, they
yielded the Castle, upon condition to depart, their lives and goods saved.

A gentleman named Monsieur de Rasse, who as then commanded in the Castle, in
favor of the Constable, made that composition: but if his master had not
entreated for him, it had cost him his life, because he never defended
himself, and not long before had sent word unto the King, that he doubted not
the Castle. But for the same cause he was sent home unto his own house, and
never after employed in the wars.

Resolution of the assieged within the Town of Metz.
The king having received that second loss, wrote unto the Duke de Guise, to
know in what disposition he found himself to be within the Town of Metz.
The Duke sent him answer, whereof the effects proved correspondent with his
words, and with all certified him, of the order holden by the Emperor in his
camp. When the king perceived himself to be secured on that side, he left
the Duke de Neuers, for General of his army in Lorraine, made Monsieur de
Chastillon, Admiral of France, and his Lieftenant in Picardie, in place of
Monsieur d'Annebaut, not long before dead within la Fere.

The Admiral de Chastillon presently went to Hesdin, and the companies of the
Duke de Neuers, began to trouble the Emperors army, by surprising their
victuals: great pity it was to behold, what misery the soldiers at that
time endured, by reason of the winter. The Italians left the Emperors camp,
constrained to do it by force of cold and famine, and went unto the Duke, to
be employed under the king, The state of the Emperors army before Metz.
and while the Duke d'Alue used all the means he could to place his battery,
those within Metz made many assaults, sometime on horseback, sometimes on
foot, to the great discommoditie and loss of the Emperors camp, much
abashed at the boldness and valor of the Frenchmen, who at that time did many
strange and unaccustomed actions: as entering so far into the camp, that
they set upon the Artillery: ran into the enemies Tents, and in small
troops never ceased to give alarmes unto the Emperors camp. About the 20. of
November, Valor of the assieged. Battery.
the battery began to play upon the Town in three several places: and the
26. of the same month, the walls of the Town were battered with 40. great
Pieces, that shot both night and day without ceasing, but only to refresh
them: being one of the most furious batteries, that ever was seen at any
time. The assieged, not only Princes and Lords, but every man whatsoever,
carried earth to make rampires, by which their diligence, they no less abashed
the Emperors camp, then by their valor.

Hesdin taken by the Frenchmen from the Emperor.
The French army conducted by the Admiral de Chastillon, entering into
Picardie, where the Duke de Vandosme commanded as Lieftenant for the king,
caused the Emperors army conducted by the Count de Reux, to withdraw
themselves from thence, who left his son with a strong Garrison within the
Castle of Hesdin, which being assieged upon the 17. of December, and furiously
battered with 4066. cannon shots, without any reasonable breach: fear so much
ceased upon the assieged, that the next day after they yielded themselves, with
lives and goods saved. On the other side, the Duke de Neuers continued his
course, molesting the Emperors army, and by the conduct of Monsieur de Mouy,
cut off a great Conuoy of victuals and munitions from them, without the loss
of any man: wherein Mouy obtained great honor, by having advanced himself so
far, and bravely returned from among a great company of the enemies, without
leaving one man behind him, and yet bereauing them of a great relief.

The Emperor retrait and raising of his camp from Metz, to the great honor
of the assieged.
Touching the Emperor, his batteries being spent in vain, and his Mines,
countermyned by the diligence and industry of the assieged, that never ceased
by sallies, and continual charge, to molest, and dispearse his army, wholly
afflicted with cold and necessity, about the 18. of December, he caused the
greatest cannons of his battery to be dismounted, with resolution to retire
with honor and commodity, whereunto the Count d'Aigremont, was employed, to
discover, and to assure his passage. The Duke de Neuers provided with great
diligence for Thoul, thereby to shun a surprise, and by diverse courties made
the Emperor to make haste away, who being advertised of the condition of
Hesdin, perceiving the dispotition of his army, and his forces used against
Metz, to take no effect, having lost a great number of men, and much treasure,
and part of the reputation which before he had obtained. Upon the fifth of
January he began to retire, leaving all the charge unto the Duke d'Alue, to
separate and retire his army. Great pity it was, to see and behold the
number of poor Soldiers, that as then were discharged and sent away, without
any means to help themselves. The Duke d'Alue, and the Count de Brabancon,
The dislodging of the camp.
with the most part of the army, dislodged in great disorder, departing by
night only with two fires for their guide, making no noise, and without
sounding of trumpet, drum, or fife, leaving their Tents standing, with some
quantities of armor, barrells full of powder, and great store of necessary
provisions, part of the artillery under ground, and many poor sick men: whom
the Duke of Guise and others, caused to be friendly used and comforted:
Vidasme de Chartres, set upon the rereward of the Duke of d'Alues camp, where
he overthrew a company of light horse, burnt great quantity of powder, and
brought more persons then he desired, without any loss of his own men. The
rereward was left unto the Marquis of Brandebourge, The retrait of Albert
Marquis of Brandebourge.
upon whose camp many issues were made, but he kept himself so close, and
wrought in such manner, that he escaped safely away with all his troops.
Solemn prayers and thanksgiuings were yielded unto God, through all the Realm
of France, for the happy success of that great siege: specially the Duke of
Guise caused a general procession to be made within the Town of Metz, where
he was accompanied by all the Princes and Lords, that had assisted at that
siege: Delivery of Metz.
as the Princes of Anguien, the Count Montpensier, and the Count de la
Rochesuryon, the Duke de Neuers, Horace Fernese, who not long after espoused
Diane, Bastard-daughter to the king, Pierre Strossie, le Vidame de Chartres,
Monsieurs de Montmorency, d'Anuille, de Gonnor, la Brosse, Lieftenant of the
company of the Duke of Lorraine: la Rochefoucant, the Vicomtes de Turaine, and
de Martigues, Delangues, Entragues, de Biron, S. Remi, and others in great
number: which done, he went unto the Court, leaving the government of the
Town unto la Gonnor, that commanded in it before the siege.

Siege, batteries, assault, taking, and utter destruction of the town of
Terouenne.
About the end of the spring, the Emperor sent Monsieur de Binecourt, with a
puissant army to besiege the Town of Terouenne, a very strong place, whereunto
in great diligence, was sent Monsieur d'Esse: and with him Francis de
Montmorency, eldest son unto the Constable, with their companies, followed by
diverse Lords, Gentlemen, and Soldiers. The Town was most furiously battered,
and the assieged sustained three assaults, such as never had been seen the
like: where on both sides many men were slain. On the French part were slain,
Messieurs de Esse, de Vienne, de Beaudisne, de la Roche, Pose, de Blandi, and
captain Ferrteres, with many Gentlemen and soldiers: after that, the
Assaylants used great means to mine the walls, so that in the end, by a mine
very properly and promptly made, they filled the diche: which Monsieur de
Montmorency perceiving, by advise of all the Captains, demanded a composition,
but while they were in parley, the Almaines and Burgonians entered in diverse
places, and began to kill all that they met: the Spaniards covetous of money,
warranted many Gentlemen, and French soldiers: Monsieur de Ouerti, to save the
life of Monsieur de Montmorency his General, was sore wounded, whereof not
long after he died: which news much pleased the Emperor, who therevppon
caused the Town to be rased to the ground.

And because the report went that Hesdin should be besieged, the Duke de
Bouillon Marshall of France, undertook to defend the Castle, the Duke Horatio
Fernese, the Count de Villards, with diverse other Lords and Gentlemen, being
assistants, with about 2000. soldiers, where they were presently enclosed by
the Emperors army, whereof Emanuel Philebert Duke of Sauoy, and Prince of
Piedemont his Nephewe was General, which place he battered more freely then
at any other time it had been, and mined in so many places, that it seemed
ready to fall, by which means the Frenchmen were constrained to parle, and
while they were upon the point to make a composition, nothing rested but the
sign: on the one side a Priest by misfortune having put fire unto the
artificial works made within the Castle, therewith to defend the assalt, on the
other side, the Burgonions that desired nothing but the spoil, having caused
their mines to work, part of the soldiers were burnt with those artificial
fires, and part blown up with the mines, the rest remained at the mercy of the
Emperors soldiers, that entered into the Castle. The Duke de Bouillon, Hesdin
taken from the Frenchmen, and rased.
charged the Prince of Piedemont with his promise, but he answered him and
said, that there needed no Hostages to be given, seeing he found himself to be
master of the place: and by that means, the Duke with diverse others were taken
prisoners, by whom the Prince gained a most great ransom. The Castle was
taken upon the 18. day of July, Duke Horatio, the Vicount de Martigues, the
Seneschal de Castres, and diverse Captains and Gentlemen were slain therein,
which is the fortune of war: but the Emperor caused it to be rased to the
ground.

The overthrow of some of the Emperors forces, and the taking of the Duke of
Arscot.
After that, the French Army being assembled by Amiens and Piquigny, about the
15. of August, there happened an encounter, wherein the Prince of Conde had the
leading of the light Horse, and with the same he brake into the Emperors
troops, beating and driving them before him above a mile, slaying of them to
the number of seven or eight hundredth men: and took prisoners about five
hundred, and among the rest the Duke of Arscot, bearing away their Ensigns:
which done, the Emperors Army retiring toward Arras, the kings Army about
the end of August lay about Corbie: Wherein there was almost 7000. horse, 25.
thousand foot, and above an hundredth pieces of Artillery both great and small.
The Emperor determined to cause this great Army either to consume of it
self, or else at the siege of some Town or Castle. But to the contrary, the
king desired nothing but battle, and to effect his will, he approached near
to Cambray, and making toward Valenciennes, caused a certain charge to be
given, where the French horse men had the better, and perceiving that the
Emperors Forces would not hazard themselves, the king withdrew his Camp,
sending the Marshall de S. Andre to ouerrunne the plain country, belonging to
the Count of S. Paul, and about the end of October, he discharged a part of
his army, the rest were placed in Garrisons to pass the winter time.

de la Roche Suryon, in Vermandois, composed of ten thousand foot, three
hundredth lances, Three armies in France.
and five or six hundredth Argoletiers in the second, marching toward Crecy,
conducted by the Constable: there was 25. Ensigns of Frenchmen, as many
Suissers, two Regiments of Lansquenets, and two thousand horse, part
light-horses, and part Argoletiers, with the rereward of France, and some
English and Scottish horsemen. The third, conducted by the Duke de Neuers,
Exployts of th^se three armies.
was composed of twenty companies of Englishmen and Scots: two Regiments of
Lansquenets, three hundredth lances, eight hundredth light horse and
Argoletiers, and two hundredth Almaine Pistoletiers: the first entered into
Artois, where it made great spoil, and burnt many places, that of the Duke de
Neuers ouerranne Ardennes, took the Castle of Orcimont by composition,
destroyed and burnt great numbers of villages, and constrained the Garrison of
the Castle of Beaurin, to yield by composition: and then entered into the
country of Liege, having assured and opened the navigations of the Meuse, by
the taking of certain little Castles, and strong Forts, that lie along by the
river side: the Constables army took Mariembourg, and fortified Rocroy.
Issuing out of Ardennes, those of Dinam were sounded, to know if they would
remain as newter: but they made a most bold and voluntary answer,
accompanied with some Harquebush shot. Whereupon the Herault, and Trompet of
the Duke de Neuers, somoned them, and the Duke by force took the Castle of
Agimont, in the beginning of Iulie, finding the Castles of Castelthierri, and
Valuin, wholly abandoned and forsaken: which done, he wanne Bouines by
assault, wherein most of the Inhabitants were slain, or executed to death,
because they seemed to resist the kings army. Dinam after some small
resistance, yielded it self, the Inhabitants having their lives saved, and the
Town not burnt, as that of Bouines, but wholly sacked. Therein happened a
cruel skirmish between the Frenchmen and the Almaines, that would have
violated and forced certain women and maids, taken within the church, which
quarrel was ended by the king: the Castle not long after was taken by
composition. An overthrow of the Emperors forces.
While these things were in this sort executed in the country of Liege, the
Prince de la Roche Suryon being in Artois, overthrew two Cornets of the
Emperors horsemen, whereof 200. of them were slain, and the Cornets sent unto
the king: who understanding that the Prince of Piedemont assembled an army,
determining to fight, if the Spaniards would advance themselves, purpased to
pass the Sambre, which he effected: and being followed by the Duke de Neuers,
he entered into the country of Hainaut, about the 20. of July, where he made a
horrible spoil: some of his troops running to the subburbes of Neuelle, the
frontier Town of Brabant, wherein, with all the villages round about it, they
set on fire, winning great spoil: then the army drew toward Baius, one of
the principal Towns in Hainaut, leaving nothing about it, but fire, The kings
revenge for the spoils done in Picardie.
smokes, ashes, and misery, throughout all the plain country: a most
lamentable tragedy between two so great Princes. The Frenchmen being inca^ped
about Baius, made greater fires then ever they had done, burning all the
castles and Gentleme^s places throghout the country. The goodly house of
Mariemo^t, belonging to the Q. of Hungary was not forgotten, neither yet the
castle of Tragny. Baius being assailed upon the 22. day of the same month,
yielded it self to the kings mercy, that caused it to be burnt in revenge of
the spoil of Foulembray, as also of the Towns and villages of Picardie, that
had been burnt during his being in Almaine. They set fire likewise in an
other goodly Castle belonging unto the Queen of Hungary, then in Reux, after
that in Bauets.

The army being past beyond Monts, Hainaut, Landreei, Auanes, le Quesnoy,
Vallenciennes, and Cambray, the Prince of Piedemont used all the means he
could, to be revenged for those extreme losses, but could not effect it: the
Frenchmen being strong, and well conducted, in the end, about the tenth of
August, both the armies met near unto Renty, where there chanced an
indifferent hard encounter on both their parts. Encounters of both the armies
by Renty.
The Emperor lost about 800. or 900. men, and the King two hundredth, after the
which skirmish, winter opproaching, the king dismissed his army, and that of
the Emperor making toward Hesdin, burnt and spoiled all the plain county,
and therein had done much hurt, if the Duke de Vandosme, that lay not far
from thence, had not resisted him.

Continuance of war.
In spring time, the war began again between the two Princes, and the
report of the courses made by the Emperors army, gave occasion to the
Frenchmen, to enterprise upon the Castle of Cambresis, which was presently
taken by assault, and good war holden with the Spaniards. Maruembourg, was
victualled by Bourdillon, Lieftenant to the Duke de Neuers. The king and the
Queen of England, entreated the Emperor, and the King of France, to make a
peace, wherein Cardinal Pole, an Englishman, Vain treaty of peace.
traveled much as then all flaming with fire, against those of the religion,
who at that time were most sharply handled within the Realm of England.

This treaty of peace began with great bruit, but in fine, it vanished like
smoke, and war began again stronger then ever it was. The Duke de Neuers,
and the Admiral de Chastillon, being made Governors of Picardie, (because
the Duke de Vandosme, as then king of Navarre, and Sovereign of Bearc, by
means of his wife, was gone to take possession of his new estates,) took good
order both for the victualling and keeping of the places and frontiers of the
country: notwithstanding, not long after, as some of the Garrisons of
Picardie, marching with 1500. horses of the French rereward, called the
companies of Nobility, and four hundredth footmen, had in such sort ouerrunne
the country, that in fine, they returned al laden with spoils, The rereward
of France over thrown.
being led by la Iaille, their General. Haulsmont Governor of Bapaulme,
finding them enclosed between a Wood, a Village, and a River, whereof he
caused the passages to be broken down and surely kept, without espials,
order, fear of the enemy, or hurt: charged them so courageously with a small
company of men, that in short space, he made them loose both courage, booty
and lives, at his discretion: where la Iaille was hurt, above five hundredth
taken prisoners, some escaped, and the rest slain. Those of Hannuyers and
Arcesiers men, much given to derision, made it a co^moniest, saying: that they
had taken Nobles of France without weight: but to say the truth, there was as
then but few Nobles in those troops, only certain Wagoners and Pages that
were employed in the muster, and to make a show, sent by Widows, and Orphans
of Gentlemen deceased: or by the Lords of certain fief, rated at certain
values. To assure Picardie, the king went into Villiers Costerez, sending the
Duke of Guise further upon the frontiers, and the Admiral into the middle of
the Province.

The estate of Predemo^t touching the wars between the Emperor and the king
of France.
Now I must show you what was done in the wars of Piedemont, and other places
beyond the Mountains. The Marshall de Brissac, who the winter before had taken
Iuree, and Bielle, in the spring time fortified S. Iaco, took Crepacuore, and
by means of Monsieur Saluaison, by a surprise most bravely executed, got Casal
de Montferrat, a town and Castle, and a place of great importance, spoiled
Poman, S. Saluadour, and other small places, not to be holden, and hardly to
be strengthened and fortied in any convenient time. The Duke of Alue having
succeeded Gonzague, in the Government of Lombardie, about the end of Iulie
entered into the field, with 20000. foot, 4000. horse, and 40. cannons, and
besieged S. Iaco, wherein were Captains, Birague, and Vimercat, who
constrained the Duke to retire from Pont de Sture, where he fortified himself,
hoping by famine to constrain such places to yield, as he durst not besiege.
The king sent four thousand foot, and four thousand horse, to strengthen
Marshall de Brissacs forces, Taking and spoiling of Vulpian.
who perceiving himself so strong, besieged Vulpian, and by Kochepose
overthrew the Dukes forces, sent to aid them: by force took the basse Town,
and soon after, the Castle by composition was yielded: Vulpian had the walls
rased and beaten down, and not long after, Mont-Coluo, a Town and Castle
yielded unto the Frenchmen.

These things were done in the months of September and October: not long afer,
the Dukes troops, by means of an Ambascado placed hard by Iucise, slew and
took certain French soldiers, whereby they wrought some small revenge, for
their great losses at Vulpian and Mont-Caluo.

A particular discourse of the war of Siene, from the beginning to the end.
Before I leave the affairs beyond the Mountains, it is necessary I should
say something touching the wars of Siene, that fell out and kindled in this
year, beginning at the original thereof. During the siege of Metz, the
Emperor being ceased of Siene, an ancient and famous Town in the
territories of Tuscane, placed Don Diego de Mendosse Governor therein, with a
Garrison of Spaniards: Don Diego using rigor more therein then was convenient,
the Sienois not content therewith, began to conspire against him: he under
color of favoring the people, caused the Gentlemen to leave their arms:
which done, he began to molest both the one and the other, who consulting
together, sent unto the king, to desire him to receive them into his
protection, which he consented unto.

The Fugitives of of Sienie, in the kings name began to raise men throughout
Italy, under the conduct of the count Petillane, Hieronyme de Pise, and Maire
de Sainctefior. The Duke of Florence sent eight hundredth men to aid Mendosse.
But the Sienois moved at the new extortions raised upon them, let four
thousand men co^ducted by the Count de Petillone enter into the town, that
drove out the Spaniards, but not without great loss on both parts, part of the
Spaniards having saved themselves (without cannon) within the Iacopius, and in
the Citadell, were entered upon by force, and put to the sword. Their General,
and others of the Florentine Captains, issued by composition, and ceased upon
Orbitelle, a place not far from thence, which they fortified. The Emperor
being returned into Almaine, after the siege raised before Metz, commanded
Don Garsie de Tolede, Viceroye of Naples, to ouerrunne the plain country of
Sienois, which he did with 12000. foot, and one thousand five hundredth horse:
on the other side, the king sent Monsieur de Terms, that set good and strong
Garrisons within all the places of the Segnerie of Siene, having as then under
the kings pay, above twelve thousand foot, not accounting the natural
countrymen, sworn enemies unto the Spaniards, but very few horsemen. And
because the Emperors camp, conducted by the Viceroy and Ascagne de la Corn,
seemed to threaten Siene, they fortified the Town with all diligence. The
Viceroy assailed Monselice, Montelle, and Montalein, where Monsieur de Terms
took order, and maintained himself in good sort, until the king sent Pierre
Strossi, with a great company of men, and made him his Lieftenant General in
Toscane. Strossi came to Siene, raised more Soldiers in Italy, whereof Duke
Cosme being advertised, solicited Pope Julius and the Emperor, in such sort,
that they joined with him to drive out the Frenchmen. To this end Jacques de
Medicis, surnamed le Mediquin, Marquis de Marignan, having charge of the
consederates army: about the beginning of the year 1554. besieged Siene, and
approaching it by night, had almost surprised it, by reason that as then the
fortifications were not all finished, but the Sienois withstood him, and
repulsed the Marquis, who at that time lost many of his men, notwithstanding,
he left not off to incampe himself before the town, and forraging the plain
country, directed a furious battery, whereby in the end, he reduced the
Inhabitants to great extremity, without the coming of Strossi, who entering
therein, presently took order for the rampars, and the reparation of the
breaches, not having forgotten to furnish all the places about Siene, and
because Rodolphus Baillon, General of the Emperors horses, and Ascagne de la
Corn, had made an enterprise upon Chiusi, Strossi by night went to meet
them, with six hundredth men, and having taken them at an advantage, put their
troops in disorder, slew Baillon, and sent la Corn prisoner into France.

The king with all speed sent new forces into Toscane, and the I Will of Corse,
wherein Monsieur de Terms had taken the Towns of S. Florent, and S. Boniface,
a Port of the sea, leaving good Garrison therein, under the charge of Iourdan
Vrsin, with certain Captains, Frenchmen, and Gascous, for the defense of the
Yland, part whereof as yet obeyed the Geneuois, upon whom being participants
with the Emperor, Monsieur de Terms had taken those Towns.

But to return to Siene, the last secorers that the king sent thither, being
of five thousand Switzers and Gascons, with some light horse: Strossi suddenly
made a sallie with six thousand chosen footmen, and five hundredth good horse,
and therewith took Montcatin, and Montcarlo, from the Duke of Florence, which
he fortified. The Marquis of Marignan, constrained to leave the siege of
Siene, to aid the Duke, was in danger to be wholly overthrown, if Storssi
had taken occasion when it was offered. But the Marquis fortified with new
aid, Strosci was constrained to bring his wearied forces to breath themselves
within Siene: mean time, Leon, Prior of Capoue, and brother to Strossi, having
not the means to stay for the French Navy, ceased upon certain Geneuois
ships laden with corn, and having filled them with Soldiers, warred upon
the coast of Toscane, and to spoil the Ports of the sea, belonging to the Duke
of Florence. After that, he went to lie before Scarlin, where approaching to
view the place, he was stricken with a Harquebusshot, whereof he died.

Strossi much grieved thereat, went to continue the siege, staying for the
French aid, which not long after being arrived, conducted by Monsieur de
Monluc: Strossi made his army, wherein he had six thousand Italians, two
thousand Gascons, as many Switzers, two thousand five hundredth Lansquenets, and
about a thousand horse: wherewith he determined to set upon his enemies, if
they would come forth: and perceiving that they withdrewe themselves from
Siene, he committed the custody thereof, unto Monsieur de Monluc, and went to
batter Ciuitelle, lying in the territories of Florence: to the aid whereof,
the Marquis of Marignan made so great have, that he had almost surprised the
assaylants, where there was much blood spilt on both sides. Stressi constrained
to discampe, besieged Foyan, a strong and very rich place, which the first day
of his arrival was taken by force: and Charlot Vrsin, with all the soldiers
that kept it, put to the sword, and the Town spoiled and burnt. The Marquis
having recovered certain cannons, approached the army of Strossi, that
marched toward Montpulcian, where the Italians began to forsake him, and by
that means his forces were less then those of the Marquis, which constrained
him to retire: The battle and overthrow of Strossi, and the French army in
Toscan.
but in stead of doing it covertly, and by night, for the safety of his
troops, he determined to march openly in the day time, and to save his
Artillery, he sent it before him. Whereof the Marquis being advertised, with
all speed pursued after him, and having overtaken him in the field, between
Martian, Lucignan, and Foyan, gave him battle: where the fight was dangerous
and bloody, but Strossi having the less and weaker company, the Frenchmen
fled after Bighet, an Italian Ensign, Coronel of the army, that first saved
himself, after that the horsemen were dispersed. The Gascons and Switzers, that
fought valiantly, were overthrown by advancing themselves too far among
their enemies, and almost all their Leaders slain in the field: the number of
the slain is diversely reported, some said two thousand five hundredth, others
four thousand, besides many hurt, that lived not long after, and five or six
hundredth prisoners. The Marquis wrote unto the Emperor, that all Strossies
footmen were slain at that bartaile, but as then he forgot to pursue his
victory: which if he had done, Strossi and all the Kings army at that time
had been wholly overthrown. Strossi that had showed marvelous prooses of his
valor and nobleness, saved himself in Montalcin, leaving Foyan, that was
presently taken by the Marquis, as also Martian, Lucignan, and other places,
wherewith the Sienois meruellously abashed, were in mind to have yielded, had
it not been for Monluc, that assured them, and after did great service unto the
king, as also to the Town. Bighet partly cause of the overthrow of the army,
and the Count d'Alte, that had cowardly yielded up Lucignan, a most
impregnable place, were beheaded. Presently after, the Duke solicited those of
Siene to yield unto the Emperor, and they about the end of January, in the
year of our Lord 1554. answered him most bravely: but yet to use so great and
lofty words, they had need of better means of resistance: while these things
were effected, Monsieur de Lanssac being gone on embassage to Rome, diverse
articles were there drawn and set down, to end the troubles of Siene.

The Pope gave charge to his Legates, that lay residents by the Emperor and
the king, to bring them to an agreement, but nothing took effect, each of the^
seeming to have right on his side, mean time, the differences touching
religion began to increase: such as would not receive and acknowledge the
traditions of the Pope, were cruelly burnt. They suffered the Turk to win
diverse places in Europe, and his Galleys as then came before Corse, to aid the
Frenchmen, were at the siege of Calui and Boniface among the Christians, and
help to conquer the Island, and then returning homeward, spoiled the coast of
Toscane, besieged Plombin, and the I Will of Elbe, belonging to the Duke of
Florence, and passing further, executed an infinite of mischieses upon the
realms of Naples, Sicile, and Calabre, and so laden with great spoils, and
numbers of Christians their prisoners, they arrived in Constantinople and other
places, without any impeachment: so much, and so great, was the hatred between
the Emperor and the King, that they had rather see the Turk enriched with
Christians teasure, then once to consent and agree in one, to invade so common
an enemy. But returning to Siene, Siene besicged and taken.
the Marquis of Marignan came to besiege it with all his forces, only upon the
hope he had, that Strossi being wounded, and Monluc lying at the point of
death, being dead, (for it was thought they could not live long) Lanssac and
Fourqueuau taken, the Sienois being wholly destitute of counsel, and French
secorers, would yield unto him. Strossi being somewhat recovered, and having
been certified of the death of Monluc, hazarded himself with six companies of
foot, and two of launciers, to come to Siene. Where, by the prudence and
resolution of Serillac Nephew to Monluc, (he entered) who by a stratageme of
trompets, caused an alarm in the Marquess camp, that thought verily some new
army had been come to set upon them: but having found Monluc living, and in
some better estate then he had been, he returned again, yet not without great
danger: Monluc having made many skirmishes upon the enemy, perceived that in
fine, they would take the Town, whereupon having showed the Soldiers and the
Townes-men, what he thought the Marquis would do, he gave order that every man
should be stinted in his victuals: and that they should live by prescript rules
of war. The Sienois very willing to follow his counsel and advise, did as he
commanded. The Marquis having assayed, by scaling the walls in the nightime,
to enter into the Citadell, and the Fort of Camollia, was valiantly repulsed,
with the loss of six hundredth of his men, and by many skirmishes, batteries,
intelligences, and combats, seeking to become master of the town: being not
able to effect his will, determined to proceed with the first and surest
resolution, which was to constrain them by famine: by which means his camp
endured much misery, and every month diminished more and more: nevertheless,
in fine, his perseverance overcame them, so that upon the 20. day of April
1555. an honorable composition having been made and agreed upon, with Monsieur
de Monluc, his troops, and those of Siene, the town was yielded unto the
Marquis, and after, into the hands of the Duke of Florence. Touching that which
after happened to the territories of Siene, I mean not at this present to
entreat further thereof, leaving that to the description of the wars of
Italy, from whence I must return unto Picardie.

Wars in Picardie.
Mariembourg being revictualled, the Leaders that commanded in those quarters
for the Emperor, having erected an army of twenty thousand foot, five or
six thousand Rutters, and some Enfignes of old bands of Spaniards, caused a
place called Giuets, to be fortified, from whence they forraged the Country
lying nearest unto it, and famished Mariembourg. The king assembled his forces
at Maubert Fontaine, whereof Francis de Cleues, Duke de Veuers was Lieftenant
General: having eight hundredth launciers, as many light horse, and about eight
thousand footmen, who once again revictualled Mariembourg. The 26. of Iulie,
the Rutters and the French light-horsemen met together, but the Rutters were
presently constrained to reenter into their fort, and the Count de Barlaimont,
General of the Emperors Army, refusing battle, the French men retired:
presently after, the prince of Orange entered in to the kings country, and
spoiled the Castle of Faignolles. After that, in winter time, Messieurs de
Sanssac and Bourdillon, the third time reuictualled Mariembourg. The reign and
troublesome season, together with the want of victuals on both sides,
impeached the armies from meeting together: During this last voyage, the king
having gotten the writings and evidences, whereby John de Brosse Duke
d'Estampes, claymed a right and title unto the Duchy of Bretaigne, into his
hands, gave the Count of Ponthieure, in exchange thereof unto the said Duke.

The Emperor resigneth all his estates unto his son and his brother.
At the same time, the Emperor a prince of great valor and courage, as all
Histories do witness, having so long time borne a world of affairs and
troubles within his brains, determined to discharge himself thereof, and
having sent for the Prince Don Philip his son, unto Brissels (then king of
England) resigned unto him his kingdoms of Spain, Naples, Cicile, and others,
whereof he gave him letters pattents, commanding all his subjects to obey him:
Those letters being delivered upon the 25. of october, 1555. were read in open
counsel by the Chancellor. And among many notable instructions and aduises, by
the father given unto the Prince his son, he exhorted him to make peace with
the King of France, and to have pity upon Christendom miserably tormented,
by so long and cruel wars. He likewise left off the Empire, and by letters
unto the Electors, desired them to give that dignity unto Ferdinand his
brother, to whom by right it ought to appertain, having by them bin chosen and
elected for king of the Romans.

Wars in the Isle of Corse.
About the same time, the Geneuois assaied to win the Isle of Corse, not long
before taken from them by Monsieur de Terms, and sent thither the Prince
d'Aurie, that assailed the port of S. Florent, which yielded by composition,
the soldiers issuing armed, and their goods saved, returning to Boniface to
Iourda^ Vrsin: d'Aurie following after them, thinking to win it, but he was
soon repulsed to his great loss. About the month of the same year died the
Marquess of Marigna^, The death of the Marquis of Marigna^.
being out of favor with the Emperor. For having too long prolo^ged the taking
of Siene, and consuming a whole army about it, he was solemnly buried at
Millan, the Duke d'Alue being assistant at his funeral.

Philip following his fathers counsel, and solicited thereunto by Mary Queen
of England, his wife, inclined to peace, which to effect, after many meetings
and conferences, a truce for 5. years was agreed upon between the^. The Count
de Lalain, Truce for 5. years between the 2. Kings.
came to Blois to swear the truce unto the king, and the Admiral de
Chastillon went to Bruxelles to the Emperor and king Philip to do the like. For
certain months that this peace endured, one called Villegagnon a knight of
Malthe, rigged and prepared certain vessels, and made a voyage unto Amerique,
Villegagnon saileth for Amerique.
promising to do woonders for the king in that new world, but his mind not
well settled, and his unjust behauiours wrought him discredit, whereby he did
nothing to any effect. But if this enterprise had been taken in hand by a wise
leader, it had surely been an ouerturne to the execution of great matters. But
the ruler and disposer of all men's actions, had otherwise ordained.

Beginning of the breach of peace.
Pope Paul the fourth, of the family of Caraffes in Naples, enemy to the
Spaniard, being advertised, that within Rome, certain assemblies were made and
holden in the houses of Mark Anthony Colonne, and the Cardinal of Saint
Fior, enemies to the King of France, took that for an occasion to revenge
himself, and without much examination, caused the Cardinal Camille, Colonne,
Julian Cesarin, and the Abbot of Bresegue to be committed prisoners in the
castle of S. Ange, summoned Mark Anthony, watched carefully to take and
intercept all letters and pacquets, disarmed all strangers, and placed straight
and hard watches and sentinelles throughout all the City of Rome. Some write,
that the Colonels suspecting the Pope to be a French man, and fearing some
surprise, thought in time to provide for their affairs. And the Pope taking
the matter to be other then it was, used the means aforesaid. The oppressed
being servants unto the king of Spain, gave him to understand, how they were
used, he commanded the Duke of Alue to aid the Colomnes and others their
participants. Whereupon the Duke presently went to Naples, and did what he
could to reestablish the Colomnes and Vrsins in their Segneries. They on the
other side, fortifying themselves about Rome, and holding the Pope enclosed, he
determined to demand aid of the king of France. For the which cause he sent
his Nephewe Cardinal Caraffe, that bare a triumphant hat and a sword unto the
king, being at Fontainebelleau, about the end of the month of June. The king
granted his request, adding that he would advertise the king of Spain thereof,
which he likewise did, but the answer he received, little pleased Caraffe.
Whereof ensued the beginning of a fire, that after produced great flames. The
Annalistes and Hystories of France, Italy and Spain, make different
discourses of the breach and rupture of this peace, which would desire a bigger
volume. It suffiseth me to pass it over in brief. The Pope was the first
that put the Irons into the fire, and the Kings did not greatly withdraw
their ears, to lend their helping hands, as not wishing great good unto each
other: Their principal officers provoked by many and diverse passions, and
those that governed them, having desire to mount aloft, and to rise higher, and
perceiving that truce imbased them, were very well pleased, that within Rome
they had begun to erect the Scaffold whereon to act some new tragidie in
Christendom, and specially in France.

Wars between the kings, begun about Rome.
So the French men would oppose himself against the Spaniard for the Popes
cause: Strossi Marshall of France, in place of Monsieur de Sedan, deceased at
his return from prison out of the low countries, was sent to Rome, there to
resist the Spaniards, until the aid of France came thither: on the otherside,
Don John de Lume governor of Millan, came into France, and Duke Octauian
Farnese restored to the possession of Plaisance by the Spaniards, forsook the
King of France. In the mean time, the Duke d'Alue, forraged the country about
Rome, took Anagne, Pilastrine, Segne, Tiuoli, and besieged Ostie: cutting off
their victualles, holding Strossi, with Monluc and their troops, enclosed
within Rome: about the end of December, the king sent the Duke of Guise, to be
his Lieftenant General, in the army that marched to help the Pope.

The Duke of Guise being in Piedemo^t, gives alaru^ to Italy.
In the month of January 1557. the Duke of Guise well accompanied, being arrived
at Turin, the Capital town of Piedemont, the Spaniards fortified Millan, and
refreshed the Garrisons of the places of importance in Italy. The Duke of
Ferrare armed and lodged soldiers, upon the frontiers of Ferrare, garrishing
Florence and other towns under his obedience, specially those that bordered
upon Bologne. The Duke of Alue provided for the towns within the Realm of
Naples, and upon the sea coast of Calabria: as then all Italy was in arms,
every one standing upon his guard, diversely discoursing upon the Duke of Guises
arriual and intents, having a strong army of 14. or 15000. foot, 8000.
lances, and 1200. light-horses: some say more, the report being given forth,
of an other supply ready to march forward, as soon as war should be opened in
those parts: but it was as necessary to employ them elsewhere.

Ostie taken from the Pope by the Spaniards.
In the mean time, the siege of Ostie continued, those that kept the Fort,
having sustained many assaults, their powder failing, and the Soldiers and
Citizens, for the most part, being hurt, a composition was granted, and the
place yielded unto the Spaniards, that agreed with Cardinal Caraffe, for
forty days truce, to the end, the Pope might have some time and leisure, to
think upon some good agreement. The Cardinal to the contrary, stayed for the
Frenchmen, and solicited the Venetians to take part with them, which they
refused, Agreement between the Pope, the King of France, and the Duke of
Ferrare.
desiring not to obtain the King of Spaines ill will: but the Duke of Ferrare
took the French Kings part, and received the title of Defendor of the Church,
and between the Pope, the King, and the Duke, it was agreed, that he should
provide 20000. foot, and 1000. horse, and pay all the charges of the army. The
King should furnish as many foot, and twice as many horse: and the Duke six
thousand foot, two hundredth launciers, four hundredth light-horses, and
twenty Pieces for battery: which had been sufficient forces, to have made
and wrought great conquests, if the Popes Cofers had not been stirred: but
that Article made all the rest of no effect.

And how would he have furnished money for so great and puissant an army, when
in effect he suffered the like army of the Duke of Guise to maintain it self,
or rather to be dispearsed: in such sort, that the return thereof, seemed
rather a company of men ouerthrown and spoiled, then a brave retrait of
Soldiers coming victorious.

The nature of the Popes.
The Popes in these latter times, have always used to hold on the stronger
side, to advance their affairs, at the cost and charges of those that hearken
unto them: and when they have obtained their desires, to leave and forsake such
as assist them in their greatest need, as it happened in this war, trauersed
by wonderful devises on all sides: but to conclude, the enterprises and
pretenses, of great and mighty men of this world, are wholly like smoke, if
the favor and help of the most great and puissant God of heaven does not
assist them.

The taking of Valence beyond the mountains
The Duke of Guise having joined his forces in Piedemont, with those of the
Marshall de Brissac, marched toward Valence, and giving out that Pauie had
been taken by the Frenchmen, summoned Captain Spoluerin, that had two thousand
soldiers with him to keep it, to put all to fire and sword, if he entered
therein by force. Spoluerin that feared his skin, and the loss of his
booties, wrought so well with the Soldiers, that they consented to the
yielding up of the town, so they might issue with lives and goods saved: which
was agreed unto, and the 18 of January, Spoluerin, and others of the
principal Commanders being entered into Pauie, were beheaded, because of their
cowardice. The Cardinal of Trent, Governor of Millan, sent to summon the Duke
of Guise, to restore Valence unto him again, as taken contrary unto the
articles of truce: his answer was, that the Duke of Alue having first broken
the truce, the Frenchmen could not choose but follow, and that he intended
naught but war, until such time, as that the Pope should be satisfied, and
touching Valence, that they had justly set upon them, because their Garrison
had shot their ordinance against the French soldiers, that marched by the
Town to aid the Pope. Ostie taken again with the fort and other places.
On the other side, Strossi, Monluc, and others that were in Rome, perceiving
the Duke of Alue to be gone from thence, marched with 5000 foot, and 600. horse
to besiege Ostie, which they presently took, the fort yielded by compositio^,
the spaniards issuing with their lives, arms, and goods saved, taking with
the^ certain pieces of artillery, they likewise took Velitres, Tuscule,
Marin, Grotteferrate, Palesan, S. Ange. S. Paul, Vico Valerio, and diverse small
places in the territories of Rome, from whence they drove the Spaniards.

The French army in Italy.
Departing out of Piedimont: the Duke of Guise having consulted what was best
for him to do, resolved within himself, to martch straight forward to Rome, and
being at Bologne, he complained unto the Popes officers, because he saw no
preparation made for the wars, saying, that the king had bin otherwise
promised. They made him answer, that there were 10000 soldiers ready prepared
in the Marquisat of Ancore, wherewith for that time he seemed to be content,
and being arrived at Rome, he mustered his troops, where he found five
thousand Switzers, their General being the marquis de' Elboeuf: 4000 Grisons,
7000. French men, and Gascons, some Italian, 750. lanciers, and 1500. light
horses. The Duke de Nemours commanding the footmen.

Wars and taking of towns in Piedemont.
According to the counsel holden in Piedimont, the Marshall de Brissac being in
the field, by composition took Valfeniere, lying between Ast and Carmagnolle,
which he utterly spoiled, assailed and took Chiauasse, a Castle standing upon
a mount, wherein he placed a garrison. The report being spread abroad, that the
French men would enter into the realm of Naples, the Spaniards took good order
for the keeping of the places near unto the Marquis de Ancoue, but the Duke de
Guise not desiring to go so far into the country, took Campilio, and
besieged Ciuitelle, from whence, he was constrained to raise his siege, having
lost a great number of his best soldiers. In Piedemont, Marshal de Brissac was
constrained to retire from Coni, the Duke of Guise being aided by the
Marquess of Pescaire, Estate of Italy.
Strossi, and the Duke de Palliane, took Montfort, by assault, a little town
hard by Cintelle, which was spoiled and burnt. But the Duke of Guise perceiving
his forces to diminish, and the Spaniards daily to increase, and that the Popes
promises took no effect, advertised the king of his estate, and on the
otherside, offered battle unto the Duke d'Alue, lying between Ferme and
Ascoli, but the spaniards perceiving, that with a little patience, The spaniards
refuse battle.
the Pope would soon be brought to reason, and the French men disperse
themselves, or else easily be spoiled, knowing likewise, that some thing was to
be effected in the country of Picardie, they thought it but a point of foolish
hardiness, without convenient means so to hazard the estate of the king of
Spain. And because that neither the Pope, nor the Duke of Ferrare, furnished
that which had bin promised, and to the contrary, that the French army received
not one penny pay of the Pope, and that the Ferrarois borrowed forces of his
son in law the Duke of Guise, therewith to defend himself, they began to
consult upon their return into France, The subtilty of the Pope.
but the Pope who as yet had not that he sought, fearing if he should be left
alone, the Spaniard would not fail to pare his nails, swear unto the Duke of
Guise, that he would never make agreement, nor once accord with the Spaniard
without the kings of Frances consent: for assurance whereof, he would send the
Duke de Palliane his son for hostage into France. By which devises, he stayed
the French men, to see what success the affairs begun in Picardy would have,
where the French men having bin overthrown in battle upon S. Lawrence day, S.
Quintius taken, He makes peace with the King of Spain.
and France in great distrust: the Pope perceiving his hopes to vanish like
smoke, and that the Duke of Alue approached near to Rome, he sent Cardinal
Caraffe unto him, with full power and authority to agree upon a peace with
the King of Spain: which was concluded about the month of September, the Pope
having renounced the league made with the French King, who sitting between two
stools, fell on the ground, and all the intents of the house of Guise and
others, took no effect, whereby the army all wearied and dispearsed, returned
into France, cursing both the Pope, and all his train.

Truce broken in the frontier of Picardie, whereof ensued the battle on S.
Laurence day, where the Frenchmen with great loss were ouerthrown. The taking
of S. Quintins and other places.
The King having resolved to send the Duke of Guise to aid the Pope, contrary
to the advice and counsel of the Constable, and diverse Princes and Lords, that
dissuaded and besought him to the contrary, and that he should rather seek to
maintain the truce, gave express charge unto the Admiral, to take order for
the safety of his Towns and Forts in Picardie, and to make some enterprises
upon certain places in the low Countries. Whereunto the Admiral that had
been of the Constables opinion, although he well perceived from whence such
resolutions proceeded, not daring to refuse the commission given, with great
diligence took order accordingly, and thereupon made an enterprise upon Douay,
which having not taken effect, he took Lens, a small Town in Artois, which he
pilled, whereby the Gates of war were fully opened, Picardie and Champagne
exposed to continual courses, and the frontier places on both sides fortified.
The Queen of England sent a Herault of Arms into France, to defy the King,
and to proclaim war against him: and about the middle of the month of Iulie,
the prince of Piedemo^t accompanied with the duke d'Arscot, the Earls of
Mansfeld, d'Aiguema^t, Meigue, and Barlaimo^t, began to erect a puissant army
at Guiets, staying for further aid of Rutters and Bourguignons. The Duke de
Neuers provided for Rocroy, Mesieres, and Mariembourg, which he doubted would
be assailed, from whence the Prince retired, perceiving it to be too dangerous
an enterprise for him, marching toward the Town of Guise, with 40000. foot,
and 15000. horse, not accounting 10000. Englishmen, which he daily expected,
the French army being 18000. foot, and 6000. horse. The Admiral, with the
Sieurs de Villebon, de Senarpont, and others, were of advise, that the towns
of Picardie should be fortified, specially such as lay in greatest danger: but
they were not believed, in such manner, that the Prince of Piedemont having
stayed a time before Guise, presently sent his horsemen to enclose S. Quintins,
and marched thither with all his army: so that upon the sudden, the Town
was besieged on all sides. Monsieur de Teligny being within it, S. Quintins
besieged.
with a broken company of launciers, and one Bruiel a Gentleman of Breton, was
Governor of the Town, with very few footmen: and the Inhabitants themselves
wholly ignorant in Marshall affairs, made great difficulty to receive a
greater Garrison being moved thereunto. The Admiral determined to enter
therein, and to the same end, upon the 2. of August he departed from
Pierrepont, with four companies of launciers, and three of light-horses: and
being at Han, he was constrained by reason of the danger of the voyage, to
take no more but 2. companies of foot: whereof only the third part entered
with him into S. Quintins, The Admiral enters into Saint Quintins.
the rest stayed behind, and were constrained to retire, because the town was
almost besieged round about: touching the order therein taken by the Admiral,
concerning the fortifications, and other things, it is most certain, that
nothing was by him forgotten. The town being well aided by those few men that
entered with him, there was found disorder touching their victuals, their
powder being burnt and blown up by the Citizens default, that knew not how
to behave themselves in Marshall affairs, which much troubled the Soldiers.
Advise being given unto the Constable General of the French army, what state
S. Quintins was in, he sent the Prince of Conde, General of the light horse,
the Marshall Saint Andre with four hundredth launciers, and Monsieur d'Andelot
with ten Ensigns of footmen, from la Fere, to enter into Han, as well to
bridle the camp, as to seek by all means to refresh and strengthen those of
Saint Quintins, d'Andelot offered to enter therein, with two thousand men,
while the army on all sides, should give an alarm unto the enemy, who by
means of certain prisoners, having discovered the enterprise, took such order
therein, that their pretense took not effect.

The Constable brings his army unto S. Quintins, to cause certain men to
enter.
Mean time, the Spanish army increased, by aid of the Englishmen, being to
the number of ten thousand foot, and about one thousand five hundredth horse.
The Constable desirous to help those of S. Quintins, having determined upon
all the means that might be used, to help the Town, and being fully bent to
execute the same, the 9. of August, he caused the French and Almaine footme^ to
pass over the bridge, that lies above la Fere, with certain Pieces of
artillery: and the tenth of August, being S. Lawrence day, the horsemen joined
with the foot, and so marched toward S. Quintins: where, about nine of the
clock in the morning they arrived, and there rancked themselves in order of
battle, right before the subburbes of Isle, as then taken by the Spaniards,
that were driven out again even to the Chaussee: mean time, the artillery
played upon the Prince of Piedemonts camp, wherein it moved great disorder:
and while that was done, the Constable caused as many troops to enter into the
Town, as possible he might: which done, the King of Spaines army resolved
with themselves by a prompt and general resolution, to set upon the
Constables forces, and so constrain him to fight: to the which end, the Prince
of Piedemont, and the Count d'Aiguemont joined together, at such time as the
Duke de Neuers was gone to relieve Monsieur d'Eschenets, that held play with
the enemy, while the rest that went to aid the Town, should enter: the
Constable being upon retrait, not minding to give battle, the Duke joined with
the Prince of Conde, and so made assault near unto a windmill, withal his
light horse, and they two together without any loss, joined themselves with
the maine battle, but their enemies followed them, and approaching with 8.
great Squadrons of horsemen, the Count d'Aiguemont, was the first that with
two thousand horse, charged the Frenchmen on the one side: the Dukes Ernest,
and Henry de Brunswic, seconded by the Count de Horme, with two thousand
Rutters, and ten thousand lanciers, fell on the other side, the Count de
Mansfeld, and other leaders, entered upon the middle part with three thousand
horse, with so great force, that the Frenchmen were ouertrowne. The Duke of
Neuers being one of the first, notwithstanding after many dangers, he got out
of the preace: and although the parties were unequal, yet the Frenchmen failed
not to fight, where the Constable was both hurt and taken, and with him the
Dukes of Montpensier and de Longueuille, the Prince of Mantoue, the Marshal S.
Andre, and many others, as well knights of the Order, as Lords and Gentlemen:
the chief of name that were slain, were John de Burbon, Duke de Anguien, the
Viscount of Turaine, and others, and most part of the Captains of the footmen,
who perceiving the horsemen coming, placed themselves in a square battle, but
they were presently broken, and part slain, the rest taken prisoners. This
bloody fight endured for the space of 4. or 5. hours, the Spaniards pursued
the Frenchmen within a mile of the town of la Fere. And surely al me^ were
much abashed how so many escaped, considering the great fear and disorder they
the^ were in. The Prince of Conde, the Duke de Neuers, the Count de Sancerre,
Messieurs de Bourdillon, Grammont, Cruecueur, Piennes, Descars, and others
escaped, Montmorency the Constables eldest son, took another way. This
overthrow caused great fear in Parris, for in it the Frenchmen lost great
numbers of men, wherein the Histories seem not to agree: some say 5000. others
8000. slain in the field. The King came presently from Compiegne to Parris, to
assure his capital town, and at the same time raised a subsidy of 300000.
Frankes, to satisfy his most urgent affairs: while king Phillip receiving the
Ensigns taken from the Frenchmen, and beholding the prisoners, who in a manner
were led before him, as in a triumph, contented himself with that victory,
without enterprising at that time to enter further into France, whereof
nevertheless many Towns were in great fear. King Henry by his Lieftenants,
provided for his Frontier-townes, and gathered his camp at Laon, causing
14000. Switzers to be sent for. Touching those that were besieged within Saint
Quintins, at the coming of d'Andelot, The Town of S. Quintins taken by
assault.
they were relieved with four hundredth soldiers, and about 50. men of
commandment, with some Gentlemen of name, and certain Canoniers: but king
Phillip being arrived in his camp, the battery began most furious* and the
assieged by no means could be aided, but only with three hundredth men, whereof
a third part were slain in entering. The Towers and fortifications from S.
John's Gate, to the Tower standing upon the water, having been battered with the
Cannon shot, the Spaniards became masters of the Duches, and upon the 20. of
August, the Erenchmen divided and placed in eleven several breaches, sustained
a general assault, and could not be forced: yet the Town was taken, by
entering at a tower which no man guarded, the French soldiers therein were most
slain: the Admiral his brother (that not long after saved himself) Iarnac,
S. Remi, de Humes, and other Captains and Gentlemen of name taken prisoners,
and the son of Monsseur de la Fayette, the Captains Saleuert, Ogier, Vicques,
la Bar, l'Estang, and Gourdes slain. During these storms, The King
threatened to be slain.
the king being in Parris, as he went to mass, a young man named Caboche, borne
in Meaux, who ordinarily, and of long time, had followed the Court, and
because of his fair writing, served the kings Secretaries, whether being out
of his wits, or stirred by some other motion, presentented himself before him,
with a naked sword in hand, and crying out, said: Stay King, God has commanded
me to kill thee, but presently the Switzers of the guard fell upon him,
wherewith he was committed, and by the Court of Parliament condemned to be
hanged for that attempt. After the taking of S. Quintins, the Count de
Aremberg, with 1200. horse, and 3. Regiments of Lansquenets, besieged
Castellet, The taking of Castellet.
where he made a furious battery. The Barron de Solignac, that commanded
therein, peceiuing himself destitute of the aid that had been promised him:
and that the place was not strong enough to defend an assault, not having above
three hundredth men therein, and they not greatly bent to make resistance,
yielded the place: for which cause he was sent prisoner unto Parris, and if by
chance he had not saved himself, by an escape out of prison, he had surely
lost his life: because (as it was said) he had made promise never to yield the
place, before he had sustained an assault. While the King of France assembled
a great army, as well without, as within his Realm, and by his Lieftenants
provided for his towns in Picardie, and that the Parrisians made general
Musters of their companies, where were found between thirty five, and forty
thousand men.

The assembly in Same Jacques street discovered.
Those of the religion multiplied and began to increase in diverse parts of the
Realm, specially within the City of Parris, where having bin discovered in
an assembly made by night in S. Jacques street, many were cast in prison, some
burnt, and the rest escaped by diverse means: in other places also many were
taken and executed, the people verily imputing the causes of the troubles in
France wholly to them. But the king of Spain employing his army, Han taken by
the Spaniards.
upon the 12. of September took Han, the Castle being yielded, and the Town
burnt by the Frenchmen themselves. Besides that, he took all such places, as
might in any sort impeach or trouble, (that Castle and S. Quentin) which he
overthrew and spoiled: further, his troops surprised certain companies of
Scots within Noyon, and took Chauni, wherein he placed a great Garrison, there
to make provision of wines, wherewith to furnish the places which he had taken.

Aid coming out of Almaine, and Switzer-land, into France, the king for a
time caused the troops that came out of Italy, Polleuille driven out of
Bresse.
under the conduct of the Duke de Guise, and Aumalle, to stay in Bresse, and
Lyonnois, thereby to impeach the pretenses of the Barron de Polleuille, who
with twelve thousand foot, and one thousand two hundredth horse: for the Prince
of Piedemont, came to besiege Bourg in Bresse: from whence he was constrained
in all haste to retire, otherwise both he and all his troops, had wholly been
spoiled, who in dislodging, dispearsed and separated themselves, in such sort,
that in few days after, it could hardly be perceived what had become of that
great number of men.

The kings enterprise against Callais
The Duke of Guise being arrived at the Court, lying in S. German in Lay,
because of the Constables imprisonment, was appointed Lieftenant General for
the king in all his countries. Whereupon the secret practices long pretended,
were then pursued and fully executed in this sort. Edward the third of that
name, King of England, had taken Callais, in the year of our Lord 1347. a Port
of the sea, and a place of great consequence for the Frenchmen: since which
time, the said Town had still continued in the Englishmens hands, and by them
much fortified. The Constable long time before the battle of S. Lawrence. by
means of Monsieur de Senarpont, Governor of Bullen, had used such means and
practices touching that Town, which is a part of the ancient Domaine of the
Crown of France, that without his overthrow and imprisonment, it was most
apparent he would have executed his pretense. In his absence it was concluded,
while king Phillips forces by reason of the winter season were dispearsed, to
execute that enterprise so much for the advantage of the Realm of France. And
thereupon the king of France raised two armies, one conducted by the Duke de
Neuers, making show to enter into the Duchy of Luxembourg: the other led by
the Duke of Guise, under pretense therewith to hinder the victualling of S.
Quentins. The Duke de Neuers marching toward Luxenbourg, the Spaniards and
Wallons, ran thither to defend it: but suddenly he sent his forces to
join with the Duke of Guise, that made show of victualling Amiens, Ardres,
and Bullen, and in great haste upon the sudden, turned all his forces
against the Town of Callais, wherein as then there was no Garrison. The
Princes of Conde, and la Roche Suryon, the Duke d'Aumalle, and the Marquis
d'Elboeuf brethren; Strossi Marshall of France, Montmorency, the Constables
eldest son, Monsieurs de Terms, d'Andelot, de Sansac, d'Estree great Master
of the Artillery, de Tauanes, Senarpont, Grandmo^t, Randan, Allegre,
Creuecueur, Piennes, Gourdan, and other Lords, Knights and Captains, being in
the army.

Nieulay bridge, The taking of Callais.
and after that, Risban: which done, they entered the Castle, and then the
Town, all yielded by composition, within the space of eight days, the
Englishmen and Spaniards, not having means in time to aid the Town. The
Englishmen grieved at the loss of such a place, thereupon conceived a mortal
hatred against king Phillip. Presently after the yielding of Callais, they
besieged the Town of Guines, in the count d'Oye, which was taken, but the
Englishmen that were in the Castle, drove the Frenchmen out, and burnt the
Town: who were presently besieged upon the 13. day of January, and having
endured the battery, and sustained an assault, the second being prepared,
they asked and received a composition. Guines was wholly spoiled and defaced,
as being noisome to Calais, as also not being needful to be kept so near
unto it: so that in fine, the whole Count of Oye, was reduced under the kings
obedience: for the which, great joy was made through all the country of
France, in exchange of many a tear not long before shed for their loss,
upon S. Laurence day.

Parliament in Parris.
The same month the king held a Parliament in Parris, wherein they granted him
a subsidy of three Millions of gold, for the maintenance of his wars: that
done, he went to visit Callais, the Government whereof, was given unto
Monsieur de Terms. The Duke de Neuers accompanied by the Governors of Iuoy,
Mesieres, Bouillo^, and Maubert Fontaine, took the castle of Herbemont, hard
by Iuoy, Exployts done by the Duke de Neuers.
also the Fortes of Iamoigne, Chigny, Rossignon, and Villeneufue: but by reason
of the cold, which as that year had not begun till about the month of
February, he was forced to leave the field, and to enter into Garrison: while
the king in diverse places of the Realm, made many secret leuies of soldiers,
commanding his Captains not to march with any of their troops, before they
should receive express commandment from him. In the month of April, A
marriage between the Dauphin and Marie, Queen of Scots.
the marriage between Francis, eldest son to the King Prince Dauphin de
Viennois, and Marie Stuard, daughter to James the fifth, king of Scots, and of
Marie de Lorraine, before widdowe to the Duke de Longueuille, and sister to the
Duke de Guise, was concluded, and after upon the 28. of the same month,
accomplished with great solemnity.

During this marriage, there was a certain motion of peace to be made
between the two kings, at Peronne, by the Duches Dowager of Lorraine, and the
Cardinal, brother to the Duke of Guise, but all in vain: for on the one side,
king Phillip took Nesle, and the Englismen spoiled the coast of Normandy: on
the other side, Taking of Theonuille.
the king of France determined to besiege Theonuille, to the which end, he sent
Monsieur de Bourdillon, to see what might be done, he being accompanied by
Vieille Ville, Governor of Metz, with the old troops of the Garrisons of
Metz, Thoul, Verdun, and Danuilliers, in the beginning of May, encamped
himself before Theonuille: fifteen days after, the Duke de Neuers came
thither, and then Monsieur de Guise, General of the army, followed by the
most valiant Captains and Gentlemen of France.

The battery began the fifth of June, with 30. great Pieces: the Count de
Horme assayed to enter into it, followed by certain troops, but the passages
were in such sort closed up, that with loss he was forced to retire. The
Duke of Guise going to view a breach, seconded by certain valiant Leaders,
caused a false assault to be given, whereby at that time, the Town hardly
escaped from taking: but the assaylants being in very small number, were
forced to retire, with loss of diverse good and valiant soldiers: presently
after, by the only means and advise of Monsieur de Monluc, they took around
Tower, that much aided the besieged, and as they were about to mine a platform
adjoining thereunto, the Marshall Strossi was stricken with a Harquebu-shot,
whereof he died, his place being given to Monsieur de Terms. The 21. of
June, the mines being prepared to work, Taking and spoiling of other places.
the assieged demanded a composition, which was honorably granted unto them,
and two or three days after, they issued forth, to the number of one thousand
five hundredth soldiers, but most part sick, which were well and courteously
used, not one either troubled, or spoiled at their issuing.

The Town of Luxenbourg wherein were the Countes of Mansfeld and Horn, was
viewed: but not long before, Arlon was assailed, forced, spoiled, and burnt,
and Chigni, Villemont, and Rossignill, taken again from the Wallons: wherein
they set fire only in Chigni, which they fortified. Vieille-ville was left
within Theonuille, with ten Ensigns of footmen, and some companies of
Launciers.

Enterprises in Flanders, by the Marshall de Terms, who in fine, was
overthrown by the Count de Aiguemo^t
Because the Englishmen made diverse wars, as well by Sea, as by land, into the
country of France, the king caused two small armies to be made and conducted
by the Duke d'Aumalle, at la Fere, the other, under the Marshal de Terms at
Callais. Terms knowing that the towns lying on the Seacoast, and subject to
the Spaniards, were but meanly manned, because they feared not the Frenchmen
on that side, he made an enterprise upon Dunkerke, a Town lying upon the
Sea, between Newport, and Graueling, in the which enterprise, he besieged
Berges, that was presently taken and sacked: which done, he went before
Dunkerke, which held out but four days, and in the end was taken and pilled:
where they found so rich a booty, that the very boys of the army were
thereby made rich: but as Messieurs de Villebon, and de Senarpont, staying for
Marshal de Terms, that as then was sick, lay encamped hard by Graueling, the
Earl of Aiguemont, Lieftenant General for the king of Spain in the low
Countries, with all speed assembled the Garrisons and other forces, to the
number of sixteen thousand footmen, a thousand or twelve hundredth Rutters,
and two thousand lanciers, determining to impeach the passage of the French
army, from entering any further into Flaunders, and to make them leave the
siege of Graueling: and the Marshall was scarce healed and entered into the
army, but the Count de Aiguemont was upon him, not once making show to fight.

The Marshall perceiving him too strong, would not likewise hazard himself,
but rather began to retire toward Callais: which the Earl doubting,
determined to stop his passage, and so constrain him to fight, or to make him
yield by famine, before the town of Graueling: which the Marshal perceiving,
assayed to pass the river (that runs from S. Omers) called l'A. And he had
no sooner begun, but the Flemmings only staying thereupon, got before him,
which constrained the French Vangard to range themselves in order, thereby to
sustain the rest of the army, where it made a brave resistance, driving
certain squadrons of horses out of rank, but the Count having made a furious
charge, procured the overthrow and spoil of the Marshall, who being sore
hurt, was taken, with Messieurs de Villebon, Senarpont, Moruilliers, and
Chaune, and many Captains and soldiers slain in the field. The Marshals army
being composed of certain companies of launciers, three cornets of
light-horses, Scottish-men, 14. Ensigns of French footmen, and 18. Companies
of Lansquenets: all being either slain or taken. The number that escaped,
were not many: that great wound, renewed the former of S. Lawrence day, and
brake the enterprise upon the Duche of Luxenbourg, where the Duke of Guise
pretended to be doing, who in the month of July, took his course to
Thierashe, and so lodged at Pierrepont: which he strengthened with 7. Cornets
of Rutters, and a new Regiment of Lansquenets. An army by sea of English men
and Flemings, overthrown in Brittaigne.
At the same time, the army at sea composed of Englishmen and Flemmings, to
the number of 6000. men, or thereabouts, having sailed along the coast of
Britaigne, in the end took land at Conquet, which they spoiled: and entering
further into the country, were overthrown by Monsieur de Kersimon, whereof
some he slew, other he took prisoners, and caused the rest to save themselves
by fight within their ships, where they presently hoysed sails and put to
sea.

Both the kings armies hard by Amiens.
Both the kings having prepared their armies, no less puissant then at other
times, encamped themselves, and stayed not far from Amiens, along by the
River of Sum: where they had great numbers of strangers, so that their own
subjects, in comparison of them, were very few. There they made certain
courses and skirmishes, but no battle of any consequence. and as it seemed,
those two great Princes, were as then come thither to make an agreement: the
treaty whereof was moved, and to proceed therein, they chose the Abbey of
Cercamp, upon the frontiers of Artois and Picardie: wherefore the King of
France appeased the Constable, the Marshall S. Andre, the Cardinal of
Lorraine, Moruilliers, Bishop of Orleans, one of the kings privy Council, and
Secretary Aubespine. The king of Spain sent thither the Duke d'Alue, the
Prince of Aurange, Deputies for peace.
Rigome de Silues, Granuelle Bishop of Arras, and Vigle de Zuichem, President
of the Council of Estate in the low Countries. They assembled in the month
of October, having sor vmpier, of the differences that might fall out between
them, the Duches Dowager, and the Duke of Lorraine her son. Mean time, the
Constable having agreed for his ransom, came to do his duty unto the King,
who gave him all the entertainment that possible he might, and made him lie
with him, as some certainly report. During this meeting, both the armies were
dismissed, and the strangers sent into their countries. While this treaty of
peace continued, Charles the Emperor, and his sister Ellenor, Death of the
Emperor Charles the fifth, and Ellenor his sister, of Mary Queen of England,
and of Cardinal Poole.
wife unto King Francis, died in Spain: the peace was grounded upon the
marriage of Charles Prince of Spain, with Elizabeth, eldest daughter of K.
Henry, and of Philebert Emanuel, Prince of Piedemont, with Margaret, daughter
to king Francis deceased. That which prolonged the treaty, was, that the Q. of
England demanded the restitution of Callais: but about the end of November she
died. After whom likewise died Cardinal Poole, her great Councellor, her
death, that changed the state of England: wherein after that, neither the
Spaniards, nor the Pope, had more to do, caused the assembly to be referred
unto the peace ensuing. Phillip having with great pomp celebrated the funerals
of his father, within the Town of Brussels, The Duke of Lorraine married with
the younger daughter of the French King.
stayed in Flaunders, to hear what should be done by his Deputies, before he
passed into Spain. The K. of France, to join the Duke of Lorraine in alliance
with him, gave him Claude his second daughter in marriage, reserving the elder
for the conclusion of peace. The espousals, were holden in Parris, upon the 5.
of February, and about the 15. of the same month, the Deputies changing place,
and being furnished with large and ample instructions, met at the castle of
Cambresse: king Phillip lying at Monts in Hanaut where the Cardinal of
Lorraine went to visit him, and after that, the Duches Dowager.

Peace agreed upon, between two kings.
At this second meeting, both of them seemed very unwilling, specially the
Spaniards, moved thereunto by news out of Piedemont, where the Frenchmen had
lately received an overthrow. But in the end, after many arguments and
conclusions, they drew unto an agreement. In the Tretie at Cercamp, a marriage
had been spoken of, between Charles Prince of Spain, and Elizabeth of France.

Now, the Deputies perceiving king Phillip to be a Widdower, and esteeming the
alliance to be stronger if he espoused the Princess, which before should
have been given unto his son, they propounded that Article, which to the good
contentment of both the Kings, was concluded and agreed upon, together with the
marriage of the Prince of Piedemont, to the Lady Margaret. The King of France
yielded to the King of Spain, all that he had taken from him, both on this
side, and beyond the Mountains: also to the Prince of Piedemont la Bresse,
Sauoy and Piedemont, except four Towns: to the Geneuois, the Isle of Corse:
and Siene to the Duke of Florence: retaining nothing but Callais, without
gaining a foot of any other land, in all that long and dangerous war, which
had desolated so many Provinces, sacked, burnt, and overthrown so many Towns,
Bourges, Villages, and Castles, been the death of so great a number of Princes,
Lords, Gentlemen, Captains, Soldiers, Citizens, and Paisants: caused so many
rauishings and violatings of women and maids: and in a word, which had in a
manner, tormented all Europe: so that in effect, the king yielded above two
hundredth, (others write almost as many more) places, for the conquest whereof,
a sea of blood of his natural subjects had been spent and shed: the
treasures of the Realm consumed: his lands engaged, and he indebted on all
sides: and which is worse, the fire being quenched upon the borders, not
long after, began within the middle of all his Realm, and in every place
thereof, as well is seen during the reigns of his three successors. But these
things are the unsearchable and deep judgments of God: which are not lawful
for us to enter into, but only to worship and adore him that works all
things with great wisdom, with mercy toward his children, and with most
just and fearful vengeance against his enemies.

Counsel given the king against the peace and quietness of his Realm.
The king having agreed with his foreign enemies, with whom all men hoped a
most sure and perpetual alliance to be made, was again put in mind and
counseled to redouble the hard and cruel punishments, by him devised against
those of the religion, who in the middle of those troubles, had much increased
thoughout all the Realm. And so in steed of spiritual means to be used in
things concerning the soul, diverse evil Counselors to this Prince, caused him
to conceive an extreme hatred to those of the religion, filling his ears with
many unworthy and terrible reports against them. Monsieur d'Andelot first felt
it, being for religion committed prisoner in Melun: whereupon many
discontentments and suspicions grew among the most noble houses, whereof
ensued diverse and many mischiefs: which after the death of king Henry began to
increase, who having understood, that in the Parliament of Parris, many and
diverse judgments were made, touching the condemnation of such as were accused
for religion, was counseled to sit in person at a Mercurialist judgment,
Mercuriales and imprisonment of certain Counselors in Parris.
within the Augustines (because as then the Palace was preparing and making
ready for the marriages) that there he might hear and understand, the advice
of all his Presidents and Councillors.

Others of the same Council, esteemed that the presence of the king, would but
abash such as seemed to oppose therein, and that so those of the religion
remaining without support, and condemned, they would in fine, procure the
execution of their desires. But it fell out clean contrary: for that some
Councillors said, and flatly affirmed, that it would be more convenient, to
deal with less rigor against those of the religion, until such time, as by
a free and general counsel, they had been showed their error.

He that spoke boldest, and plainest, was Anne de Bourg, a man of great
learning and piety. The king that never had heard any speech of such
importance, commanded the Constable to lead du Bourg, and other Councillors
prisoners, to answer their objections: swearing in great chollour, that he
would see the end. Whereupon, Monsieur Montgommery, Captain of the guard,
led du Bourg into the Bastille, the rest into other places. Mean time, those
of the religion were hardly pursued in every place, who during those troubles,
in the month of May, caused a Sinode to be holden, by all their Pastors, A
Sinode of the religion in Parris.
Deacons, and ancients within the Town of Parris, wherein the Articles of the
Doctrine and Discipline of the reformed Churches throughout all the Realm,
were written and set down.

Mean time, the Courtiers sought and devised, all the means of joys and
pleasures they could invent, thereby to solemnise the royal marriages, both of
the Kings daughter, and of his sister. I speak not of the murder committed
upon the person of a renowned Player of Comodies, who at that time had made
most magnificall preparations, therewith to rejoice the Court, that was slain
in the house of Reims by his own servants, so that all his preparations were
laid aside: Preparation for the marriages.
neither yet of the Queens Dream, nor of the apprehensions and discourses of
diverse Politicians, who were of opinion, that this great Wheel of earthly
prosperities, would shortly turn about: only I will show you, that the sighs
of prisoners for religion, the horrible torments used to some of them, and the
earnest prayers of infinite numbers of families, threatened, and that well
perceived, that the peace had been agreed upon, between the Frenchmen and
the Spaniards, thereby to make a war with them, that never should have an
end: were the winds that hoysed up the wonderful and strange alterations, which
the wise and provident counsel of God, in short time after made to appear.

Marriage of the King of France his daughter with king Phillip.
Elizabeth of France, having been solemnly led and conducted by the King her
father,andgt; unto the Cathedral church of Parris, and there most
magnifically, and in great triumph, espoused by the Duke d'Alue, Deputy for
the king of Spain his Master. The espousals done by the Cardinal de Bourbon,
and after fires of joy made for the peace, the reioycings of the people, glad
of that rest and quietness, the Banquets, Proclaimations, and Ceremonies
accustomed, with all majesty performed, assisted by so many Noble Princes,
Lords, Gentlemen, Cardinals, Officers, and Domestical servants, both of the
King and Queens household: there likewise being present, the Dukes of Sauoy,
and Alue, the Prince of Aurange, the Count d'Aiguemont, and other Lords of the
low Countries, in great numbers: and after the sumptuous banquets, plays,
maskes, and daunces, followed the last act which changed all those joyful and
pleasant Comodies, into bloody and mornfull Tragedies, wherein the king played
the lamentable Prologue: for that having published a running at Tilt, to be
performed within S. Anthonies street, Atourney in S. A^thoniesstreete.
where (against the advice of those that besought him to leave that exercise,
to such as should show him pleasure therein) he would in person be a
principal actor, seconded by the Dukes of Guise and Ferrare.

But the second day of his running, having run very often, the Queen
desired him to leave off, saying, that the Duke of Sauoy might supply his
place. He sent her word by the Marshall de Montmorency, that he would run
but once more, and that for the love of her. Whereupon having sent a Lance to
the Count de Montgommory, commanding him to run against him, and the Count
earnestly excusing himself, either for the respect he bare unto his Prince,
or fearing to fail, as the first day he had many times done, not once
touching any against whom he ran. The King sent him express commandment
not to refuse him. With that the Earl ran, and breaking his Lance upon the
Kings Cuirasse, The king sore hurt with a splinter of a lance
a splinter thereof entered into the Kings Vizarde, not being well closed,
and by chance ran into his eye, so far in, that his head festered.
Wherewith the King presently began to fall by reason of the blow, but the
Princes and Lords ran to him and led him into his Palace of Touernelles,
where in great dolor and pain he died, upon the tenth day of July, He died in
the flower of his age.
in the thirteenth year of his reign, and the forty and two year of his
age: the day before his death, he desired that the marriage of the Duke of
Sauoy and Lady Margaret his sister, should be celebrated in his Chamber: and
that whatsoever had been accorded unto (by the treaty of peace) touching the
Duke, should wholly be performed. His heart was buried in the Temple of
Celestins, in the Chapel of the Dukes of Orleans, his royal Obsequies were
celebrated upon the thirteen day of August, and his body buried at Saint
Dennis, in the Common Tomb for the Kings of France. Of person he was a
goodly Prince, courteous, mild, The description of king Henry the second.
loving his servant and men of valor. Much addicted to his pleasures, and to
believe such as knew how to please his humor, who many times caused him to
use much rigor, which he could not so soon discover: the ambition and
avarice of certain men that provoked him forward, were the principal causes
of the continuance of wars, which heretofore we have noted: specially after
the breach of truce, set laws, Justice, Offices and benefices to sale, diued
into, and emptied the purses of French men, by infinite exactions, whereof
ensued most great mischiefs. The estate of France, under this Prince.
Two great sins reigned in France during the time of this Prince: that is,
Atheism, and Magicque. Whereunto may be added, the corruption of learning: For
that the knowledge thereof, induced by King Francis the first, changed into
diverse wicked and curious minds, cause of all mischief, specially in the
form and phrase of French Poets, who in the reign of Henry, by their impure
rimes, filled with all manner of blasphemies, converted an infinite number of
souls. These sins and others, in great abundance still increased, drawing
upon both little and great within the Realm of France, the strange punishments
which in the reigns of the successors to this Henry, full well appeared.

Five sons, and five daughters.
By Catherin de Medicis his wife, married in Anno. 1533, he had five sons and
five daughters. The eldest, Francis the second, borne the 20. of January, 1543.
The second Lois, the Duke of Orleans, that died at the end of certain months.
The third, Charles Maxemilian, borne the 20. of June, 1550. King after the
death of his brother. The 4. Edward Alexandre, after King, and called Henry the
third, born the 19. of September, 1551. The fifth, Hercules: after called
Francis, Duke of Alencon, Aniou, and Berri, and Count du Maine, borne the 18.
of March, 1554. The eldest daughter was Elizabeth, promised to Edward the sixth,
King of England, but married to Phillip king of Spain, borne the 11. of
April, 1545. The second, Claude, married to Charles Duke of Lorraine, bonre the
12. of November, 1547. The third, Margaret, married to Henry de Bourbon, King
of Navarre, borne the 14. of May, 1552. The fourth and fifth, named Jane, and
Victoire, borne at one burden, upon the 24. of June, 1556, and died presently
after. In this History you may behold, the success and estate of the
successors to this Henry, being his sons, with the first whereof I mean to
begin.

Here ends the troubles, that happened in the reign of Henry the second.
Francis the second.
M.D.LIX.
The intent of King Henry.
KING Henry (by the counsel given him touching the rupture of the truce, and by
that which after ensued) having somewhat discovered, who and which they were,
that gave him evil advise concerning his estate, was minded and fully
resolved, after the solemnization of the marriages, to look more particularly
into such men, thereby to retain some, and send the rest unto the places from
whence they came. But the wrath of God lay upon the Realm, having stricken the
head, pursued the members, as hereafter it appears. Francis the second, young
in advise, The state of France under Francis the second. The Nobility. The
Courtiers.
much more in years, was wholly left to the government of his mother, and the
uncles of his wife, that ruled ye land as you shall hear. Part of the Nobility
wearied with the troubles of so long wars, desired naught but peace, leaving
all care of public charges, and casting their eyes upon the surest side,
thereon to lay hold. The Courtiers went which way the wind would blow: as
touching the officers of Justice, most of them were friends or subjects unto
diverse Lords: some good and upright men yet resting in the Court of Parliament,
durst not almost proceed in any thing, as being abashed at the sudden blow,
given unto the chief and principal Court of Parliament, the last
Mercurialist. The Ecclesiastical persons, The Ecclesiastical persons.
held and accounted them for principal Pillars of the Church, that were the
greatest burners. As touching the third estate, the great charges and troubles
of wars forepast, had wholly bereaved them of al lively feeling, and moving.

Two parties.
In the Court were two parts, the one, those that held with the Constable: the
other the Guisians. The Princes of the blood, had almost no care of the
Commonwealth, nor yet of their own affairs. The Queene-mother an Italian,
Florentine, of the family of Medicis, and one that in 22. years, wherein she
had continued in France, had some good time to know the humors both of the
one, and the other, and behaved her self in such sort, that she only ruled.

Those of Guise.
Which to attain, and desiring wholly to drive away the Constable, whom she
did most suspect, she held on the other side, and placed servants about the
King of Navarre, by them to know and understand his mind. As Soon as king
Henry was deceased, the Duke of Guise and the Cardinal of Lorraine, led the
King and his brethren, with the Queens unto the Louure, leaving the Prince of
the Blood, the Constable, the Marshall, the Admiral, with diverse other knights
of the Order, and Lords, that held with the Constable, to attend upon the dead
body. The beginning of the reign of this young Prince, promised much, when
suddenly they beheld Francis Oliuier, a man of great reputation, Francis
Oliuier, restored to be Chancellor.
restored again unto his place of Chauncellor, and that had been put out of
the place, by means of the Duches of Valentinois, that wholly ruled the
deceased king: they were in further hope, when they perceived this Duches to be
wholly out of credit: for that as soon as he was dead, they caused her to yield
up the keys of the kings closet, with all his precious Jewels, that then were
given unto the Queen Regent.

But this was only a particular quarrel between women, for in truth, the
Duches during king Henry's life, had been in all men's sight as Queen of France.
The Queen Mother that hated her extremely, was very glad to see her wholly
dispoyled and driven out of the Court, contenting her self therewith, not to
leese the favor of those of Guise, who although they only had their
advancement by the Duches means, perceiving her to be as a rotten plancke,
left her, to pleasure themselves another way. They sent Bertrand (from whom the
seals were taken) unto Rome, and took from d'Auancon the ruling of the
Treasures: Bertrand keeper of the Seals, discharged of his office.
nevertheless, he continued still in the Court, as being too well acquainted
with their affairs, and as yet it was not necessary to compel him to accept
of any new party. The Marshall of S. Andre, advanced by the favors of King
Henry, to whom he was a secret servant, and wholly fatned by the confiscations
of the goods of those of the religion, and by borrowings, never to be repayed,
having made offer of all that he had, to the house of Guise, was received into
their band.

The Constable sent home
The Constable perceiving, that the king in open Parliament, had declared, that
his meaning was, that from thence forth al men should have recourse touching
matters of estate, the crown, and of his house, unto his two Uncles, the Duke
of Guise, and the Cardinal of Lorraine: and that by consequent, his mortal
enemy entered into his place, and doing that, which wholly apperteined to his
offices, of Constable, and Great-Maister of France: yea, and in the presence of
the Spaniards, and other strangers, who before had made so much account of
him: about eight days after the kings death, went to present himself unto the
king, delivering up the seals, to him committed by King Henry: and having
been certified from the king, that the charge of the treasures, and other
affairs concerning the estate, were as then committed to the Cardinal: and to
the Duke of Guise, the commandment of all things that belonged unto the
wars, and that for his part, the king permitted him leave to depart, and go
unto his house: saying, he still retained him of his Council, and that
whenever he would come unto the Court, he should be welcome: he thanked
the king for suffering him so to retire, beseeching him, that as touching his
coming unto the Council, his Majesty would excuse him, for two causes: the
one, because he could not serve under such men, over whom he had always
commanded: the other, for that being holden and accounted for an old and
simple man, his counsel would not be necessary: otherwise, he offered both
life and goods to serve the King. Which done, he went to see the Queen mother,
that handled him very rudely: reproching him, that he in presence of the king,
with smiling countenance should say, that he had never a child that in any
thing resembled him, but only his bastard-daughter, that married with the
Marshall de Montmorency. Yet for the love of her deceased king and husband, she
said she was content to remit her own particular quarrel: for which, if it
pleased her, she could have caused him to loose his head: yet she exhorted him,
not altogether to leave the Court, but to come thither sometimes. He denied the
accusation which she alleged touching her children, affirming it to be false:
desiring her to have in remembrance the many services by him done to her, and
to the Realm, and not to regard the evil report of such as were his enemies,
that should not do him all the mischief which they pretended. And so having
taken his leave, and brought his master unto his Tomb, he withdrew himself
unto his house.

The Princes of the blood scattered.
Touching the Princes of the blood, the Prince of Conde was sent into Flanders,
there to confirm the peace: to whom was delivered a thousand Crowns to bear
his charges. The Prince of la Roche Suryon, was sent thither likewise to bear
the order of France unto the king of Spain, and at his return, appointed with
the Cardinal of Burbon, to conduct the Princess Elizabeth into Spain. The
Parlime^ts, were appointed at the good pleasure of those of Guise. The Cardinal
de Turno^, an old enemy to the Constable, and to al those of the religion, was
repealed from Rome, reestablished of ye privy council: The Kings Officers of
his house changed.
part of the old officers of the kings house were discharged: part sent home
unto their houses, with half their pensions, to give place to others. And to
conclude, there stayed not one in the Court that favored the Constable. The
Provinces of the Realm, and the frontier Towns were filled with Guisians: and
all Governors and men of war commanded to obey the Duke of Guise, as the
king himself. All the Parliaments were advertised, Those of Guise have charge
of all.
that the Cardinal had the whole ordering and disposing of the treasures, and
of the estate. The Queen Mother, advanced above all, obtained the moneys
proceeding of the confirmation of Offices, and the privileges of Towns and
corporations: whereof she gave a part to whom it pleased her: although such
sums ought not of right to be exacted, unless the Crown fall into an other
branch.

First Edicts.
The first Edicts, were made against such as bare Arms: namely, Pistols, and
Bastinadoes: then against long Cloakes, and great Hose. It was a common saying
in every man's mouth, that the Cardinal was a fearful man, if there were ever
any in all the world: having understood by a certain Magician in Rome, that by
envy, and then when he should be most in credit, his enemies would cause him
to be slain with a Bastianado: for that cause he had procured that Edict,
being always in great distrust, even at the time when all men were in most
subjection to him. Among so many affairs, the 14. of July, Letters Pattents
from the king, confirmed the Commission unto the Judges, appointed to proceed
in judgment against Anne du Bourg, Process against Anne de Bourg, and other
prisoners.
and four other Councillors that were committed to prison. Du Bourg, steadfast
in religion, was hotly pursued. Bertrand, Cardinal and Archbishop of Siens,
being one of the principal wheels of this criminal Chariot: and the
Cardinal of Lorraine the leader thereof. Those of the religion, perceiving
themselves to be at the point of a more violent persecution, by express
Letters unto the Queen, besought her, by her authority, to command the
leaving off to persecute them, in such great rigor. She promised the Prince of
Conde, Madame de Roy his mother in law, and to the Admiral, to cause the
persecutions for to cease, so they would leave their assembling together, The
Queen Mother promises to do for those of the religion.
and that every man would live according to his own conscience, secretly, and
not to the hurt of others. She had been most earnestly moved by the letters
of one named Villemadon, that knew great part of his secrets, putting her in
mind of her great affection unto pity, at such time as she was barren,
exhorting her, not to withdraw the Princes of the blood from the mannaging of
the affairs of the estate, thereby to advance and make Kings the house of
Guise. Those letters were written the 26. day of August, and wrought with so
great effect, that from thenceforward for a certain time, the Queen seemed to
hearken unto the comfort and ease of those of the religion: mean time, those
of Guise, to make their government seem agreeable to all the people, and to
leese nothing, in the kings name published letters of the reuocation of all
alienations made, Alienations made by king Henry, revoked.
as well for life, as years, being for recompenses of any services past,
except those sales, whereof the moneys had been employed for the kings great
and urgent affairs, the Dowries of the kings daughters, and that of the late
Queen Ellenor, which as then the Princess of Portingall enjoyed: the rest to
be reunited unto the Kings domaines, and ordinary receipts. This reuocation was
a Bow to certain Princes, great Lords, and notable personages: who by such
policy were defeated of their services, and all rewards made unto them, by
the late deceased King. On the other side, such as were in favor with the
house of Guise, obtained other letters of exemption, and by that means, some
were put out, and others kept possession, or else obtained some other new place.

The king of Navarre solicited to come to the Court, rides thither.
The Constable perceiving the King would die, had sent unto the King of Navarre,
to counsel him with all speed to repair unto the Court, and to ceise upon
the government of the young King, before any other. This Prince not greatly
desirous to deal with such affairs, and as then somewhat distrusting the
Constable, stirred not, giving those of Guise the means and leisure to thrust
themselves into his place, but certain Princes and Lords, moving him again,
he began to hearken unto it, communicating the same to four of his
principal Councillors, being Iarnac, the Bishop of Mande, President of his
Council, Descars his Chamberlin, and Bouchart his Chancellor, who were of
advise, that without longer delay, he should ride unto the Court: whereof those
of Guise being advertised, promised hills and mountains to Mande, and
Descars, if they could find the means to stay him: they moved therewith,
staying till their master was on horseback, and onward of his journey, began
to diswade him, showing him of certain imminent dangers that were not to be
shunned, by seeking to stand too much upon his degree, and that he ought to
proceed therein by indifferent means, without seeking to hazard himself, and
to win the good report and favor of all men: upon this counsel being come
to Poictiers, where diverse Princes and Noblemen went to meet him, he showed
many resolutions, and gave good hope and comfort unto the Ministers of the
Churches, specially those in Parris, Orleans, and Tours, desiring him, that
they might as yet be aided and assisted, touching that which concerned the
open profession of religion. What entertainment he had.
The first disliking showed unto him, when he approached near the Court,
being at S. Germain in Lay, was, that his furriers found no place for him
within the Castle: and that the Duke of Guise said unto his Marshall, that it
should cost him his life, and ten thousand more with him, before any man
should take the place and lodging which the king had given him, to be near
unto his person. The second, that not any of the Court, went to meet and
receive him, as the manner is, specially to the Princes of the blood. The
third, that being gone to do his duty to the Queene-mother, and after, to the
king: those of Guise, in stead of going to embrace and bid him welcome, stayed
til he went unto them: and was constrained to accept the lodging of the
Marshall of S. Andre, who after the courtly manner, had offered it unto him,
not thinking to be so soon taken at his word. The fourth, that the next day,
in stead of being warned to sit in counsel, no man was sent unto him, either
to salute him, or once to see what he did. The fifth, that at the end of three
or four days, the king called him aside, showing him, that his Uncles the
Duke of Guise, and the Cardinal of Lorraine, had the whole charge of all
affairs committed unto them: and that whosoever would seek to please him,
must obey them in all things whatsoever. But touching his pensions and estates,
he confirmed them unto him, assuring him, that whenever he would come unto
the Court, he should be heartily welcome. Diverse of the king of Nauarres
train, perceiving that he had quietly swallowed all those pills, withdrewe
themselves, or else claue to the surest side: as Iarnac, that joined with those
of Guise. Within few days after, this Prince went unto Saint Dennis, there to
accomplish certain ceremonies accustomed after the death of king Henry: which
done, he went to Parris, accompanied with his brother the Prince of Conde, and
some others, but not many: and being there, he sounded the advice and minds
of some, whom he esteemed to be well affected unto the Realm, but he could not
perceive any thing by them.

Sacrying of the King as Reims.
Those of Guise following on their course, upon the 18. of September, caused the
king to be sacred at Reims: and presently after, the Queene-mother sent the
Admiral, and the Cardinal of Chastillon, to the Constable, to entreat him to
resign his place of Great-maister, unto the Duke of Guise: to whom the year
before, king Henry had flatly denied it, in exchange whereof, she promised him
one of the offices of Marshals of France, for his eldest son. The Constable
resigneth his estate of great master, and the Admiral his government, which
was given to Brissae
The Constable resigned that office wholly into the kings hands, and got the
other with all speed to be given unto his son: and the Duke of Guise was
presently invested therewith. The Admiral being Governor of Picardie,
perceiving that they sought to put him out, and that for the same cause, they
had assayed to set division between him and the Prince of Conde, and that they
began to cut off some part of the money that should be employed about the
charges of the necessary fortifications of the Frontier-townes, thereby to
bring him in disgrace, and so to thrust him out with shame: prevented them, and
showed the king, that the same government for many reasons, belonged to the
Prince of Gonde, whose ancestors had long time held it. He had no sooner spoken
the word, but they presently took him thereat, as touching the resignation,
but not concerning the provision: for that in stead of giving it to the Prince,
those of Guise got the^ a new participant, bestowing it upon the Marshall de
Brissac. While in this sort, Writings against the rule of strangers.
they used both the Princes, and great Lords, the meaner sort could not be
content, for that by diverse printed pamphlets, whereof some were directed to
the Queen Mother, some in taunting verse, and some in prose, both by the
behauiors past and present, they fully discovered the intent of those of Guise,
A Target against those devises.
whom they printed forth in all their colors: they by those dealings,
perceiving some secret matter working, and that their authority was but weakly
built, began to think better upon it: which was the cause that at one time,
they made 18. knights of the order: whereof sprang the common saying, that the
order of France is a collor for every beast. And because in those writings it
was noted, that to prevent such disorders, it would be necessary to assemble
and call a Parliament of all the estates of the land: they persuaded the king,
to hold him whatsoever he were, for a mortal enemy to his authority, and
guilty of treason, that should once speak, or move the question to bridle
it, or to appoint a Protector over him: that they were but practices and
devises, of such as lived discontent, solicited thereunto by Hereticques, that
only sought to overthrow and spoil the religion of his fathers.

Means to interrupt the Parliament.
The Queene-mother likewise, no less then they, doubted the assembly of this
Parliament, and at that time, things were so governed, that the King of Spain
wrote letters to the King his brother in law, which were openly read in the
Councel-chamber, the king of Navarre being present: wherein (he said) he
understood, that certain mutunous, and rebellious persons, enforced themselves
to move and stir up troubles, thereby to change the government of the
Realm, as if the king as then reigning, were not sufficient and capable
thereof, and to give the charge to whom it pleases him, without the consent
and will of others, or of any his subjects, that for his part, he would
imploye his whole forces, to maintain the authority of the King, and of his
officers whatsoever: yea, and that it should cost both his, and forty thousand
men's lives, already prepared, if any man were so bold to attempt the
contrary: for that he bare him such affection, The King of Spaines declaration.
(as he said) that from thencefoorth, he declared himself both Tutor, and
Protector of him and of his Realm, as also of his affairs, which he no less
regarded then his own. Not long after, the king of Navarre returned unto Bearg.

Petitions to the Queen, and what ensued.
The pursuites against the Councellor du Bourg, proceeding, moved those of the
religion in Parris, to present a petition to the Queen Mother, exhorting her
unto her duty, withal, setting down and threatening the vengeance of God, and
the danger that might ensue, by means of those so hard and rigorous dealings:
which in the end, might turn unto great troubles. At the first, she answered
them with an angry countenance, but in the end, she became somewhat milder,
making show to desire to see one of the Ministers of Parris, to confer with
him. Madame de Roy provided one, and this Minister went as far as Reims,
where he stayed a certain time, but never could speak with her, but she
still found some excuse, when any man told her of him. Besides du Bourg, about
the end of this year, diverse were imprisoned within Parris for the religion,
and their houses pilled and robbed, as if it had been in a Town taken by
assault: witnesses being seduced, Slanders and false witness against those
of the religion.
to protest and verify, that in a certain assembly made upon the Thursday
before Easter, in the place of Manbert, at a Councillors house, great numbers
of Lutherians, men, women, and maids, after the sermon and solemnisation of
their Sabbath, had eaten a Pig in stead of the Pascal-lambe, and that the
candles being put out, every man took his woman, and had his pleasure with her.

The Cardinal by these informations, moved all the Court: but the
Queene-mother for that cause, having spoken against certain of her
Gentlewomen, that were of the religion, they found the means that in her
presence, the two principal witnesses were examined, being two young boys,
who said and affirmed, both then and many times before, they had had their
pleasures of that Councillors daughters: but in fine, they began to stagger,
and covertly to deny in nevertheless, the accusation and process went forward,
and because that at the taking of the prisoners, there had been some
resistance in the subburbes of S. German, they sent from house to house, to
search for all their weapons, and took them away, not leaving them so much as
a knise, which were carried into the house of Guise.

The Counselor so shamefully slandered, went with his wife and daughters, and
yielded himself prisoner, Innocence found, but in no sort maintained, as it
appears.
where the daughters were sound to be Virgins: but without doing justice upon
the false witnesses, and such as had procured them, by virtue of a certain
edict that set prisoners at liberty, which were accused for religion, and
notwithstanding their complaints and declarations, they were in a manner
forcibly thrust out of the place: and while they were holden prisoners, diverse
were burnt wiihin Parris, and other Towns, only for the religion, which among
all those troubles did much increase.

A declaration against the authority usurped by strangers.
On the other side, hatred increased both from great and small, against the
house of Guise. About the end of October, a Proclamation was made touching the
assembly of a Parliament: wherein was proved, that it appertained unto the
Parliament, to provide for the government of their kings that were in
minority: that the king spoke nothing, but by the mouths of the Uncles of his
wife: that the Cardinal of Lorraine, and the Duke of Guise, were incapable of
the Government, the one being a Priest, and a creature of the Pope, the other
and all his family, even in the life of the late deceased king, having been
so bold, to say that the Realm belonged to the house of Lorraine, as issued
from the race of Charlemaigne, upon the which Hugh Capet had usurped: that they
had manisestly striuen for certain members thereof: as the Count of Pronince,
and the Duchy of Aniou: they set down the lamentable effects of their
ambition, in the breach of peace: and in the last voyage into Italy, cause of
the overthrow of the battle of S. Lawrence, and danger of all the Realm:
which to avoid, they were constrained to yield up all the conquests of
Francis the first, and Henry the second: they forgot not likewise their
exactions, their dealing with the treasures, and the great debts of the king.

Means to uphold that authority.
They perceiving that the king which began to grow up, gave no great hope,
either of long life, or issue, began likewise with more care to provide for
their affairs. They sought to obtain and procure unto themselves, diverse
servants and friends in the Parliamant, enticed the Courtiers, and all the
captains and men of war to favor them, showing a great zeal to the Romish
religion, thereby to win the hearts both of the spirituality, and the
Cannons. And in the month of November, to please them, a rigorous edict was
published against the assemblies of those of the religion, who being found with
the manner, were presently condemned to die, their houses rased, and great
recompense promised unto such as should disclose their assemblies. These edicts
published, the persecution followed, but the spies being abashed of
themselves, there were other edicts published against all those that favored
any of the religion, and that once seemed to abash either the Judges, or the
witnesses in any such process.

The President Minard and Julian Form stain.
The eighteenth of December, Anthony de Minard, President in the Parliament of
Parris, was slain with a Pistole, as in the evening he returned from the
place, to go to his house, but it could never be known from whence it came,
no more then of the death of Julian Ferme, Agent for the house of Guise, slain
hard by Chambourg where the king lay, and sound with certain notes and
memorials, cocerning the lives of certain notable personages, some were
imprisoned, and in great danger for the death of Minard: and among the rest,
one Stuard a Scot, who (although he was of the lineage of the Queen as then
reigning) was cruelly tortured: yet could they not draw any thing from him,
that once might prejudice himself, or any other.

About this time, the Elector Palatin, having sent his Ambassador unto the
king, to crave that the Counselor du Bourg might be given to him, to serve
him in the town of Heidelberg: the Cardinal being greatly moved at the death
of Minard, wrote unto the Court of Parliament, that they should presently
proceed with their process against du Bourg: but before it proceeded so far,
express Proclamations were once again made and published against bearing of
arms.

Anne de Bourg executed for religion.
The 20. of December, Anne de Bourg having constantly perseuered in the
consession of the faith, concerning those points, which at this day are in
controversy and debate touching religion, was degraded: and the next day, the
Judges caused to the number of six or seven hundredth men, as well horse as
footmen, and all armed, to set up Gibbets, and to carry wood into all the
places of Parris there unto appointed. And in this sort, upon the 23. of the
same month, du Bourg was led to S. John in Grieve, and there hanged: which
done, his body was burnt and consumed to ashes. Presently after, other were
burnt in Parris, and many other places, for the religion, and many means
invented to massacre such as passed along the streets, not doing reverence unto
the Images, as then newly set up at all the corners of the streets, and every
passenger was constrained to contribute their money to the boxes presented unto
them, therewith to bear the charge of the waxe-candies, Extraordinary rigors.
that were set up to burn before them, otherwise it cost the^ their lives.
They went likewise from house to house, to gather money for the maintenance of
the officers, and suings of process, against such as were found faulty therein:
and whosoever refused or delayed to put his hand into his purse, sped but
hardly for it.

The usurpation of the insupportable dealings of the house of Guise, awaked the
French men.
These proceedings altogether unsupportable, the threatenings against the
greatest personages in the Realm, the putting back of the Princes and
principal Lords of the Realm, the despising of the Estates of the land, the
corruptions of the Courts of Parliament, adicted to the part of the new and
strange Governors, that ruled both the king and Queen, the common treasors,
the offices, and the benefices divided and given at their commandment, and to
whom it pleased them, their violent, and of it self vnlawsull government
against the laws of the land, and the order of the Realm, moved most great
and marvelous hatreds against the Duke of Guise, and the Cardinal of Lorraine,
and caused that diverse not being able longer to endure so great oppression,
began to unite themselves to gither, thereby to determine upon some just
defense, that so they might erect the ancient and law full government of the
land. Whereupon counsel was asked (both touching law and conscience) of diverse
Lawyers and Divines: whereof the greatest part concluded, that men might
lawfully oppose and resist against the government usurped by those of Guise,
and if need were, take arms, thereby to repulse and withstand their violences,
so that the Princes who in that case are borne as lawful Magistrates, or any
one of them would take the matter upon him, being thereunto required by all
the Estates of the land, or else by the greatest part thereof. The first, that
with earnest zeal determined upon this matter of so great consequence, were
not all of one opinion: for some of them moved with a true zeal of serving
God, the king, and the Realm, believed verily, that they could not do a more
just and upright work, then to procure the abolition of Ferrany, and the
reestablishment of the Estate, and withal, to open the way to some means of
comfort and reliese to those of the religion. There were some that were
desirous of change, and the rest provoked by evil will and hatred conceived
against those of the house of Guise, for having done some wrong and outrage,
either against themselves, their friends, or allies. But in effect, their only
and final intent, was, to enforce themselves wholly to work the means to
cease that unlawful government, and that the Estate of the realm might be
established as it ought to be. But for that in this intent, both general,
lawful, and commendable, there chanced diverse particular and defective
discourses, it is not to be wondered at, if that there happened a confusion in
the pursuit, and that if the event fell out but badly, for those that took it
in hand, specially such as mixed their particular passions, with the
consideration of the common profit of the land. For as touching those that
only determined to release and free the Realm of France from the yoke of
strangers, although the greatest part of them are dead in the pursuit thereof,
as well then, as since that time, in the reigns of the two kings ensuing, and
that as yet, that debate not being determined, yet are they gone out of this
world, with that most singular contentment in their minds, to have most
courageously sacrificed and yielded up their lives, to reduce their country
into a true, spiritual, and corporal liberty.

Difficulty, in a great enterprise.
In these first enterprises, there appeared an other great and doubtful
difficulty, which was, how they should begin to address themselves unto the
king, for that besides his minority, he had no great understanding, and it
was impossible to speak unto himself about such affairs, considering his
whole affection and desire was, to bend himself unto the counsel of those two
whom they sought to withdraw and separate from him. To present the matter unto
his privy Council, would be as much, as to allow their adversaries to be
their Judges, and so evidently to work their own confusion: to have recourse
unto the Parliaments, it would less avail, and yet more dangerous: so that
in fine, the surest way was found to be, by ceising upon the persons of the
Duke of Guise, and the Cardinal of Lorraine, by some devise, and under the
name of some one, or some number of the principal members of the Estate, to
demand an assembly of a Parliament, to the end, that they two might there
yield an account of the administration of the affairs of the land. Whereupon
Lois de Bourbon, Prince of Conde, was most instantly desired to hearken
thereunto, and by that means to hinder and impeach the to tall ruin, both of
the king and Queen.

The Prince of Conde much affected to the good of the king, and of his Realm.
And as some have lightly thought and written, that all this whole proceeding,
after named the tumult of Amboise, had been an enterprise of men, wholly rash,
seditious, enemies to God and the Estate, provoked by despair, and induced by
fury: so is it found and esteemed by others, evil affected unto the house and
memory of this Prince, that durst presume to charge him to have bin moved and
pushed forward, with some particular affection that entered into his mind, and
that it was but a mere quarrel against the house of Guise, which by that
means he sought to end, and after that, to moved some greater change: but
not to turn this small Cronicle, into a large Apology: it shall suffice,
simply to rehearse those things, which for the most part, are fresh and in the
memory, of many a Frenchman as then living, and such as were borne since, and
having been faithfully informed thereof: for, as for men that are partial,
who to gratify such as held the sword over their heads, while they caused the
books (wherein most impertinently they handle this matter) to be imprinted,
without saying worse by them, both the world present, and to come, will wholly
reject their witness, as full of evident and mere passion, and clean
repugnant to the truth: and will avouch, that the Prince therein showed
himself to be a true Frenchman, and most affectionate friend unto the good and
service both of the king and Realm.

The Prince then, with his most secret Council, having long and deliberately
thought and consulted upon this point, wherein he was desired to be
assistant: as in truth the sequel thereof required: first gave express charge
and commission, to certain wise, expert, and well approved friends, secretly,
carefully, and exactly, to inquire, what were the principal things that might
be imposed against those of Guise, which being known, with a good and safe
conscience he might look into that which should redownd, unto the good both
of the king, and of his Realm. The informations made, it was found and well
known, by men, both of person and quallitie, and such as were indifferent, that
they might well and lawfully be charged with diverse points of treason, as also
with an infinite number of pillings and interceptions, as well of the treasures
of the Commonwealth, as of particular persons. And among other notable crimes,
he was assured and offered to have it justified, by such as in a manner had
been their household servants, that they meant to cease upon the Realm,
Abreefe collection of the informations made against those of Guise.
and put all the Princes of the blood to death, as soon as they once had fully
exterped those of the religion: determining in short space to rid themselves of
all their enemies, having already understood by the Physicians, that the king
could not live long, neither yet have issue: which in man's judgment might
easily be effected, considering that those of Guise, had both justice, money,
strong Towns, men of war, and the people at their commandment.

Monsieur Renaudie undertakes the charge to cease upon the bodies of the
Guisians.
The question was, these informations being made, how the persons of those
parties so charged, might be taken and ceased upon. This was the difficulty
which Godfrey de la Remaudie, surnamed la Forest, Barron de Perigot, and a
Gentleman of an ancient house, undertook to resolve, accepting the mannaging
thereof under the authority of the Prince, who in person promised to be at
the day, and in in the place, where, and when, those of Guise should so be
taken: upon condition, that nothing should be said, enterprised, nor done, in
any sort whatsoever, either against God, the king, his brethren, the Princes,
nor the Estate: that in doing otherwise, he would himself be he, that first
should seek for to oppose against al those that undertook the contrary: which
conclusion was made about the end of the year 1559.

1560.
The Lady Elizabeth of France, married unto the King of Spain, departed from
the Court of Blois, about the beginning of December, being conducted by the
king her brother, and the Queen her mother, as far as Chastellerault and
Poictiers, and keeping on her way with the Cardinal of Bourbon, the Prince de
la Roche Suryon, and other great Lords, into Gascon: at Bourdeax the King of
Navarre met her, and so led her with great honor through his countries,
keeping her company until he entered upon the borders of Spain, The Lady
Elizabeth le^de into Spain.
where she was received by the Noblemen and Lords, appointed by king Philip,
who with great pomp and magnificence, they led unto their Master, about the
beginning of this year.

An order for provision of Offices.
The first of January, a Proclamation was made in the kings name, for the
provision of Judicial offices, the nomination of the offices being committed
unto the Judges, and the Kings officers: who nominating three persons for each
office, they should give their names unto the king, that out of them he might
choose him, whom he judged to be fit and capable for the place. But this was
but an ordinance in paper, and wholly without effect, as many others had been:
the same month, and the next, the process against the Counselors, Coucellors
holden prisoners, released.
la Port, de Foix, du Faut, and Fumee, that had been committed prisoners, with
Anna du Bourg, were ended, and all they for a small fine, were set at liberty.
They used all the means they could, to condemn the Counselor Fumee, but he
behaved himself so well and wifely, against all the Judges, and other his
adversaries, that in the end, he wound himself out of their hands.

Assembly at Nautes.
But to return to that which is more important: The first of February, la
Renaudie with a great number of the Nobility, and others of all the Provinces
of the Realm, met at Nautes, where under color of soliciting certain process
in the Parliament of Britaigne, which as then was holden therein, they
assembled, where after certain inuocations upon the name of God, al before
recited, was there by Renaudie exposed and declared. And after diverse of the^
had given their judgments, and esteemed the enterprise to be both just and
necessary: one among therest required, that before they gave their promise,
each of them should swear, and solemnly vow to God, not to enterprise or do
any thing against the authority of the king, or the Estate of France,
protesting for his part, that if he might perceive it, that even when the
execution should be brought to effect, he would advertise the king, and
sooner suffer himself to be slain before his face, then to endure that any
thing should be done, to prejudice his person, that being judged by the^ al,
to be most reasonable and just, every man swore, not to attempt any thing, but
only for the good, profit, and moditie of their king and natural Lord: as
also the beginning of the Articles of their accord, was framed in these words:
Protestation made by the head, The solemn protestation of the confederates.
and al his Council, not to attempt any thing against the Majesty of the
King, Princes of the blood, nor the lawful State of France.

After all their consents given, they determined upon that which was most
requisite for the execution: where Renaudie having showed them his mind, swear
and made all the company to swear. And among them it was agreed, that upon the
tenth of March, the apprehension of those of Guise should be performed, within
the Town of Blois, where they presumed the King would still remain.

Five of these Gentlemen of each Province, with other forces, were to accompany
Renaudie, under the conduct of the Barron of Chastelnau and others, for the
troops of all the Provinces.

They likewise provided for many other things, that might impeach this great
and hautie enterprise. The company being withdrawn, every man with his
commission, Order given for the execution.
and the place of meeting agreed upon, upon the last of February, Renaudie
having advertised the Prince what had been done at Nantes, he took exact
order, and that in great diligence, and almost incredible, for all that was to
be required therein, on his behalf: and not long after, being come to
Parris, there with more commodity to effect his promise, he lay in the
subburbes of S. German, with a certain Councellor of the Court of Parliament,
named Des Auenelles, that had a house furnished after the manner of Parris.
This Auenelles that made profession of religion, perceiving much resort of many
several persons into his house, Des Auenelles discovered the enterprise against
those of Guise.
and understanding somewhat by their words, in the end, he fully perceived
their intent: so that he likewise promised them to employed himself therein:
but having with himself apprehended the danger, he being poor, covetous,
and desirous of advancement, thought to have found the means to help
himself, and with another of the same humor, went to one of the Masters of
Requests, called l'Alemant, Agent for the Cardinal, and Milet, Secretary to
the Duke of Guise, to whom he showed the whole pretense.

How the Guisians provided for themselves.
The matter proceeding in this sort, those of Guise, the Chancellor, and the
Queen, were made acquainted therewith: and Des Auenelles having had some
reward, was sent from Blois to Parris, there to give out false reports against
those of the religion. Besides that, those of Guise sent letters in the name of
the king, and of his mother, unto the Admiral and his brethren, to will them
to come unto the Court.

They likewise gathered people on all sides, and wrote unto all Bailiffes and
Seneschales, to stay all men, both horse and foot, that should be found
bearing of arms, and traveling to Amboise. Touching the Admiral, he being
arrived, made great protestation unto the Queen Mother, in presence of the
Chancellor, touching the great and extreme rigors, used against those of the
religion, desiring her to cause those persecutions to be ended, till they
might have a holy and free council. Where upon the Chauncellor did so lively
set down the Admirals advise before the Council, the Guisians being present,
Edist of abolition, touching religion.
that presently there ensued an edict of abolition of all forepassed ordinanced
concerning the religion, excluding out of that pardon, the Ministers, and such
as should be found to have conspired against the king, his mother, his wife,
the Princes, his principal officers, and the Estate, also such as by force had
rescued prisoners out of the Officers hands, and taken the kings packets, and
slain his messengers. This edict was made in the beginning of March, which
notwithstanding la Renaudie left not off to pursue his enterprise, although he
knew it well to be disclosed.

The Prince ryding unto the Court, to show the King and his Council, the
information given against those of Guise, as soon as they should be taken, and
to require a Parliament of all the estates, being between Orleans and Blois,
he understood that all had been discovered, which notwithstanding he passed
forward, thereby to encourage his men. And being arrived at Amboises those of
Guise braued him, as much as possible they might: but he making a show, as if
he knew not what they meant, put them in no little fear.

The changing of place, caused la Renaudie to stay in a place called la
Carreliere, The marvelous resolution of la Renaudie and others. Lignieres
discovers the enterprise
about 6. miles from Amboise, with the principal of his Council, and the day
of execution was appointed to be upon the 6. of that month, in such sort, that
those of Guise, although they knew thereof, had found themselves in no small
danger, with all their adberents, had it not been for Captain Lignieres: who
approaching near Amboise, to be assistant at the enterprise, instead of
ayding them, went unto the Court, and there particularly described the names of
the Leaders, their meeting place, with all the circumstances.

The Queen Mother alleging for his excuse, that he did it to save the honor
of the Prince, whom he perceived to be wrongfully accused of treason, and
thereby in danger of his life: by which means, the company was no sooner
arrived at the place appointed, but that they were taken and led prisoners,
one after the other, not once being able to join themselves together: those of
Guise in the mean time, assembled men on all sides, (which fell out well for
them) discovered diverse Pistoles and other weapons brought in Trunkes, which
were presently ceased upon: and by that means, they brought the prisoners by
dozens and scores, into Amboise: whereupon the twentieth of March, all the
kings guard were changed, and the Gate where the companies of Renaudie and his
troops should have entered, was closed up. The Barron de Chastelnau, and
Captain Mazieres, being arrived in the subburbes of la Rich in Tours, and
there discoued, What happened to the Baron de Chastelnau and his company.
were set upon by the Count de Sancerre, but having resisted him, as he
thought to cease upon them, he was constrained in all haste to retire, and
yet without any hurt, either to him or his: from thence, the Barron and his
company went to the Castle of Noisay, where he found the principal dealers
in that enterprise.

Those of Guise having made the king believe, that certain rebels were
assembled to murder him, he sent the Duke de Nemours with a troop of men,
who having surprised Raunay and Mazieres, walking without the Castle, took
them prisoners: many of their men saved themselves, some one way, some an
another. Nemours having environed the Castle with a strong guard, and brought
them two unto Amboise, after dinner returned again, with a troop of five or
six hundredth horses.

The Barron had sent Renaudie, to make haste to come to relieve him, not
minding to abandon the place, wherein he found both arms, powder, and
munition. But perceiving himself enclosed, and the Duke returned again, he
began to parley, being required thereunto, and having at large declared the
causes of that their enterprise, the Duke oftentimes desired him to leave his
arms, and to come and speak with the king, binding himself unto him by the
faith of a Prince, that neither he, nor any of his, should once be hurt, but
all freely set at liberty. The Barron assuring himself upon the word of a
Prince, was content to do as he desired, the like did all the rest. But
being in Amboise, they spoke not unto any man, but only to such as the Duke
of Guise would send unto them.

La Renaudie, the same day being advertised what had past at Noisay, commanded
the troops that were beyond the river, to march straight unto Amboise, which
they did within the wood, but being stayed and intrapped, The troops sent by
Renaudie taken and surprised.
by the horsemen sent thither by those of Guise, most of them were taken: who
being led prisoners, were presently hanged, and then cast into the water:
those that were best apparrelled, and likeliest men, were slain within the
woods, to spoil them of that they had. Therest of the troops stayed for in
the place appointed were taken, and the Soldiers were tied by 15. in a
company at horses tails, and so cast into prison.

The Duke of Guise king in effect.
Therevppon, the 17. of March letter were sent out, by the which, after a long
discourse made against the prisoners of Amboise, the Duke of Guise was by the
king, declared his Lieftenant Genenerall, with all power to raise in, both
foot and horse, therewith to punish the rebels, without any other form or
manner of Justice. Other letters were sent out the same day, with
commmaundement unto al those that were in arms, ready to come unto Amboise,
being advertised by their leaders, Means to dispearse the troops.
and upon their faiths given, should within 24. hours after the sight of
those letters, depart and get them home into their countries, upon pain to be
hanged, if they once presumed to do the contrary.

The death of Renaudie.
The next day, as Renaudie sought to assemble his troops, he was met in the
Forest of the Castle Regnaut, by one named Pardillan, that shot a Pistole at
him, but having failed, Renaudie slew him: but one of Pardillans servant
with a shot of a Caliuer, flewe Renaudie: his body was carried unto Amboise,
and hanged upon the Bridge, with a writing made fast to his neck, containing
these words: La Renaudie, called la Forest, chief of the rebels. The death of
la Renaudie, was the cause that diverse of those which meant to assemble,
separated themselves, and so retired. But no man made any great pursuit after
them: Renaudie had with him five hundredth horse, followed by 1000. more, not
accounting the footmen.

Among the rest of the prisoners, there was one la Bigne, that had been
Secretary unto la Renaudie, about whom was found a paper written in Ciphers:
and to save his lise, he disciphered the paper, which contained nothing but
only that which had been concluded by all the Associates, with their express
protestation, not to attempt any thing against the kings Majesty, the Princes
of his blood, nor against the State of the Realm, the articles tending only
to this point: to take the Government from those of Guise, and to cause the
ancient custom of France to be observed, by a lawful Parliament. He was
likewise found ceased with an humble petition unto the king, in the behalf of
those of the religion: wherein the unjust proceedings of the Cardinal, against
the Parliament of Parris, and Anna du Bourg, with others, were fully
discovered. Those of Guise at the first, The souldt-diers that were prisoners
released.
would not have saved any of the prisoners: but thinking that the over great
number that should be executed, would make them to be hated of all men, caused
the soldiers to be set at liberty, and to each man they gave a teston, to
bring them on their way. The Captains la Motte, Cocqueuille, and others, had
not lost courage, but gave a whot alarm unto the Courtiers of Amboise, and had
it not been by means of some wrong intelligence, that constrained them to
retire, without loss of their horsemen, the enterprise had surely been
executed, but it was nothing but a means to kindle the chollor of those of
Guise, who that last time caused all the footmen that might be taken,
presently to be hanged, and as then it was a most dangerous time for all
sorts of men, either soldiers, Marshants, or others, to be found abroad
without Amboise: for that the least hurt they could receive, was presently to
be spoiled, and stripped of all they had, and then the thieves, who under
color to aid the king (to whom a new guard was given, composed only of such
kind of men, both horse and foot) committed most strange and cruel
extortions.

The first execution of the prisoners.
Those of Guise, perceiving the troops that meant to cease upon them to be
gone, and the rest in prison, and being aided by those that from all places
came to help them, began to make pursuit after such as were retiring,
whereof some they took: they commanded the Prince of Conde in the Kings name,
not to depart from the Court without express license, and began to hang,
drown, and behead their prisoners, which continued for the space of one whole
month. All the river of Loire being covered with dead bodies, tied by six,
eight, ten, twelve, and fifteen, at long Poles: the streets of Amboise lay
full of dead men's blood, and every place was hanged with dead bodies: many were
hanged at the windows of the Castle, and to make men believe that all this
proceeded only from those of the religion, that sought to establish themselves
by arms: they questioned with the greatest part of them, touching the Articles
of their faith, The kings complaints against the Guisians.
and disputed with them of the points of the religion now in controversy,
thereby to blind matters: and not once touching that which wholly concerned the
Estate, and for which cause the enterprise was taken inhand.

Some that returned according to the kings permission, being intrapped, and
brought prisoners to Blois: found friends, that sent unto the king, and the
Queen his mother, to procure their deliverance, but by no means they could be
spoken withal, the soliciters being threatened to be cut and hewed in pieces,
if they happened to present themselves before the king: he would oftentimes in
weeping say unto them: What have I done unto my people? what mean they to deal
thus with me? I will hear their complaints, and do them justice. Sometimes
he said to those of Guise: I know not what the matter is, but I understand
they have nothing to say but unto you: I would that for a time you should
absent your selves from hence, to the end, that men might see, if it be
against me, or you, that they complain.

They very cunningly, and presently, bandied such blows, and to divert the
people from giving credit unto the demonstrations made touching the cause and
justification of their enterprise, they sent letters in the kings name, unto
all the Parliaments and Judges of several provinces, wherein those of the
religion were accused to have conspired against the King, A combat of pens
against swords
the Princes of the blood, and the Estate of the Realm, whereunto was made a
most large and ample answer, wherein all the dealings of those of Guise, were
fully discovered, with plain and most evident proofs against them, to be
guilty of high treason, and not those that had assembled, to reduce the King
and all his realm, into true and perfect liberty. There was likewise
published an other pamphlet, showing by the example of Phillip de Commines, in
the last chap. of his first book, that such are open enemies unto the Estate,
that say it is treason to speak o^ the assembly of a general Parliament. And
that it is the means to lessen and diminish the kings authority. There was
likewise aduertisements unto the people, and complaints unto the Parliament:
and so some aided themselves with pen, against the swords of their enemies.

Reuocation of the abolition given by the king.
The 22. of march, other letters were sent forth, whereby the king declared,
that his meaning was not, that the abolitio^ of the 17. of March, should extend
further but unto those, that simply and of ignorance had assembled and
traveled for the keeping of their promise, and that therein were not
comprehended such as had guided the conspiracy made against his person, the
Queens, Princes, and Noble personages that were about him: in the which number
are contained those that came in arms, into the subburbes of the Town, and
such as had been taken about, and within the Castle of Noisay: which served
for a dispensation of the faith, given by the Duke de Neuers, unto the Barron
of Chastelnau, and others.

Presently after these letters, they returned to executions, wherein neither day
nor night passed, but that a great number of prisoners were put to death, and
all men of quallitie, some hanged, some drowned, the rest beheaded, without any
public sentence given, without declaring the causes of their deaths, or
without telling their names. They constrained the king and his young brethren,
to be assistant at those spectacles. Besides that, the Duke of Guise many
times for a pastime, after his dinner, caused some of those whom he most hated
of the prisoners, to be brought forth, and hanged out at his chamber windows.

The Barron de Chastelnau, made a marvelous process against those of Guise, and
the Duke de Nemours, they being present, thereby made the Chauncellor stand
still, and all amazed, that dealt in those affairs against his conscience, and
appealed from the sentence given against him before God: the like did most of
all the rest, to the great astonishing of all the assistants, perceiving a most
invincible constancy in all those men: but neither the stout courages of the
prisoners, nor yet the cries of both great and small, that as then were present
at those executions, could not in any sort, once mollify the hearts of those of
Guise, nor yet divert the rigor of their cruelties.

A Gentleman named Villemongis, being upon the scaffold ready to be
beheaded, having wet his hands in the blood of his companions, and lifting them
up to heaven, cried out saying: Lord behold the blood of thy children: thou
shall revenge our cause.

The death of the Chancellor Oliuier.
Among the prisoners, that after the Barron spoke most boldly unto the
Chancellor, there were two, the one named Picard, the other Campagnac, that
showed him his petegree, from one point to the other: but the last of them
touched him so near unto the heart, that with grief thereof, the poor
Chancellor fell sick, wherein he continually sighed and murmured to
himself, tormenting his body in most strange manner: for that all crooked
and aged as he was, yet he stirred his body with such force, that he made the
bed to shake, with greater force then a young man of Iustie years could do.
The Cardinal going to visit him, his pains began to increase, and
perceiving him a far of, he cried out and said: Ha, ha, Cardinal, thou
haste made us all to be damned. But when the Cardinal went near him, saying
unto him, that the wicked Spirit sought to seduce him, and that he should
remain constant in the faith. That is well done now (said he) and so turning
his back, presently lost his speech: in his great torments many times,
lamenting the death of the Counselor du Bourg. Behold how the chief and
principal condemners of the prisoners in Amboise was taken, and first executed
upon the scaffold, of the terrible and manifest judgments of God. The rest in
time likewise were brought thither, each of them in his turn, Monsieur
Michell, de l'Hospitall, an excellent man, as then Chancellor of the Duchy of
Sauoy, was repealed from Nice, where he remained, to succeed in Oliuiers place:
and till he came, Moruilliers, Bishop of Orleans kept the Seals, and used all
the means he could, to please the house of Guise.

The Prince behaueth himself boldly in his innocence, against all men.
The Prince of Conde was in Amboise during those horrible tempests, where he
behaved himself like a man wholly without fear, as knowing himself to be
vnculpable. Those of Guise animated the king against him, setting and
appoynting men to watch and look into his behavior, whereof the Cardinal
kept a Register, specially of one word spoken by the Prince in chollor,
perceiving certain of the prisoners to be executed at the Castle windows,
saying: that the king was counseled otherwise then he ought to be, to cause
such Lords and honest Gentlemen to be put to death, not considering the great
services by them done, unto the late deceased king, and all the Realm: of whom
being so deprived, it was to be feared, that during those great troubles,
strangers would enterprise against the Realm, and that if they should be
aided by any of the Princes, they would easily overcome it.

Presently after, they caused du Vaux his Sewer, to be committed prisoner, and
caused the king to send for him into his chamber, to show him, that by the
information given, he had understood him to beee the chief of the
conspiracy: whereupon the king added many and sharp threatenings. The Prince
for answer, besought his Majesty, to assemble all the Princes and knights of
the Order, that as then were within Amboise, together with his privy Council,
to the end, that in so great a presence, they all might hear what answer he
would make. Presently therevppon, the company was assembled in the great Hall
of the Castle, and in the kings own presence, where the Prince having recited
the speeches, by the king used unto him, and what thereupon had followed, said,
that the person of the king excepted, with those of the Princes his brethren,
and the Queens, and with reverence unto them all, those that had said, and
reported unto the king, that he should be the head and conductor of certain
seditous persons, that were reported to have conspired against the person of
the king, and his estate, had fallely and wickedly lied. And that to prove his
innocence therein, he would leave his place and dignity of a Prince of the
blood, to fight with them, and cause them with his sword or lance, to confess
themselves to be right villains: and that they themselves only sought the
ruin of the Estate, name, and blood royal: for the conservation whereof, he
said, he would employ both life and goods, as he had always made good
proof, as also for his interest to the Crown and house of France, the title
whereof he ought to procure with much more right, then those that were his
accusers: summoning all the company, that if among them there were any that had
made the report, or that once would seem to maintain it, presently to show
themselves: whereupon no man presenting himself, he besought the king to
esteem him for an honest man, and from thencefoorth not to bend his his ears
unto the secret tales of such flaunderous and bad persons: but rather to reject
and bannish them from his presence, as enemies both to him, and public peace:
which done, he went out of the Council, to give them leave to consult. But at
a certain sign made by the Cardinal, the king brake up the assembly,
without asking their advise, where as then he might have made some alteration,
or disadvantage to those of Guise. The Admiral shows himself a faithful
servant to the king and the Realm,


The Queene-mother much troubled in these tempests, yet according to the manner
and custom of all the world, seeking to hold on the strongest side, sent the
Admiral into Normandy, to know the cause of their commissions, desiring him
most earnestly, without dissembling, to certify her the truth thereof, with
promise not only to acknowledge his travels in that behalf, but to keep it
secret.

He executed his commission with all diligence, and without fear of any man,
nor long after sent a Gentleman to the Queen, with large and ample letters,
therein containing, that those of Guise were the only cause, and true
original of all the troubles that happened in France, because of their violent
and unlawful government; showing the proofs thereof: adding, that the
faithful subjects of the Crown, held for certain, that the calamities would
never be ended, as long as strangers governed the King and his Estate: he
exhorted her therevppon, to take the cause in hand, and to give ease and
quietness to those of the religion, causing the edicts that tended thereunto,
to be well and truly observed.

Comfort to the prisoners for religion.
These aduertisements, bred letters, that were directed to all the Parliaments
and other Judges, freely to release all such prisoners as were detained in
their Prisons for the cause of religion: the execution of which letters,
nevertheless, were long performing, an other thing likewise drove forward this
wheel: which was, that cerraine prisoners at Blois and Tours, for the
enterprise of Amboise, having found the means for to escape out of prison,
wrote a letter unto the Cardinal, partly in jest, and partly full of
threatenings, that it should not be long before they would come to see him, with
all the rest that were not in his keeping, and that had wholly determined to
spoil his person. He being a man very fearful, for that time, put water in
his wine, which caused the general enlargement of diverse prisoners throughout
all the Realm: and it was spoken by diverse men, that the Cardinal verified the
ancient Proverb: which is, If you touch pitch, you shall be defiled therewith.

Letters in favor of those of Guise
Further, those of Guise perceiving themselves to be assailed on all sides, by
diverse writings, being as it were the forerunners of some new onset: the last
of March, they caused certain letters to be dispatched to all the
Parliaments, Bailiffes, and Stewards, as also to strange Princes, wherein such
as had been present at the enterprise of Amboise, namely, the heads, were
accused of high treason, both against God and man: specially those of the
religion, and their Ministers, were therein abused in diverse sorts, to the which
was added, a number of great and large promises of reformation, both in the
Politicque and Ecclesiastical Estate.

Answer to their letters.
To these letters, a most ample and large answer was framed, directed unto the
Parliament, which painted out the house of Guise in all their colors,
requiring that they in open Parliament of all the Estates, might yield account
of their behavior, in the government of the Estate. The Parliament of Parris
sent this answer by one of their Vshers unto the Cardinal: But that of Rouen
seeking to do more, their deputies being sent unto the king, were constrained
presently to retire, and could do nothing

Letters unto the king of Navarre.
The ninth of April, letters were written and sent in the kings name, unto the
K. of Navarre, to the same effect as those that were sent unto the parliame^ts,
being desired to cease upon certain persons, that attended about his person,
accused to be of the enterprise of Amboise: therein likewise was set down, the
acculatio^ imposed against the prince of Conde, who for the same cause had
justified himself: mean time, a consultation was holden, to cease upon the
person of the Prince of Conde, which the Duke of Guise, wholly seemed to
dislike. He on the other side, sent his Secretary unto his brother, to
advertise him what had past, to ask his counsel, and to write him answer
thereof. This being discovered to those of Guise, they wrote a letter unto the
Prince, full of excuses, to the end he should content himself: which he
likewise sent unto his brother, that made him a plain answer, fearing to be
discovered.

Wars in Scotland moved by those of Guise
At that time those of Guise thought to trouble and overthrow the Estate of
Scotland, which their sister the Queen Dowager, and monsieur d'Oisel governed
peaceably, they having made the marriage between their Cousin, and King
Francis, caused their Cousin to take upon her the title of Queen of England,
and of Scotland, only upon some vain imaginations: and not content therewith,
they sent certain intelligencers into England, there to move the people to
favor their Cousin, and to bring the Q. of England in hatred with her
subjects, specially because of thereligion. Their intent was presently found
out, notwithstanding they lost not courage, but to maintain their credit with
the Catholics, they caused certain rigorous edicts to be made in Scotland
against the religion, whereof ensued a tumult, appeased by the Q. Dowager, and
the Noblemen of the country. Thereupon king Henry being dead, and the
government of France in their hands, they sent the Bishop of Amiens and la
Brosse, their faithful servants into Scotland, who at their arrival, would
constrame every man to go to Mass, telling the Q. Dowager, and Monsieur
d'Oisel, that their sufferance had spoiled all: saying, that from thencefoorth,
they would use force, not sparing any man. And thereupon sound diverse means to
alter the Esate of Scotland, and although the Queen Dowager propounded diverse
peaceable and sure means, they two would deal as they thought good: but in the
end, the Lords and Gentlemen of the country, threatened and troubled by such
newcome fellows, rose up in arms, and desired aid of the Englishmen their
neighbors, in such sort, that in short time they drove out the Priests, reduced
la Brosse into a small corner, and compelled the Bishop to save himself in
France. The Queen of England before she entered into arms, had desired those
of Guise not to proceed in so hard and violent manner, whereunto they not being
desirous to hearken, upon the 24. of March, she made a long discourse, wherein
she showed, that she little esteemed of all whatsoever those of Guise and their
adherents should enterprise or undertake, against her person or Estate, and
withal made it evidently known, that her only desire was, and ever should be,
to live in peace and amity with all Christendom. They sought both by
Ambassadors and messengers, to ease the mischief by them devised, but by no
means could effect i^ so that in fine, things of themselves grew to such an
end, that in the mean time it may be said, that the violence used by those of
Guise, gave such a blow unto the Papacy with in the realm of Scotland, that
ever after it did nothing but languish and consume, and in the end was wholly
extirped, and so remains.

Touching France, during those executions of Amboise, as also before that,
those of the religion still increased, both in zeal and number, Advancement of
the religion in France.
in all the places of the Realm: and yet not without great hinderance by
diverse persecutions, and by the means of some men, that could no more content
themselves to use it secretly, whereof ensued their open assemblies, and that
within some Churches. Those of Valence, Montelimart, and Romans in Dauphin,
being the first. The Duke de Guise being Governor, extremely offended, that
those of whom he thought to be most feared, began to take that course which
most displeased him, to stop their intents and purposes, first, he sent John
de Monluc Bishop of Valence, who before by means of his Sermons, had done more
hurt then good unto the Pope, and because Monluc did not proceed with any
effect, and that Monsieur de Cleremont, Lieftenant for the Duke of Guise, was
esteemed to be too favorable. Mangiron a cruel man, and an extreme enemy to
those of the religion, had the charge given to him, wholly to root the^ out:
at the beginning he proceeded therein with great subtlety, with diverse of his
Agents, playing many several parts: and in the end, having found the means to
drive certain Gentlemen out of Valence, that maintained those of the religion,
he began to play his part, sacking their houses, as if the town had been
taken by assault. Proceedings of Maugiron against those of the religion in the
Parliament of Grenoble in Dauphine.
to strengthen him, they sent him sixteen Ensigns of the old troops of
Piedemont, and some Companies of launciers. On the other side, Truchon chief
President of Grenoble, aided by diverse Councillors, went to Valence, and
passing through Romans, caused 60. of the principallest to be cast in prison,
while Maugiron pilled those of Montelimart, to whom he had both sworn and
promised not to do any wrong, neither in public, nor in private, that had good
means to impeach and hinder him from his pretense, if by fair words he had
not won them. To return unto the Presidents and Counselors of Grenoble,
they caused two Ministers in Valence, to be beheaded, and hanged three of the
principal Citizens of the Town. The rest of the prisoners went out by the
Golden gate, with abiurations, whippings, bannishments, and great fines,
wherewith the Judges and kings Atturneyes, made themselves rich. At Romans they
hanged two men, and whipped one, whom they after sent unto the Galleyes.

The estate of the religion in Prouence.
In Prouence, two Gentlemen being brethren, Sieurs de Mouuans, named Anthony,
and Paulon de Richiend, having made open profession of religion, in the time of
King Henry, Anthony was traitorously massacred by those of Draguignan, in Anno.
1559, whereof Paulon could never have justice. Not long after, Captain
Chasteauneuf, being sent from Nantes to Prouence, by Renaudie and his
companions, to assemble those whom they thought meet to assisist them in the
enterprise of Amboise: the Deputies of 60. Churches in that Province, being
assembled at Merindol, Paulon was chosen Leader of the troops of Prouence:
which having accepted, he made a diligent inquiry through all the country,
and found two thousand men, that had good means to horse, arm, and entertain
themselves, besides a great number of Gentlemen, and other voluntary
Soldiers. And as when the time of marching approached, his Council were of
advise that the troops should seek to enter into Aix, there to erect the
religion, and so to give occasion to those of Guise and others, to mollify
their persecutions, when once they should perceive men rising in all places of
the Realm, to withstand their rigors.

This enterprise discovered, Mouuans determined to make a way through the
plain country, where he made war against the Images, which were beaten
down in every Church, causing all the relicques of gold and silver to be
molten, and to sell the vessels and other to yes belonging unto the Mass, the
money whereof, even to a halfe-penny, was left in the hands of the Consuls and
others, of every place. A most admirable military Discipline, but yet truly
and severely executed at that time: whereupon Mouuans pursued by the Count de
Tande, with a great power, retired in good order into the high country, where
he expected news from Renaudie: mean time, the Count (being a wise
Gentleman, as any of his time) dealt so wisely therein, that by agreement made
between them, it was ordained, that Mouuans might surely and freely retire,
without any hurt or displeasure (neither great nor small having been hurt
either in word or deed in all Prouence: the Mages likewise not once complaining
of any thing done unto them) for whatsoever had past: with promise to cause
justice to be done touching the mother of his deceased brother. Captain
Paulon, surnamed the Barron de la Guard, venturing against the faith and
promise made to set upon Paulon, being within a straight thing, Perjury of
Captain Paulon.
to put both him and his troops unto the sword, not being above 50.
Soldiers, was himself enclosed by Paulon, that offered him battle: but the
Barron forgetting his fence, although he had ten times more men then his
enemy, and a good intent do do great service to those of Guise, that had
dispoyled him of estate of General of the Galleyes, to give it unto the great
Prior of France their brother, bledde at the nose, and by means of a new
Capitulation, renounced the Council of Constance, and retired with great
shame: after that, for a long time holding himself secretly, his name serving
for a mockery and jest to all the world.

Mouuans flattered by his enemies to be intrapped, answers them in plain
French
Paulon perceiving himself to be but hardly bestead in his own country,
because of the success of the enterprise of Amboise, and of the particular
threatenings against him, made by ye Duke of Guise, because of the troubles he
had raised in Prouence, for a time withdrewee himself unto Geneua, whither the
Duke sent men, expressly to practice with him, by infinite promises, both by
word of mouth, and writing in commendations of his virtues, and admiring of his
valor above all the Captains in Prouence, to move him to return into his
country. But Paulons answer to the Duke of Guise, was, that as long as he
knew him to be an enemy both to the religion and the State, and that he
usurped the places of the Princes of the blood, he might well assure himself
to have Mouuans his mortal enemy, and although a poor Gentleman, yet one
that has so good credit with the true servants and subjects to the king, that
they at least fistie thousand (where of he was the least) would imploye both
lives and goods, to cause him to make amends for all the wrongs by him
committed, against the good subjects and servants to the king: and that he
might be fully assured, that as long as one of them both lived, he should
never be quiet, nor live in any assurance of his life, nor any of his race,
seeing he had so much incensed and provoked the Nobility and people of
France. Not long before his departure out of France, he said Mouuans received
letters from the king himself, and from the Queene-mother, wherein they
gratified him very much, as one of the most faithful and affectioned servants
to his Majesty, promising him great favor, and withal, ratifying the accord
made by the Count, Governor of Prouence. But at the same instant, Mouuans was
advertised, that the Queene-mother had expressly sent unto the Parliament in
Aix, that they should find the means, to cause him, to cause Mouuans,
Chasteauneuf, and other Captains that were of the enterprise of Amboise, to
be slain. Advancement of the religion in diverse Provinces.


At the same time, those of the religion multiplied in Normandy, and Preaching
was publicly used in diverse places. Those of Rouan were troubled by an
Anabaptist, that was taken and burnt.

The Church of Tours was much troubled by the seditious dealings of the
runnagate Monk, named Richelieu, Captain of the Kings new guard, but by
silence and patience, is kept together, the Town having failed twice or thrice
to be lacked and spoiled in all the other Provinces of the Realm, those of the
religion perceiving themselves to be wholly destitute of humain aid, took a
notable resolution, not to address themselves any more to seek the help of
man, but what danger so ever might happen, determined to assemble to pray to
God, to hear his word, and to continue in true obedience thereof, living in
great love and concord one with the other, and with much edification to the
Catholicques, who in great troops lest the Mass, to make profession both of
contrary life and doctrine.

The Queene-mother, perceiving that those of the religion, addressed themselves
no more, to her, willed one of her Masters of Requests, called Chastelleus, to
use the mean that la Roche, one of the Ministers of Parris, should come unto
her, or some other in his place, to confer with him about somes means
whereby to procure the quietness of those the religion. La Roche not being
found, and they of Tours being desired in his place, to send Duplessi their
Minister, they excused themselves, beseeching the Queen to content her self
with letters that should be written unto her, which she seemed not to
dislike. Whereupon a large discourse was written, under a devised name of
Theophile, for those of the religion, wherein after certain protestations of
their sincerity, the depths and grounds of their great griefs against the
house of Guise, was fully shown: then diverse remedies wisely propounded,
whereby to prevent a ciuell war, which were, that provision should be made
for the good government of the Realm, and a Council to be given unto the king,
according to the ancient customs of the Realm, that to stay and remedy the
differences of religion, a holy and free council should be holden, and that in
the mean time, those of the religion should be permitted to live in peace of
conscience, and according to the profession of their faith.

Declaration^ of the religion against the house of Guise.
This declaration, being by Camus delivered to the Queen Mother, fell into the
hands of those of Guise, which construed it in many sorts, to know who that
Theophil^ might be. The messenger was oftentimes in danger of his life, and in
the end, he being troubled and tormented in diverse kinds, and knowing that
such as had given it unto him, would not be known, but kept themselves
secret, he showed their names in presence of the Queene-mother, and those of
the house of Guise, who likewise charged him to be of the conspiracy of
Ambotse, but in stead of being secret, he told them much more truth then they
desired to hear, and yet he got out of their hands, by virtue of the general
abolution made in the beginning of the reign of Charles the ninth.

The Guises proceedings too.
The Guises perceiving themselves to be so much noted and daily hated in every
place of the Realm, specially by those of the religion, determined wholly to
root them out, and to the same end wrote unto the King of Spain, and other
Catholicque Princes, laying the fault upon those of the religion, touching all
the troubles that happened in France, as also the conspiracy of Amboise. To
the Princes protestants they wrote, that the many and great executions made in
France, was only upon certain Sacrementaries, open enemies unto the
confession of Ausbourg. Besides that, their intent was to establish the
Inquisition in France, wherein they thought the Chancellor de l'Hospitall would
be assistant, which he did not, but like a wise Politician as he was, he
withstood their blows in such manner, that when in the month of May the edict
of Spain should have been published, he knowing that the privy Council and
the Parliament have given consent, he moderated it by another edict, wherein he
exposed his reasons with such vehemency and great eloquence, that those of
Guise themselves, that only were the purchasers thereof, The Duke of
Romorantin breaks the pretense of establishing the Inquisition of Spain.
agreed to his advise, and certified it unto King Philip, that liked well
thereof, although his whole desire was, to see the Realm of France disguised
in a Spanish suit.

Whereupon the edict of Romorantin was published and set forth, whereby the
King committed the knowledge and inquiry of Heresies, unto the Prelates of his
Reaime, forbad all public assemblies and unlawful forces, declared all the
Ministers of the religion, makers, composers, and printers of infamous
libelles, tending unto the moving and stirring up of the people, guilty of
high treason: this edict appeased not the murmurations and troubles, but to the
contrary, rather doubled and increased them on all sides.

A Combat of Princes.
Against all the books published and set forth, against the unlawful
government of those of Guise, John du Tillet, Clarke to the Court of Parliament
in Parris, composed a book entitled, The Kings Maiorit, wherein he defended,
that in France, the Kings being of the age of fifteen years, might then
command: after that, he inueyed against those of the religion, saying: that
with a false and wrong title, they termed their new opinions to be the Gospel
of Christ: naming their Ministers seditious and mutinous, and concluded, that
God would favor and prosper the arms that should be taken in hand and used
against them. Many strong and earnest aunsweres were made unto it, whereunto,
neither he, nor yet his brother the Bishop of S. Brieu durst once reply,
although by the Cardinal they were most instantly required thereunto: for
whose contentment, at the request and solitation of a certain Counselor
named du Lion, a Printer of Parris, named Martin l'Hommet, was hanged, for
printing a book, The Tiger put two men to death.
entitled, The Tiger, made against those of Guise: the like intertainment was
made unto a rich Merchant of Roane, who being present at the execution, and
perceiving the people most strangely moved against l'Hommet, desired some of
them to use themselves with greater modesty. His process was made without any
further delay, only to please the Cardinal, as du Lion not long after, in a
great audiance openly confessed.

The Queen-mothers dealing, and resolution of those of Guise in those
difficulties.
The Queen Mother much troubled among so many waves, hearing a speech of calling
a Parliament, and of establishing the Princes and the Constable, whom she
deadly hated, unto their places and authorities, which if it happened, she
should no longer have the mannaging of the affairs, resolved to hold and
maintain all things in the same estate, wherein as then they were: and under
her authority to cover the imperfections of those of Guise, who still
continued in their gross and high speeches, protesting that they would employ
the means, both of themselves, and of their friends, that possible they could
make, to beat down and repress the insolency of those that sought to
purchase the alteration of religion: which from that time forward was their
pretense, thereby to abolish the other quarrel, that only concerned the
State, which was affirmed to have been wholly usurped, and now to be most
lawfully ruled and governed by them. They thought likewise, that having
exterped those of the religion, as their meaning was to begin with it, it
would be a means to cut the sinews of the Princes of the blood, of whom
thereby they should easily bring to reason, as also the Constable.

Counsel of some of the Nobility.
Touching those of the religion, the first and principal in the roll, were
certain Gentlemen, that made free and open profession thereof, and although
they had not in any sort, been privy, or once consenting unto the enterprise
of Amboise: yet were they accused and summoned, to come and justify themselves
before the king But they perceiving that nothing but their destruction was
pretended, concluded, some to go unto the Prince of Conde, to encourage him,
the rest unto all the Churches of the religion, to give them notice and
intelligence of their destructions, then ready to fall upon them, if each of
them sought not to desend themselves.

The Prince of Conde escaped while his enemies consulted his death.
The proposition moved in the privy Council, touching the ceasing upon the
person of the Prince of Conde, and to make his process, to the end, that having
begun with him, they might proceed against the rest, made them to look unto
themselves.

It chanced, that upon this proposition, touching the taking of the Prince,
the Cardinal was resolutely of that advise: but the contrary, the Duke of
Guise had made a long discourse, to show that they should not proceed therein,
and that it should be wholly against his consent and desire. Some at the first
were much abashed, that those two heads in one hood, were of so different
minds, but when they well perceived that nothing was by them neglected, where
to find the means to lay hold upon the Prince, every man then did know,
that this contrariety was only done of purpose, thereby to draw the Council
to give their whole consents, to the end, that by those means they might
fortify and cover themselves, against all chances whatsoever. In the mean
time, the Prince looking on his own security, with good advise delivered
himself out of their snares, and got unto Bearn, where as then the king of
Navarre his brother was Resident: they (as the common saying is) used to make
bread of stones, and to turn all things for their advantage, began to assure
the king and his mother, that without all doubt, the Prince was culpable, and
that his flying made him to appear as guilty: whereupon commissions were
presently made, and sent for to levy men, to war against Gascon, whither the
Mashall de S. Andre, under pretense of going to see his brethren, was sent to
discover: which served to no other end, but only to cause the two Princes to
stand more warity upon their guard.

La Planche discovers those of Guise.
There rested yet another thread to untwine, which was to know, if that the
Constable were not of the Princes Council, whom (as they thought) they held
already within their fingers, to this end, they appointed the Queene-mother to
work the matter, who secretly sent for Lois Regnier, Sieur de la Planche, one
of the Council ours of the Marshal de Montmorency, who being entered into her
chamber, (the Cardinal standing behind the tapistrie) and desired very
earnestly to say his mind, touching causes and remedies of those troubles,
made a large and ample discourse, the effect whereof was, that those of Guise
being strangers, ought not to have the government of the Estate, unless some
natural Frenchmen were joined in commission with them. He likewise made a
long answer touching the accusation made against the Prince of Conde, showing
it to be a mere falschood, once to think or suppose, that the enterprise of
Amboise, was thought or meant against the person of the king, or for to trouble
the Estate.

After that, he desciphered the original of those of Guise, behauing himself
in such sort in all his aunsweres, like a good Politian, and that with so good
reasons, that thereby he escaped from the Court, and nothing was done either
touching him, or against the Constable, nor any of his.

Those of the religion, next to God, commit themselves unto the protection of
the Princes of the blood.
Those of the religion having understood by aduises given the^, by many
Gentlemen in diverse Provinces, that their overthrow began to approach, if
with all speed and readiness, they provided not for themselves. Having
recommended themselves by hearty prayers unto God, determined to cast
themselves into the arms of the Princes of the blood, as Fathers, Tutors, and
Conseruers of the innocencies of the poor afflicted people, and that by the
natural laws of the country, were called unto that charge, during the
minority of the kings. And for the same cause, certain notable personages,
were appointed among them, to go unto the king of Navarre, and the Prince of
Conde, at Nerac, to whom with all their means, he offered a large declaration,
containing a rehearsal of all the wrongs by those of Guise committed against
the king and the Realm: with a most humble supplication, that it would please
the said Princes to devise the means, to deliver the king and his Estate out
of their hands.

The explort of Monsieur de Mombrun.
About this time, Monsieur de Mombrun, a Gentleman well affected to thereligion,
being narrowly sifted by the Parliament of Grenoble, and bravely escaped out
of his enemies hands, was desired by diverse of the Venitian Merchants, to aid
and assist them, against the violences and extortions used in their behalfes,
by the Popes Vicelegat, contrary unto their privileges, and ancient
franchises.

La Motte Goudrin, Lieftenant for the Duke of Guise in Dauphine, was likewise
entertained by the Vicelegat, to help him with all his forces. And although
Mombrun had very few men, yet he constrained his enemies to seek for an
accord: which having but violated and broken in all the articles, by the
Vicelegat, and la Motte Goudrin, Mombrun raised arms again, and handled the
Priests hardly, that had slain some of his men after the accord was made and
sworn: which done, he put a great number of la Motte Goudrins soldiers unto
the sword, and used him in such sort, that he made him leave his fence: but
having been constrained to dispearse his little troop, and soon after
betrayed by one of his domestical servants, he saved himself by flying out
of the Realm, having trauersed through many dangers, and saved himself in
the territories of Geneua, and about the country of Berne.

The Princes counsels discovered by la Sagne, whereof ensued the imprisonment of
Vidame de Chartres
To return unto the Princes, they being much confirmed in the resolution by
the^ taken to discharge their duties, touching the relieuing of the realm of
France, by the declarations and offers of those of the religion: they began to
deal therein, and among other agents employed in those affairs, the Prince of
Conde sent one named la Sagne, unto diverse great Lords, to desire them not to
sail him of their aids. La Sagne having received an answer from the
Constable, and Vidame de Chartres, came unto the Court, where he delivered
certain letters, and as he stayed fro an answer, he was so indiscreet,
that he suffered himself to be undermined by one Captain Bonual, who having
discovered it unto those of Guise, ran after him, and brought him prisoner to
Fountainebleau, where the letters of Vidame de Chartres being read, wherein he
promised the Prince to maintain his just quarrel against all men, except the
king, his brethren, and the Queens: those of Guise sent to apprehend him
within Parris, and to keep him prisoner in the Bastille, where they used him
with most great rigor, until he died.

They found not so good a bait in the Constables letters, or at the least,
would make no show thereof, because they would not trouble themselves with so
many things at once. La Sagne was well paid for his prating, for that his
nostrils were stretched in such sort, that he told all whatsoever he knew,
and more then truth, to prolong his miserable life. Mean time, his co^fessions
made upon the rack, caused those of Guise in all haste to dispatch their
affairs: for first to their great dishonor, and disadvantage of their
kinswoman, they agreed with the Queen of England, provided for the frontiers
of Lorraine, caused the old troops that came out of Dauphine and Piedemont,
to lie along by the river of Loire, writing on both sides to their partakers.

A proposition in the Council, for calling a Parliament at Fontainebleau.
On the other side, the Queene-mother, that feared least she should be
disgraced, whatsoever might happen by the advice of the Chancellor and the
Admiral, to whom as then she made show willingly to hearken, she resolved to
cause a motion to be made in open council, that it were requisite, that the
king should assemble, all the Princes, Lords, knights of the Order, and men of
authority in his Realm, to take order for the pacifying of the troubles,
which they esteemed specially to proceed because of the persecutions against
those of the religion.

Those of Guise found this resolution to be good, thinking thereby to find a
means to entrap both the king of Navarre and his brother, trusting likewise,
for that most part of those that should assemble, were of their retinue, that
nothing should pass therein, but for their advantage: and that this meeting
would wholly break off the calling of the general States, and by that means
make a sure ground for their affairs. Whereupon they began to write into all
places, in the Kings name, who desired every man to be at Fontainebleau, upon
the 15. day of August, for the causes aforesaid. Those of Guise sent letters
likewise from themselves, full of all good promises and rewards. The King
likewise wrote unto the King of Navarre, desiring him to be there, with his
brother, and all such Lords, who as then were with him. But covertly by the
means of secret practices, those of Guise dealt in such sort, that the King of
Navarre resolved not to come, and that against the advice of the Constable and
diverse great Lords, who said and affirmed, that as then the means presented it
self, whereby to put down those of Guise, and to reestablish the lawful
government of the Realm. And to conclude, the Constable verily supposing that
the Princes would be theee, sailed not to come thither with above 800. horse,
which constrained those of Guise, as then weak, to fly softly, and to show a
good countenance unto the Constable and his Nephews.

The Admiral presented a petition to the King, in the behalf of the religion.
The 21. of August they were assembled, wherein there was not one of the Princes
of the blood, and before they began to debate of any matter, the Admiral
presented a request unto the King, for those of the religion in France, whose
desire was, that it would please his Majesty to grant them liberty of
Churches, and free exercises of their religion in all places. The King having
hanked the Admiral for his vigilancie, fidelity and sincere affection, caused
the petition to be openly read, and then having declared from point to point,
the cause of that assembly, desired the assistance, every man in particular,
freely and without fear or passion, to give him counsel, as occasion and
necessity therein should require: that done, the Queen Mother and the
Chancellor spoke, and the Duke of Guise and the Cardinal, offered (but in
general) to render up an account of their administration: which finished that
days meeting, the assembly being remitted until the 23. of August, whereunto
Monluc, Moruilliers, du Mortier, and d'Auanson, al four of the privy Council,
opposed themselves. But he that spoke most to effect, and that deserved most
praise to be a faithful Counselor, was Charles de Marillac, Archbishop of
Vienne: Oration and advise of Marillac.
who by notable reasons, lively desciphered, showed that it was requisite to
assemble a nactionall Council, thereby to remedy the differences in religion,
and the third Estate, to direct the government of the Realm. But he lived not
long after this Oration made, and many spoke diversely of his death.

The Admirals Oration censured by those of Guise.
The next day being the 23. of the month of August, the Admiralles turn fell
out to speak, whose Oration tended to the ordering of religion and the Estate,
before mentioned by Marillac, but with far more eloquent phraise, whereunto
he added a most grave and wise censure, against those that by inuironing the
king with double guardes, learned him to fear his subjects, and his subjects
to hate their Prince, desiring the king most certainly to be persuaded, that
all his subjects reverenced him, and bare most earnest and hearty affection
unto him.

The Duke of Guise much grieved and offended at that which the Admiral had
spoken, specially touching the new guards, made a large discourse unto the
contrary, in such sort, that he showed himself in great perplexity, with all
the wit he had, to defend his broken cause. His brother the Cardinal, walked
with some more deliberation upon those pricking thorns, assaying to refute
the humble protestations contained in the request presented by the Admiral, in
the name of all those of the religion, who from that time forth, was most
extremely hated by those of Cuise, who nevertheless at that time made show
not to dislike in any sort, that a general assembly of the Estates should be
assigned, and that as touching religion, they propounded an other advise, which
likewise was allowed, as in the articles following you may read.

A Parlia-assigned the 10. of December.
And according to the resolution upon the last of August, letters were
dispatched unto all Bailiffes and Stewards, signifying unto them, that the
Estates general, were assigned to meet upon the tenth of December next
ensuing, within the Town of Meaux, to the end they should take order, to cause
Deputies to be chosen against that time. But in this Commission there ran a
clause: which was, that during such elections, the Governors and Lieftenants
of Provinces, should severally visit the Towns: to inquire and understand the
peoples griefs, and to bring them unto the King, that provision and good order
might be taken for the good of every Province.

A Sinode of the Clargie the 20. of January.
By the same letters, he assigned the Bishops, Prelates, and other
Ecclesiastical persons, to be at Parris upon the 20. of January next after
ensuing, to advise and take counsel, what shall be fit and convenient to be
showed unto the general Council, exhorting them in the mean time, to reform
that which belongs to be reformed and amended by the Church: further,
commanding them to be watchful over their adversaries, termed wicked spirits,
composed of the remnants of the rebellion and tumult of Amboise.

Gathering of troops of Soldiers.
Those of Guise having by this means assured themselves against the Princes, the
next day sent letters in the kings name, unto all Bailiffes and Stewards, for
the assembly of men at arms, or lanciers, to be ready by the 20. day of the
month of September, the distribution whereof, was done in such manner, that the
companies were all mingled, and the suspected environed, with others that might
set upon them both before and behind, the commanders having charge to take and
put to the sword, al such as they once esteemed or suspected to march to aid
the Princes. On the other side, because the declaration which those of the
religion had directed unto the Princes, in many points concerned those or
Guise. At the denial of John du Tillet, a certain young Counselor named Des
Autels of Charrolois, presented himself, that (under the title of an Oration
unto the people of France) made an answer unto it, and with privilege from
the King, caused it to be imprinted. But this Orarout was so well schooled by a
replye made thereunto, that never after he durst hold up his nose, and was
disauouched by the Cardinal, that only had set him on work, saying, that
both time, and his actions, would soon procure him reason at the hands of his
enemies. And those of Guise having joined the forces, Letters from the king, to
the king of Navarre, and the prince of Conde, with their answers.
returned out of Scotland, with the old troops of Piedemont, Metz, and
Picardie, they caused them to approach near unto them, with 1200. launciers,
reserved, besides the deuisions made within the Provinces, and sent a message
in the Kings name unto the King of Navarre, whereby the Prince of Conde was
charged to have enterprised against the Estate of France, and to have sought to
cease upon the least Towns, to have them in his possession, for which cause
he desired the King of Navarre, to send his brother unto him, under strong and
safe conduction, which if he refused, he said he should in person be
constrained to go thither, with such a train, that it would not be for his
commodity.

The King of Navarre and his brother, made a grave and bold answer, which
was, that if their accusers would make themselves known, and seem to defend
the accusation against them, and being bereaved of that authority which they
usurped, they with a small company would present themselves before the King:
where in his presence, they would evidently show him, that such accusers, were
the parties guilty, to whose most false reports they besought his Majesty in
any sort not to give credit. The kings word given to the princes to entrap them.


This answer made those of Guise to seek another course, and therevppon
dispatched an other message, whereby the King sent word unto the Princes, that
they might without all fear come unto him, and return again when they thought
good, assuring them by the word of a King, that nothing should be done or
attempted against their persons in any sort whatsoever, that he would peaceably
hear both their causes, and instifications, without committing them to prison,
or once making process against them, that his desire was only to have an
answereby word of mouth, touching the points wherewith the Prince was charged,
which the King could not in any sort believe: and to conclude, that they should
be received and used according to their estates and dignities: yea, and that
they should have their places restored, that of order and custom belonged unto
them, touching the mannaging of the affairs of the land, to the end, to have
their counselles and advise, thereby to reduce all things into a good and
polliticke order, They were betrayed by Amaury Bouchart, Chancellor of Navarre.
without any troubling or molesting the Prince, concerning the religion which
he professed. The like letters were written unto them by the Queene-mother.

At the first, the King of Navarre had a good courage, but having heard that
the affairs in Lyonnois and Dauphin, had succeeded otherwise then he esteemed,
begun to draw back, although the Deputies of the Provinces, offered to
assemble their troops for his security, before the French launciers had
stopped the passages: or if he found that not to be expedient, they promised to
assemble themselves in all places, to strengthen him when he should go unto
the Parliament. He had a Chancellor named Amaury Bouchart, Master of Requests
unto the king, who from the beginning, had been very earnest to move him to
hearken unto the declarations and requests, daily made unto him from all the
parts of the Realm: but this Bouchart having heard that the enterprise made
against Lions by Maligny, had taken an other effect then he expected, wrote
secretly unto the king, desiring him to separate the Prince of Conde, from the
king of Navarre his brother, because that without ceasing he never left off to
solicit him, to do diverse things against his Majesty's officers, as also to
trouble the Realm, at the only instance of certain Lutherians and Preachers,
that came from Geneua, whereunto he said, his master would by no means
hearken, but that it was to be feared, that in the end, by long and
importunate suit, he would divert him: whereof he said, he could not choose
but advertise his Majesty, whose most humble, natural, and faithful subject
he was, and always would be, as also one of the Ministers of his justice.

He wrote other letters of the same effect unto the Cardinal, promising him
by word of mouth, to certify him of certain things of great importance, which
as then he durst not write: and to conclude, he promised him the means, to
give him intelligence, how and in what sort he should devise and frame process
against the greatest Lords of the Realm. Speaking of Geneua, he meant Theodore
de Beza, whom the King had expressly sent for, by the counsel of the said
Bouchart himself, to meet with diverse other notable personages, from all the
parts of France, whose advise, specially of Beza, was, in any sort to procure
that the conclusion of Fontainbleau, touching the assembly of the Estates
should be observed, and fully executed. But that advise was not followed, and
that touching Beza, he returned with great danger of his person, having begun
to preach publicly in Nerac, where the king of Navarre in person was
assistant. Some were of opinion, that Iarnac, who had wholly withdrawn himself
from the Princes, with S. Foy his brother, before that Lieftenant of the
company of launciers, belonging to the Prince of Conde, had practiced with
Bouchart to write those letters.

They determine to go to the king.
The Princes giving credit unto the kings word, and upon the protestations and
promises made unto them by his Agents, and among others, the Cardinal of
Bourbon his brother, sent expressly unto them, accepted the Kings offer, and
having written unto the king, that they would ride to Orleans with a small
train, before the assembly of the Estates should be prepared. And being at
Limoges, they were presently visited by diverse Lords and Gentlemen, to the
number of seven or eight hundredth, well mounted and armed at all points: they
made them offer of six thousand, footmen out of Gascon, and Poicton, mustered
and reaeie to march, 4000. both on horse and foot, out of Languedoc, and as
many or more out of Normandy: with full assurance of the good wills of most
part of the men at arms or launciers, and presents of money, so it would please
the king of Navarre, to declare himself Protector of the King and of the
Realm, against the house of Guise. But the evil servants, which as then
attended on him, as Descars and his companions, (for Bouchart had withdrawn
himself) gave him so many alarmes, and devised such inconveniences, under
pretense, that they did not deliver unto the^ a sum of money of three or four
hundredth thousand crowns, to look better into those affairs, that being at
Vertueil, where another good Agent (being the Cardinal of Armaignac) came unto
him, he dismissed all his company, and countermanded those that were coming,
with many thanks and promises, most earnestly to employ himself in the
Parliament, for the good and benefit of all the Estates of France. They having
showed him many reasons for the same, and desired that at the least, the Prince
of Conde might stay behind, thereby to hold their enemies insuspence: he
answered, that their innocence should suffice, that it was no easy matter to
put the Princes of the blood to death, that if their lives were taken away,
they would receive their deaths with patience: that God had means sufficient
to deliver the Realm of France, which that they should be the cause of the
loss and ruin of so many honest men, that desired to join with them. The
Princess of Conde, a Lady for her time, as wise and virtuous as any could be
found, used all the means she could, to diswade her husband from that voyage:
but all in vain, the Lords and Gentlemen that had accompanied the Princes,
being upon the point of their retract, after many humble congratulations,
protested that by those means, being so unfortunately destituted of their
heads, yet they doubted not but that God would raise them others, thereby to
save and deliver them from the oppression of Lyrants. Those words used in the
presence of their secret servants, being rehearsed to those of Guise, were
causes to hang new belles at their ears, and in the mean time, understanding
that the Princes were already entered into their journey, they caused Monsieur
de Mompesat, one of their confederates, in the kings name, expressly to forbid
the Princes coming unto the court, upon pain of death not to enter into any
of the kings walled Towns: as then they were already enclosed among the
forces of their enemies, under the conduct of Marshall de Terms. The Cardinal
d'Armaignac, Descars, and others, untrusty servants, made the king of Navarre
believe, that this verbal commandment of Montpesat, was only but a mere
brauado of those of Guise, which both the king and his mother would disauouch.

The Princes refusing all aduertisements, went unto Orleans
The Princes having past Chastelleraut, were more certainly advertised of their
michiefe to come, and counseled to keep the high ways, because of diverse
Ambassadors that were appointed and set to kill them, if they once went out of
the way, under pretense that they sought to save themselves, and at the same
time, means was offered unto them, to bring them unto Angers, and so into
Normandy, where they should want nothing: but they continued in their first
resolution, traveling by easy iourneyes, and it seemed that one of the
brethren was as a Provost Marshall, that led the other to prison. Thereupon
those of Guise led the king to Orleans, thither calling all the Nobility and
men of arms: which made both young and old to think, that some pretense was
meant against the Sates: but by a rumor spread abroad, it was said, that all
those forces being assembled and brought together, was to assiege and chastise
Orleans: whereof the principal Citizens were registered in the Criminal books,
to pass the danger, and by their confiscations, to grease the hands of diverse
hungry Courtiers, under pretense, that they had been of the enterprise of
Amboise.

Rigorous dealing toward those of Orleans.
For this cause Mansieur de Sipierre, a slave to those of Guise, appointed for
Lieftenant to the Prince de la Roche Suryon, Governor of Orleans, being
arrived in the Town, about the beginning of October, disarmed the Inhabitants,
filled such houses (as were suspected) with Soldiers, and committed the
custody of the Gates unto the Sheriffs.

The Prince their Governor, being entered therein about the twelfth of the
same month, and received with honor by the principal Citizens, advertised
them, that the king would make his entry therein, upon the seventeenth day
ensuing, which term being prolonged for the space of one day, upon the
eighteenth he made his enterie. The troops of the Town being in number about
four thousand men, to whom they had restored their arms, only their
Bastianadoes: the principal Citizens following in good order, and all the
streets hanged with Tapistrie and other hangings.

The king beheld all those troops passing along through the Subburbes, which
being reentered into the Town, he mounted on horseback, riding under a
Canapie of cloth of Gold, and so went straight unto the Church: and being on
the way, his horse stumbled in such manner, that he had surely fallen, if he had
not presently bin relieved. After dinner, all the troops went to meet the
Queen, who likewise made an honorable and brave entry: but those of Guise
were at neither of both, fearing (as some say) to meet with some desperate
fellow that might hurt them: because a Magician in Rome had showed the
Cardinal, that both he and his brother should die a violent death.

The arrival of the Princes in Orleans, and bow they were received.
The Even before all Saints day, being the last of October, the Princes
trusting to their innocencies, and reposing themselves upon the grace of God,
to whom they recommended themselves, as also caused al those of the religion by
prayers to do the like, arrived at Orleans, and past from the beginning of the
gate, until they came to the kings lodging, in the Estappe, through diverse
soldiers, all footmen, ranged along in ranks so close together, all armed,
that all that long way, not any man could pass between them. Not one Courtier
nor Townes-man stepped forth to meet them, only the Cardinal de Bourbon,
and the Prince de la Roche Suryon, who by express license, had obtained that
favor, received them.

The king of Navarre according to the custom, desiring to enter on horseback
within the Court Gate, was put back with a rude answer, that the great Gates
might not be opened: they being then constrained to light, went into the king,
that stayed for them in the great Hall, accompanied with his uncles of Guise,
and other Courtiers, whereof not one of them once stepped forward to meet them.

Their entertainment was but mean, and after due and solemn reverence, night
grew on, which caused the king to go into his mothers Chamber, followed only
by the Princes, those of Guise not once seeking to enter. The Queen mother
having received them with the water standing in her eyes, the king speaking
unto the Prince of Conde, said, he had been advertised from diverse places,
The Kings speech to the Prince of Conde. The Princes answer.
that he sought to make diverse enterprises against him and the State of his
Realm, for the which cause he had sent for him, to hear what he could say by
word of mouth.

The Prince, that neither wanted courage, nor audacitie, answered boldly in
his own defense, and in such sort discovered those of Guise his enemies, His
imprisonment.
that the king could not otherwise judge, but that great wrong and injury was
offered unto his blood: nevertheless, according to the conclusion made before
his arrival, the king commanded Chauigny Captain of the guard, expressly
sent thither by those of Guise, to take the Prince: which he did, and led
him prisoner unto a house not far from thence, before the which there was
erected a Fort of Brick, fluncard, and filled with field-peeces, and diverse
cannoniers to keep them, which pieces beat along three streets, whereby it
was able to defend all men from coming near unto the prison. The windows of
his chamber were closed up, and he was kept so straightly that no man spoke
unto him, but only his Chamberlain. The king of Navarre desired that his
brother might be committed unto his charge, The entertainment of the King of
Navarre, and others.
and he would gage his life for his forth coming, but it was refused him:
and touching himself, his guard was taken from him, and still having watch
about him both by night and day.

At the same time, certain were sent to cease upon Madame du Roye, mother in
law to the Prince, being in her house of Anicy in Picardie, from whence with
great rigor she was brought unto Saint Germains, by Monsieur de Renouart, and
de Caronges: executers of that commission. They likewise sorgot not the
Counselor la Hay at Parris, as one that dealt for the Prince: such as were
his faithful friends within Orleans, withdrew themselves out of the danger.
Bonchart, Chancellor to the king of Navarre, at the same time was taken in
his own house, by Iarnac, who in show made great appearance of disliking:
Bouchart threatening him in presence of those that took him, to cause him as a
Traitor to loose his head: but all this was but words, and nothing else. The
papers were not forgotten, Bouchart taken and led to prison. Imprisonment of
the Bailiffe of Orleans.
and Bouchart was led to Orleans, and then to Melun, with other prisoners
that came from Lions, by that means to make ready the proofs against the
Prince, whose process was followed with all diligence. Hierome Groslot, Bailiffe
of Orleans, a man both learned, virtuous, and full of piety: a lover of the
good and quietness of the Commonwealth, and an enemy to all Tyrants and
factious persons, abhorring avarice and ambition: within two days after the
Princes arrival, was likewise committed prisoner: having three dangerous
witnesses against him, which were his office, a goodly house within the the
City, and another in the country. The cause pretended, was, that his father
had been Chancellor to the deceased king of Navarre: and he in Orleans, the
Protector of those of the religion, and an affected friend unto the Princes.

Further, when time came that he should make an Oration unto the king, at his
entry into the Town, the Bailiffe moved at some wrong offered unto him, as
it appeared, as he went toward the king, together with the kings countenance,
that looked frowningly upon him, he could not utter his mind as he had
first determined: and thereupon those of Guise took some occasion to accuse
him unto the King: saying, that he felt his own conscience to be guilty of
his treason.

Being in prison, false witnesses, whereof the Curate of Saint Pattern, and the
Vicar of Saint Catherine, were the principal, with Jacques Aleaume, Jacques
L'huillier, le Borgne, le Alemant, and Jacques Masnet, accused him to have
determined to deliver Orleans unto the King of Navarre: to be of the
intelligence of Amboise, and to have been in a certain assembly holden by
night within the great Churchyard, as also to have manifestly supported those
of the religion.

Dauanson maker of the process.
The maker of the process was Dananson, a slave to those of Guise, that sent such
witnesses, as he perceived not to be sufficiently instructed, unto the Curate
of Saint Pattern: that by him they might understand their lesson. Marshall de
Brissac had already laid hold upon the house in the country, named l'Isle,
and in fantasy made division of the goods in Sipierre: and Boyuin, his
Secretary, was so bold to say unto the wife of Groslot, that if she would
speak boldly, showing her, that she must come off with money unto his Master,
the Bailiffes affairs might speed the better.

The Guises practices open the mouths of the estates of the Provinces.
Out of the Kealme, those of Guise had made the Pope, the king of Spain, and
others, to think that at that time, they would root out all those that bare
the name of Lutherians within France, whom they held bound both hand and foot,
hoping that winter, to clear them all out of the country: in the springtime
to send them into Almaine and Switzerland, to visit their friends: but their
devises could not impeach diverse and several assemblies in many Provinces, (to
determine and devise what were best for them to present at the Parliament) to
give them some new work: whereof the Orations made at Blois, Angers, Parris,
Bazin, Plessis, Grimaudet, Capel, and others, are proofs sufficient: as also
in most part of the other Provinces, when the oppressors were discovered, and
the people disposed to provide by lawful means against so many disorders,
introduced and maintained by strangers: many of them having openly said, that
they would not endure, that those of Guise should so oppress the Princes of
the blood: whereof most part that used that speech, Conspiracy to extirpe
those of the religion.
were men of the religion: and those of Guise being advertised, could well
show and propound this article of religion unto the Duke de Montpensier, and
other great Lords, in diverse places of the Realm, to make them the readier and
more prompt to lean unto them.

The hope of confiscations being mixed therewith, which made many ravening
fellows to look about them: there was nothing offered, but Estates, Offices,
Benefices, Mountains of Gold, to such as would aid and assist the King, to
extirpe and root out the enemies of the Church of Rome.

Passages kept that no aid should come.
Besides that, the kings forces were divided by those of Guise, into the Towns
next about Orleans, as far as Bourges, Moulins, Blois, Tours, Saumur, Angers,
Chinon, Loudun, and Poicton, and in all the passages from whence they esteemed
that any aid might be procured to help the Princes that were prisoners.
Those of the religion were narrowly looked unto in diverse Towns, specially in
Parris: mean time they proceeded unto the framing of the process against the
Prince. But because of the observation of the forms of justice, The manner of
proceeding against the Prince.
neither the informations made at Lions, against the Marshall of Saint Andre,
nor the prisoners of Melun, were sufficient: they produced the Princes words
used at Amboise, lamenting the death of so many Gentlemen that were executed,
with that which he had uttered riding to Bearn, unto Monsieur de Genlis, that
had renounced the Ceremonies of the Romish Church, to the end, that not being
able to accuse him of high treason, they would condemn him of Heresy.

To strengthen this second proof, those of Guise sent a Priest unto him,
apparelled after the Romish manner, which certified him, that he had express
commandment from the King, to sing Mass before him in his chamber. But the
Priest with a rude answer was sent back again by the Prince, with
commission, to show the King from him, that he was not come thither in any
sort to be perticipant or communicate with the impieties and pollutions of the
Roman Antichrist, His magnanimity in Religion.
whereunto, long before he had renounced: but only to yield him an answer
unto the false and forged accusations imposed against him. Which answer was not
forgotten, but thereof a large article was framed, both by the deposition of
the Priest, and of the guarde.

As also his accusations against those of Guise.
This magnanimity much moved those of Guise, but much more in that the Prince
spoke openly against them, to their discredits: oftentimes showing a bag which
he held in his hand, affirming it to be the process of those Brigands and
Guisian thieves: by the which, many points of high treaon, whereof they were
culpable, were well proved and verified: which he kept and reserved to
present unto the estates, thereby to give them knowledge of their subtle and
unlawful governments, that imputed their own treasons unto the Princes of the
blood, that sought to oppose themselves against their tyrannies: and that if
ever any man ever sought or meant to enterprise any thing against the King and
his Realm, it would be those Harpiers and vpsprung house of Lorraine. A
Gentleman one of their Participants, and in time past, very familier with the
Prince, was appointed by them to confer with him, He pronounces war
against the Guisians.
as also to sound his full meaning and intent, and therewith to seek to abate
his courage: which he pretending, the Prince desired him to show those of
Guise, that for his part he had received so many and great wrongs and
injuries at their hands, that their quarrel could never be fully ended,
either at the swords point, or else by Lanuce: which if he could not effect,
yet he hoped before his death, to make them manifestly to be known and
found culpable of those faults, by them imposed upon him. This most haughty
resolution, caused them to send for the President de Thou, Barthollomewe Faye,
and Jacques Violle, Counecllours of Parris, certain Masters of the requests,
Bourdin, Attorney General, They seek to make his process.
and du Tillet the Clarke, to examine the Prince upon high Treason: and that
if they could not find him guilty thereof, they should then examine him
upon the Artickles of his faith.

The Prince answered them, that it belonged not unto them to put any such
questions unto him, not specifying diverse causes of refusing them therein,
which he might well have showed: specially against de Thou, whom he most
sharpelye reproved, and when they enterprised to proceed further in law, the
Prince appealed unto the King. But the next day being the 15. of November, the
peale was declared by the privy Counsel to be of no force: from which the
Prince having once again appealed, he was commanded upon pain of high
treason to answer before those Commissioners, He purges himself of treason,
and openly professes religion.
which he did: having two Councellers to help him. And before them, he
clearly acquitted himself of treason: and boldly confessed and avouched the
religion. Not long after, the Secretary Robertet, brought him a certain paper
containing diverse speeches, pretended to have been spoken by him at Amboise,
beholding the execution of certain prisoners. He therewith at large expounded
his meaning upon those speeches, yet was there no witnesses produced against
him for the same, no nor Bouchart himself, that had faithfully promised unto
the Cardinal by word of mouth, to show him many wonderful things touching
the Prince, but they proceeded so far, that upon his aunsweres, he had
judgment of death pronounced upon him, and his head to be stricken off, upon
a Scaffold before the Kings Palace, upon the tenth of December then next
ensuing, at the entering of the Estates into the Parliament.

He is condemned by the privy Council and participants of Guise.
It is affirmed and published by writing, that this judgment was underwritten
and sealed by all the privy Council, (only the Chancellor and Monsieur de
Mortier, that delayed it off) as also by diverse great Lords and Barrons, by the
eighteen knights of the Order newly chosen, and by diverse others, participants
of the house of Guise, and by more Masters of Requests, and Councillors of
the Parliament, which the king sent for, and caused to come thither, that not
once dealt in the cause.

The Count de Sancerre refused to sign it, desiring the King with weeping
eyes, rather to cut off his head, then once to move him thereunto, whereat the
King much abashed, dismissed the Count, not pressing him any further therein.
They likewise used many rude and hard dealings toward the Princess of Conde,
who very stoutly and with a meruellous courage, sued for her husband.

Means and subtilties used, that no speech should be had in the Parliament
touching religion.
At the sametime, the Pope published a Bull, bearing date the twentieth of
November, wherein he promised a general Council for the ordering and
determining of matters of religion, assigning it to be holden within the town
of Trent, upon Easter day, then next ensuing. On the other side, the Cardinal
of Lorraine, had given order, to write and Register, the names of all the
principail of the religion, in every Province throughout France: which rolls
were made and diliuered unto him.

All those that held on the Princes parts, and with religion, were as then
judged to die, thereby to cease all quarrelles, and that no more speech might
once be moved touching the reformation of religion, seeing as then the
affairs concerning the same, were in that estate which those of Guise desired:
and for the execution of so high and haughty enterprises, as the assembly of
the Estates, whereby the liberty of France should wholly have been
ouerthrown: the forces of the Realm divided into four parts, under the
conducts of the Duke d'Aumale, the Marshals of Saint Andre, de Brissac, and de
Terms, marched to clear the Provinces of all suspected persons touching
religion: to furnish the charges thereof, they took the third part of all
Ecclesiastical revenues, the Gold and Silver of Relicques, and the Treasures
of the Temple: with promise that the confiscations should restore it all again.

For supply of Soldiers, the Pope dispensed with all the Clergy, and
promised to furnish them with a great number of men of that calling. As
touching the extermination of the Princes and Lords, they proceeded therein
with time and leisure.

The King of Navarre was to be confined unto the Castle of Leches, the
Admiral into the great Tower of Bourges, with all his children, his Nephews
in another Tower within Orleans, which after that, was called the Admiral,
hard by that of Saint Aignan, prepared for the chief Citizens of the Town.

Determination to kill the king of Nanarre, marnellously preserved.
The Marshals of Saint Andre and Brissac, being arrived at the Court* were of
advise, that the King of Navarre should be slain, without troubling
themselves to set a guard to keep him: whereupon they determined to poison
him at a banquet, and then upon an evening, to kill him as he went from the
kings chamber: which taking no effect, the king was desired to do it, and to
stabbe him with his Poniard, and so to shed his own blood, which Gods
merciful providence would not permit, although it seemed to be almost upon
the point of execution, the King having the Poniard ready under his Gown,
being already entered into certain rough speeches against the King of
Navarre, who in presence of those of Guise, made him so sufficient and good an
answer, that he escaped. An other pretense was sought to get him to ride
abroad to hunt, and in hunting to kill him.

The Constable had not as yet entered into the Lackes, but they were minded to
constrain him thereunto, having already sent out commission to lay hands
upon Monsieur d'Anuille, his second son. As touching the Admiral and his
two brethren, the declaration by them made, (specially the Admiral and
d'Andelot) to be of the religion, was cause sufficient to condemn them.
Means used to entrap and extirpe all those of the religion.
Which to effect, the king sent commission to all the knights of the Order, to
certify them, that he would hold a general feast of the Order, upon
Christinas day then next after ensuing: minding (all excuses set apart) that
every man should as then come thither: which being expected, the Doctors of
the Sorbonists, framed such a confession of the faith, that not any man, how
little feeling soever he had of the religion, would for a thousand lives have
once signed or consented thereunto.

The day being come, this confession was to have been presented by the King
himself, unto the knights, he being the first that should set hand unto it,
requiring the like of every one of them, with oath and promise to hold and
observe the same vnuiolably in every point, and to set upon and ouerrunne all
such as should deny it, without exception either of friends or Parents
whatsoever: and whosoever should make the least denial, or any delay,
presently without further inquisition, form, or manner of proceeding, the king
should degrade him of the Order, and as also of estates, dignities, and
honors, and the next day after, he should be burnt. The like should also be
done upon the same day, by an assembly of Cardinals, thereby to intrappe the
Cardinal of Chastillon: that done, all the Princes and Lords of the Realm,
should come to sign to that confession: then all the Gentlemen and Domestical
Officers to the king. The Chancellor had commandment to do the like among
the Masters of Requests, Judges, Secretaries, and other Officers of the Courts
of Parliaments.

The Queene-mother took the charge upon her, to cause all the Ladies and
Gentlewomen of the Court to do the like: it being enjoined unto al those that
had any retinue or household to cause them to follow the same rule, upon pain
to answer to the contrary at their perils. After that, it was to be sent unto
all the Parliaments, Baliages, Stewardships, and other Jurisdictions of the
Realm, to exact the like confession of faith upon every man, and whosoever
delayed or failed therein, to be presently burnt, without any other form or
manner of process. If any belonging unto the Princes or Lords of the Guises
part, were exempted from death, for having refused to sign, and after repented
their fault, for his penance, all his life after, he should wear a Sanuenito
or colored robe, after the manner of Spain, for a perpetual shame and
ignominy.

The Curates and Vicars, were charged to go unto all the houses of their
Parishes, accompanied with the Clerks, Notaries, and other such persons
thereunto appointed, to take the Signatures, and to keep a just record of the
number of every particular Jurisdiction. New Commissions likewise being sent
out unto the Captains and Gentlemen, perticipants with those of Guise, to raise
men of the same confession, that they might justly execute that which should
be given them in charge.

The Deputies for the Estates, put in fear and hardly handled.
As the Deputies for the Estates arrived, and the tenth of December approaching
for the beginning of the Parliament, express commandment was given them from
the king, upon pain of death, that not any of them should once be so bold,
as to utter one word in open Parliament touching religion, because his Majesty
had otherwise disposed thereof. But some of them not refraining to say, that
the letters of commission to assemble, specified the same. Those they sought by
fair means to appease, or else to blind their eyes with the Popes new made
Bull, with the assembly of a Council: others they put in fear: and to some
they made faires promises, but to such as were not of the religion, they partly
made them privy to their intents aforesaid. At that instant, there arrived a
packet from the Count de Villards, Lieftenant for the Constable in Longuedoc:
who wrote, that the Deputies for that Province, that were appointed to sit in
Parliament, were such, as were most affected unto religion, and such as would
not fail to ask the liberty thereof, as having special charge to do it:
whereupon men were presently sent forth for to arrest them, but they taking
an other way to Orleans, without giving leave to enter into their lodgings,
they were ceased upon, with all their notes, containing most ample
instructions, both for the good and benefit of the Estate, and religion.

Constancy of the king of Navarre.
On the other side, certain Captains and soldiers solicited the king of
Navarre, to save himself, presenting him with the means: diverse of his
friends aduertising him of many dangers that might happen unto him by staying
there. But he committing his life into the hands of God, and doubting least
his retrait would rather be cause to bereave him of his life, refrained that
counsel, so that whatsoever either friends or enemies could say unto him, yea,
although he might easily perceive himself to be openly disdayned and mocked
by the Courtiers, he would not forsake the Town, neither yet leave his
brother, before he had seen what would be the effect thereof.

The Admiral goes to Orleans.
The Admiral sent for by the king to come to Orleans, without making any
account of his friends, and other his familiars disswations, showing him into
what danger he would thereby bring himself, presently took his voyage, and
being arrived at the Court, he understood by the Queene-mother, that the
Cardinal had fully determined to ask him a reason of his faith in the
presence of the King, praying him not wilfully to put himself in danger. His
constant answer was reported unto the Cardinal, who therevppon made his full
account, that either the Admiral should as then renounce the religion, or else
loose his life.

The day before the Prince should be executed, the King fell sick.
Upon Sunday, being the ninth of December, as a part of the Kings household
were already departed from Orleans, to go to Chambourg and Chenoncean, the
king of Navarre in the morning going to salute the King, he was warned to come
forth, and to ride on hunting, until the States were come: but he excused
himself, considering his brothers captivity, yet had he express
commandment, the next morning to prepare himself to ride: upon the which
day, his brother should have lost his head: but that day the common Proverb
was truly verified: which is, that God can alter all men's actions: for that the
same day, about four of the clock in the Evening, the King being at Evening
prayer, at the Iacobins, he fell in a sound, wherewith he was presently
carried into his Chamber, where being revived, he began to complain of his
head, on that side of his left ear, wherein he had a continual Phisola, in
such sort, that with the pain, a Fever ceased upon him. Which
notwithstanding, Those of Guise seek to withstand the blow.
those of Guise caused diverse commissions to be sent abroad unto the Captains
of their part, to raise men in diverse Provinces: and not long before,
commission had been given unto the Marshall de Terms, to march to meet the
Spaniards, as then coming unto Rayonne, and with them to enter into Bearn. The
Viscounte d'Orthe, Governor of Bayonne, had commandment from the King, to
put the Town (if need were) into the king of Spaines hands, thereby to serve
him for a passage for his army to enter into the county of Navarre, where he
was, to wast and destroy all the land, and then to proceed with the overthrow
and utter extirpation of all the Gentlemen and Lords, who in those countries
had favored the King of Navarre, or the enterprise of Amboise. But a great
part of those Lords and Gentlemen, not minding to sell their skins so good
cheap, raised arms, to the number of seven or eight hundredth horse well
mounted, with five or six thousand footmen, who were all appointed, so soon
as Marshall de Terms should have past Limoges, to enclose him between two
rivers: whereof he being advertised, and remembering Graueling, he retired in
all haste unto Poictiers, giving advise unto the Court what had happened unto
him: whereat those of Guise being abashed, and perceiving the king to wax
weaker, and every day sicker then other, determined with desperate minds to
kill the king of Navarre, who not long before being advertised thereof, made
his complaint unto the Queen Mother: which notwithstanding his enemies would
not leave off, but by all means sought to effect it, if it had not been for the
Cardinal of Tournon, that gave them counsel to stay their enterprise, until
the Constable, with his sons and Nephews, were come unto the Court, least
that by killing the one, they should chance to move a greater danger, and to
stir those up, that might procure far greater trouble then the Princes
could effect. Mean time, the king of Navarre took great care to look unto
himself, yet all that he could do, would not have prevailed, if his enemies had
set upon him.

The kings disease increasing more and more, the ^uke of Guise began to utter
his chollor against the Physicians, the Cardinal sent on Pilgrimages, But no
man can strive against God.
and used Friars and Priests at Parris and other places, to make processions:
and the king made a solemn promise unto all the Saints in Picardie, specially
to our Lady of Glery, (as they term her) that if it pleased them to help
him, he would wholly purge his Realm of all those Hereticques. But as then
began his more ruin, and his Fever still to increase: whereat those of Guise
being abashed, what countenance soever they showed, assayed to persuade the
Queene-mother, that the kings body should be kept from burial after his
death, until such time as they had taken order for their affairs, and caused
their unjust actions to be allowed by open Parliament: to the end, that no man
might call them to account hereafter. But that was impossible, for that too
many people daily attending when the time would be, at the same time the
Vidame de Chartres, prisoner in the Bastille, having been carried from thence,
to remain within his house in Saint Anthonies street: presently upon his
arrival thither, he fell sick and died. The Bailiffe of Orleans was
committed unto the custody of his mother in law. And those of the religion as
then were drowned in most ardent prayers, tears, and fastes, thereby to
obtain some aid and succor at the hands of God, against so many imminent
dangers, that as then hung over their heads.

The Queen Mother establishes her authority to sustain those of Guise
The Queene-mother perceuing her eldest son at such extremity, taking
counsel with her self, as also of those of Guise, sent for the king of
Navarre, willing him to come unto her Chamber, where being come, and thinking
to enter, a Gentleman spoke unto him in his ear, that at any hand he should
be careful not to refuse the Queen, whatsoever she should demand, otherwise
it would cost him his life. Being entered, he found the Queen to be
accompanied with the Duke of Guise, the Cardinal of Lorraine, and a
Secretary, who with a countenance framed unto her passion, made great
complaints and declarations unto the King of of Navarre, as touching things
past, discovering her mind likewise, concerning things present, and to come:
concluding that her meaning was, and so she would have it, that the said king
of Navarre should release unto her all the right and title that he might in any
sort pretend or claim unto the Regencie, and government of the king and of the
Realm: and never seek to enjoy, require, or once desire it: and that if the
States would give it him, he should remitte it wholly unto her: and because it
should be firmly holden by them, she said he should confirm it unto her by
writing under his hand: then her meaning was, he should reconcile himself
unto her Cousins of Guise, and so deface the opinion by him conceived against
them: saying, that they ought to leave all quarrelles, and from thencefoorth
live in peace: seeing the greatest and woorthiest Lords, and Princes of the
Land, began to show them the way.

After some excuses, and effectual aunsweres made by the King of Navarre, in
the end he yielded the Regencie unto the Queen, The Regencie of the Realm
yielded to the Queen Mother.
that he should be Lieftenant for the K. in France, to take order for all the
Marshal affairs, and to receive the packets: which having opened and read, he
should send the^ unto her again, and that nothing should be done without the advice of him, and the other Princes of the blood: who from thencefoorth should
otherwise be respected: that done, she caused him to imbrase her Cousins of
Guise, and mutually on both parts, to forget all quarrelles past.

From which time forwards they all began to salute and embrace each other, as
if they never had been at mortal strife. Reconciliation of those of Guise,
with the king of Navarre.
All this was done before the arrival of the Constable and his Nephews.
Further, they caused the sick king to say unto the King of Navarre, that of
his own mind, and wholly against the wills or consents of those of Guise,
he had caused the Prince of Conde to be committed prisoner, asking his
counsel, and desiring him to believe him: and for the love of him, and of the
Queen his mother, to deface and wholly remit all the evil will and opinions,
that in any sort he might conceive of them: which after served them to some
good end. Those of Guise not well assured, The fear of those of Guise.
notwithstanding all that had been past, obtained of the Queen Mother, that
the guardes of the Gates of Orleans might be made stronger, impeaching the
entry of many persons, and commandments made in pain of death, that not any
man (whatsoever) should speak unto the Prince of Conde, without express
license and commandment from the Queen Mother, or else that he brought her
signer.

The death of King Francis the second
The 14. of December about noone, they esteemed the king to be dead, although
he departed not his life, till about five of the clock at night: not long
before his death, those of Guise went to shut themselves within their lodgings,
from whence in 36. hours after, they never came forth, before such time as
that they had a full assurance, both from the Queene-mother, and also from the
king of Navarre: and before that, they carried unto their houses the sum of
three or four score thousand Frankes, that rested in the treasor: whereunto no
man resisted, which made all men suppose, that the Queene-mother suffered them
to do it, the better to maintain her self in time to come.

A change in the court.
As Soon as the king was dead, the Queene-mother sent for the Constable unto
Estampes, in all speed to repair unto the Court: at his arrival he
discharged the guard, that were placed by those of Guise to keep the Gates of
Orleans: the Prince of Conde continued prisoner in Orleans, ten ortwelue
days after the kings death, he never having had the credit once to see him
during his imprisonment: after that, he was sent with a guard unto Han, from
whence he went to Roye, there to attend the issue of his process, in other
sort, then either his friends or enemies once conceived. Delivery of those of
the Religion.
Those of the religion, that had still remained in long and continual prayers
in their most secret assemblies for certain days, began to lift up their
heads, being all prepared and ready to die, if the king had lived but
certain weeks longer.

The king of Spaines troops marching toward Bearn, were countermanded, and so
retired without any exploit. Monluc that was promised by those of Guise, to be
made Count de Armignac, and stayed for them in that country, retired unto his
house, as others adherents unto them, which did the like: the most secret
servants that those of Guise could have within the Court, presented themselves
with all humility unto the K. of Navarre, The inconstancy of the Court.
discovering unto him ye certainty of those affairs, that should have bin
executed against his person. But the Queen Mother would not permit, that
neither then, nor at any time after, such things should once be spoken of,
thereby fearing (as she said) some great trouble that might arise. But it fell
out clean contrary, for that for want of taking order therein, when time
served, it grew to such an issue, that both she and her sons, having never
seen any other the^ mischiefs, were deep sunck into them, that before they
died, they never could find any certain issue how to avoid them. The Admiral
among the rest, wheresoever he came, glorified the wonderful works of God,
Constancy of the Admarall.
who at that time had delivered him out of the hands of his most mortal
enemies, even at such time as they thought most to triumph over him. Those of
Guise besought the Queen to make him to be silent, yet he ceased not to
offer, and also to justify the^ to be culpable of diverse points of treason, if
it pleased her to permit that justice might be given accordingly. She not
seeming to hearken thereunto, desired him to think well of them, and from that
time to live in peace, assuring him to set good order among them. His answer
was, that to show a good countenance unto those that had purchased his death,
charged his honor, procured the confiscation of his goods, with the total
ruin and overthrow of his house, his kindred, and friends, he could not do it,
without showing a double heart, which was a thing clean contrary to his
religion, and not fit for any honest man to do: yet he remitted the vengeance
unto God, that could well do it when he should see his time, seeing men would
not permit him to have justice.

Those of Guise, desiring not to be far from the assembly of the Estates,
wherein they feared some earnest matter would be propounded against them, King
Francis that had been so much moved against those of the religion, is buried
after their manner.
caused the body of the dead king, to be conuaied by Sansac and la Brosse,
unto Saint Denis, where without any solemnity, or royal pomp, it was buried.
The Duke of Guise as then great master, and having ceased upon the last
receipts of money, not long before the king died, with whom he kept company in
his life: was much dispraised and evil thought of, by reason of that great
fault: whereunto his servants answered, that as then he had no more need of
the kings help, by whom he had served his turn so well, but that thencefoorth
he was to look unto himself, and to seek to eleuate his house.

Such was the reign of Francis the second, that died at the age of 17. years
lacking one month: in the 17. month of his reign: the 17. day of his
sickness: and the 17. hour after midnight: and because that during the short
time of his reign, the seeds of civil dissension were sown and scattered in
France, which hitherto have endured for the space of twice seventeen years. I
thought at large herein to declare all that had passed in this kings time, the
better to please the Readers minds.

Here ends the troubles, that happened in the reign of Francis the second.
Charles the ninth.
M.D.LX.
The Regencie confirmed to the Queen mother.
FRANCIS the second being dead without issue, Charles his third brother
succeeded in his place, Son to Henry the second, (the second called Louys,
dying an infant) borne the 27. of January, 1550. upon the 20. of December, in
open Council, where the young king was brought, accompanied with the king of
Navarre, and other Princes of the blood, with diverse Lords and principal
Councillors, an order was established for the mannaging of affairs, and the
Regencie confirmed unto the Queen.

The Parliament.
Two days after, the Estates assembled in a great Hall within Orleans, where
the Chancellor made an Oration, wherein he showed, to what end an assembly in
that sort was to be holde^: why they had assembled: what good would happen
thereby, and wholly confuting those that were in doubt to have them meet,
painting them out in all their colors. After that, he propounded the means to
appease all troubles, The Chancellors Oration.
showing wherein they might relieve both the Estate and religion, inclining to
a Council, exhorting them on all parts, to a perfect union and quietness of
mind: lastly, he spoke of the kings debts, which done, he ended his Oration,
and so for that time, the assembly came forth.

The next day after, certain disputations were holden, to know if the Deputies
might as then enter into a Council after the kings death, De Rochefort, for
the Nobility.
whereby it seemed, all their Commissions not to be of any force: which being
decided, they began with Orations. Monsieur de Rochefort speaking for the
Nobility, approved the Regencie of the Queen Mother, complained of the
jurisdictions usurped by the Clargie: of the disorders happened among the
Nobility, and of the wrongs done unto them: set down the means to govern
the Spirituality, and to maintain them within their bounds: spoke for the
comfort of the people, specially concerning justice, showing that the Offices
for justice, oght to be freely given, justice reduced to a certain necessary
number of Officers, and that the Nobility ought not to be secluded from the
administration thereof. After that, he spoke touching the disorders used in
confiscations, and against seditions, besought the King to receive and
maintain the Nobility in their privileges, and withal, presented a request,
wherein was required the use of certain Churches for the Nobility, de l'Ange
for the third Estate.
that as then made profession of the religion. One named l'Ange, speaking for
the third Estate, entreated principally against the ignorance, avarice, and
carelessenesse of the Clergy: thereof inferring, that such faults ceasing in
them, all troubles would soon be ended. John Quintin Autunois, professor of
the civil law in Parris, appointed to make an Oration for the Clergy, (whom
the Cardinal of Lorraine had preferred, De Quintin for the Clergy.
as also for the Nobility and third Estate: but all in vain) spoke much, but
with much dirision: pronouncing nothing but by writing, and that with small
grace, having for his co^trowlers diverse of the principal Prelates and
Cardinals of the Realm. The sum of his Oration, after many and great
commendations, uttered in the behalf of the Queene-mother, was to show the
principal causes of the assembly of the Estates, not to deal in any thing
touching the reformation of religion, which cannot err: but rather to solicit
and command the Ministers of the same, duly and truly to execute their
charges, and not to permitany other religion then that of Rome: whereupon he
made a long inuection against those of the religion, and such as had desired
Churches: saying, that he which had been the messenger and presenter of their
request, (in a manner openly charging the Admiral, set right against, and face
to face with that Orator) oght to be holde^ and declaredan Hereticque, and
against him, as be-being one, they oght to proceed, according to the rigor both
of cannon and civil laws: thereby to root the mischief out of the heart of
France. He compared those of the religion unto the Arians: and the Lords that
favored the^, to the Traitor Gainas in the time of Arcadius, used all his
eloquence to prove the antiquity of the Romish religion, and that those of
the religion in France, were dispersed people, and such as sought to induce an
Anarchie, wholly unworthy of any support or good intertainment, requiring the
prohibition of all books not allowed by the Doctors of the Sorbonistes:
concluding therewith, to desire that all those of the religion might be wholly
rooted out and extinguished: which done, he directed his speech unto the king
and his mother, making request for the maintaining of the persons and goods of
the Clergy, for their elections, for the observations of the ancient Cannons,
for the exemption of Tithes, contributions, and cotisations, whereupon he
made almost a whole hours work. Lastly, he pleaded without request, for the
Nobility, for the third Estate, for the government of justice: and to
conclude, made a long discourse of the institution of a king.

The next day, the Admiral complained unto the king and to the Queen mother,
of the presumptious ignorance of de Quintin, A payment for de Quintin, Orator
for the Clergy.
that had so openly charged him, touching the presenting of a request in the
behalf of the religion, at Fontainbleau. Quiutin excused himself upon the
lesson that had been given in writing, and in his second Orarion, denied his
first, to please the Admiral: and not long after, died of sorrow and grief,
perceiving himself so well discovered, by diverse answers made unto his
Oration, wherein his Apostacy, his slanders, and his falsehoodes were fully
set down.

In the beginning of this year, the Spirituality had commandment from the
king, to be at the Council of Trent, and commission likewise was given unto
all Judges and other Officers, Order touching religion.
that they should presently release both bodies and goods of all such
prisoners, that then were kept or holden in prison for religion: defense being
made to all men whatsoever, not to injury them nor their religion, upon pain
of death.

The States continued their conference at Orleans, where the Citizens of
Orleans were much greened, that in the last kings time those of Guise had
filled their houses with soldiers, that had fed upon them at their own
pleasures, complaining that the Duke de Nemours held a great number secretly in
diverse places, to do some sudden exploit. The king of Navarre and the
Constable, being appeased, the Queen Mother caused all that complaint to
cease, contenting themselves, that the Duke disauouched them all. There rested
yet another stop, which caused the Parliament to be reiourned until the
month of May next after ensuing, to be holden at Pontoise.

The King of Navarre and the Channcellor, desiring the estates to take order
that the Kings debts might be paid: The breaking up of the Parliament.
offering to show them a particular roll thereof. The King of Navarre saying
further, that if by accounts, they found that he had received any
extraordinary gifts, he would freely restore them again. But those of Guise
and others, that could not say the like, did so much, that those matters
proceeded not any further in question, hoping that time would cause them to
speak of other things then restitutions.

Not long after, the Prince of Conde recalled unto the Court, came from la
Fere, The King justifies the Prince of Conde.
to Fontainbleau, and the next day after his arrival, entered into counsel,
upon the thirteenth of March, where in presence of them all, the king declared
that he had been sufficiently certified of his innocence, permitting him to
make a second declaration thereof at the Court of Parliament in Parris:
whither, not long after, the Prince went. On the other side, the King of
Navarre, complained to the Queene-mother, touching the Duke of Guise, that was
preferred both before himself and the Constable, and proceeded so far
therein, that both he, and the rest of the Princes of the blood, with the
Constable and diverse Noblemen, The Queen Mother assures her regency.
began to prepare themselves to depart out of the Court: but she perceived that
to be a blow wherewith to abate her government, by the Cardinal of Tournons
means, she sent for the Constable, commanding him expressly from the King,
that he should not depart from the Court. Which done, she stayed the rest, and
so brake off that matter, to her no small contentment.

The report of this coffeehouse, being spread into diverse places, the
Deputies for the assembly of the particular states of Parris, began to speak
thereof, and earnestly to agree of some order to be taken, The particular states
of Parris, see clearer then others.
touching the government of the Realm, displacing of some, and placing of
others in principal offices: to constrain those of Guise to yield an account,
touching the treasures by them received in the last Kings time, as also of
other their misbehauiours: to recall the gifts made unto the Duchess of
Valentinois, themselves and others: and that before their justification they
should not sit in counsel. The Queene-mother much troubled thereat, found no
better nor no surer means, then to make a new contract with the king of
Mauarre, and therein to employ the Constable, that by the accord between them,
the King of Navarre was expressly declared Liestenant General for the King, To
break their intent, the Queene-mother agrees with the King of Navarre.
and order set down that the Queene-mother should do nothing but by his advise
and consent. This was written and signed by them both, as also by the Council,
and namely by the Duke of Guise, who by the Queens Counsel showed himself
much more tractable then ever he did. Diverse of the King of Nauarres Council,
were of the contrary opinion, although he alleged diverse great promises made
unto him from the Queen by word of mouth, alleging that she would wholly
deny whatsoever she had said: that his Lieftenants place should be but in
paper, and that if the matter were ruled and ordered by the Estates, both the
Queen and those of Guise, with all their adherents, would be so dealt
withal, that the realm would be restored unto her pristinate government: and
that to the contrary, leaving things in that order, France as then being at
peace and quietness with foreign enemies, would presently be troubled in
most strange and extraordinary manner within it self: for partiallities being
great on both sides, the one would seek to ouerrunne the other: and that it
was to be hoped, that if the affairs of the estate were ruled and ordered
according to the laws of the Realm, men might easily impeach and hinder
wicked men, from effecting that which by them is secretly pretended: that then
at the beginning it behooved them to look unto it, and to be well advised,
thereby to establish peace and good government in the affairs of the Realm.
But whatsoever they said, it was to no effect, whereby both the King of Navarre
himself, the Princes of the blood, and all the Realm in general, did after
endure much woe, the wound whereof as yet remains fresh.

The increase of the religion not supported.
Forth us it fell out, those of the religion openly increasing within France,
and in the Court the King of Navarre did seem to support them: Sermons were
made both in the prince of Condes and the Admirals chambers, as also both
within and without the Court, and the Queene-mother caused the Bishop of
Valence, to preach within the great Hall, which Bishop followed not the
Sorbonists doctrine, such as desired nothing but new troubles, thereby not to
be constrained to give account for things past, and that knew full well, that
the sweet air of a firm and steadfast peace, would soon melt and consume
them, or else reduce them into so miserable an estate, that they should be
forced to hide their heads, taking that occasion as it fell out. They first
inflamed the Constable by the daily speeches and exclamations of his wife,
ordinarily accompanied and plied by Priests and Friars, and then by his
kinsmen. And lastly, The perturbers solicit the Constable to begin their
Tragedy.
by certain persons purposely appointed to that end by those of Guise, as also
by the Queene-mother against those of the religion, saying that they went about
wholly to abollish the Mass, and all his Relics, and that under pretense of
yielding up of accounts and extraordinary gifts, they sought to unhorse him,
that for the space of forty years, had dealt in the greatest and most urgent
affairs of the Realm.

The Marshal of Saint Andre, and Montpesat drove forward this wheel, and
therewith persuaded the Constable, already moved, in that he saw and openly
perceived, the ancient traditions of the Romish Church to be wholly despised,
both by great and small within the Court.

His eldest son, who being a Lord of great judgment, and perceiving his
Father upon the point to be separated and disioyned from the Prince of Conde,
and his Nephews de Chastillon, and other great Lords, thereby to become the
executioner of the Guisians passions, used all the means he could to drive
back the blow: but he did no more therein, then the Admiral and his brother
the Cardinal de Chastillon. The Constable remaining firm in that opinion,
that changing of religion would breed an alteration of the estate, which he
would not endure: and to conclude, not long after, he and the Duke of Guise
having made diverse banquets, together with the Duke de Montpensieur at
Fontainbleau, the Constable made a Supper to the Duke of Guise: the Prince de
Iainuille, and the Marshall of Saint Andre, the next day riding to Chantilly,
to the marriage of Thore his fifth son: the Duke of Guise not long after
following him to Nantueil, about five miles from thence, where by letters they
had many and several conferences.

The common people in division, following the example of the Nobility.
The people of France being used to cast their eyes upon the Court, perceiving
that there the great personages began to look with strange countenances upon
each other, they began to do the like. There wa^ted no prouokers nor perswaders
in the temples, who without suppression spoke of nothing else but fire and
sword, whereby in many places ensued great mutinies, as in Beauuais, Amiens,
Pontoise, and other Towns, wherein most great excess and rigor was shown to
those of the religion, who being as it were but a handful, in comparison to
those of the Romish Church, demanded naught but peace, sometimes certain of
them (less patient then the rest) not being able to endure the injuries of
those that termed them Huguenots, and no Christians, began to replye in like
manner, calling such as abused them, Papists, and from such stinging words,
they fell to quarrelles: which differences produced an edict made at
Fontainbleau, forbidding those reproaches and names of Huguenots and Papists:
also not to search any man's house, nor to keep any man prisoner for the
religion, under color and pretense of certain forms not well observed. An
edict made at Fontainbleau as aremedy against the order taken by the
Parliament, which, as then was almost broken.
The Parliament of Parris, that likewise began to take a part, in stead of
opposing it self against commotions that might alter and change the quietness
of the estate, made great declarations unto the King, affirming most plainly,
that the diversity of religion, is not to be endured in one estate, condemning
that, by them termed to be a liberty of conscience, and requiring the king to
make and ordain an open profession of the Romish religion, and thereunto to
inioyne all his subjects whatsoever, to observe and keep it, upon such pains
and penalties, as he and his learned Council should think most convenient.

There were other declarations made touching the words of Papists and to live
Catholickely, contained within the edict, whereupon those of the Parliament
propounded many difficulties, to the great hurt and detriment of those of the
religion, that were wholly and openly condemned: and the Pope expressly named
the head, and Gods Vicar upon earth. This wind served but only with more
speed to assemble and bring together the tempests of civil wars, which at
this day as yet continues.

Sacrying of the king. The Cardinals complaints.
In the month of June, the king was sacred in Reims, where were present
thirteen Peers of France, the kings eldest brother being the first, and all
the other Princes of the blood sitting in their degrees, there the Cardinal of
Lorraine made great complaints against those of the religion, whereupon it was
determined, that a new assembly of the Princes, Lords, and others of the privy
Council, should be made in the Court of Parliament in Parrris, to take order
therein. Not long after, letters pattents were sent unto the Presidents de
Thou, and Seguier, to assemble the particular Estates of Parris: but upon the
opposition framed by the Counselor Ruze, in the name of the Nobility, those
assemblies of Estates were broken up, without any resolution: only in one
point, which was, that the payment of the Kings debts should be imposed upon
the Clergy. About the same time, the act for the clearing the Prince of Conde
of treason, was newly published, and proclaimed openly in the Court, by
President Baillet: the doors being open, and all the Judges and Counselors
being present in their Scarlet gowns, within the great chamber, where were
present diverse Princes and Noblemen, A decree in the Court of Parliament, to
justify the Prince of Conde and others.
the Duke of Guise and the Cardinal of Lorraine being of the train. There
the Prince was declared innocent in that which had bin imposed against him, and
free liberty reserved unto him, to have law against all such, as he therein
suspected to be his enemies and false accusers: and such recompense in that
case to be allowed him, as to a man of his estate might appertain. The like
Acts were read and pronounced at the same time for Madame de Roye, Vidame de
Chartres deceased, Monsieur de Cany, and the Counselor de la Hay.

Not long after, the king, the Queen his mother, and the privy Council, came
into the Parliament, and there, after many and diverse opinions given forth
concerning religion, in the month of July, The edict of Iulie.
an edict was published upon pain of death, forbidding al injurious speeches
and words whatsoever, on both sides to be used: all leagues and things tending
unto sedition: all slanderous words against Preachers and assemblies,
forbidden to those of the religion: who nevertheless could not have been
condemned to endure a greater pain, unless it had been bannishment out of
the Realm: all which provision, until a full and ample declaration should be
made by a general Council, or by the next assembly of the Prelates, all
faults past, in respect of those of the religion, to be remitted, with
commandment to punnish all such as should seem to delay them: Bastionadoes
forbidden, but only to men of quality. In like sort the Prelates were sent
for, to be at the conference and safe conduct given unto all Ministers, freely
to come and dispute of their religion.

Practices against the King of Navarre.
The place being assigned at Poissy, while those of the religion were in good
hope, because the Cardinal of Lorraine and others, protested to reason quietly
touching the articles debated by the parcelles of the holy scripture: means was
practiced wholly to divert the king of Navarre, from the affection by him
showed to those of the religion, and by the means of the assembly at Poissy, to
break off the Parliament, as then reiourned until the month of August next
after ensuing: because the Queene-mother knew full well, that the Gentlemen
and the Commons, would ask to have Churches allowed unto them: which being
agreed unto, would make the Princes part too strong, which she doubted.

Such order therefore was taken in that point, that Descars before that,
Chamberlin to the king of Navarre, and put from his Master, Descars
entertained.
having discovered him to be a Pensioner to those of Guise, was restored to
his place, and became in more favor then ever he had been.

Also the Duke of Guise, being returned from Callais, where he had been with
Monsieur d'Anuille, second son to the Constable, and a great number of other
Courtiers, to conduct the Queen of Scots widdowe, to Francis the second:
solicited the Prince of Conde, An agreement between the Prince of Conde and the
Duke of Guise.
to be reconciled unto him: at the which agreement made at Saint Germans in
Lay, upon the 24. of August, with the king and the Queene-mother, there were
present all the Princes, Noblemen, Cardinals, Councillors, and Knights of the
Order. The king having spoken of the cause of the assembly, commannded the Duke
of Guise to speak, who turning unto the Prince, spoke and said: Sir, I neither
have, nor ever meant to do, or execute any thing, that should be against your
Honor: neither was I either author, means, or moouer of your imprisonment.
The Prince of Conde answered him and said, I esteem them both for wicked and
mischievous persons, that were the cause thereof. The Duke replied and said, I
believe it well, but that touches not me: which done, at the kings request,
they embraced each other, with promise from thenceforth to continue good
friends: and the Queene-mother to witness the joy she then conceived, that
day held a solemn Feast.

The Queen Mother practice a both with great and small, to maintain her
Regency.
As touching the Estates reiourned unto Pontoire, in the month of August as then
it was no longer time to defer them: but the Queen playing secretly on both
parts, to ratify the agreement made between her and the king of Navarre
touching the Regencie, and to the end it should no more be spoken of, first
sent thither the Counselor du Mortier, that was sent back again, finding so
many that spoke against him. Wherewith the Queen calling her wits together,
she remembered that he had always borne a good countenance unto the Admiral,
pretending in some earnest matter to imploye his aid: and occasion as then
falling out, this Lord was sought unto by all means, and thousands promises
were made unto him, for the ease and relief of those of the religion: he
perceiving that the King of Navarre had no desire to deal therein, and (after
the manner of simple men) trusting to many and great protestations, made and
uttered unto him concerning his future good, used Clarklike means, employing
himself unto the Estates, for the confirmation of the accord aforesaid: The
States forced to agree to a thing that overthrew a law of the Realm.
and to finish up the matter, the King of Navarre himself went thither in
person to certify them, that he had resigned his right and title unto the
Queen: which notwithstanding the matter was much debated, many great
personages partly perceiving the great mischiefs, which by that disorder would
in fine, grow up in such sort, that the Estates agreed not thereunto, but with
protestation to the contrary, in their bills which they presented unto the
king at Saint Germans in Lay, where the general assembly was holden, the
Chancellor commanded by the king, by a long Oration persuaded the company to
determine with themselves, whether it would be necessary and convenient, that
the assembly of the religion should be holden or forbidden. And after him,
Lieftenant Autun, surnamed Britaigne, speaking for the communaltie, in a large
discourse, showed the abuse both in the goods and jurisdictions of
Ecclesiastical persons: their duties, the great charges that spoiled and
overthrew the people, required that the persecutions should be ceased against
those of the religion: that promise should be made unto them of an assembly,
and that to the same end, Churches might be permitted unto them: also that
their principal Ministers should be called to confer with them of the
differences of religion. Touching the acquitting of the kings debts, and
ordering of other affairs, the third Estate made a large couerture, proposing
diverse means to cease division, and to reduce the Realm into as rich estate as
ever it was. But because diverse matters propounded, touched and concerned many
of the greatest personages, specially the Spirituality, it was all but words,
which likewise were the cause to hasten the principals of such Sects, to invent
their conspiracies. The Clergy desiring to get out of the mire, made offer,
that to acquit the king of his debts, for the space of six months, they would
every year pay four tithes: at the same time likewise, the Imposts of five
sols, upon every Alme of Wine entering into every walled Town, was raised for
the term of six years and no more: besides the eighth and tenth part being
ordinary custom.

While the Estates were busied to dispute and determine of matters concerning
the Estate, The Popes devise to hinder the assembly of Poissy.
Pope Pius having been advertised what had been determined touching the
assembly at Poissy, sent the Cardinal of Ferrare his Legate in France, with
charge to remit all things touching religion, unto his Council, because that
among other articles agreed upon by the States, it had been decreed, that the
benefices of the Realm should be conferred by the Ordinaries, every man in
his jurisdiction, and not by the Pope. Also that dispenses should more be
allowed. There was likewise a question among the^, touching the reception of
the Legate: who in fine made such means, that the Chancellor was commanded to
seal his letters of authority, which the Chancellor did not, but after many
commissions, adding thereunto, that it was done without his consent: the Court
of Parliament would not approve them: and touching the Courtiers, at the first
the Legate was but hardly used by them, but he used such means by his friends,
that in the end he got the upper hand, having with his assistants in France,
frustrated the assembly of Poissy.

Assembly of the Clergy for the conference at Poissy.
At the same time the Prelates assembled, for the conference at Poissy, and
because some of them were wholly without learning, and the rest little studied
in the holy Scriptures, they brought with the^ a great number of Sorbon Doctors
and others, whom they appointed to dispute in their presence, thereby to learn
what were best for them to say. Touching those among them, that had any
learning, they were suspected, so that in their particular conferences, many
times there happened great strife among them, and many times blows: whereat
the Courtiers made great sport.

While they were in this debate among themselves, diverse Ministers of the
Churches in France, to the number of twelve, with 22. Deputies, The Ministers
came to Poissy, and present a request unto the king, with the confession of the
faith.
by the kings safe conduct and commandment, arrived at Poissy: not long
after, followed by Pierre Martyr, and Theodore Beza, whom the king of Navarre,
and the Prince of Conde, had caused to come from Zurche and Geneua. Those that
first arrived, presented a petition unto the king, upon the tenth of August,
wherein they desired that commandment might be made unto the Prelates, to
peruse the declaration of the faith of the reformed Churches, presented unto
the king since the ninth of June then last past: to the end, that at the first
assembly, they might show what cause they had to deny it: and upon their
objections, to hear the defenses of the said Churches, by the mouths of their
Ministers and Deputies. They further desired, that the Prelates and other
Ecclesiastical persons, might not be judges over them, seeing they were
parties against them, that the king and his Council would be present at that
assembly, that all the differences might be decreed by the only word of God:
that two Secretaries might be chosen on each part, that every day might
confer the notes of their disputations together: and that those notes should
not be holden nor accounted for lawful, before the parties had subscribed
unto them. The king received the confession and petition, The Kings answer.
by the hands of Augustine Marlorat, and Francis de S. Paul, in the presence of
his Mother, the king of Navarre, and other Princes of the blood, with diverse
Lords of the Council: and with a good countenance, said unto them: I will
refer your petition unto my Council, and you shall receive an answer from
my Chancellor.

The 24. of August, 1565 Th. de Beza preached at the Court. And the 24. of
August 1574. the Massacre was committed against those of the religion.
Conference between Th. de Beza, and the Cardinal.
Theodore de Beza being arrived at Saint Germans in Lay, upon the 24. of
August he preached publicly, and the next day at the Castle, within the Prince
of Condes Hall, where he had a great and notable assembly without any noise or
trouble. The same day about evening, being sent for into the king of Nauarres
Chamber, there he found the Queen, the king of Navarre, the Prince, the
Cardinals of Burbon and Lorraine, the Duke de Estampes, and Madame de Crussol,
where having made a low reverence unto the Queen, in few words he showed
her the cause of his coming thither, together with the desire he had, as also
all his company, to serve God and his Majesty, in so holy, commendable, and
necessary an enterprise. Thereupon the Cardinal of Lorraine began to speak,
charging Beza to have been author of the troubles, to have dispearsed infamous
libelles about the Realm of France: and to have spoken with vnreuere^t
speeches touching the presence of our Lord in his holy supper. But he having in
few words showed the vanity of the two first articles, he entered into a
reasonable large discourse of the third: wherein he so well satisfied all the
common questions of the Cardinal, that he said expressly unto the Queen, that
he was very well pleased to hear him speak, and greatly in hope that the
conference of Poissy would proceed to a hat pie end, with so courteous and
reasonable disputation: and with that, speaking to Beza, he said: I am glad,
that I have both seen and heard you speak: I protest in the name of God, that
you shall confer with me, to the end, that I may understand your reasons, and
your minds: and you shall find that I am not so black as I am desciphered.
Beza thanked him, and besought God to continue him in that good mind,
promising for his part, to employ himself for the advancement of the good of
Gods flock, as much as in him lay.

Madam de Crussul there upon said, (as she was always bold to speak) that
it would be necessary to have Ink and paper, A pleasant and notable speech
of Madame de Crussull.
to cause the Cardinal to sign and avow his saying. For (said she) in the
morning he will speak clean contrary: and she diuined right: for in the
morning, a report was spread about the Court, that at the first meeting, the
Cardinal had confounded and reduced Theodore de Beza. In such manner, that the
Queen was costrained to tell the Constable, (who much rejoiced thereat, as
thinking it to be certain) that he was wrong informed. Not long after, the
queen of Navarre arrived at the court, which made the assemblies to increase.

The second request of the Ministers.
The eight of September, the ministers presented a second request, wherein they
showed a reason of the articles propounded, in their first requiring answer.
The Queen mother received this petition in the presence of the King of
Navarre, the Prince, the Admiral, the Chancellor, and one of his Secretaries:
which done, she dismissed Beza, and three others, that accompanied him, with
good speeches and assurances, that the Clergy should not be their judges.

The beginning of the conference at Poissy
The next day about noone, the king (accompanied as his estate required) entered
into the great Refectorie of the noones in Poissy, where the Princes and
Princesses being set on each side, and behind him, somewhat lower, fat six
Cardinals, 36. Bishops, and Archbishoppes: and behind them, diverse Doctors,
and men of the Clergy. Right before him, at the end of the hal, stood his
guard, and behind them a great number of men of all estates, there he made a
short and small declaration touching the cause of that assembly, commanding
the Chancellor in larger manner to make it known unto them. The Cardinal de
Tournon, in the name of all the Prelates, humbly thanked the king: which done,
he desired that the Chancellor might deliver his proposition in writing, and
that leisure might be given them to consider thereof: which was refused them.

Therevppon the Ministers, to the number of twelve, with 22. Deputies of the
Churches in the Provinces that assisted them, The Ministers and deputies for
the religion, appeared before one of the greatest assemblies that ever was in
our time, and there confessed their faith
being called and brought in by the Duke of Guise that had the charge, with
Monsieur de la Ferte, Captain of the guard, were led unto the bars, where
all bare-headed they stayed: and Theodore de Beza being chosen by them all,
began to speak, and first having made a brief Preface unto the king, he
began his Oration with an humble and ardent prayer unto God, devised and
employed to the time and occasion of that assembly: which done, standing up,
he showed the most singular contentment, which al those of the relgion
received at that time, by having such recourse unto their Sovereign and
lawful Prince, the Queen, the Princes of the blood, with all the Lords and
notable persons at that time, and in that place assembled: that done, he
showed the sincerity and good desire of all those of the religion: which being
ended, he entered into the principal point, making a most ample and large
collection of the articles of Christian doctrine: not forgetting any point that
is in controversy, but he expounded it sufficiently: withal, saying somewhat
touching the Discipline of the Church: concluding, that both he, and his
companions, with all those that were of the religion, desired nothing but the
reformation of the Church, which only desires to live and die under the
obedience and protection of the king: detesting all those that soght the
contrary: praying to God for the prosperity of the king, his mother, his
Council, and the Estate, and therevppon having made a great reverence, he
pursued with his matter, presenting to the king, The confession delivered to
the king, and received by him.
the confession of the faith of the Churches of France, requiring that the
conference might be made upon the same.

His long Oration was pronounced with a most acceptable voice to all the
assistants, and heard with a most singular contentment even to the end, where
he spoke very openly to the Prelates likings, against the opinion of the
presences of the Lords body in the bread. For this article put them in a great
murmuration, (although before he had spoken many other things, that expressly
condemned the Doctrine of the Church of Rome) nevertheless, he proceeded and
ended: the king nor any of the Prelates not once offering to rise. His Oration
ended, the king received the confession of the Churches, by the hands of the
aforesaid Monsieur de Ferte Captain of the guard, which he delivered unto the
Prelates.

The Prelates behauior after the Oration, in the name of the Churches.
Among other Prelates that were in a hot case, the Cardinal de Tourno^
boiling in hot chollour, having desired the King to persevere in the religion
of his auncestor, asked time to answer to that Oration, saying, that it
should be well answered, and that he hoped that the King having heard the
answer, would be reduced, and remembering that word (he said) not reduced, but
holden and kept in the good and perfect way: the Queen sought to qualify his
chollor. The next day, Theodore de Beza wrote and sent the Queen an ample
exposition, of that which he had spoken touching the Lords Supper, to the great
misliking of the Prelates: who being assembled to consult touching their
affairs, the Cardinal of Lorraine began with these words: In my opinion, I
would that he (meaning Theodore de Beza) had either been dumb, or we deaf.
And after many opinions given, it was determined, that the Cardinal assisted
by diverse Doctors, The mean to be Judges in their own cause.
specially of Claude Despense, that framed the answer and served for a
prompter unto his Disciple, should answer only to two points: that is,
touching the Church and the Lords Supper: not to dispute thereof, but that it
should not be thought they were without reply. For the rest, that they should
frame a confession of the faith, opposite to that of the Ministers, which if
they refused to approve, sentence of condemnation should be solemnly
pronounced against them: and by that means, the conference would be ended
without any more disputation.

The Ministers advertised of this resolution, contrary unto all Ecclesiastical
conference, by request made their complaint unto the King, which being
presented to the Chancellor, A new invention of the Cardinal to disgrace the
Ministers.
he according to his wisdom provided for it in such sort, that the Prelates
proceeded in another manner. Touching the Cardinal, he bethought himself of
a new expedition, in his advise very fit, thereby to confound the Ministers,
and with mockery to send them from the Court: for the which cause he wrote
unto Monsieur de Vieilleuille, Governor of Metz, that with all speed he
should procure certain Theologians, to be sent out of German, who touching
the Lords Supper did not agree in opinion with those of the Churches of France:
pretending to cause those Theologians, to strive and dispute against the
Ministers, and having had some pastime to hear them at variance, to send them
both away without any further conference. Vieilleuille used such diligence,
that three or four Doctors of Virtemberg, and two Theologians of Heidelberg,
went presently into France: but one of those of Virtemberg dying of the plague
within the City of Parris, and the two Theologians of Heidelberg being of the
opinion of the Churches of France, the Cardinals expectation therein was
frustrate, and yet they offered him fair, for that they determined to ask him
and the rest of the Prelates, if they meant to hold with the confession of
Ausbourg, having called some of those Doctors, and asked them, when the
Cardinal would give an answer, who in fine, was constrained to seek some
other places of refuge.

The Cardinals Oration.
The 6. of September, the Cardinal in presence of the King, the Princes, and
the Council, made his Oration, containing a long deduction of two points
agreed upon by the Prelates, which were touching the Church and the Lords
Supper: that done, they most instantly besought the King, to continue in the
religion of his ancestors, and to summo^ the Ministers to vnderwrite that which
the Cardinal had propounded: which done, they would confer upon the rest of
their articles: and that if they denied it, they should wholly be refused to be
heard: and presently sent out of the Realm, wherein there ought to be but one
faith, one law, and one king.

The Ministers requests
The Ministers as then required to be heard what they could answer unto the
Cardinal, but it was referred until an other time: and although that from
that time forth they used many means to be heard in open audience, they could
never obtain it, only upon the 24. day of the same month, Theodore de Beza,
in presence of the king and his Council, answered unto the Oration made by
the Cardinal: where were present five Cardinals, and fifteen or sixteen
Doctors. Despense and Desanctes made certain disputations, where unto Beza
made answer. The Cardinal of Lorraine had summoned the Ministers, to know if
they would allow of the confession of Ausbourg: and they desired him first to
sign it, which done, they would follow: but there he was at a nonplus: which
was done upon the 26. of March, where once again Despense discoursed of the
Lords Supper: Diverse conferences between the Ministers and Doctors that spoke
for the Prelates. The resolution of Sorbonne.
and after him, Doctor Martyr in a large and ample manner: but because he spoke
Italian, the Cardinal said he would not deal with any, but such as spoke the
French tongue. A Spaniard general of the Jesuits, would likewise have spoken,
whom de Beza have refuted, he entered into disputation with Despense. The rest
of the Ministers also answered unto certain objections propounded by other
Doctors of Sorbonne, touching the interpretation of the words in the
institution of the Lords supper. After that, all was changed into a particular
conference, wherein it was impossible for the Ministers to induce the Deputies
for the Prelates unto any orderly disputation, neither yet to the conclusion of
any articles. That of the holy Supper was oftentimes entreated of, and
sometimes it seemed that the parties were almost at an agreement: but the
Sorbonne Interpreted that very hardly, which by the Doctors of the Deputies for
the Prelates had been allowed of, and made an inuection in writing against the
Ministers, desiring that they might be driven out of the Realm, if they would
not approve and allow of the doctrine of Sorbonne, touching the Eucharistie.
The Ministers to the contrary, humbly required, that the confessions and
articles of the doctrine on both parts might be examined, by the order usually
observed at all times in any Ecclesiastical conferences: but their adversaries
who in most bold and evident manner showed themselves to be their Judges, would
never consent thereto.

The 13. of October, the Prelates having thanked and discharged their Doctors,
sent them away, and in the end withdrewe themselves, having first taken order
touching their cannons, which concerned not any Christian doctrine, only
discovering certain disorders in their Clergy: the reformation whereof, they
referred unto the Pope, and the Council of Trent, that did nothing therein,
because their Church cannot err. At the same time certain letters were
discovered, written in the Kings name unto his Ambassador in Rome, named
Monsieurde l'Isle, and others from the Queen Mother, which showed that al their
conference was but a devise, and mere invention, thereby to intrappe the
Clergy, which agreed unto some Tithes, to save the rest of their stakes: The
intent of the assembly at Poissy. Advancement of those of the religion
and that was it whereof they sought to be resolved, and not of the religion,
nor yet of any thing that concerns the conscience, wherein diverse of them had
in a manner played Banckerrupt.

After the departure of the assembly, those of the religion by little and
little began to preach openly, and in some places without resistance, ceased
upon certain Churches, whereof ensued an edict, made by the King, bearing date
the 3. of November, which commanded them to leave them, which they presently
performed in the same month. Those of Parris being assembled to preach in a
Garden without the Church-gate, called la Cerisaye, at their return there was
some blows given, but the hurt was less the^ it was thought to be, because the
conference of Poissy had reduced no remedy, that the parties were still at
difference: and that the religion openly advanced it self throughout all the
Realm. Counsel given to assemble the chief persons of the realm to take
order touching those affairs.
The Queen was counseled to assemble the most notable persons of all the
Parliaments in France, with the Princes of the blood, Lords, Councillors, and
masters of Requests, thereby to advise and make some new edict, touching the
government and order of those of the religion, as also to answer unto the
demand of the States, that had most instantly desired to have allowances of
Temples. The chief of the Romish Church, and among the rest, those of Guise,
found this counsel not to be expedient, alleging that they ought to be
content with the edict of July: and withal, they complained of the Queens
leuite, openly accusing the king of Navarre, the Prince, the Admiral and his
brethren. The Queen that sought to assure her Regencie, would not hearken
thereunto, whereby those of Guise took occasion to withdraw themselves from
the Court, leaving certain seruitors and solicitors to supply their places.
The Queen willingly gave them leave to depart, assuring them of her good will,
both to them and their religion, and desired them to return as soon as
possibly they might.

They went from thence about the end of November, and at the time of their
departure, there rose a most horrible and extraordinary wind: aforeshewing (as
some affirmed) of the tempest that not long after ensued. At the same time
likewise were brought and sold in the Court, three great Pictures, most
excellently wrought, (whereof one was bought by the Prince of Conde) wherein
was represented the bloody and horrible massacres of the ancient Triumuiras
of Rome, true Pictures and shows of the cruelties exercised the year ensuing,
by the support, and in the presence of French Triumuirat, upon those of the
religion. Not long before their departure, the Queen of Navarre discovered an
enterprise, An enterprise of the Duke de Nemours.
made to take away the Duke of Orleans, the Kings brother, and to carry him
into Lorraine: for which cause the Duke de Nemours, in all haste saved
himself, and returned not again, until the civil wars began to arise.
The report also was spread abroad, that the King of Spain, and other Princes
adherents to the Pope, made preparations to aid their participants in France,
and to dispearse the assembles of those of the religion.

The Queen inquireth what forces the religion could make.
All these things, moved the Queen to make inquiry of the forces and means of
those of the religion, whereof were found 2150. Churches and more, for the
which the Deputies had required Churches, offering all service and obedience
unto the King, both with bodies and goods at their own charges: but she
desired to know it more at large, which by many of the Churches was thought to
be superstitious, and thereby they made no such certificates, because of the
diversity of opinions, although some of them thought it both good and
necessary, to show the Queen the number of the forces, as well horse as
foot, which by those of the religion might easily be raised, judging that
such a power, as it after appeared to be, had been the means to draw the
Queen, and by consequent, the Kings and all the Princes of his part, unto
them, which would easily have stayed those of Guise and their partakers, and
in appearance have wholly hindered the discipation of the Churches, stopping the
passage unto all strangers, other suspecting the Queens intent, and fearing
least so open a discovery should be the cause, the easlier to expose for a
pray unto their enemies, would not proceed so far.

The commotion of Medard.
These things being thus imbroyled, about the end of the year, there happened
a great mutiny in Parris, raised by certain Priests of Saint Medards Church,
in the Subburbes of S. Marceau, which rang a bell, while those of the religion
were assembled at a Sermon: from whence proceeded wounds, murders, and
imprisonments, where those of the religion not being the beginners, paid a
fine, and four of them, one being Gabaston knight of the watch, were
executed, to appease the people of Parris, and yet not presently done.

1562. The Edict of January.
In the beginning of the month of January, and the absence of those of Cuise,
that thought upon other matters: as also of the Constable that would not be
present, a great assembly (such as the like had not been seen in France) was
made, there by to take order touching the Estate, and to ordain an edict:
wherein, after each man had said and propounded his mind, touching the which
was esteemed by them to be most convenient and necessary for the good and
quietness of the Commonwealth, in the end it was agreed to make that solemn
edict, which until this time, bears the name of the edict of January: which
being a true means to prevent and stop the mischiefs which as then
threatened the Realm of France, was nevertheless in the end, turned unto an
occasion of the greatest calamities that ever happened therein. By it, the
edict of July was abollished, permission granted to those of the religion, to
assemble without the Towns, and sufficient order taken, that either part might
live in peace and quietness with each other, which was agreed upon, and signed
at Saint Germans in Lay, the seventeenth day of January.

Difficulties in the same.
The execution of this edict moved great difficulties, specially on the part of
those of the Romish Church. Touching those of the religion, their Ministers and
Deputies, having resolved upon certain doubts that might be made, they ranged
themseluelues wholly unto the Kings pleasure. The Parliaments, only two or
three, made much difficulty to publish it: that of Diyon would never do it,
and that of Parris, made great question upon it. The chief President, Bourdin
the Kings Attorney, held firm for the Church of Rome, assisted by Merle,
Provost of Merchants, Marcell Sheriff, and diverse others. The King of Navarre
seduced by his enemies.
The winds that made them turn, blew from the Constable and those of Guise: yet
they had done little or nothing at all, if at that time the King of Navarre had
not suffered himself to be seduced by his most deadly enemies, that had for
instruments of his overthrow, the Ambassador of Spain, the Popes Legate, and
the Cardinal de Tournon, aided by two of his principal servants, Descars and
the Bishop of Mande.

He not being ambitious, suffered himself to be persuaded, that if be would
but show him as newter, and cause the Prince his son but once to hear
Mass, the king of Spain would peaceably yield up the Realm Sardagne unto
him: which they affirmed to be an Island, no less in valewe then that of
Sicile, and four times as much as his Realm of Navarre: which was as much (as
a man may say) to present him with nothing between two dishes, and thereby to
bereave him of the certain and honorable means to recover his Realm of
Navarre, if he would have hearkened thereunto, and continued to have favored
and supported those of the religion, as he had done until the edict of
Ienuary: nevertheless, the pernicious counsel of those men, was of such
force, that he fully determined to believe it.

By little and little he withdrew himself from those whom he had sauoured.
Whereupon he sent Monsieur d'Anduze into Spain, and Descars to Rome, from
whence having received news, he began by little and little to withdraw
himself from those of the religion, to use the Queen his wife somewhat hardly:
and among others, to court a Gentlewoman attending upon the Queene-mother, in
such sort, that from day to day, the mischief increased, to the great grief
and sorrow of all such as before that time honored him, specially of his wife,
a Princess most wise and virtuous, that sought all means to reduce him, but by
no means could effect it: yet was she solicited by the Queene-mother, to
seem to agree and hearken unto the King her husbands mind. Whereunto she
answered, that before she would go to Mass, if she were able to hold her
Realm of Navarre, and her son within her, hands, she would cast them both
into the Sea, thereby not to impeach her, which was the means in that behalf,
not to move her any more.

The Queen mother shows her self a newter.
The Queene-mother perceiving the king of Navarre to yield to the other side,
determined for a time to seem to be indifferent, that of the religion being
very strong, and full of resolution, and for that cause she entertained the
Prince of Conde and the Admiral with fair speeches, giving order in Parris
and other places, that those of the religion should be maintained and vpholden
peaceably, in the exercise of their religion. On the other side, covertly
making certain small breaches in the edict, by certain modifications, termed
declarations, made by the King. Those of Guise slept not, but devised a new
matter in Germany, The Guisians feign to be desirons to be of the confession
of Ausbourg.
therewith to blind the eyes of the Protestant Princes: the Cardinal having
desired a meeting to be made by the Duke de Virtemberg at Sauerne, there to
confer with the Ministers touching the confession of Ausbourg. John Brence,
and Jacques Andre the Dukes Preachers, and two principal Doctors of Germany
came thither, and there conferred with the Cardinal, who presented them with
certain vessels of silver, and used the matter in such sort, that the Duke
departed with opinion to have done some great matter: and by that means, those
Almaine Doctors verily thought within short space to plant their error in
France. In the mean time, those of Guise, that laughted at the simplicity of
the Almaine Prince, having received news that the king of Navarre held with
them, determined in all haste to repair unto the Court. On the other side, the
Queen advertised by many and diverse receipts, and solicited by those of the
religion, Publication of the Edict of January in Parris, A vain disputation,
upon vanity.
came to S. Germains to Parris, and did so much, that upon the 6. of March,
the edict of January was both allowed and published in the Court of Parliament:
with protestation, that nevertheless, it was done to obey the urgent
necessity of time, and the kings pleasure. At the same time, she caused
conference to be holden between the Ministers and the Sorbonistes, touching
the adoration of Images, whereof ensued no other thing, then only that each of
the^ remained still in their own opinions. She likewise sent Monsieur de Cursol
into Dauphin and Languedoc, to give order touching the troubles in those
places: and Monluc into Guyenne, for assistant to Monsieur de Burie^ she
thought to have sent the Prince of Conde, Miseries of France.
but that intent brake off: whereby those of Guyenne found themselves but in
hard case, for that therein Monluc used great and cruel oppressions, which he
himself has set down within his Comentaries: wherein after his death he
has spit forth the rest of that his fury, which during his life, he could
not fully execute upon them.

It was thought good likewise, (thereby to prevent that which not long after
fell out) that each Governor should withdraw himself into his Province:
whereunto the Marshall de S. Andre, well backed, answered, that his office
bound him at that time to remain at the Court, near unto the King. On the
other side, the King of Navarre showed so strange a countenance unto the
Admiral and his brethren, that they withdrewe themselves into their houses.

The presumption of the Marshall de S. Andre.
The Prince of Conde stayed, and to take Physic, went to Parris: while the
King was led by the Queen his mother, unto Mouceaux in Brie. Those of Guise
being advertised of all that passed, determined with a good troop to ride to
Parris, where the Constable was to meet them: as he did. It is said that the
Queen desired them to come thither without arms, which the Duke of Guise did
not, as by effect appears.

The first of March, he having upon the day before departed from his house of
Ianuille in Champagne, A brief discourse of the massacre of Vassy.
accompanied with his wife and the Cardinal of Guise his brother, he rode
unto Vassy, a Village not far from thence: having with him, about two
hundredth men armed with caliuers, pistolles, and courtelasses. And 8. days
before, his company of Lanciers stayed there for him, and as they came near
the Village, having understood the bell to ring unto a Sermon, to be preached
by those of the religion, within a barn of the said Village of Vassy, wherein
might be assembled to the number of one thousand or twelve hundredth persons,
both men, women, and children, all peaceable and without arms: as he lighted
from his horse, and having secretly spoken with the Provost, and the Prior of
the Monastery, he went with all his troop, both horse and foot, unto the
barn: young la Brosse Cornet of his Launciers, marched first, and entered into
the barn: seconded by four or five hundredth others, where he began to
blaspheme and swear, that he would kill them all. His men began without,
having slain three, and the Gate being forced, themassacre began: the Duke
being there in presence with his naked sword in hand, followed by the elder la
Brosse, Lieftenant of his company. On their part of the religion, there was no
manner of resistance, but only prayers to God, and running away, every man to
save himself, as it pleased god: where, besides a great number of wounded
people, there was 42. men slain, and many that died in short space after: they
killed likewise certain women. The poores box was taken and emptied: the
Pulpit broken down: the Minister hurt in many places, was led prisoner: the
dead bodies being dispoyled and stripped of coats, hoase, shoes, and all
that was about them, and many men being stripped, saved themselves, all
bloody and sore wounded.

New matter against those of Vassy.
After this valiant combatte, which being executed with the sound of the Dukes
Trumpet, as if he had fought against the enemies of the Crown, he departed
with his bloody troops, and laden with spoils, took the way that led to
Reims, where the Cardinal of Lorraine stayed for him.

but not content to have dealt so cruelly with those of Vassy, he becaused
certain informations to be made against them: wherein the principal
murderers were witnesses. And eight days after, the Duches Dowager of Guise,
sent Monsieur de Thou thither, that made search for their weapons, and would
constrain them all to go to Mass: which notwithstanding those of the religion
took courage, comforting themselves, and assembling every Sunday and Festival
day, to praise the Lord, until such time as civil wars dispearsed and
separated them.

The prince of Conde being at Parris, and receiving news of that massacre,
having consulted with diverse Lords and Gentlemen that kept him company, with
all speed certified the Queen and others in the Court, Justice demanded, but
in vain: for the massacre of Vassy: all was past over in words or notable
preductions of troubles.
what had happened and fallen out, who thereby took it for an alarm, and
counseled him to seek the means of preservation for the Realm: and those of
the religion, whom he presently advertised, looked unto themselves. The
greatest part (as Frenchmen are always full of hopes) imagined nothing but
quietness, and troubled themselves to build Churches, not much thinking upon
warlike provision, therewith to defend themselves. But by the Princes advise,
they were indifferently awaked. Much more the Lords and Gentlemen of the
religion, dispearced throughout the Provinces, which began to make provision
of arms and horses, staying for news both from the Court and Parris, from
whence in the name of the Nobility and Churches of France, Monsieur de
Francourt, and Theodore de Beza being sent to Monceaux, to ask justice of the
king against the Duke of Guise, because of the massacre at Vassy. The Queen
made gentle answer: but to the contrary, the King of Navarre began to be
offended: saying, that whosoever presumed to touch but the fingers end of his
brother the Duke of Guise, should have to do with all his body. Theodore de
Beza, thereupon having most humbly showed him, that the Justice which kings
ought to show unto their subjects, is the work and rule of God: and that to
demand justice, was no hurt or injury unto any man. He replied, that they
had thrown stones at the Duke of Guise, and that he could not stay the fury
of his troop, and that Princes are not to endure the dishonor to be cast at
with stones. Whereupon Beza very gravely, and with all due reverence,
answered, that if it were so, the Duke of Cuise might have had justice against
all those, that in such vile manner had despised his estate and dignity: and
therewith, speaking unto the King of Navarre, he said: My Lord, it is most
true, that it belongs to the Church of God, (in whose name I speak) rather
to take, then give blows: but may it please your Grace, to remember, that it
is an anuile which has endured many and several hammers.

The Triumuirat coaseth upon the King and Parris.
From that time, the estate of France might well be resembled unto a Sea that
begins to rise and rage in every place, for that in every Province, great
and wonderful troubles began to rise: whereof in the end of the History, of
the first troubles, we mean to speak: for now we must return unto the
principal instruments of the most bloodiest Tragedy that ever was seen in
France. Presently after the return of Francourt and Beza, those of Guise, the
Constable, the Marshall de Saint Andre, and after the King of Navarre, openly
holding with them, arrived in Parris: from whence they constrained the Prince
of Conde being very weak, with a Town being his enemy, and such as in
short space might swallow up both him and his, The Prince went to Meaux, the^
to Orleans,
if they had been ten times as many more) to withdraw himself unto the
Town of Meaux, with a good troop of Gentlemen. It was strange that as then
his enemies fell not upon him, but the haste they had to assure themselves of
Parris and the king: and the fear that at that entrance she should be
constrained to fight, and to hazard them overmuch, caused them to work by
great.

The Prince being at Meaux, wrote unto the Admiral and other Lords, sending
them word, that want of courage had not constrained him to leave Parris, but
rather want of aid, and that with all speed they should meet him: which they
did, all armed, which those of the contrary part had already openly
discovered, and being in mind to withdraw themselves and to retire, men came
unto them from all places: and the Prince determining to ride unto the Court,
to the end, that being strong about the king, who as then lay at
Fontainbleau, he might constrain his enemies to seek to agree: he
understood that they had gotten both the king and the Court into their power:
in such sort, that the Prince rode toward Orleans, whereon he ceased, and
there began to take order in his affairs, while those of Guise led the
King and Queen to the Castle of Melun: and that in the most part of the
Provinces of the Realm, they used those of the religion, withal the
insolences and cruelties, that possibly may be devised.

From Melun the King and Queen were brought to Parris, where the Constable had
overthrown and defaced ihe places, Beginning of the first and horrible
troubles in France
where those of the religion used to assemble. The people beginning to mutin,
and to assemble in great troops, in such manner, that both there and in other
places, where those of the Romish Church were strongest, those of the religion
received such entertainment, as the most cruel Barbarians would have been
ashamed to use it: which likewise in some places moved those of the religion,
whereby the Churches, Images, some Priests, and others, bare away the blows.

But this was little or nothing, in respect of all the mischief, that those of
the Romish Churches endured throughout France, in those first troubles, in
comparison of the miseries which those of the religion endured, in one of the
seventeen Provinces, as the Histories published by John le Friar de Laual,
Belleforest, Monluc, and others of the Guises part do witness, and thereat
rejoice and make great triumph.

If the massacre of Vassy had not chanced, the Prince and the Admiral had bin
constrained either to loose all, or to have forsaken the Realm, because that
before that time, they never thought upon defense, The evil committed at
Vassy, cause of some good.
nor of any thing that after happened and fell out: much less to be
offensive. The edict of January, and the Queens promises staying their hands:
but when the Lords and great Gentlemen of the religion, dispearsed throughout
the Realm, had once heard of that bloody exploit, committed by the Duke of
Guise, by little and little they assembled themselves about the Prince: who
being at Orleans, first began to write into all places, which caused diverse
Towns to be ceased upon for those of the religion, the only cause to break
diverse intents of their most cruel adversaries.

Likewise on both sides they began to raise Soldiers out of the Realm:
mean time, Declarations and protestations of the Prince.
mean time, the Prince published diverse declarations and protestations, for
the justification of his defensive arms, referring his enemies (from that time
named the Triumuirat) to the edict of January, and to leave off arms, thereby
to set the King at liberty, and his Realm in peace. The Triumuirat (that is,
The Triumuirats answer.
the Duke of Guise, the Constable, and the Marshal de S. Andre) made diverse
answers, only tending unto the suppression of that edict. The Emperor and
the protestant Princes, were by the Prince fully certified of the whole Estate
of France, who in an open assembly of the Estates, showed the letters of the
Queen Regent, expressly written unto him, after the ceasing upon the King and
Parris, recommending unto him, the mother and her children. besides that, he
made an agreement at Orleans, with the Lords and Gentlemen there assembled, to
use their forces and means for the delivery of the king and Queen, and for
the maintenance of the edicts and state of the Realm: this agreement sent unto
the Court, the same day being the ninth of April, A greement made at Orleans.
a letter was published and registered in the Parliament, whereby they certified
the King, his brethren, and the Queen, that as then they were at liberty:
also by an other, the King declared his intent to be, that the edict of
January should be executed in all places, but only in Parris. The Prince for
his part, solicited those of the religion, to send him men and money. The 25. of
April, the Count de Rochefoucaut, with great troops went out of Poicton and
Xaintonge, and arrived in Orleans. The next day the Prince received a large
answer, Many proceedings on both parts before they proceed to arms.
unto a certain declaration by him made and sent thither: but having
understood that the day before, in all the places of the City of Parris, both
he and his partakers had publicly been declared and termed seditious and
evil Christians: he made a second declaration, wherein he openly declared
and described, the horrible cruelties already committed against those of the
religion, imploring the edicts, yields a reason of his actions: and by
letters written the 27. to the Parliament of Parris, desired that his enemies
having first raised arms, should lay them down: and that for his part, he
would do the like, thereby to cease the calamities of the Realm. And to the
end to show all foreign Princes his intent, two Gentlemen were by him deputed
to stay in Almaine, to the end, that if the Triumuirat should there enterprise
to levy men, they should procure that the Prince might there be aided, and
not others: which done, order was taken for the security of Orleans, and there
they coined money in the kings name.

The Queen therevppon began to solicit a peace, writing letters unto the
Prince, who upon the first of May made her answer: withal, sending her a
memorial signed with his hand, Means used by the Queen.
containing the means of pacification, as he had declared unto the
Parliament. The fourth day after, the Triumuirat made a declaration to the
contrary, requiring the abolution of the edict of January, and of all exercise
of religion, only that of Rome: and that such as bare arms, without the
express commission and commandment of the King of Navarre, the kings
Lieftenant general, should leave them off, upon pain to be declared
rebels, and enemies to the king and his Realm: desiring likewise the
Queene-mother, to obtain, that all the forces on both parts, might be united
and joined together, under the commandment of the king of Navarre: and that
so doing, they were ready to retire unto their houses: The declaration of the
Triumuirat.
but the king made a new declaration, wherein the edict of January was still
continued.

After many speeches, in the end they grew to blows: whereof I will speak as
time serves: and first begin with the Prince and his troops: Iu the
beginning of the war the Queen seeks to accord.
and the^ with a summary deductio^, of that which happened in the Provinces.
The companies of Lanciers being for the most part arrived at Parris, with some
of the old companies of foot: the king of Navarre, and the Triumuirat,
marched toward Chasteau Dun. The Prince at that time being as strong as they,
determined to enter into the field: which moved the Queen to seek the
procuration of a peace, while the Triumuirat might have means to gather a
greater force.

One of the principal dealers therein, was the Bishop of Valence, The
practices of the Bishop of Valence, and what followed.
who in some sort persuaded the Prince (extremely grieved to see himself
constrained to enter into a civil war) to offer the Queen to go out of the
Realm, with all his friends, to procure a peace. Within two days after, he
went to speak with the Queen, and showed her his mind, which he had no
sooner uttered, but he was presently taken at his word, the Queen making him
great promises: saying, that the next day she would send unto him, to know
the conditions by him to be propounded. Whereupon at his return, the Prince
having communicated his intent unto his company, not only the ordinary
Council, but all the Coronelles and Captains, were summoned to give their
advise, which was wholly and directly against that declaration, and the opinion
of Monluc, and the Queene-mother. Among the rest, Missieurs d'Andeloc, and
Boucard, maruellously encouraged all the company, by their bold and brave
resolutions: and if they had believed Monsieur d'Andelit, presently they had
set upon the Triumuirats troops. After the Truce, an enterprise of no small
importance was begun: but your guides having not well conducted the Princes
troops, and withal, much reign falling, a great advantage was lost.

Good discipline for a time in the Princes Army.
At that time military discipline among the Princes soldiers, was much to be
commended: for the Gentlemen never molested their Hosts: and such as had
means, paid honestly for that they took. The Pesantes stirred not out of
their houses: such as offended, were punished. One named the Barron de
Dampmartin, that had violated a maid, by great favor escaped death: but
after, continuing his follies, he had his head stricken off within Parris: this
exemption in the beginning of the wars, was taken for an evil sign. No
blasphemy was heard in all the Princes camp. Among the^ you saw neither cards
nor Dice: and for women, they were from the^: no man strayed out of his troup,
to forage, much less to boote-halling: morning and evening, at rising and
sitting of the watches, they had public prayers, and the air sounded with
their voices, singing Psalms. Diners Ministers were distributed among the
troops, that had charge to continue and procure that good order, and at one
time were better heard then at an other.

This Discipline was continued almost two months, at the end whereof, Baugency
being taken by assault, caused a beginning of disorder: from whence proceeded
la Picoree, or boot-halling: which since that time became so common, that at
this day it seems to be chief Prince. The Admiral, a great enemy to
boot-hallers, with stood it, and punished some of them with great rigor: but in
sine, a great number got the upper hand. The army of the Triumuirat, committed
most terrible outrages without any reproof, and all under pretense to extirpe
the Huguenots.

How the Prince hindered the dispearsing of his army.
After the taking of Baugency, the occasion of fighting being let slip, the
heat of those of the religion began to quench, the means to maintain
Soldiers, lessened, and some of the Nobility began to doubt of their just
quarrel: wherefore to prevent a total dissipation, the Prince took counsel
to imploye part of the Nobility that were with him, in the Provinces where the
affairs hung as it were in a balance, so that the Count de la Rochefoucaut,
with ceraine troops, marched toward Poicton, Xantonge, and Angoulmois.
Monsieur de Soubize, was sent to Lions: Iuoy with his Regiment to Bourges:
d'Andelot, for the sucours out of Almaine: and Briquemaut, into England. On the
other side, the king of Navarre and the Triumuirat, led the king with them in
their army, and being assembled at Chartoes, determined to besiege Bourges,
(holde^ by those of the religion) before it should be fortified, and by so
great a Town, not above two days journey from Orleans, in their judgment was
a great help and furtherance to the Princes affairs: they marched toward it,
and having besieged it, Bourges yielded to the Triumuirat.
it made no such resistance as they expected, but was yielded unto them by
composition: for the which cause, Iuoy, Governor therein, was never after
esteemed, or once accounted of, by reason of an evil opinion conceived against
him. They being puffed up with this sudden and unexpected victory, which
(as they said) was as it were an arm cut off, from those of the religion, they
(with their army of twelve thousand foot, and three thousand horse) were
ready to march to besiege Orleans, wherein the Prince and the Admiral
continued: but the danger thereby feared to receive more great loss, besides
the shame, put them in the heads to besiege Roaue, governed by Monsieur the
Count de Montgommery, Roane taken by the Guise.
with seven or eight hundredth old Soldiers: and two companies of Englishmen,
under the conduct of Monsieur Kilgre. And upon that resolution, about the end
of September, they besieged Roane, where after diverse assaults, they took it
by force. The Town being sacked for the space of three days, there they
executed many of the best of the Citizens. And on the other side, Death of the
King of Navarre.
the King of Navarre was wounded at the siege, and died upon the seventeenth
day of November, the town having been taken 3. weeks before. The hard usage of
the prisoners of Roane, was the cause that in Orleans they proceeded in justice
with Baptiste Sapin, Counselor of Parris: and the Abbot de Bastines, taken
going into Spain, that were hanged in Orleans about the beginning of November.

The overthrow of the Army of Duras.
Not long after, the Prince had news of the overthrow of the troops of Gascon,
led by Mousieur de Duras, so that in man's judgment, there rested no more hope
unto the Prince, but only the Almaine forces of Rutters, conducted by Monsieur
d'Andelot, so that he took counsel with the Admiral, that if they were
intercepted, he would himself in person travel into Almaine, with all speed
to obtain new aid, while the Admiral should keep Orleans. But about four
days after, they had news that their Rutters were within four days journey
of Orleans, where the Count de Rochefoucaut arrived, with three hundredth
Gentlemen, The Prince marches toward Parris.
and some of the rest of the troops of Duras. The Prince having his foreign
aid, was counseled with all speed to march to Parris, for to impeach them,
and thereby to force them to seek for peace, and to send into Normandy for
150000. crowns to give the Rutters: whereupon he set forward, with 8. Pieces
both great and small, wherewith he met the Rutters, hard by Pluuiers, which was
taken by force: from thence he went to Estampes, some being of advise that he
should march to Parris with all speed, while the alarm was in the Town. But
they determined to besiege Corbeil, which was so well defended by Causseins,
Master of the camp, and certain forces put into it by the Marshall de S.
Andre, that the Prince left to go toward Parris, and at his arrival there,
he had a hot skirmish given him: whereof the end was, A furious sirmish.
that the forces that had issued out of the trenches of Parris, after some
fight, were constrained in all haste to save themselves in their said trenches,
with some loss, to the great astonishing of the Parrisians.

For the space of seven or eight days, that the Prince remained encamped at
Gentilly, Arcueil, and Montronge, Villages not far from Parris, What was done
about Parris.
many conferences, or rather delays, were holden and used: and the Prince
perceiving that his enemies still increased, thought to give them a canuisado,
which took not effect, having been discovered by one of the principal of his
army, that left him to go to the Duke de Guise: whereof within three days
after he repented, being his brother that had yeeled Bourges: and the Prince
saved himself by a most strange means: for that fearing that he would make
them acquainted with the defaults of his army, the next day he dislodged. The
falt of Monsieur de Genlis.
The Duke de Guise being strengthened by certain companies out of Gascon, and
some Spaniards, had determined upon the next day in the morning to give him
battle, before he had leisure to assemble his dispearsed companies. So the
Prince departed upon the tenth of December, and the thirteenth being in the
way to Chartres, after diverse opinions of his Council, he resolved to march
straight toward Normandy, to recover money, and to meet his forces coming
out of England: there to divert the siege of Orleans. The sixteenth, Galardon a
small Town, was forcibly taken by the Prince: and the next day he marched
toward Dreux: and as he passed over a small river, hard by the Castle of
Maintenon, an old woman stepping a good way into the water, took him by the
boot, staying him, and looking upon him, said: Go Prince, thou must suffer,
What happened to the Prince not long before the battle of Dreux.
but God is with thee. He made her answer, and said: Good wife, pray to God
for me. The night before the battle, being in his bed, and talking with
certain Gentlemen that were in his Chamber, he said to Theodore de Beza, that
had said prayer before him: I know we are not to account of dreams, yet I
must tell you what I drempt the last night. Me thought I had given three
battelles, one after the other, and in the end. I obtained victory: and saw
my three enemies dead before me, my self being wounded to death: and that
causing them three being dead, to be laid upon each other, I laid my self
upon them, and so yielded up my soul to God. And being answered, that the
things which troubled his mind, caused him to have that dream, and that
whether he lived or died, he could not choose but be victorious. He said, I
pray God it may be so. But sure it is, that time verified his vision, for that
his three enemies were all slain one after the other: as the Marshall de S.
Andre the next day, the Duke of Guise before Orleans, and the Constable at the
battle of S. Denis, and he himself after all them, slain at the battle of
Bassac.

A brief description of the battle of Dreux.
The ninteenth of December, the two armies approaching near each other, in that
of the Triumuirat were nineteen thousand foot, and two thousand horse. And
that of the Prince, about four thousand horse, and less then five thousand
foot: the battle being very furious on both sides, continued for the space
of six hours. Among other particularities thereof, diverse things are to be
considered on: that there was no skirmish given, while the two armies stayed
within a cannon shot one from the other, for the space of two long hours, as
well to range themselves, as to determine upon their fight. Another, the valiant
courages of the Switzers, that sustained four charges, before they could be
broken, having lost seventeen Captains, and the third part of their troops,
being above three thousand men. As also the patience of the Duke of Guise, who
notwithstanding that the Constable had been taken, the Marshal de S. Andre
slain, and part of his army ouerthrown: yet he stayed to seethe end of his
fortune: and dealt in such sort, that before he left, the Prince was taken
prisoner: and in that fight were lost on both sides, at the leaft seven
thousand men besides diverse prisoners and hurt, whereof most part died. The
Princes army lost above 2200. foot, Notable circumstances of the battle.
and fifteen hundredth horse, as well Rutters as Frenchmen. The Gentlemen of
account that were slain, were Arpaion, Chandiu, Liencourt, Ligneri, la
Fredonniere, la Charliere, Rongnac, Mazelles, Saint Germier, and in a manner
all the Cornet of Mouy, who was taken prisoner at the last charge. The
Triumuirat, besides his Switzers, lost the most part of his horsemen: the
Switzers, and a great number of other foot men. The Gentlemen and men of name,
were the Duke de Neuers, slain a little before the first charge, by one of his
Domestical servants, that had diswaded him from the religion: Misieurs
d'Ann^baut, and de Giury, with his Cornet and Harbinger: La Brosse, principal
of the massacre of Vassy, and one of his sons. And Aussun, a Noble man of
Gascon, having through fear fled unto Parris, died of grief. There was
likewise another notable thing to be marked, which was the taking of both the
Generalles of the armies, the one at the beginning, the other before the
battle ended: whereby the field was left by both parts, but in the end,
reentered by the Duke of Guise after his retrait: and the next day, reentered
by the Admiral, that again offered battle. Besides that, the retrait of the
Princes army, was done safely and in good order, being two Regiments of
Rutters, and one of Frenchmen, all about twelve hundredth horse. The army
Triumuirat weak of horse, not desiring to leave their foot, having marched
about six hundredth paces after them, contentented themselves therewith. The
Duke of Cuise was esteemed to have gotten the victory, because he stayed and
lodged in the field where the battle was fought, and the Admiral about a mile
from thence. The Duke likewise sent the Ensigns (taken up in field) unto
Parris, and got the Princes Artillery, who the same night supped and lay with
the Duke of Guise. A marvelous thing to consider the estate of two such
persons, so near unto each other, and eating and resting together.

The Duke de Guise being declared Lieftenant of the army, because of the
Constables imprisonment, What was done by the heads of the armies.
caused seventeen new companies of Lanciers to be raised, besides the
increasing of ten others, each wanting twenty horse, and created twelve
knights of the Order: which done he threatened the Rutters and Marshall de
Hesse, to slaye them all, if they would not join with him: but the Marshall
made him the like answer, laughing at his boldness. The Admiral keeping on
his way, marched toward Beausse, taking certain small places, and so that
year past over.

during those troubles. The second of January, The Admirals exploits after the
battle of Dreux
the Admiral besieged Selles, in Berri, and within five days after, took it
by composition. The Count dela Rochefoucaut, entered into the Town of Saint
Aignan, lying in the same country: and the prince of Portion with his troops,
into Montrichard. The Duke de Cuise marching toward Beausse, Duras was
constrained to leave Estampes: as also de Pluuiers: so that there rested
nothing else in that country for the Prince, but the Town of Orleans: the
custody whereof, was committed to Monsieur d'A'ndelot, with foureteen Ensigns
of Lansquenets and Frenchmen, and four of the Inhabitants of the Town, with a
great number of Gentlemen. The Duke of Guises camp being at Baugency, his
light horses ran before Orleans: And also of the Duke de Guise.
but Auaret issuing out upon them, slew some, took others prisoners, and put
the rest to flight. Mean time, the King and his mother, were conducted to
Chartres, with all the privy Council, and some of the Parliament of Parris,
to frame (as they said) the Princes process, kept by a company of Lanciers,
and three companies of foot.

D'Anuille the Constables son, perceiving the Duke of Guises meaning was, to
strike two blows upon one stone, by causing the Prince to be executed, and so
those of Orleans in exchange to cut off his fathers head, being their prisoner,
took so good order therein, that that assembly was dispearsed. The King going
to Blois, where the Prince was brought, and from thence conveyed to the Castle
of Auzin hard by Amboise.

The Admiral resolves to go into Normandy.
The Admiral on the other side, received new promises and assurances of the
Rutters, and withful determination to fight, marched unto Iarqueau, which as
then was in his power, and the tenth day after, took Sully and the Castle, by
composition. Touching the Duke de Guise, being hard by Orleans, it was
resolved, that the Admiral with the Rutters and some French Gentlemen, should
march toward Normandy, thereby to constrain the enemy to separate his
forces, and to give the Rutters money, that should be brought out of England,
leaving all the footmen, with the rest of French horses, led by Duras,
Bouchauanes, Bussy, Saint Cyre, Auaret and others, for the defense of the
Town, under the government of d'Andelot. The good will of the Rutters toward
those of the religion.
The Rutters at that time showed themselves so voluntary, that they left their
wagons at Orleans, and caused their boys to carry their necessaries upon the
waggon-horses, whereof they made a Cornet of four hundredth indifferent men.

The Duke de Guise on the other side, took order for the defense of the Towns
of Normandy, and at the same time, a thousand extortions were committed
against those of thereligion, specially in Parris, where diverse strange
murders were committed. There was likewise a declaration sent unto the
Rutters, in the name of the King, and all the Princes of the blood, to cause
them to leave the Admiral. But that served to as much effect, as the Queens
letters to the Admiral, that answered her in other sort the^ they expected. On
the other side, the Prince having sailed to escape out of prison, and one that
sought to help him being executed, yet he lost not courage, but to the
contrary, spoke with bolder courage then ever he did: his nature being such,
that in adversity he seemed most invincible.

The Admirals voyage into Normandy.
The first of February, the Admiral departed from Orleans with four thousand
horses, better furnished then when he fought the battle: but not any carriage,
only thirty wagons, lightly lade^. The fourth of February he came before
Eureux: where the Inhabitants were content to suffer him to march peaceably
before the Town, the which passing through a straight hard by Bernay a small
Town, certain Pesants conducted by a Gentleman of the country, under color
of their great number, sought to resist him. But to theirs, and others their
likes costs and overthrows, who after the taking of Roanc, had committed many
outrages: and at the Admiralles arrival, assembled themselves together, who
having stayed certain days at Dines, was desired by the Inhabitants of the
Town of Caen, to aid them against the Marquess d'Elboeuf, and a new knight
of the Order named Renouart, who with their troops molested the Townsmen
continually, taking some of them prisoners. The Admiral busied with other
matters, sent them Monsieur de Mouy, not long before delivered out of prison,
with his company, and some Argolitiers, and having received money out of
England, Artillery, powder, five companies of English, and two of Frenchmen,
he battered the Castle of Caen, upon the first of March, and the next day
took that strong place by composition.

The Duke of Guise approached to Orleans.
But in the mean time, let us return to the Duke de Guise, that approached
Orleans about the fifth of February, and the next day with most resolution, and
by the faintness of the Lansquenets, that forsook the place, he wanne the
Pertereau, wherein they of the Town left four hundredth good French soldiers,
some taken, the rest slain: and without the valiant resolution of the
Governor and the Gentlemen that were in it, they had received more hurt. The
ninth, he took the Tourelles by surprise, and caused great quantity of
Artillery to be brought from Parris and Nantes, to batter the Isle and the
Town: they within showing marvelous resolutions, to rampire and fortify
themselves.

The Duke of Guise slain by Poltrot bofore Orleans.
Thursday, the eighteenth of February, having appointed what order should be
taken touching the assayling the Isles, about nine of the clock at night, he
wrote unto the Queen, that within four and twenty hours after, he would
send her word of the taking of Orleans, wherein he would not spare any, man,
woman, or child whatsoever: and that after he had kept his Shrouetide
therein, being as then upon the three and twentieth of February, he would in
such sort spoil and destroy the Town, that the memory thereof, should be
extinct for ever. But man purposes and god disposes, for that the same day,
as the Duke of Guise about evening returned from the camp to the Castle of
Coruey, where he lodged, minding to execute that which he had written unto
the Queen, a young Gentleman of Angoulmois, named Ich^ Poltrot, Sieur de
Merey, having long time before determined to give the blow, and made his
friends of Lions and other places, privy thereof, stayed for him in the way as
he returned to his lodging (accompanied with two Gentlemen, one going before
him, the other speaking with him) mounted upon a mule, Poltrot, that rode upon
a Genet of Spain, went so near the Duke, that being about five or six paces
from him, he discharged his Pistolle, laden with three bullets, seeking to
strike him on the shoulder, where his armor could not defend him, (as he did)
doubting he wore a privy coat: which done, he fled away: and the next day
having ridden all night, he was taken and committed prisoner, Poltrot executed.
and not long after, tormented with hot tongues, to make him confess, and
then torn in pieces by four horses.

Diverse confessions were published to be made by him touching this deed,
thereby to accuse the Admiral and others, as if they had moved him to do it:
but besides the constant and resolute answers of the Admiral, it was
evidently known, specially at the execution, that Poltrot did it of his own
motion and particular intent, thereby to deliver France, and specially Orleans,
from the violence of the Duke of Guise, that died the four and twentieth of
February, not having holden his Shrouetide as he thought within Orleans, but
rather in his turn, received another reward, then either he or his expected.

The motion of peace moved before his death, was presently renewed, and after
many meetings and assemblies, Motions of peace renewed after the death of the
Duke of Guise.
the Queen Mother exceeding glad of the death of the Duke of Guise, whom she
doubted more then all the rest, having given a thousand courteous
entertainments unto the Princess of Conde, the seventh of March an assembly
was holden in the Isle of Boeufs, hard by the Town, whither the Prince and the
Constable (as yet prisoners) were brought to make some agreement. The Constable
at their first entrance, said, that if they spoke touching the edict of
January, he could not endure it: and in truth it was as much to condemn him
and all his party of treason, to have violently broken so solemn an edict.

The Prince having demanded permission of conference with his Council in
Orleans, desired to have the advice of the Ministers, who by three of their
Deputies, gave him at large and expressly to understand, that neither the Queen
nor he, by the law of God, nor reason, could in any thing whatsoever, once
derogate so solemn an edict, made at the request and desire of the States, and
so notable an assembly of all the Parliaments of France, and by them all sworn
and pronounced. The next day at his request, all the ministers being to the
number of seventy two, being assembled, they made an humble request and
exhortation in writing unto him, touching the cause aforesaid: and withal, The
Ministers advise.
added diverse good and necessary articles, to make an assured peace, as that
those of the religion, acknowledged by the King to be his faithful and
obedient subjects, might be peaceably maintainted in the exercise of the
religion the king declaring himself protector of their doctrine and discipline,
against al Atheistes, Libertines, Anabaptists, Seruitistes, and other
Heretics, or Scismatikes, that the Baptism administered in their Churches,
might not be reitterated: and that the marriages therein celebrated, might be
holden for good and lawful: that without other leave, it might be permitted by
those of the religion, to have free exercise thereof in all places: that the
religion might no more be called new, seeing their Churches are founded upon
the ancient doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles: that every man might
peaceably enjoy his estates, offices, and goods, with perusing and recalling of
processes, touching such as are interessed by suspect Judges: that all
murderers, the eues, spoylers, exacters, and others, that without war (their
massacries and other inormities, being acts of hostility) should be taken
and punished according to their deserts.

Notwithstanding so many declarations, both by word of mouth and writing, the
Prince was in such sort persuaded by promises, that after that, Peace agreed
upon.
they would make another and better agreement for him, making him believe that
the conditions as then set down, were done only to please those of the church
of Rome, and by little and little to attain unto a full and perfect liberty:
withal, that many of them desired nothing else, but whatsoever it cost them,
to return unto their houses. That he consented to the altering of the Edict of
January, suffering certain exceptions to be added thereunto, which he caused
to be read unto the Gentlemen, desiring that none but they bearing Arms should
give their advise: which he spoke openly before all the assembly, in such
manner, that after that time the Ministers were neither sent for, received, nor
heard speak, or give their advise in any sort: nor likewise the Admiral and
his company knew nothing more thereof, then only the conclusion.

The Queen mother that was in great doubt to be reduced unto the Edict of
January, and the Constable as much or more then she, employed all speedy
means to conclude and set down the Articles in manner of an Edict, agreed
upon the 12. of March, and fully resolved by the Kings Council at Anboise,
upon the 27. of the same month, and the same day published in the Town by
sound of Trumpet. The exercise of religion was thereby restrained to the houses
of certain Gentlemen, and in some Towns, besides those wherein it had been
used at the beginning of that month: with a certain confused remission and
pardon for all forepassed matters.

Exploits of the Admiral.
To return to the Admiral after the taking of the Castle of Caen, he sent
Monsieur de Colombieres, to set upon Bayeux, who at the second assault wanne
it, using the inhabitants somewhat hardly, because they had abused themselves.
The Captain called Iulio, a wicked villain (if ever there were aany) was
hanged in Caen, by reason of diverse crimes imputed and laid against him. The
next day after, being the fifth of March, the Garrison of Saint Lo, being in
fear, yielded the place unto the Admiral, that sent thither the Count
Montgomimery: who from thence marched straight to Auranches, wherein he was
received without resistance.

The thirteenth of the same month, he took Vire by assault, and punished the
principal offenders. And minding to proceed further, the packet of the peace
was delivered unto him. About the same time that Bayeux was taken, The Admirals
forces march to Orleans.
Monsieur Mouy received Hondefleur by composition. And as he minded to reduce
Ponteau de Mer, the Admiral sent for to return to Orleans, repealed to Caen,
from whence the Horsemen departed upon the 14. of March, divided into two
battles. The Prince of Portien conducted the auantgard, composed of four
Cornets of Rutters, that marched toward Lisieux, and the 18. ^ntred forcibly
into Bernay, where certain Priests were slain and hanged, that fought, and yet
knew not how to make war. The town of Aigle in the borders of Norma^die, was
forced by the Vicont de Drux, upon the 20. of the same month, and al such as
w^^ found in arms slain in the streets. The same day the Admiral departed with
the greater part of his forces, marching by Falaise and Argentan, that yielded,
having agreed for a ransom of a 10000. frankes: from thence he went to
Mortague, a great borough Town in Perch, where certain Priests moved the
people to do him injury: whereby diverse of Mouies company were both hurt and
slain, that marched in wings: whereupon the Borough was entered by force, and
the chief offenders, specially the Priests, rewarded for their pains.
Monsieur de Coignee, likewise punished the Monks of S. Calais, who with their
Garrison had cruelly handled his household servants. On the other side, Mousieur
de Coruoy, took the Castle of Mezieres, hard by Drux, and slew the soldiers
that were in it. The 23. of March, the Admiral arrived at Orleans, and used
all the means he could to remedy the Princes accord, having agreed to the
breach and abolution of the edict of January, The Queen mothers pra^^^ses.
under the shadow and pretense of the Queens promises, who on the other side,
about four days before, had caused Poltrot to be executed, with all
extremity that might be invented: caused a funeral pomp to be celebrated
for the Duke of Guise in Parris, and gave his estate of high Chamberlin, and
Great-maister, to his son Henry, as then an infant both of years and
understanding: but aster showed openly unto the third king, in what school he
had been taught, as hereafter you shall read.

The estate of the prounues and Towns.
Now I must show you a summarie recital, of the estate of the Provinces and
principal Towns in France during the first troubles, from the month of
April 1562, until the peace.

Parris the principal Town of the Realm, during that time committed many
great and terrible spoils upon those of the religion, Parris.
diverse therein were executed, not only of the Town, but such as had been
brought prisoners from other places. The people on the one side, desired
nothing but blood and spoil, and the Parliament not to spare either great or
small that sell into their hands, taken at the return of the Princes army, or
in any of the Towns of his resort, brought thither either by appeal or
summons. Diverse Counselors were sent into certain Towns, to proceed against
those of the religion, among the which this Town aforesaid used great means
and meruellous inventions, to extirp the memory thereof.

At Senlis, those of the religion had therein but hard entertainment, by means
of Claude Stocq, and Guillaume Berthaut Governors thereof, Senlis.
who not long after, ended their lives in great misery, sustained by Terouenne
and Fauier, Councillors of Parris: among others that were put to death by
sedition and injustice, one was the wife of Jacques Reuerant, the rest Adrian le
Clerce, John Gouion burnt, Louys Chaunin, John des Iardins, John Greffin
Lieftenant particular, Messieurs de Moncy, S. Eloy, de Houdencourt, d'Ardres,
de la Maison Blanch, young Gentlemen. Anthony Trappier Master of a School,
was be headed at Parris, and their heads brought to Senlis, and set upon the
Gates and other places: some were condemned to pay fines, to be bodily
punished, to be kept in prison, and put into the Galls: not sparing the
simple women.

In Picardie, the first exremitie used against those of the religion in Amiens,
was, that the thirteenth of May 1562. their Bibles, Amiens.
new Testaments and Psalms were sought for and openly burnt: then the
Ministers Pulpit. And from wood and paper, the Guisians, proceeded to deal
with their bodies, killing and casting into the water, Jacques Berne and
Francois Greuin, Harquebused David Preuost, and N. Marquant, slew two
Artificers, the one named Robert, the other Rondelet: and a poor impotent
person, named Mauguyet: and to knit up the matter, hanged Christ opher Rich
a Draper, because he had borne arms.

Those of Abeuille, slew Robert de S. Delis their Governor, his brother and
Lieftenant with nine Soldiers, two Gentlemen, and a Page, Abeuille.
as well in the Towne-house, as in the Castle, in despite of the religion:
whereof that Governor Lord of Haucourt, made open profession upon the 38. of
March, one thousand five hundredth sixty three, named Louys Beliart, being
condemned to pay a fine, (in the presence of the Justice and Parliament) was
drawn along the streets by the feet, with his face down ward, and then cast
and drowned in the river.

Meaux in Brie.
At Meaux in Brie, those of the religion that therein were strongest, continued
their exercise until the end of the month of June, when the Images were
thrown, their Priests peaceably withdrawing themselves, for the which cause
they and others, by order and judgment given in Parris the last of June, were
exposed and given to the spoil of such as could, or would undertake it without
further process. Another order given by the said Parliament, dated the 3. of
July, against all the Ministers, Deacons, and other officers, could not stay
those of Meaux: but to the contrary, they appeased the edict of January, not
permitting that such an order condemning them to death, should once be
published: whereupon at the instance of those of Parris, Lihoux brother to
Monlue, was sent to Meaux: wherein he entered with a small company, and by the
consent of those of the religion, upon the 25. of July, the next day Mass
began to be used. The sixth of August, commandment was given unto the
Inhabitants, to bring all their weapons into the Towne-house: whereunto many
obeyed, others, to the number of four hundredth that were gone under the
conduct of Captain Bethune, to join with the Prince of Portun, (but could
not,) and so being constrained to separate themselves, for the most part were
slain, the rest being hard by Meaux, were handled in the same sort: and of
all that number, there escaped but 4. me^ that went to Orleans: Monsieur de la
Chapelle Aux Vrsins, successor to Lihoux, used those of the religion with more
favor: but that continued not long, for that Monsieur de Boisy, Great-maister
of the horse, arriving there upon the 21. of September, caused the walls of
the great Market to be thrown down, and the Gates thereof to be broken,
being as then one of the fairest places for the bigness thereof, that was in
France. And not long after, there entered two companies of soldiers, led by
Captains of Parris, named Gantier and Forgeron, that committed a thousand
injuries. Many women in Christmas time, were beaten and drawn to hear Mass:
many children new christened, and diners marriages reconfirmed: and because
such as had fled, sought to have gotten the Town, upon the thirteenth of
February, 1563: those of the Romish religion being moved thereat, that with
great cruelty they murdered Gilles Cabeche the kings Attorney, Fracre
Lambert, that had been Deacon, Pierre Champenois, called Lorraine. Those of
the market fled, their houses being so sacked and spoiled, that they took
away the locks, grates, boults, windows, and gutters, and the place made
uninhabitable: those that fled, some of them died with hunger and cold. The
Kings officers, and the presidents of the place, as Frolo the chief President,
an infamous man, and Cosset the kings Attorney, were the principal moouers
thereof, and had their part of the pray. Many men, women, and children, were
massacred and drowned: and among the rest, a child of one John Oliuiers, of
four days old, had the head stricken against the walls. Denis Piero, John
Augrant, Claude Baillet, Mathieu Cantier, Pierre Thibaut, Guillin Rose, Nicolas
Bergeron, N. Floquet: la Biselle, a woman of the age of 88. the wives of John
Augrant and Pierre l'Archer: and diverse women and maids violated, both in the
market and about the Town. After that, they hanged two men of the religion,
among the which, one was John de la Hay, a rich Farmer: another Fremin
Cauiller, one of the Governors of the Town.

The executioners running into diverse places, where they committed an
innumerable number of mischiefs. In their troops were diverse Priests, and
among the rest, the Curate of Mareuil, who with his own hands slew certain
men of the religion.

In Champagne, at Chaalons, two men of the religion were hanged. At Troys they
lived friendly and peaceably with each other, until the beginning of August,
Chaallons and Troys in Champaigne
that the Duke de Neuers, Nephew to the Prince, having by Desbordes and
Vigenare his servants, been diswaded from the religion, and the Princes part.
In the month of August the exercise of religion ceased, and presently
thereupon, Desbordes that commanded in the name of his Master (whom he
killed at Dreux, and after he himself was slain in the battle) caused diverse
Artificers to be committed to prison: bills and other books of divinity, to
be rent and torn in pieces, and the houses of those of the religion, to be
spoiled and robbed with great fury, the owners being murdered: many children
were taken from their mothers, and new christened: and marriages resolemnised:
the goods, moneable and immooueable, of 62. of the principal of the Town
ceased upon, and whatsoever thereof might be sold, the money was confiscated:
and sixteen or eighteen men, were massacred and hanged by the sentences of the
Judges and at the peoples pleasures, among the which, were two or three that
had denied the religion: women likewise were not spared, whereof three or four
were drawn through the streets, and cast into the water. Besides that, the
soldiers went out and slew all that they met without company: the Mayor and
Sheriffs being the principal ayders in those cruelties, and in a manner no
massacre was done, but by the commandment of the Mayor.

Those of the religion at Bar Sur Seine, about seven miles from Troys, having
^ound the means to be stronger then their adversaries, Bar Sur Seinie.
for a time maintained themselves in that sort: but because it is a place easy
to be surprised, those that were in the Town perceiving the cannon placed
against the Castle, saved themselves as they could. The enemies entering into
the Town, therein committed such rare cruelties as never were seen, specially
against women and little children, cleaving some of their breasts, and plucking
forth their hearts, bit them between their teeth, rejoicing to have tasted of
a Huguenots heart. A young Councellor, son to Ralet the Kings Attorney, was
hanged at his own fathers request. Those that were within the Castle were taken
and cruelly handled, specially their Captain, partly cause of all the
disorder, whom they condemned to die, and being upon the ladder, renounced the
religion: but his Apostacy saved him not from hanging. The Town remaining in
their hands that had taken it, and with most horrible blasphemies defiled
diverse women and children. In the month of January, forty or fifty horses of
the Garrison of Antrain, a place being but a mile from thence, about the
break of day surprised the Town: and at their arriual, having laid hands
upon Ralet, they tied him upon the top of a house, where he was slain with
Pistolle shot: the rest of the massacres were likewise murdered, and their
goods given to others. Claude Cousni d'Ay, was sore wounded within Espernay,
Espernay.
and cast into the river of Marne, where the murtheres finished his misery:
hurting diverse of the people that wept to behold the cruelty committed against
him.

Monsieur de Saint Estiene, being returned from Orleans, to recreate himself
in his house hard by Reims, with two of his brethreren and others, S. Estiene.
was enclosed and besieged by a company of five or six hundredth men: and
although the houses were not strong, neither of walls, towers, nor diches, yet
those Gentlemen, with their wives and servants, being but 25. persons, having
gotten into a Tower, made long resistance, and therein sustained two assaults:
but in the end, a part of the tower having been beaten down with a cannon
shot, and the besieged constrained to hide themselves within a hollow place of
the wall, the women were gotten out, upon promise to be set at liberty, as
(in regard of their honor) they were but spoiled of all they had, and led
prisoners to Retel: which done, they sent certain Pages to call to Monsieur de
S. Estiene, and to certify him that the Duke de Neuers sent for him, and that
he should not doubt to come forth: which he had no sooner performed, but his
own Cousin German, named the Barron of Serny, killed him, his two brethren,
and sixteen others were stabbed. The assaylants lost before this place, about
one hundredth and fifty men, all well known. This happened in the month of
September, 1562.

Commosion of Pesants.
The Pesants of Colors, Gerisiers, and the Villages bordering upon them, for
the most part, Tenants to the great Prior, brother to the Duke of Guise,
committed infinite murders and mischiefs about Troys, murdering Monsieur de
Vigny, his wife, and their servants: robbing and spoiling his Castle. But
Monsieur de Cormononcle, a Gentleman of the religion, accompanied with eight
men only, finding those companions in disorder, ouerthrewe them: and slaying a
great number of them, put the rest to flight: taking all from them, which they
had taken and brought away from the house of Landry the Controwler, about five
miles from Troys. But the Pesants assembling again, and assisted by others
called, bare feet, raised at Sens, and thereabouts besieged Villeneufue, a
Castle belonging to the Monsieur de Esternay: but they were speedily repulsed
from thence with great loss: but to revenge themselves, they burned the base
Court, wherein stood the barn and the fairest stalles in all France, with the
Mill, and a piece of a house: which was done about the end of December. Within
two months after, seven score caliuers returned again to besiege the Castle,
but Monsieur de Bethincourt, a Gentleman of the religion, accompanied with nine
horse, and four footmen, set so resolutely upon them, that some of them
being slain, and 25. taken prisoners, the rest saved themselves by flight.

The nineteenth of November, one of the Dukes of Lunebourg, who in Anno. 1559.
had had a quarrel against the Duke of Guise in the camp of Amiens, The Duke of
Lunebourg slain in France.
being at Rameru, between Troys and Vitry le Francois, accompanied only with
18. men, minding (as it was said) to go to Orleans, by the commandment of
Bussy d'Amboise, Governor of Chaallons, was assailed in his lodging, being in
his chamber, where six of his men were slain, and himself wounded with
thirteen Pistolle shottes: which done, they laid him in a Horse-litter, and
bare him unto Chaallons, where he died. Bussyes executioner, named
Malfontaine, an Apostate of the religion, in triumph of that worthy exployt,
carried before him as in triumph, eighteen horses, eighteen cloakes, eighteen
pair of boots, and 36. Pistolles.

Ceant in Oath.
In the Town of Ceant in Oath, seven miles from Troys, the commons having found
the means to enter therein, upon the 24. day of August, murdered diverse of
the Town, and continued therein, till the end of January ensuing. The number
of those that were specially noted, besides those that were murdered in other
places, were twenty persons: and a young child of five years, burnt with his
father. Many houses were burnt by them, for the space of a mile from the Town,
and about six score horsemen, and three hundredth foot of the religion, led
by Monsier de Semide and other Captains, being not able to follow the Prince
of Portien, that with other troops had gotten to Strasbourg, about the
sixteenth of September: for their retrait ceased upon the Borough Town
Cermoise, where they maintained themselves valiantly, and ouerthrewe an army
of three thousand men that came to assail them: and slaying one hundredth and
fifty of their brauest Soldiers: the rest fled with the loss of three of
their men only: and not long after, they joined with the Prince of Portien
their General, at his return with the Rutters.

One of the greatest massacres committed upon those of the religion, was done
in Sens, a Town lying upon the river of d'Yonne, whereof the Cardinal de
Guise was Archbishop, where one hundredth prisoners of all sorts were cruelly
murdered, and their naked bodies thrown into the river. Sens.
As many houses were robbed and spoiled, and the Church for the religion
defaced: the Vines growing about it being all cut up. This was done upon
Sunday the 12. of August, and other days ensuing: in the which time, those of
Guise having given the charge of that murder unto Hemard Lieftenant of Sens,
published in the Kings name at Parris, and sent word to the Prince in Orleans,
that they would have the edict of January fully observed in all places, only in
Parris.

Those of the Romish Church in Auxerre, cruelly massacred one named Cosson,
stabbed and cast the keepers wife of the Castle (called Aualon) into the water,
being a fair and comely young Gentlewoman: Auxerre.
beat the Kings Attorney so cruelly, that they left him for dead: killed the
Judge de Corbelin, and committed diverse strange robberies and pillings both
within and without the Town, by the conduct of Geolier, and a brabling Rascal
called Borgant. In the month of October, they were procured to issue out of
the Town, by Monsieur d'Auignau, a Gentleman of the religion, accompanied with
twenty horse, who having slain fourteen of them, and hurt many others,
stayed their fury.

The fifteenth of the same month, this Gentleman accompanying one of his
companions that traveled unto Orleans, with a packet of some importance, slew
sixteen more of those murderers, and scattered the rest that sought to stop
his passage. The Inhabitants of the Town of Saint Cyre, S. Cyre.
about the end of the month, having denied passage unto the Rutters and
Lansquenets, conducted by Monsieur d'Andelot, were set upon by night, whereof
forty being slain, the richest of the Town were taken prisoners. The
Inhabitants of the Town and Bourg of Issy (provoked by a Iacopin) not being
content to have used diverse outrageous words against Monsieur d'Andelot,
discharged certain muskets at the Rutters: but they for their pains, had
their town spoiled and burnt by the Rutters and Lansquenets. On the other
side, the company of the Marshal of Saint Andre, overthrew and spoiled the
houses of those of the religion, within and about Auxerre.

Upon Monday, being the eleventh of May, Neuers.
1562. those of the Romish Church in Neuers, having taken arms, brought in
certain Gentlemen of the country, and among others, Cheuenon and Chastillon,
that ceased upon the Gates: and within three days after, began to fall upon
those of the religion: and one named la Fayette, coming thither upon the 23.
of the same month, began to forage, his Soldiers openly selling their
Hosts goods. He cast the Ministers in prison, rebaptised the children,
reitzerated marriages, drove out such as pleased him, and cleansed their houses
of all that could be found therein. Besides that, he and Cheuenon committed
infinite pillages upon the boats passing by it, and under pretense of a
certain commission or judgment given in Parris, la Fayette ceased upon
diverse immooueable goods, and being well laden with a pray, to the valewe of
forty or 50. Crowns, he retired unto his house in Auuergne. At the same time,
three or four of the religion were executed within Neuers, and one of the
Ministers died miserably, (but yet co^sta^tly) in prison, Corbigni or S.
Leonard.
the other miraculously escaped away. The like entertainme^t was given to those
of the religion in Corbigni, called S. Leonard, a town in Niuernois, most
strangely forraged by Noysat, Marshall of de la Fayettes company: Anthony
Doyuet, Lieftenant of Saint Pierre le Monstier, Liefenant du Boys, and the
Knight of Chastillon in Bazois. They slew Monsieur de Mex, a Gentleman not
far from thence, much affected to the religion, as he well showed it, dying
most constantly, being wounded with many Pistolle shottes. Not long after,
those murderers were surprised, and the Town taken of a scalade, made by
Captain Blanay, whose soldiers used the people very courteously: but brake
down the Images, and the Popish Altars: reestablishing public exercise of the
religion, which continued therein after the edict of pacification. Those of the
Romish Church in Antrain, Antrain.
by the solicitation of a Priest, named Estiene Blondelet, had determined to
do worse then their companions of Auxerre, but upon the twelfe of December
they were prevented by Captain Blosset, who valiantly surprised the Town, and
gave such an alarm to those conspirators, that the chief of them leaped over
the walls, some hid themselves, and the rest having discovered the
enterprise, which was to massacre all those of the religion: Blondelet and
another mutinous fellow, named le Dangereux, were hanged. A Bourguignon, named
Monsieur de Trouan, that came into France to fish in troubled waters as others
did, thought to play the warrior, and to assail Antraine, but having lost
part of his men, he retired with shame: and not content therewith, seeking to
revenge himself, was slain by Blanay in a certain encounter.

Monsieur d'Issertieux, called by those of la Charity, professing the religion,
in the month of April 1562. by common consent of all the Town was
established Governor thereof, La Charity.
Cheuenon, Achon, and others, did what they could to enter therein, but they
were always driven away: but in the end, la Fayette besieged it, having the
great Prior of Auuergne for his Lieftenant, and by means of a division that
happened among the Inhabitants, the Town was yielded by composition, with
sufficient advantage for those of the religion: but the first thing that the
great Prior did, was to take Issertieux by the bosom, from whom was pulled the
counterpaine of the agreement: his armor, and one of his horses. Which was
done upon the 10. of June. Certain days and months ensuing, those of the
religion were pilled and ransacked, in so many and diverse kinds, by la
Fayette, that they were notable to pay any more: to whom nothing was either
too hot, or too heavy, as also by his company, the Lieftenant and certain
Councillors of Saint Pierre le Monstier, took their parts likewise. In the
month of February, 1563. the Duke of Guise sent three companies of Lanciers
thither to refresh them: but those of the Town, and the thieves themselves,
doubting to be pilled, shut the Gates, which put the Lanciers in great fury:
who to revenge themselves, used great cruelties about the Town, on that side
that bordereth upon Berry, against those of the religion, drawing some of them
at their horses tails.

The third of March, Captain Boys, Blosset, and Blanay, scaled and took la
Charity, which the three companions aforesaid soght to relieve, but they were
constrained to retire. Within three days after, Captain Boys staying therein,
only with sixty seven souidiers, kept the Town against an army of three or
four thousand men, both horse and foot, and fix field pieces, where he
sustained the siege eight days together, without loss of any man, having
slain above fourscore of the assaylants, constrained the rest to leave the
siege, to their no small confusion: in such sort, that by the edict of
pacification, the exercise of the religion remained within la Charity.

Many small Towns in those quarters were much molested, specially in respect:
of the religion: as Bony, Cosne, Neufui, and others: Chastillon Sur Loire.
but most of all Chastillon Sur Loire, which having withstood many
difficulties, and spoiled of all her commodities by thieves and rouers, (being
but poor keepers of vines) to defend themselves against the violences of such
as desired the loss and extermination of their lives. And having fortified
their little Town (not having any ditches) as well as they might, upon the
fifth of January they sustained an assault slew seven or eight hundredth men of
the Regiment of Monsieur de Pry, Governor of Guyen, that sought to put him to
the sword, hurting diverse others, the men defending themselves by throwing
stones, and the women with hot water, which they cast upon the assaylants,

In the month of February, Monterud Governor of Berry, besieged them, and with
cannon shot beat down their feeble walls, yet could he not enter, but by
warlike means, that under pretense of parley, he withdrew his battery, which
lay in such sort, that he could do little good therewith, and having placed
them in better order, he commanded a new bridge to be made, and thereat entered
by force: where no kind of cruelties was spared, neither upon women, nor
children, old nor young, no not so much as against women great with child and
ready to be delivered. The Town being pilled and spoiled of all whatsoever
it had, even to the boltes, locks, bars and glasse-windowes of the houses,
which notwithstanding, as soon as Manteruds army was departed, those of the
religion that had escaped, returned thither again, and reestablished the
exercise of religion.

Guyen sur Loire.
The Town of Guyen Sur Loire, maintained it self long time in peace during the
troubles, only by the means of those of the religion, being the strongest
part within the Town, but the disorder committed by diverse Captains and
soldiers, sent thither from Orleans by the Prince to refresh themselves, and
the taking of Bourges, reduced things to such a stay, that most of those of the
religion, forsook both their houses and their goods to go to Orleans, where as
the^ the plague was very rife. The camp of Triumuirat, not long after arrived
before Guyen, and all the places bordering on the same, using all the cruelties
that possible might be invented: among the which, certain Italians (in hatred
of the religion) having cut the body of a young Infant in two pieces, cate his
lieuer: which was verified to be most true, yet justice for the same could not
be had. Lastly: those of the religion being returned from Orleans, with Lanbert
Daneau, one of their Ministers, they met another troop of their friends, that
two days before came from Chastillon sur Loin, with the other Ministers called
La Vallee, and being entered into the Town, by virtue of the edict began
the exercise of the religion, Guyen being named for the balliage town in
those quarters. The Monks of Fontaine John, an Abbey near adjoining unto
Chastillon sur Loin, having abandoned their gowns, to bear arms, and to
rob and spoil the country, with other soldiers, upon the seventh of
October, were all set upon, by Monsieur de Dampierre: and seeking to resist,
were all slain: only some few that were burnt within the Cloister, from
whence it was impossible otherwise to get them forth.

Montargis, belonging to the Lady Renee, daughter to Lois the twelfe, Duches
Dowager of Ferrare, Montargis.
was the retrait of diverse families of the religion: notwithstanding the
threatenings of the Duke of Guise, son in law to the said Lady, who sent
thither one Malicorne a new Knight of the Order, to cease upon the Town and
Castle, with four companies of horse, who being entered into the Town, moved
the people against those of the religion, in such manner, that at that time a
poor man was slain and cast into the water, as before that time likewise they
had killed a woman, and committed certain outrages: and Malicorne continuing
in his boldness, proceeded so far, as to threaten the Lady with cannon
shot to batter her Castle, wherein were diverse of the religion, whom he
pretended to ransom: but the Princess made him an answer, saying: I charge
you look what enterprise you take in hand, for that there is not any man
whatsoever, within this Realm, that can command me, but only the King: and
if you proceed so far, I will be the first that shall stand within the breach,
to try if you once dare be so bold to kill the daughter of a King: and on the
other side, not so meanly allied, nor yet beloved, but that I have both the
means and power to revenge your boldness, even to the very infants of your
presumptious race. Which words caused Malicorne like a snaile to pull in his
horns, and presently after departed: the Duke of Guise being slain, as you
read before.

Those of the Romish Church, within the Town of S. John's de Nemours, in the
mouth of June, S. John de Nemours.
did so much, that they drove those of the religion out of their Town, not
permitting any of them to enter, until the peace concluded, raising of
extreme impositions upon their goods, that were openly sold for small
prices. Not long before they had used all the means they could (by counsel of
some Traitors) to bring certain troops of soldiers into the town to massacre
the people, Monlius in Bourbonois.
but their enterprise took no effect. Monsieur de Montare being come to
Moulius in Bourbonnois, with commission, therein to use all hard and extreme
dealing toward those of the religion: first, without any form of law or
process, he caused two Artificers to be hanged, and perceiving himself to be
strong of men, drove all such as he any thing doubted out of the Town: which
done, he gave his troops leave to issue forth, and to slay all those that by
any means were found in the fields, using al kind of strange dealings and
extremities, unto the houses and farms lying about it. Captain Saint Auban,
that led certain troops out of Languedos to Orleans, failed not much to take
both Montare, and the Town of Moulius, and as he determined to besiege it, he
received letters, that caused him to make haste way. At his departure from
thence, the Townes-men issued upon his rereward, and took Monsieur de Foulet,
a Gentleman dwelling not far from thence, and his Lacquey, with a Counselor
named Claude Brisson, that were all three slain. Not long after, four others
were hanged in Moulius. And in the month of July after, five others returning
from Orleans were drowned: with three Merchants of Dauphine. Besides that,
diverse were put to death, the hangma^ or executioner (by Montare, called
Gossop) serving the peoples humor, and executing either without law or
process, such as they delivered unto him to be put to death.

The leven and twentieth of May, 1562. the Count de Montgommery, accompanied
with fix score horses, entered into Bourges, wherein many secret conspiracies
were used and executed against those of the religion, and kept it for the
Prince, bringing from thence great sums of money, for the payment of the
Soldiers under the Princes conduct: taking the great Tower likewise into his
custody. In the month of June after, Monsieur de Iuoy was sent thither by the
Prince, with two thousand foot, to provide for all things necessary against
the Town should be besieged, as the enemy determined to do it. Three Corners
of Argolitiers came thither likewise, who being arrived therein, they used to
make certain sallies: by which means, the Town of Meun sur Loire was taken,
to the great periudice of the Priests, the Monks and Images. As likewise they
forced the Castles of Saint Florent and Coudrai, the Gentleman of the place
dying with fear. Iuoy having made an enterprise upon Issoudun, prevailed not,
whereupon his troops began to mutin against him: which being appeased, the
fifteenth of August, the army of Triumuirat approaching to Bourges, Iuoy and
the Sheriffs were summoned to yield the Town unto the King. The Sheriffs
referring the matter unto Iuoy, he made refusal, whereupon ensued diverse
issues and skirmishes, commonly to the great disadvantage of the enemies: and
there was an open combatte fought between Captain S. Martin the Huguenot, and
the Monk Lichelieu, Master of the Triumuirats camp: Bourges in Berry.
the Monk was thrust into the body with a sword, and lost his coat armor,
which Saint Martin bare away.

The twentieth day of the Month, a strong battery was made, and in one day
they shot at the least a thousand cannon shot, but because it prevailed not
much, the Duke de Nemours was employed, to persuade the besieged, and being at
the wall to speak with them, making many goodly promises, which he assured
upon his faith: one of the Soldiers within the Town said openly unto him,
that the faith he then offered, was the same which he had holden to the Barron
of Chastelnau, and had it not been for certain Gentlemen, he had as then been
slain. That which constrained the Triumuirat to parley with the Town, was,
because the Admiral issuing out of Orleans about Chasteaudun had surprised and
burnt, and the powder and munition that was sent the^ from Parris, and for that
cause used such means with Iuoy, by the Count Rhingraue, and the Queen Mother,
that upon the last of August, and the next day, he granted to their request,
and yielded up the Town, to the great disliking of his soldiers: whereof part
with the Captains la Port, S. Martin (that hurt Richelieu) S. Remi, and
Brion, Master of the camp, went to the Duke of Guise, and from thence to the
siege of Roane, where they were slain: the rest had part of the booty. The
rest of the Soldiers and Captains got to Orleans, with many difficulties, and
loss of 30. or 40. men.

Iuoy had great displeasure at the Princes bands, both for his faintness and
the loosing of the place, being of so great importance. Whereupon, he
withdrewe himself unto his house, much grieved for his misfortune, specially
because he had left great store of Household Stuff and other necessaries
within Bourges: and among the rest, a Chalice set with diverse rich and precious
stones, which he was constrained to give unto the Queene-mother, who with
great devotion received it of him, and kept it as a most rich Jewel: as
likewise many other precious lewelles of the holy Chapel, which were kept from
the hands of little thieves, to be the better and safelier kept by her.

Monterud Lieftenant to the Prince de la Rochesuryon in Berry, having armed
himself with letters from the Triumuirat, contrary to the capitulation made
with Iuoy, drove those of the religion out of the Town, their houses being
ransacked: and at their issuing, some of them were robbed, some beaten, and
some slain within the Gates. An edict being made, that forbidding those of
the religion that stayed in the Town, not to speak or assemble together above
two in a company: and so Bourges remained in that sort until the edict of
pacification.

The third of April, 5562. those of the religion in Man's, ceased peaceably
upon the Town: Le Man's.
Charles d'Agennes Bishop of the place, retiring unto a Castle, where having
fortified himself, he committed many murders and spoils upon the people.
Their affairs within the Town holding in a mean, until the month of May,
that for want of a man of authority and well affected to the religion, and to
the estate of the common and particular commodity of the people, the soldiers
began to fall to extremities, and in fleed of assayling their enemies in the
field, they busied themselves in the Town, to break down Images, and Priests
Altars, to the great disliking of the Ministers, and other peaceable persons,
showing them that it was against the edict of January, the treaty of
association holden in Orleans, and the declaration which those of Man's not long
before had made, and sent unto the king by Monsieur de Mortier. From the
^hurches in the Town, they ran unto the Villages bordering about it: and
adding evil to evil, committed certain spoils, which caused the Pesants to
fall upon them, and to slaye some of them as they retired laden with their
pray. Those that remained within the Town were divided, some commanding in
the Castle, others within the Town. Those of the religion being abashed at
the insolences of the Captains and soldiers, news was brought, that the
Triumuirats army was as then at Blois, and that the Duke de Montpensieur made
preparation to assail them! They likewise had intelligence, that of three
Captains that commanded within the City, two of them had secret conference
with the enemy, which considered, as also that the Town was weak and
slenderly furnished of men, the twelfe of July, it was confusedly and in great
haste forsaken, about eight of the clock at night: at which their issuing,
were found to the number of eight hundredth men, all armed, that by Captain la
Mothe Tibergeau, with great difficulties were conducted unto Alancon. The other
two Captains presently yielded unto the enemy: those that saved themselves at
Alancon, took diverse parties: some not accustomed to bear arms stayed there:
others went to find the Count de Montgommery, or the Duke de Bouillon. For
the Ladies and Gentlewomen, some withdrew themselves to Deep, or to New-hauen,
or else into England. The next day after, the Town so forsaken, such of the
Romish religion as had absented themselves from thence, entered again, and
then began a terrible trouble: very few of the houses of those of the
religion either within the Town, or in the fields, for 8. miles compass round
about, but were all pilled, and that by the near kinsmen of such as had
absented themselves. Five hundredth Harquebusiers being appointed for the guard
of the Town, and other places bordering on the same, exercised all kinds of
cruelties upon such as stayed behind, as some poor people, maids and
men-seruants, and certain Gentlewomen of account in the Town, and other
persons withdrawing themselves into their farms, countrie-houses, and with
their friends. Presently the prisons were filled, and by decree, a judicial
place was appointed, and that neither kinsmen nor friends, should solicit for
the prisoners, whom they termed rebels and seditious. The Steward saying it
was sufficient, having seen a man to enter into the Temple while the Images
were throwing down, or bearing a sword at that time when they held the Town,
to condemn him for seditious, and a rebel. Three witnesses being hired and
appointed for the purpose, to perform the tragedy, one called Chouan a
bookeseller, the second a Priest, called les Anges, and Bandoun an Apothecarie,
so impudent in their occupation, that when their wages failed to be paid, they
said openly, that they would meddle no more therein.

Further, the accused were not allowed or permitted to refuse any witness, in
such manner, that thereby they put two hundredth persons to death, both men,
women, and servants: as also four young children, whereof the eldest was not
above seventeen years of age: and two men that were mad. Such as were
absent, had process made against them, and their pictures executed:
confiscated the goods of those whom they knew to be dead in the wars,
disabled their children of all offices and estates: depriuiuing them of all
possessions or inhereritances, that might by any means fall unto them. Not
long before the peace, they beheaded one called Rolandiere: hung a Ioyner, and
massacred four others by moone-light, and being half dead, threw them into
the river. In the Villages both far and near unto it, many murders both of
men, women, and children, were committed, to the number of six score and
upwards, with particular cruelties, and such horrible traitorous means, that I
am abashed to remember, and ashamed to recite them. One named Captain
Champagne, having a fish pond behind his house, cast above fifty persons into
it, and with their bodies nourished Pikes. His Lieftenant, called Boi-Iourdan,
seconded him therein, for that in two ditches near unto his house, were found
to the number of fifty or sixty dead bodies.

Those of the religion in Angers, Angers.
being become strong within the Town, with the hurt or injury of any of
their adversaries, about the fifth of April, and within six days after, made
an agreement to live peaceably one with the other, under the obedience of the
King, observing the edict of January. But about the 22. of the same month, a
Gentleman coming thither to demand aid of men, and money for the Prince,
certain soldiers that bare him company, in the night time brake down the
Images in Saint Sansons Church: which moved the Priests, although the
Gentleman, much condemned their action, and had not any part of the spoil.
Whereupon diverse Gentleman and soldiers of the religion being gone to
Orleans, those of the Romish religion, perceiving themselves to be strong,
first blinded their enemies, causing the edict of January to be newly
published, and then being well assured of Monsieur de la Fancille, that
commanded in the Castle Puygallard, a Gascon Captain sent by the Duke de
Montpensier, upon the fifth of May at night entered into the Castle, followed
by diverse soldiers, and the next day his watchword being Satan, did so much
that he ceased upon part of the Town: and the more to blind those of the
religion, and wholly to get them into his possession, he granted them free
exercise of the religion, and the next day caused the Gates to be opened, that
they might go to hear the Sermon, made within a house that stood upon the
ditch: and to take up the body of one of their Ministers, named Charles
d'Albiac, called du Plesus, who the day before had been slain, as he went to
save himself by leaping over the wall. The next day their began a horrible
tumult, for that under pretense of disarming those of the religion, they
entered into their houses, and because two of them among the rest, whereof one
was the receiver of the talages, had shune their Gates, their enemies took
occasion to ring a bell, whereupon presently those two houses were robbed and
spoiled, some of the servants slain, the rest prisoners: the kings money taken
and made prise, partly by Puygallard and his companions. Which done, they cast
both men and women of the religion, and of all sons into prison. In a Merchants
house they found diverse books of the holy Scriptures, which were burnt openly
in the middle of the Town: and the soldiers of the Monk Richelieu having
found a gilded Bible, stickt it upon a holbord, and issuing from thence, went
in procession through all the greatest streets, and singing like Priests,
said: Behold truth hanged, the truth of the Huguenots, the truth of all the
diuelles: behold the mighty God, behold the everlasting God will speak. And
being come to the bridge, they cast it into the river of Loire, and with
higher voice began to cry, and say: Behold the truth of all the diuelles
drowned.

Within diverse days after, and till the end of that year, to the number of
eighty persons were executed and put to death. A Gentlewoman of the age of
seventy years, was beaten dead with the stocks of their Pistolles, then
drawn in a sack through the dirt, and her body cast into the water, with
great joy and laughter of all the people, terming her the mother of the green
devil that preached to the Huguenots.

The wife of a Counselor named Sigongue, although she lay bedthred, was
murdered, children rebaptised, and women to hear Mass by sound of drumbe,
some were abused in their bodies, many maids violated: and among the rest, two
young maids ravished in their fathers presence, whom those cruel villains had
^yed at the foot of a bed, that he might behold the fact committed. About
Angers, diverse Gentlemen and others, were massacred.

The Duke de Monpensier, having license to ring a bell, and to kill all such as
were suspected to be of the religion, which done, they fell to pillage: upon
whom the Duke de Montpensier most discharged his chollor, was upon Monsier de
Marests, a valiant Captain, who with twenty or five and twenty soldiers
having taken and kept the Castle of Richefort, against the Dukes forces, and
slain above two hundredth men in the defense thereof: in the end being
betrayed by two of his own men, defending himself till he remained without
company, and not having any more powder, yielded himself to Puygaillard, who
upon his faith, promised him to save his life: but presently delivered him to
the provost Marshall, who having brought him to Angers, caused him by the Dukes
commandment to be broken upon a Cross, and there left alive upon it, living
in that misery until the next morning at four of the Clock, without relief
or ease of any man, by ending his pain: still tempted by two Friars, to
convert from the truth of the religion, but he remained constant. The two
Traitors that betrayed him to his enemies, were likewise hanged, and an other
that had opened the Gate, whereby they entered into Rochefort, was slain: of
whom they thought to be rewarded.

Tours and the country about it.
Eight days before Easter, in Anno 1562. the Duke de Montpensier, being come
to Tours with a small troop, in diverse sorts discovered his evil will against
those of the religion, who having had advice from the Prince, how their
affairs proceeded, seized upon the Town, without any disorder, only
inregard of the Images, that by no means could be relieved, what counsel or
advice soever the stayder sort could give or procure. At the same time the
cruel sentence given in the Parliament of Parris, was published in the
government of Touraine, Maine, and Aniou, committed to the charge of the Duke
de Montpensier and of Chauigni his Lieftenant. Which sentence, was expressly
to command, all men of what estate soever, presently to rise in Arms, with
permission to sound belles in every place, to spoil and destroy all those of
the religion, that could or might be found, without respect of quality, sex
or age, and to assail their houses, to kill, spoil, and utterly subvert them.
This sentence was published every sunday in all the Parishes: and in the terms
used by the Triumuirat. Which is, to let the greatest Gray hound loose, and
presently therevppon all kind of bad persons assembled, both pesants and
Artificers, and leaving their ordinary labors, began in great fury to march
with the rest against those of the religion. Part of them entering into Ligueul,
where they hanged certain men, put out the ministers eyes, and then burnt him
with a small fire. Others entered into Cormery, l'Islebouchart, Loches, and
other places bordering upon it, where they committed an infinite number of
villainies. Among diverse other murders, fleaing a young man named Mathurin
Chaiseau of the age of 17. or 18. years. An other troop of 6. or 700. men fell
upon the village of Aze, four miles from Chinon, and burnt it: massacring to
the number of 25. or 30. persons, in presence of the stuard Agenois, who in
stead of opening his gates to aid the poor distressed people, understanding
of their coming, stood at his windows, to Judge what blows they had. In the
beginning of July, they of Tours being sommoned to yield the Town, and having
no means to be relieved by the Prince, departed from thence with their arms,
making three companies of foot, and two cornets of horse, and went to march to
Poictiers: Joining with those of Chinon and Chastelleraut. Whereby they were
about the number of 1000. men or there abouts. And being followed by 7. or 8.
co^mpanies of Lanciers, and some Cornets of light horse, belonging to the Count
de Villards, their leaders fainted: Whereupon they were charched by the
horsemen, and overthrown: some being slain, the rest robbed and spoiled of
all they had, were led prisoners to Chastelleraut, from whence they escaped
by diverse means, and some got to Poictiers. Their Minister called Ihon de la
Tour that had bin at the conference in Poissy, aged 75. years, was drowned in
the river of Clain: the first that yielded themselves in that overthrow, were
sent to Tours, and about three hundredth of the nimblest of them, thought by
running to get Tours, but at their arrival the Townsmen began to ring a
bell, at the sound whereof, diverse of them saved themselves, the rest, to the
number of two hundredth, were taken and committed to prison: and the next day
six or seven score of them, were murdered and cast into the river of Loire.
Others being found about the Town, were likewise thrown into the water, not
sparing man, woman, nor child. After that, came Chauigny, with his band of
Priests, Monks, Friars, Cannons, and their companions, and then the murders
and pillages began to be renewed. The President of Tours, named Bourgeau, an
ancient man of great credit and authority, who although he never had made
profession of the religion, yet he was esteemed to be one, having presented
Clerueaux Lieftenant to Chauigny, with 300. Crowns, and a Basin of silver, was
led forth of the Gates, but being perceived and discovered, by such as
watched for such things, he was murdered with swords and staves, and then
stripped into his shirt, and hanged by the foot, his head in the water up to
the breast: and being still living, they cut open his belly, and casting his
guts into the river, sticking his heart upon the point of a Lance, bare it
about the Town, saying it was the heart of the President of the Huguenots.

Not long after, the Duke de Montpensier arrived in the Town, causing diverse
Gibbets, wheels, and flakes, to be set up, and then under pretense of
justice, the murders began again, so that the number of those that were
executed, before, then, and since, amounted to above three hundredth persons,
most part being rich men, and many of good account. As Soon as the Commons, or
the Justice, had put any man or woman to death, they enrered into their houses,
and killing their children, took all they found therein, in such manner, that
Richelieu the Monk, boasted to have as much Velvet, Satin, and Taffata, (which
he had gotten in Tours) as would reach a league in length: his companions
likewise had their parts, in such manner, that such as six weeks before, were
not worth a groate, presently after, offered to buy lands, and to pay thirty
or forty thousand Frankes ready money.

Let us now see what past, during these first troubles in high and base
Normandy, and first begin with Roane, Rome.
the principal Town in that Province. The fifteenth of April 1562. those of
the religion foreseeing some danger, ceased upon the Town, and five days
after, yielded reason of their action unto the Duke de Bouillon Governor
thereof. Their declaration being sent to the Court, letters pattents were
presently given unto the Duke d'Aumale, brother to the Duke de Guise, to be
the kings Lieftenant in Normandy. The third of May, the Artificers with their
wives and children, entered into the Churches, and in less then four and
twenty hours, had broken down and defaced all the Images, Altars, and other
superstitious Relics, in more then 50. Churches, as well of Parishes, as of
Abbayes and Couents: not once taking any thing for themselves, in such sort,
that from that time, until the taking of the Town, the occupation of Priests
and Friars wholly discontinued.

Seven days after, the Citizens mustered themselves, and the Court of
Parliament withdrew it self, yet without any cause. Mean time, Villebon
Bailiffe of Roan, ceased upon Pont de l'Arche, and the Baron de Clear took
Caudebec, the one above, the other below the river of Siene. Whereby it
proved great discommoditie for the Town of Roan, that by those means could
get no victuals by water, besides the ceasing of the Courts of justice, the
stay of trade of merchandise and all sorts of handy works: these
discommodities made the Citizens to look unto themselves.

In the beginning of June, Villebon came with great troops to besiege Saint
Catherins fort: where in a fierce skirmish he lost his cornet and fourteen
men, and they of the fort 8. me^. Presently after him, came the Duke de Aumale,
Saint Catherins Fort besieged.
and gave an alarm unto the Town, where presently he lost 25. of his
horsemen: But for renenge, he assayd all means he could to impeach the Town of
Roan from necessary provisions. But not long after, it was relieved by Monsieur
de Moruilliers, sent thither by the Prince from Orleans, assisted by Monsieur
de Languetot, a gentleman of great wisdom. The Duke d'Aumale, dispersed the
Churches of those of the religion in Hafleur, Montuilier and l'Islebonne, where
he hanged three ancients, and three Gentlemen of the Religion. And not long
after besieged Saint Catherins fort, with thirteen Cannons, and two coluerins:
where Monsieur de Languetot had his leg shot off with a great piece,
whereof he died. Many skirmishes being daily performed between them, till in
the end, the Duke left the Fort and fled from thence: and within five days
after, being before Ponteau de Mer, faining to parley with them within the
Town, he surprised them upon a sudden, and so entered by force, where he
used all kind of hostility, specially upon the Minister named Brionne: and
the third day after, he besieged and took Honfleur.

The six and twentieth of August, the Parliament of Roane being at Louniers,
made a declaration, whereby those of the religion in Normandy were declared
Traitors, permitting all men, Declaration of the Parliament of Roane against
those of the religion.
that either would or had the means to spoil and ouerrunne them, wholly
disallowing the edict of January, established the Inquisition of Spain, and
appointed the Duke d'Aumale, Lieftenant for the King. And by that declaration
and sentence, this Court of Parliament executed many of the religion,
commanding all such as would not make profession of the Romish religion, to
depart out of the Town of Louuiers, within four and twenty hours after,
upon pain of confiscation, both of body and goods. On the other side, they
drove all the Friars out of Roane, and having discovered treason pretended by
some of their companions, they took order therein from thence forward, The
siege of Roane.
giving good eye to those of the Romish religion: whereof they thrust out great
numbers. In August, Monsieur de Moruilliers withdrew himself from Roane, and
kept himself peaceably within his house, and so continued during the wars,
never forsaking the open profession of the religion.

In the mean time, Monsieur de Montgommery was by those of Roane desired to
assist them: which he presently did, and arrived at Roane upon the 18. of
September: within rennedaies after, the Town was summoned to yield it self
unto the army of the Triumuirat, whose camp (wherein were the king, the
Queen, and the king of Navarre) being composed of sixteen thousand foot, and
two thousand horse, besides Rutters and Lansquenets, came before the Town,
where at their arrival, they had a hot and fierce skirmish, which continued
all that day, and three days after successively.

The fixed of October, the king, army having intelligence from Captain Louis
out of Saint Catherins, Saint Catherins fort taken.
for they surprised it by force, wherein they slew al they found. And Louis
himself ayding the enemy to mount up, was slain by one of his Soldiers:
another fort called Montgommery, was taken by the like means, where the
Queene-mother led the king, being but twelve years of age, to see the dead
bodies of the women, and made him behold them bathing in their blood. The
thirteenth of October, an assault was given unto the Town, but they within
repulsed the enemy: where some courageous women (bringing meat unto the
soldiers) were slain. The next day they gave another assault at the Rampart
of Saint Hilary, but were repulsed, and for the space of 6. hours that the
skirmish endured, they lost to the number of eight hundredth of their best
soldiers, and they within, four or five hundredth, accounting women and
children that were slain with the Artillery.

The same day, the king of Navarre being visited by a certain Lord, told him,
Hurt and death of the King of Navarre.
that if he escaped safely from that siege, he would never bear arms again
for that quarrel: but the next day he would go see the trenches, where by
fortune as he made water, he was stricken with a Harquebushotte into the
shoulder: which done, he was borne by certain Gentlemen to his lodging at
Dartenal, where the Surgians used all the means they could, to get out the
bullet, but having deferred it ouerlong, they could not: one of the Physicians
named Vincentius, a voluptious man, entertained him with sports and companies
of Gentlewome^: and among therest, a Gentlewoman named Rouet, came to see him,
which was some means to inflame his wound, and having intelligence that Roane
was taken, he was borne thither, where governing not himself, as his wound and
time required, it began to grow to further pain, and in the end a fever took
him, wherewith he began to be faint, and the^ perceived they had deceived him.
Notwithstanding his servants had so great credit with him, that they caused him
to be confessed and to receive the Sacrament after the Romish manner. The other
of his Physicians called Raphuel, being of the religion, uttered many reasons
unto him, so far that he seemed to charge him with sin against the holy
Ghost: whereunto he answered nothing, but lay still. Not long after, the Queen
(advertised by his Physicians, that he could not live) being come to see him,
willed some of his men to read unto him. She being departed, he commanded
Raphael to take the Bible, and to read the History of Job: which being done,
adding thereunto certain words of the justice and mercy of God, the king
being moved in spirit, lifting up his hands unto heaven, and with tears in
his eyes, he asked mercy of God, making a large and ample declaration of his
faith, protesting, that if it pleased God to grant him life, he would cause
the Gospel to be preached throughout the Realm of France. His disease waxing
more vehement, and Raphael continually attending upon him, having made his
will, he caused himself to be borne into a boat, to go to Saint Maur des
Fosses, hard by Parris. But not long after his entry into the boat, a great
cold ceased upon him, and therevppon insued a sweat, wherewith he began to
talk idly: and among other words, he said, he would send Raphael to Geneue to
be a Minister. And upon a sudden commanded him to pray: which Raphael
did: all that were in the boat, namely, the Prince de la Roche suryon kneeling
down, the Cardinal de Bourbon, the Prince of Mantoue, and Monsieur de Losses,
withdrewe themselves apart, standing upon their feet and their heads covered.
The prayer being done, wherewith the Cardinal could not find fault, Raphael
added a certain exhortation, and with him was joined another, that went like a
seculer person, but some say he was a Iacopin: who notwithstanding, used no
other words but such as any minister would have done. The last words the King
spoke, were unto a servant of his chamber, to whom he said, serve my son
well, and bid him serve the King faithfully: and so upon the 17. of November,
1562. he yielded up his soul.

The 15. of October, many parlies were made, touching a composition, wherein the
Queen Mother used many hot and vehement speeches unto the citizens that
issued forth, saying: that she knew how to live, Parley of yielding.
that they were come too late to teach her, that they ought to content
themselves to live as the King did, and that if they would not yeelld by fair
means, they should be compelled by force. She desired two articles: one, that
they should be wholely bereaved of the exercise of religion: the other, that
they should receive the King, the Triumuirat and their troops, into their
town. But they offered to receive the King, the Queen, the Princes of the
blood, and their train: but for the rest, they craved to be remitted.
Desiring that the edict of January might be continued in force. Which was
flatlye denied unto them.

The 26. of October, an assault was given unto the Town, and in the end, by
means of a mine that wrought at the breach of S. Hilaries gate, the town was
taken by force, Roan taken by assault
where the Kings soldiers began to kill and massacre all they met, using all
kind of monsterous cruelties. Montgommerie perceiving no remedy, entered into
a Galley, and with such as could save themselves therein, went to New-Hauen:
others that sought to do the like without boats, were drowned: such as fled
out at the gates were spoiled and robbed of all they had, and some taken
prisoners. Diverse Ministers being within a strong Tower, yielded themselves
upon promise of safety: but contrary to promise, they were kept prisoners, yet
escaped only Marolart, and president Maudreuille an excellent man, that were
betrayed by one S. Estene, that had promised to save them, and for his pains,
he should have had 2000. Crowns. The Constable threatened Marolart, but he
endured it patiently: many English and Scottish soldiers were hanged, the rest
being sick, taken and cast into the river of Siene. Maudreuille, Monsieur de
Soquence, and Berthonuille, Counselors of the Town, with Marolart, were
condemned to die: Maudreuille, to loose his head, Diverse notable persons
executed.
the rest to be hanged, which was presently executed with many opprobrious
speeches, against Marolart, both by the Constable and his son. They all dyed
constantly in the profession of the Gospel. The next day, 5. Captains and two
others were likewise executed. The spoil and sacking of the Town, continued
above 4. months together, and it is almost incredible to speak, what great
riches was taken and borne out of the Town: such as came from Parris, Amiens,
Beauuais, and other, places to buy the spoils, in their returns homewarde,
were either robbed of all they had, or else never prospered in their affairs.

Touching Deep, Deep.
those of the religion therein maintained themselves very well, exercising many
notable exployts against those that sought to molest them. So that from the
beginning of May, until October, their enemies lost to the number of one
thousand or twelve hundredth men. This Town served for a retrait to great
numbers of the religion, from diverse places, nourished an infinite number of
poor people, aided those of Roane with all the means they could, but the
succors they sent to help the town, being cut off and ouerthrown, the Town of
Deep perceiving it self not able to resist, in fine, by many threatenings,
promises and other means, they yielded the Town upon certain conditions:
the woorst whereof was, that the exercise of religion was taken from them: the
Marshall de Montmorancy establishing Ricaruille and de Baqueuille, with four
hundredth men to command therein: yet those of the religion lost not courage,
but made such suit unto the Queen Mother, (that feared the Admiral and the
siege of Orleans) that they obtained license to assemble in small companies,
which they did, having certain Ministers that escaped from Roane: yet there was
not one Priest in all the country, that durst once venture to say Mass
within Deep, and although the two Captains aforesaid, kept good watch, yet they
were surprised: for the twentieth of December, Monsieur Ricaruille being gone
out of the Castle with one of his servants, to see his horses, in a stable not
far from it, was slain by Monsieur de Chastiuille, and Captain Gascon, who
presently ceased upon the Castle, Deep taken from those of the Romish Church.
and having intelligence with those that were in it, armed themselves and
entered into the Town, where without hurting any man, they took Baqueuille,
whom all men had forsaken: that done, the exercise of the religion was again
publicly permitted, and the Government of the Town, given to Monsieur de la
Curee, a Gentleman well affected to the religion.

There happened diverse exploytes of war in many places of Normandy, because
of the Towns, but because the most part of them were but surprises, and
ordinary stratagems, we will not speak of them, but only of that which
seems woorthiest memory.

The seventh of June 1562. Messieurs de Houesuille, and de Cequeuille, Gilles
Michant Physician, Valongnes.
John Guifart, and Robert de Verdun Counnellours, were massacred in Valongues
for religion, and the houses of such as made profession, were filled with
soldiers, that did what they list therein, for the space of eight days.

In the Month of May, Vire.
before Viere having been taken by Montgommery, the Images beaten down, and
the Relics borne away, the religion reestablished, upon the last of July,
those of the Romish Church assailed those of the religion, as they came out
from the sermon, whereof they slew three men, whereof one was stoned by the
women, being in the river, and hurt diverse. But about the end of August, they
were revenged thereof by means of Monsieur de Montgommery, that sent them
aid, which did much mischief to all the country round about: but not long
after, again the Duke d'Estampes took the Town by force, and many of them
put unto the sword.

The Duke d'Estampes having gotten Vire, Saint Lo.
went to Saint Lo, where having continued siege for the space of five or six
days, in the end he took it, the Town being sacked and put to the spoil.
Nowhauen.
New-Hauen, a Town of great importance, having been bravely delivered unto
the Prince, by Vidame de Chartres, Monsieur de Beauuoir, and la Nocle his
brother in law: Vidame going into England, meaning not to leave the place
unprovided, let the keeping thereof to one named Roquebrune, to whom he gave
commission to raise three hundredth men for the guard thereof. He presently went
unto the Cardinal of Lorraine, and after to the King of Navarre, promising to
deliver New-Hauen unto them, and proceeded therewith, until such time as he
should have executed his charge. But the enterprise being discovered to
Monsieur de Beaunoir, he took speedy order for the relief thereof, causing
Roquebrune to loose his head. Mean time, Vidame dealt with the Queen of
England, to aid those of the religion, upon condition, that for the security
and safeguard of her men, she should have the Town of New-Hauen delivered unto
her, without any prejudice unto the King or to the Realm: whereupon 6000.
English men were sent into Normandy: whereof part were in Roane, where they
fought valiantly till the last man: and if they had been seconded, the issue
thereof would have fallen out otherwise. Some were put into Deep, the greatest
part staying in New-Hauen, under the conduct of the Earl of Warwick. Roan
being taken, the Ringraue came before New-Hauen: where the English men and
Scots gave him many a skirmish. Many means were sought to corrupt Monsier de
Beauuoir, with promises of fifty thousand crowns, a collar of the order, and
a company of Lanciers: But by no means he would consent to yield the Town,
nor yet in any sort blemish his honor.

Touching Britaigne, the Duke de Estampes, Britain.
a Gentleman of good and moderate nature, behaved himself very indifferently
with those of the religion, as long as the Queene-mother seemed to hang in
suspense. But wars once kindled, and his Nephew Sebastian de Luxembourg, a
cruel man, if ever there were any in France, being joined with him for
assistant, mutenous companio^s began to stir, in such sort, that those of the
Army of Triumuirat, seemed to set one upon the other. But yet those of the
religion made good means to help themselves.

Now let us see what happened unto the country of Guyene, Guyenne
during these first troubles. The first of April, 1562. Monluc caused the
town of Fumel to be unwalled: Threw down certain houses, and set them at
a fine of three hundredth thousand frankes: to be paid unto the widow and
Orphans, of Monsieur de Fumel, not long before murdered by those of the Town.

Those of the religion foreseeing the mischiefs that Monluc would work, if he
were not prevented, desired Monsieur de Duras to stay in the Province, where
he fonud great forces, but he excused himself by the commandment given him
from the Prince, to lead certain forces to Orleans, which was the means of
most great miseries, and cruel massacres that happened in that country. Those
of the religion in Bourdeaux, having let slip the means to get the Town
peaceably into their hands, while Bury and Mo^luc were absent, that went about
to erect their snares, and to assure themselves, they could no more attain
unto it, for that minding to assaye it once again, they found so many faint
hearted people among them, that they were constrained to save themselves in
Duras: whereof the Parliament being informed, caused their houses to be spoiled
and thrown down: threatening all such as they could lay hands upon: and among
the rest, two Ministers named Neufchastle and Grene.

Monluc had his greatest quarrel against those of Again, Again.
who among diverse other enterprises of that Town, had surely been taken and
spoiled by them, had it not been for the improuidence of Monsieur de Memy,
General for the wars for those of the religion, in Guyenne and all the
country adjoining, wherein he behaved himself with no great honor, as
being a man rather addicted to his study, then unto arms, which in the end
made him loose his head upon a Scaffold. Bury and Monluc, knowing with whom
they had to deal, sought diverse means to intrappe those of Argen: and to the
same end, caused Captain Charry to lie about the Town: but an Ambascado,
being set for him, he was put to flight, leaving 45. of his men dead upon the
ground, and fifteen prisoners. Memy brought great forces into Again, but
knowing not how to imploye them, he was forsaken by Arpaion and Marchastel:
who as then (if he would have credited them) could have overthrown Monluc:
who knowing his adversaries weak conduction, never ceased to give him diverse
alarmes. About the end of three weeks, Memies troops having done no good in
Again, departed and left their companies. To the contrary, Monluc ceased not to
make diverse courses into the country, constraining them to supply his want of
victuals and munition, his soldiers running to the gates of Again: and meeting
with any of the religion, they put a halter about his neck, and if he
continued constant, they put him to cruel death, or else ransomed, and then
killed him. And such as were but weak of faith, after they had made them trot
with them, they constrained them to make the sign of the cross, to say an Aue
Maria, and to consesse and acknowledge the Mass to be good: yet they were not
content there with, but forced them to swear and blaspheme God, at the least
five or six times together: which done, they were accounted and holden for
good and sufficient Catholics in Monluc and Peyrot his sons opinions. The
seventh of August, those of Again repulsed Captain Bourg, that kept a passage
from them full of good provision: but having gotten the place, their soldiers
busied themselves about harkening after the sweet wines: so that the next day
again, du Rourg surprised and slew sixty of them, dispearsing the rest:
whereof diverse passing the river, drank more water, then the day before they
had swallowed wine. But the next day ensuing, they had their revenge at Lerac,
where by certain intelligence, they slew eighty of Monlucs soldiers: which
notwithstanding within 4. days after, those of Again perceiving their town to
be weak, issued out of the Town all armed, to the number of six hundredth
men: delivering the keys unto the Consulles, desiring them not to forget the
great courtesy showed unto them by those of the religion, when they were
Masters of the Town. Women of good account bare their children in their
arms, in a cradle upon their heads, or else carried them on their shoulders.
And in that sort having traveled all night, they found themselves to be about
seven great leagues from Again: where they stayed for Duras, that provided for
their security.

The next day, those of Again sought to kill and massacre such as they could
intrappe. Bury and Monluc presently came thither, and after all the mooueables
had been ceased upon, and borne away, they ceased upon the immcoueables,
executing diverse prisoners: punishing those that were absent by their
piclieres, co^fiscating their goods, as it pleased the^ to appoint. Without the
town nothing was heard, but only of horrible and cruel murders, and that in
the Bourg of the passage, there were two young children roasted. Duras hearing
of those great mischiefs, marched toward Lauserte, a Town in Quercy: which
upon the fifteenth of August, he took by force: being constrained there unto
by the braueries of those that were within it: in the Town he slew 567. me^,
among which, were 9. score and 14. Priests. Part of those of Again were within
the castle of Roime, that Duras had committed unto the charge of Captain
Lyouran, where Monluc besieged them, battering the place 3. days together.
They within, sustaining a furious assault: but in the end, the number of
soldiers that were therein being but small, and Lyouran being slain, the
Castle was forced. Monluc having lost about seven hundredth men, the cruelty
he used was extreme, not sparing old nor young, killing young children in
their mothers arms, and then the mothers. They reserved certain women,
whereof Bury would have 2. for his part. Monluc behauing himself in such
fort, that I abhor to write it.

This happened to those of Again, but that was not all: For after the overthrow
of the Army of Duras, diverse of those that escaped, having been taken, were
brought to Again, a place appointed for the butchery, where they had erected a
gybbit, called the consistory: in such sort, that from the time that those of
the religion left the Town, until the Edict of peace, there were abone five
hundredth men executed to death: and the Participants of Monluc, to fill up their
iniquities, banished the women and children out of the Town: after whom, they
sent the soldiers: hanged a Counselor in his long gown and square Cap. Not
long before this overthrow of Duras, Memy forsaken of all men, thinking to
withdraw himself into Bearn, was taken prisoner, and led to Bourdeaux. Where
by sentence in Court of Parliament, he had his head stricken off.

Exployts of Monsieur de Duras, tell his overthrow
We must now speak a word of the exployts done by Monsieur de Duras in Guyenne,
until his ourthrowe. He having received charge to raise all the forces he
could to aid the Prince, and to march toward Orleans, his intents were often
times crossed by diverse means: and having begun to raise certain forces,
he was put in mind, that he might be a good means with them to assure
Bourdeaux: Which taking no effect, he determined to seize upon the Country
between the two Seas, situate betvveene Gerome, and Dordongne, there to gather
his forces. But approaching near Saint Machaire, in stead of victuals, they
shot diverse Muskettes at him, whereby some of his men were slain: which caused
him to assail and force the Town: yet much supported by the great humanity
of Duras, whom Bury and Monluc then determined to invade: assuring
themselves, that having dispersed his forces, they should easilye accomplish
their own desires through out all Guyenne.

Which being concluded, they ouertooke him hard by Rozan: where Monluc having
the advantage, gave Duras a charge, who recovering a little wood full of Diches,
behaved himself so well with three hundredth pikes, the rest of his troops
having forsaken him, that he constrained Monluc to retire with the loss of
three hundredth men, and Duras about thirty or more. After that, he determined
to leave off his enterprise, having the conduction of many mean soldiers, and
men wholely enemies to discipline: yet having pity of the Country, and hoping
that his Soldiers would do better, he reassembled them. Procuring others,
marched toward Agenois and Quercy, ayding them of Again as much as possibly he
might. But having heard what happened therein, after the departure of those of
the religion, he punished those of Lauserte, and from thence coming to Saint
Authony, he was strengthened by two companies of footmen, led by Marchastel.
And as he determined to go to Monsieur de Cursol in Languedoc, the Count de la
Rorchefoucaut desired him to join with him, and with all speed to march
toward Orleans.

To the same end du Bordet, a valiant Gentleman, with 60. light horse, 200.
Argolitiers, and 2. companies of footme^, was sent from Xaintonge, to conduct
Monsieur Duras in the way. Du Bordet entered Pons, forced S. Satier, wherein
were slain twelve Priests, then entered into la Linde, a Town in Perigort,
wherein he punished certain seditious persons, that had massacred and cut a
poor man of the religion in diverse places of his body, filling all his wounds
with salt: and having joined with Duras and Marchastel, he determined to
punnish those of Sarlat, that had slain two Gentlemen, and passing by
Caussade, to go to Montauban to fetch Artillery, and to raise more soldiers,
certain Priests that did much mischief, were set upon and forced within a
steeple, and cast headlong out of it upon the ground: and some others of the
principal of the Town, authors of the massacre committed in that place upon
those of the religion, being committed unto the Marshall of Guyenne, were
executed to death: they placed good Garrison in Realuille, and marching to
Montauban, leaving the conduction of their troops to Chaumont, Saint Hermine,
and Pere Longue. This was but an unadvised enterprise of those three Leaders,
to leave their forces in that sort, seeing Bury and Monluc were not far of,
with six thousand foot, and diverse horse. But the wise and happy conduction
of Chaumont, mended that negligence, delivering a fierce skirmish unto Monluc,
who for that day would not fight, although Bury was of the contrary opinion,
considering their great advantage.

The troops of Duras being safely arrived at Montauban, upon the ninth of
September, four days after, Bury and Monluc encamped themselves, but being
dislodged within three times four and twenty hours after, Duras marched
toward Xaintongue, Overthrow of Duras.
and in the way forced the Castle of Marcues, wherein heetooke the Bishop of
Cahors, that had certain books of Magick-art about him, and many receipts to
win the love of women, but no books of Divinity. He escaped well from
being hanged, as author of the massacre in Cahors: in his stead they executed
five or six soldiers. From thence all the troops came before Sarlat, upon
the first of October. The resistance of the Town, and the enemies army,
composed of eight thousand foot, and diverse horse approaching, made Duras to
dislodge. And upon the eight of October, being a rainie day, he entered into a
Village named Hedreux, his Artillery and footemenlying at Ver, half a league
further. Bury and Monluc having by one of their prisoners understood the whole
estate of Duras camp, being about four or five thousand horse and foot,
went forward. But Duras in flead of joining his forces together, and to view
his enemies, supposed them to be but certain Curriers, and neglecting them,
still separated his forces. But having soon perceived his fault, he
determined to retire with a soft pace, and to set his men in safety. Puch a
valiant Knight, was of the contrary opinion, saying, that when two armies are
near unto each other, the first that retireth, gives advantage to the other,
proouing it by that which happened unto the French army upon S. Lawrence day.
Bury and Monluc perceiving that Duras began to retire, made haste to overtake
him, and gave him a charge, where in a manner no resistance was made, whereby
they entered so far into Duras Camp, that they seized upon the artillery and
their carriages, and there the soldiers staying, greedier of pray then of
honor, gave such as had first fled to reassemble, and so to pass the water,
throwing down their arms to fly the easitier: the overthrow was of about five
or six hundredth soldiers, and 2500. boys and pages, with all the artilerie,
some of those that were taken prisoners being hanged, specially the Ministers:
who by the advice of the Church, had followed those companies. I will recite
one particularly. Among the prisoners, there was a Captain called la Mothe,
that fell to Captain Bazourdans lot. Who not long after meeting with Monluc,
he gave him diverse stabbes with a dagger, and thrust him through with his
rapier, saying these words. Villain thou shall dye in despite of God.
Nevertheless to prove Monluc a liar, this poor man, being in that sort borne
away and healed, although he had many deadly wounds, woonderfully recovered his
health and lived.

Laumosniere ouerthrown by Duras.
Duras having assembled those that past the river, and made two retraits, being
advertised that Captain Laumosniere, sent by Monsierde Sansac, stayed for him
at Embornet with five hundredth men, to make an end of an overthrow, not being
once abashed, marched right unto the place, where hearriued about the break of
day: and behaved himself so well, that Laumosniere and all his men, only
three that bare the news to Sansac, were slain in the field. After this
conflict, Duras men began to leave him: so that he arrived at Orleans with a
very small company, where the peace being once concluded, he dyed.

The 10. of March 1562. Mont de Marsan was taken by certain of Monlucs forces:
those of the religion after many outrages, Mont de Marsan.
being constrained to fly into some other place, and to leave both wines and
children. Not long after, six of the principal of them, being kept prisoners,
had their heads stricken off, and three or four others executed in diverse
manners. And a Lancier being taken after the peace of Villeneufue de Marsan,
was buried quick: and at Caseras in the month of August, a young woman named
Ieanne de la Gora, pursued to be violated, threw her self out of a Window,
and dyed thereof.

The History of Thoulouse and other places belonging to the Parliament of
Languedoc, is very long: but I will assay to make a brief rehearsal thereof,
Thoulouse.
as of the rest. The Edict of January having been published therein, things
were peaceablye handled until the second of April, when by an occasion of a
Burial, those of the Romish Church, in the Subburbes of Saint Michael,
Saint Steven, and Saint Saluador in Thoulouse, assailed those of the
Religion, and hurt great numbers of them: Killing four outright, besides
diverse more of them that were thrown down into a well.

The Parliament favored this action: but to the contrary, the Capitalles
sought by all means to repress the sedition, and laid hold upon some of
the chief dealers therein: but the tumult still increased, and so continued
until night, both within and without the Town. The next day nothing was done,
but fair words to appease so great an injury: nevertheless, the Capitalles
pursued the matter so well, that four of the seditious persons were hanged,
and two whipped. But the fire of division began to be so houe, that those of the
religion already threatened with that which after ensued, seized upon the
Townhouse, and certain corners of the streets: which moved the Parliament in
such manner, that presently they sent for all the gentlemen therabouts to be
their aids, calling the commons to gither, causing it to be published
throughout the Town, that all men should take weapon in hands to invade those
of the religion, who by the intermission of the Capitalles, assayed to appease
that Tumult. Monluc gave the wheel good passage, by writing to the Parliament,
that the Capital de Lanta, new come from the Court lying without the Town, had
promised the Prince, to cause the Town to hold for him.

The thirteenth of May, the Presidents and Cou^cellors coming forth in their
Scarlet gowns, caused it to be cried throughout the Town, and in their
presence, that all good Catholicques, and faithful servants to the King,
should take arms and use them against those of the religion: to take them
either dead or living, and to kill and spoil them of all they have without all
mercy. Besides that, five or six Counselors went crying throughout the Town,
that they should not spare to kill and spoil: being lisenced thereunto by the
Court, with permission both from Pope and the King. The coppie of this
proclamation, was presently sent to all the Borrowes and Villages round about:
wherewith belles began to be rung in all the steeples of the Town, and
presently after in all the Country round about, for four or five Leagues
compass. Thoulonse is one of the greatest and most populos Towns in all
France. At which time, there was within it, at the least 25. or thirty
thousand persons of the religion, and of diverse qualities and ages: Horrible
Massacre in Thoulouse.
and then began one of the most horrible massacries that can be remembered. The
prisons were presently filled, and many were knocked on the head, at the entry
into it, because it would hold no more. The river in short space was covered
with dead bodies, and many were thrown out of windows into the river, from
whence if they seemed to escape, they were presently slain with swords and
stones.

Those of the religion that had strengthened them within the Townhouse, and in
certain other places, defended themselves with great courage, and made diverse
sallies, and if treason had not been wrought against them by Captain Saulx,
they had gotten the Palace, and driven their enemies out of the Town, but he
put them from that: whereof presently ensued a total ruin. For the next day
being the fourteenth, those of the religion perceiving that of force they must
die, resolved to defend themselves, and besides the pieces that they had
within the Towne-house, wherewith they abashed their enemies, they issued
diverse times out of their fortes, to skirmish with the enemy, where between
them much blood was spilt. The Citizens fight.
The same day Bellegarde Lieftenant to the Marshall de Terms, entered into the
Town with his company of Lanciers. Those of Terrides and Monluc stayed
without to hinder such aid as might arrive to help those of the religion,
that held but one gate, to whom about Evening, was sent a letter into the
Towne-house to make an accord, where unto they appeared, only demanding
assurance of their lives, and the rest of their goods: with the observation of
the Edict of January, which was refused them. Whereupon each prepared
themselves upon the next day after, to enter into a hotter fight then ever they
did. And because the cannon in the Towne-house, did much hurt unto the Town,
the Councillors and the Court caused more then two hundredth houses to be
burnt, and in diverse other places many houses were robbed and spoiled: and
among others, the houses of President Bernoy, and Counselor Chauuet, where
two young maids were ravished in their mothers presence.

Saturday the sixteenth, they had a cruel skirmish, and then those of the
Romish Church asked a parley, and had a truce, which truce continuing, it was
agreed upon, that those of the religion leaving their armor and weapons in the
Town house, should withdraw themselves with all security. And according to that
agreement made with the Captains and the Parliament, those of the religion
having received the Communion with tears and solemn prayers, about evening
came forth, where against the faith and promise made unto them, they took all
they could lay hold upon, and committed them prisoners, and those that got out
at the gate, called Villeneufue, many of the^ escaped and were received into
Montaubon, and other Towns that held for the religion. The soldiers scattered
about the fields, and the Pesants killed and spoiled many of them. The common
opinion is, that in this mutiny, there died within the Town above three
thousand five hundredth persons, as well on the one side as on the other.

The four and twentieth of May, Bury and Monluc determining to destroy
Montauban, marched thither with an army of a thousand horse, The first
besieging of Montauban
and five thousand foot, wherewith they besieged it, haning two fierce
skirmishes within the Town, in one of them Captain Saint Michell slew three
launciers, and took a goodly horse. The next day the artillery came thither,
many skirmishes being made, wherein Monluc had the woorst, and hardly escaped
with his life, his horse having been slain under him: the next day, the camp
dislodged and made away in great haste, but for what cause it was not known,
Monluc having lost about sixty men, but he spoiled all the houses round about
it, and burnt the corn being half ripe. Not long after, Captain Saint
Michael and his brother being attainted of treason and robbery, were slain
in the house of Marchastell within Montauban.

The enemies lay in the Garrisons round about it, which caused those of the
twone to erect certain companies, and a kind of millitarie Discipline, and
then to make issues and courses in the country, which fell out with good
success: but not to those of Castres, who in one recountre, lost between
four score and a hundredth Soldiers, in a manner all young men borne within
the town.

The three and twentieth of August, Captain Bazourdan sent by the Parliament
of Thoulouse, Other accidents in Montauban
used all the means he could to induce Montauban to fall to some composition,
and if they would not do it, yet that at the least those that said they were
their friends and could bring forces, would exhort them to make peace.

The last words used by Bazourdon, contained a certain kind of mockery
touching the confidence that those of Montauban put in the Lord, but Constant
their Minister took him up for halting. The fifth of September, those of
Negropelisse, having been surprised and hardly handled by Captain Coulumbier,
and the Bishop of Montauban, they sought to remedy it, but all too late.

The Bishop causing six of his best prisoners to be stoned and beaten to
death with staves, and their bodies cast into the river. In a sallie made upon
the eight of the same month, those of Montauban being discovered by a
traitor, were put to flight, having lost one of the Ensigne-bearers, two
Corporalles, two Gentlemen, and ten soldiers. The same day Marchastel and
Duras being entered into Montauban, desired that they might take the companies
and the Artillery with them, having lodged their army within the Town. which
constrained the Consuls to grant to their desires. But their arrival fell out
well for the Town, The second siege of Montauban.
for that within three days after, Bury and Monluc with nine companies of
Lanciers, great numbers of Gentlemen, five and twenty companies of footmen,
four companies of Argolitiers, and three companies of Spaniards, each company
of four hundredth men, with five ca^nons, three Coluerins, and five demi
Coluerins, came to besiege Montauban the second time. At their arrival, there
happened a fierce and hard skirmish, the issue thereof being such, that the
assaylants left the place which they had taken, and withdrew themselves
somewhat further with great loss. Those of the town left the Master of the
camp to Monsieur Duras, a Sergeant of a band, a Corporal, six soldiers, and
certain strangers, with diverse hurt. The next day, being the fifteenth of
September, the skirmish began again, to the damage of the assaylantes, and
four score Spaniards that had set fire in a Mill upon the river of Tar, making
good cheer in a farmers house, were surprised and all put to the sword, not
one escaping. The execution being done by five and twenty soldiers of the
Town, that returned laden with armors and other spoils in the face of the
enemy, whereupon some made forth to go on the other side of the water to
aid their companions, but their boat overwhelmed, and they were almost all
drowned. The next day, Duras presented battle unto Monluc, which he refused,
and the next day raised his siege, having lost about six hundredth men, and the
Town thirty.

The third siege of Montauban with diverse skirmishes, sallies, escalades, and
other warlike practices, to the loss of both parts, continued until the
fifteenth of April, A third siege of Montauban.
that peace was proclaimed within Montauban: and in that third siege the enemy
lost (as they themselves confessed) two thousand soldiers, foureteen or
fifteen Captains, Lieftenants and Ensigne-bearers: and diverse Gentlemen of
companies, besides a great number of hurt and maimed men, that died in diverse
places as they retired.

The Town lost two Captains, two Ensigne-bearers, some Gentlemen of
companies, and sixty Soldiers at the most. The policy in the watches having
been notably well observed, until the end of the Siege.

The fifteenth of March, Carcassone.
one thousand five hundredth sixty two, those of the religion at Carcassone
being gone out of the Town to a Sermon, at their return found the Gate shut
against them, and the Citizens armed, that saluted them with Caliners: and in
that estate they continued until the nineteenth of the same month, that those
within the Town having gotten a Leader, and having mustered their men, which
they found to be between four or five thousand, they began to shoot off
their ordinance, and to sound up drumbes in all parts of the Town, wherewith
those of the religion being in small number, were much abashed, and leaving the
subburbs, saved themselves as well as they might, which those of the town
perceiving, made after them, slaying some, and hurting others. On the other
side, within the base Town, were slain Jacques Sabatter his son, and three
or four others. The 91. of May, three of the richest houses therein, were
sacked and spoiled: and upon Whitsunday, one of the religion beaten down in
the Subburbes, being sore wounded, they cut off his nose, and ears, and
pulled out his eyes. After that, five prisoners were hanged, many put to great
ransomes, and a Gentleman beheaded. Those of Revel, living peaceably, Revel.
until the one and twentieth of May, having received news of the discipation
of Thoulouse, left their goods and houses to go to Castres and other places.
The Parliament of Thoulouse, seeing that, gave out commission, that if they
appeared not in Court within three days after, their bodies should be
apprehended and committed to prison, and for want of their bodies, their goods
of the Judge and of one hundredth and twelve others of the religion, to be
ceased upon. One of the number named Martin du Puits, a man that was rich,
peaceable, and without reproach or infamy, was taken in a farm without the
Town, and shortly after hanged, his body cast unto the dogs, having first
blacked his face, hands, and feet, causing it to be reported, that he had the
devil within him. Others being taken and led unto Thoulouse, were condemned
to the Galleys, or else put to great fines, or banished.

Touching those that were absent, the Consuls and others, took their
mooueables, took notes of their immooueables, took all they could find from
the women, and yet constrained them to lodge and find certain soldiers,
constrained with blows to go to hear Mass, and their children rebaptised.

Those of the religion being the strongest within Limoux, upon a Sunday
being the first of March, 1562. about evening, there happened a sedition,
Limoux.
wherein two of the Romish Church were slain, and three more upon the seven
and twentieth of April after, the tumult at that time being raised again.
Whereupon there fell open war between both parts, those of the religion
being strengthed with fifty soldiers that came from Foix, withstood Pomas
that came to aid their adversaries with ten companies, and eight hundredth
Bandoliers, most part Spaniards, conducted by a notable murderer called Peyrot
Ioupian. Presently after the desolation of Thoulouse, the Parliament sent
thither the Marshall de Mirepoix, that besieged and battered the great Town,
(which was holden by those of the religion) with seuenteen pieces of
Artillery, but all in vain. Whereupon he devised another means, and upon
the sixteenth of June he entered therein: by reason whereof, he executed all
kind of monsterous cruelties, violating women and children most detestably
without any description of religion. The Minister was slain, two Gentlemen and
60. soldiers taken prisoners, were hanged. A widdowe of great account having
redeemed her only daughters virginity with a great sum of money, the
villain that had sworn to defend her, violated her in presence of her mother,
and then killed them both.

Those of the Romish Church were nothing spared, for that some of them were
likewise slain. The pray that Marshall de Mirepoix had for his share, was
esteemed to be at the least above a hundredth thousand Crowns. And the fury
continued in such sort within that poor Town, that after the publication of
the peace, at one time fourteen of the religion coming thither, were all
slain: and one of Monsieur de Ioyeuses servants having been found to follow
one of the judges that was not well thought on, was stabbed and rifled in the
open streets.

The fifteenth of March 1592. both the parties within Beziers, were ready to
come to handie-blowes, Beziers.
and not long after, the news of the massacre of Vassy being published, those
of the religion provided for their safeties: and having brought certain
soldiers into their houses, in the beginning of May, the Images were thrown
down in all their Churches. Monsieur de Ioyeuse allied to the Constable, used
all the means he could to suppress those of the religion: but Monsieur de
Baudine, appointed commander over the troops of the religion in Languedoc,
while the wars continued, interrupted him: and withal, ceased upon Magalas
a very strong place, which much annoyed the Town, forced Espignan, and there
put most part of two companies of Bandoliers to the sword.

Ioyeuse followed by five thousand men, four Cannons, two Coluerins, two demi
coluerins, and four field pieces, went to besiege the Castle of Lignan, near
to Reziers, wherein were but twelve soldiers, with munition only for two
days. Baudine gave Ioyeuse so much to do, that they in the mean time saved
themselves: which done, he went to Lezignan, that held against the cannon
shot, but at the second assault it was taken: and having by composition taken
two companies of soldiers that kept Montagnac, with promise to save their
lives, falsifying his promise, he put four of the principal of them to the
sword. From thence he marched to Pezenas, where Baudine met him, and had
overthrown him, if it had not been for the treason of the Master of his
camp, who set things in such bad order, that Baudines troops were themselves
in danger to be put to the sword: and there he lost one hundredth, or an
hundredth and twenty soldiers. This Marshall not long after dying in
Montpeslier, confessed to have received five hundredth Crowns of Monsieur de
Ioyeuse before the encounter, with promise of twice as much more. This loss,
and the separation of the troops being much more, produced a parley, wherein
Ioyeuse made so many goodly offers, that they suffered him to enter into
Pezenas: but being entered, he showed them what he meant, killing certain
hurt soldiers and Inhabitants, that could not serve in the wars. His
cruelty caused him to loose Beziers, where when he thought to enter, he found
a face of wood, and those of Beziers ready in field, that forced and burnt
Lignan, having overthrown two companies that kept it. The war being wholly
turned against Montpeslier, those of Beziers failed to be surprised by night,
upon the sixteenth of October, their enemies having secretly gotten close
under the walls. But it chanced that a Drummer of the Town being drunk, about
two of the clock at night suddenly rose up, and thinking it had been day,
began to sound the Diana or morning watch, which caused the enemy to fly,
whose lathers in the morning were found in the ditches. Whereupon seven or
eight traitors were apprehended, and being found guilty, were executed for the
fact. And within eight days after, the enemy came by day, close to the
Barriers: but to their loss, the principal of their troop being hurt, where
of he died. The second of November, those of Beziers sent two companies to aid
Montpeslier: and at the end of ten days, those of Beziers overthrew Captain
Lauragues, with his company near to Cessenon. Not long after, there happened
a thing worthy memory, thereby to note the covetous desire of some men, and
by the judgment of God to show the mischief of civil wars. Anthony Sauin,
servant to a Citizen of Beziers, being taken in a skirmish, the enemy
offered to exchange him for a horse, that one of their Captains had lost in
the same skirmish. But they had rather suffer Sauin to be hanged, then part
from the horse: yet not long after, at another sallie, this horse being strong
in the mouth, running with great force, bare a Gentleman (to whom it had been
given) into the middle of his enemies, who presently killed the man, and got
the horse again.

The same month, those of Beziers being much troubled for money to pay their
soldiers, digging a ditch in the place where the Chapitre of Saint Nazaire
used to melt their belles, they found a great table of silver, which was
presently broken and coined into money at Montpeslier, wherewith they paid
their soldiers: that done, they heard news of the battle of Dreux, so that
as then it was necessary for them to look better to the safety of the place,
so that having brought victualles out of all places into their Town, they
took Seruian by assault, forced the Garrison of Casouls: by means of Monsieur
Crussol, they took order within it to end certain controversies that rose
between those of the Town, and certain strangers, whereupon it happened,
that one within the Town, moved that they had driven his companions out of the
place, meeting Anthony Duchemin, a Doctor of Physic, a man of great learning
and judgment, (upon the Rampires) threw him over the wall, whereof he died,
to the great grief of all the Town: the murderer saving himself in the
enemies camp. These things happened in the months of January and February,
and in the beginning of March upon the seventeenth day of the same month
Captain la Cost, commanding within Beziers, took Villeneufue les Beziers by
assault. Presently after peace being made, the Garrisons that lay about
Beziers retired, and the Powne remained in quiet, inioying the exercise of the
religion, which not long after, Marshall de Danuille took from them.

Those of the religion in Montpeslier understanding what had past in Thoulouse
and else where, made themselves the strongest: to them came Baudine, Montpeslier
Grille, Bouillargues, Thouras, and Montuaillant, that enterprised to besiege
Frontignan: but there he found a hard party: Ioyeuse going thither to aid
them, was repulsed by Bouillargues and Grille: but in the mean time, two
fregates of Prouinciers entered into the town: which constrained Baudine to
return unto Montpeslier, where he found war, causing the Subburbes to be
raised, that in a manner were as great as the Town: by which means there were
30. Churches thrown down. This beating down of the Subburbes was a great
discommoditie to the enemy, that were constrained to incampe a French league
from the Town, where they assailed an old Tower without flancards, and
constrained certain Harquebusiers that were within it to save themselves, with
promise of their lives: but at their coming forth they slew them all. They
did as much to the Captain and twenty soldiers, that sold them the Castle
of Maguelonne: for as they issued, they were all put to the sword.

At the same time, the Barron des Adrets, upon the thirteenth of September
arrived in Baudines camp: and the same day at night, assailed the enemies
camp with so great courage, that if they had pursued their enterprise until
morning, they had overthrown the whole army: but about midnight they sounded
a retrait, and three days after, both he and his, went back again with as
much haste as they made thither, yet he left three companies of Argolitiers
hard by Montpeslier, that made sharp war upon the Bandoliers. The enemies
having taken and presently hanged two Ministers: some of their prisoners within
Montpeslier were served in the like sort.

The memorable tourney of S. Gilles.
Baudine understanding that Messieurs de Suze and Sommeriue principalles of the
Army Triumuirat, in a part of Languedoc, had passed the river of Rhosne, with
about three thousand foot, and four hundredth horse, two Canons and a
Culuerin, brought his Camp into Montpeslier, and sent Grille to put certain
shot within S. Gilles, a little Town lying upon the Rhosne: he having the
conduct of three companies of provincial Argolitiers, with six hundredth foot,
under the charge of Captain Rapin. Bouillargues and Albenas, with their horse
went to Nismes. All these troops joined together, minded to aid S. Gilles,
and made in all, six hundredth horse, and eight hundredth foot, and departing
from Nismes upon the 27. of September, about half a mile from S. Gilles, they
surprised three horsemen of Prouence, whereof they slew two, and saving the
third, by him they understood the disorder of the enemies Camp, by which
means, they set forward, and being discovered, the army of Suze and
Sommeriue, both Captains and soldiers began to fly, with the greatest fear
that ever was heard. Bouuillargues in stead of going straight to S. Gilles,
began to set upon those that fled, where he found no resistance, but had
work enough to kill them at his pseasure: not one of them once turning his
face: Grille on the other side, charged them likewise: in such sort, that there
were slain and drowned to the number of two thousand men. The boats being
stayed by some of the horsemen, the rest flying as fast as they could toward
Fourques an Aiguesmortes: where they could not safely arrive, but some of them
were met withal, all the carriage and provision of the Camp was taken, and in
Suze and Sommeriues chests, were found diverse strange commissions. The booty
was great, because they were furnished in all sorts as if they had gone to a
wedding: and among others of their Armours, they found great numbers of violes,
and books of love, that were all broken and cut in pieces. The two cannons
were taken with twenty two ensigns, and the guydon of the Coronel, and laid
up in Nismes: The Culuerin being sunk in the river of Rhosne where it could
not be halled up again. Not one man of the religion dyed at that time by the
hands of the enemy, that used nothing but their feet, as their best
instruments for that time. Only two of their men, slain by their own
company, having forgotten the watchword which at that time was Solomon: and
to the contrary, certain Spaniards and Italians remembering it, entered among
them, but their tongues bewraying them, they sped as well as the rest.

An Ambuscado of importance.
Not long before, those of the religion had received great grief by the death
of one of the Gremians, brave Captains, and of young Maillane, having been
surprised and overthrown in an ambuscado, by them set for the enemy: but
before thy dyed, they sold their skins at a dear prise, having slain a great
number of those that assailed them: among the which, was Peyrot Loupian,
commander of the Bandoliers. The first of October, they received an other
cooling, Overthrow of Captain Grille.
for that Captain Grille proud of his victory, and despising diverse good
aduises, being overthrown at Arenasses, with the loss of one hundredth or one
hundredth and twenty soldiers. Baudine ran thither to relieve him, and
slaying a great number of the enemies, brought Grille to Montpeslier, yet the
overthrow was so great, that some flying to Lunel, other to Maugueul, the rest
to Sommiers, hardly the third part got into the Town, so that presently they
could not assembly together. Ioyeuse on the other side, perceiving his army
daily to decrease, by sickness and other necessities, began to parley, whereby
he obtained passage to retire. Yet his Garrisons in the valley of Montferrant,
made diverse courses even to the Gates of Montpeslier, yet to his loss, in hope
by certain intelligences, that he had to get the Town, discovered by two of
the principal actors, who being condemned for other crimes, upon the
scaffold confessed their treasons.

The Captains, Grille and Bouillargues, upon the ninth of October wanne a
Tower called la Carbonniere, cituate by d'Aguismortes, and brought Barks
thither, wherewith they bare away the assalt of Requais, A good thing for the
commodity of those of the religion.
whereof those of the religion made great profit toward the charges of their
wars. To return to Ioyeuse, being at Perzenas, by means of a certain
traitor he made a new enterprise upon Montpeslier: but his treason being
discovered, and Baudine having taken a little town upon the river of Rhosne,
called le Bourg, he besieged Agde: where Captain Sanglas commanded. Agde.


The first of November the assault was given, which continued 4. hours, where
they fought at hand blows, those that were besieged making brave resistance,
pursuing their enemies a great way without the breach: among the which, a woman
behaved her self most valiantly with a sword. And at the same time, they
repulsed the enemy that assailed them in another place of the town. The next
day they were assisted and strengthened, by the aid that a soldier of the
town named Trencaire, brought them from Beziers, being six score
Harquebusiers led at a certain hour, through water that ran as high as their
horse saddles, bearing their flaskes and a bag of powder (to srue them at
their need) at the end of their caliuers.

The 3. day of the month, Ioyeuse commanded to give a second assault, but it
took no great effect, so that such as served therein, spedde but hardly:
whereby the next day about midnight, he trussed up his courage, his camp
being divided into three parts, one of them marching toward Gignac,
Overthrow of one of the part of Ioyeuse.
was so bravely encountered by Bouillargues, that he slew two hundredth seventy
four of their men in the place: among the which, were three of the principal
Leaders. But for his part he lost not a man, only the poor Pesant that was
his guide, slain by a soldier, because he knew not the watchword.
Bouillargues went to Nismes, and being advertised that three hundredth men
lying in Aramon, made diverse courses to the gates of Bagnols, found means to
intrappe them by an Ambascado, where most of them were slain, drowing a Frigate
which they brought with them. Not long after, he took Saint Laurent des
Arbres, in Contat, driving thence five and thirty Italian Lanciers, sixty
Argolitiers, and a company of footmen, having lost seven men at the mine, and
slain certain Italians.

After that time, Montpeslier continued in peace, until the end of the wars,
that Monsieur de Caylus sent by the King and Queen to proclaim the peace in
Languedoc, showing Monsieur de Crussol Governor of Prouence, and all those of
the religion, that the King and his mother were well pleased to pardon all
whatsoever they had done for their just defense, houlding them for good and
loyal subjects, with thanks for their good services done, for the good of the
Commonwealth: which done, The king acknowledges those of the religion, for
his faithful subjects, approving their tust defense, and giving them thanks.
by virtue of certain letters pattents, delivered unto him in Amboise, upon
the 6. of April, having heard the declarations made unto him by those of the
religion, that besought him, that from thencefoorth their enemies might use no
more acts of hostillitie against them, and that Ioyeuse that had brought the
Spaniards into the Realm, might not be their Governor, he caused the edict
to be proclaimed within Montpeslier.

Touching the declaration of those of Toulouse and other places, committed
infinite mischiefs after the edict of peace: Ioyeuse was made Lieftenant of
Languedoc, the principal Government being given to Monsieur de Danuille, a
Capital enemy to those of the religion, and Crussol put out.

Let us speak somewhat of that which happened in those miserable times, in
Viuarets, Rouergue, Giuaudan, and the Count de Foix: which done, we will
speak of Lyonnois, Vutarets. Nonnay.
Dauphine, and Prouence. Those of the religion in Nonnay, in the month of
April, one thousand five hundredth sixty two, being become Masters of the
Town, presently after, the Images were pulled down, and a famous Chase named
les Saints Vertus, being opened, was publicly burnt. Yet after that, they
lived peaceably until the end of Angust, that their Governor named Sarras,
threatened with a siege, and perceiving the Town to be unfurnished of arms,
upon the seven and twentieth of October about evening, issued forth, and the
next morning about the break of the day, they were at Saint Estienne in
Forest, a small Town, much renowned for the great quantity of arms that are
made therein: and suddenly setting fire on the gates, he entered: which done,
he took and packed up all the arms that he found therein, without
committing other excess. But having a long retrait to make, his troops were
overthrown, himself taken prisoner, his brother fore wounded, and about six
score slain and hurt, and hardly handled. The poor Inhabitants destitute of
arms, men, and a Governor, began to fly one after the other: but had not
time to do it, for that the last of the month, Monsieur de S. Chaumont their
mortal enemy, sent by the Duke de Nemours, who as then made war upon those
of Lyonnois, surprised two gates, and entered into the Town, First taking
that was sacked and pilled, not leaving so much as the bars, locks and
hinges of the doors and windows, much human blood being shed upon the
earth, with infinite and most horrible blasphemies, spit out against the
heavens.

A Locke-smith being willed to despite and blaspheme God, refusing to do it,
was hewn in pieces with Courtlelasses: for the same cause likewise, a Pesant
was stricken dead with the great end of a caliuer. A poor Nayle-maker of the
age of eighty years, because he would not give himself unto the Devil, was
drawn about his shop by the ears, and after being laid upon his anuile,
they beat his head in pieces with his Hammer. And fire being set in one of
the Gates, burnt two and twenty houses.

Monsieur d'Achon made also the like spoil among the Villages, and about the
latter end of December, Monsieur de Saint Martin, Lieftenant to Crussol in
Viuarets, being come to Nonnay repaired the walls, and made it defenceable,
leaving certain Garrisons therein, under the Captains Prost, le Mas, and
Montgros, that were besieged upon the tenth of January, 1563. by 4000. men
commanded by Saint Chaumont, who not being very nimble at forcing of places,
took another course, presenting composition for the assurance both of the
strangers and the Town. This composition accepted, Achon would begin with
the strangers (that withdrewe themselves) and put them to the sword: but
being valiantly repulsed by Montgros, he went to discharge his chollor about
the Town, robbing and killing all that he met, not sparing sects nor age. And
notwithstanding the promises given and sworn, The second taking.
about evening Saint Chaumont let the footmen enter into the Town, to whom
for their watchword was given, the double word of Gods death: wherewith all
cruelty whatsoever could be devised, was then used. Three of the chief of
the Town, were cast down headlong out of a Tower, in the presence and by the
commandment of Saint Chaumont, diverse others were thrown down to make
sport: among the which were two young laborours, who not being able to furnish
two Testons which the Soldiers asked of them, made that deadly leap. Some
were burnt within their houses, thrown out of the windows, others killed
upon the ground, stabbed in the streets. The prisoners set to sale, and if
they found not any to buy them, they murdered them in the place: the houses
burnt to ashes, if none were found that would pay money for them: whereof they
burnt six score: women and maids were must shamefully handled: Extreme
desolation.
a poor young woman being found hidden with her husband within a house, was
ravished in his presence: and then compelled to hold the Rapier in her hand,
wherewith one of them thrusting her arm, she killed her husband.

Whatsoever the soldiers could not bear away, was broken and spoiled, in such
sort, that many sellers ran full of wine let out of the vessels, the pipes
being pearsed with Pistol shot. Saint Chaumont caused the greatest part of
the walls to be broken, beating down the Towers, and took away the Gates:
which done, went to the like to Bonlieu, a small Town, about half a mile from
Nonnay. But in despite of all these furies, the rest of the Inhabitants of
Nonnay assembled together, and had their Minister, and in Anno. 1564. the
exercise of the religion, which continued therein until the year of our Lord,
one thousand five hundredth ninety four, when we began to write this
History, the Town being restored, and people increased by the most singular
and special favor of God.

In the Count de Foix, Mousieur de Pailles commanded as Seneschall for the
King of Navarre, who ruled his actions as the wind blew: The Counts de Foix.
and fed those of the religion with fair words, until such time as having
received news of the desolation of Thoulouse, he used subtle means to cause
those of the religion to issue out of Foix, whom he feared: his pretense was,
that they being known to have broken down the Images, he should be
constrained to cast them in prison, which he desired not to do: and as the
wolf having sent away the dogs, enters into the fold and deuoureth the
sheep, so Pailles having made such as had both eyes and hands, to go out of
Foix, entered presently into the Town, committed (such as pleased him) to
prison, and gave such analarme to the rest, that he made them glad to invent
the means to fly. Of those whom he held prisoners, two had their arms and
legs cut off, and then beheaded: two others burnt, and six hanged: presently
after, two and twenty others were likewise executed, and ten condemned to
the Galleys. The goods of such as went out of the Town, were exposed and given
for a pray unto the soldiers: these extreme rigors put all the other Towns
within the County in such fear, that they did whatsoever Pailles would
command, except Pamiers, Pamiers.
a Town wherein were great numbers of the religion, who perceiving themselves
to be exposed to the fury of the Pesants that were in arms, determined not
to depart from thence. And while they expected some outcries and violences, the
plague happened in the Town, which freed them from their enemies, the cruelty
of death having surmounted the avarice of the most mutinous.

Touching those of the Romish Church within the Town, the richest and such as
had most means and greatest forces to hurt them, fled out of it, and the
meaner sort was so much diminished by the plague, that in short space there
died three thousand: in which number, there was not above fistie of the
religion: and which is more, other that had been persecuted in diverse places,
came thither, in such sort, that they became Masters of the Town, having
death for a rampart to their lives: for that the Queen of Navarre to whom
Pamiers belonged, was much troubled to look unto her self in her chief
country of Bearn. But they did so well, that after the overthrow of Duras,
they sent sixty soldiers under the conduct of Captain Honorat, to aid those
of Castres, about 2. days journey from thence. Honorat marched in safety,
until he came within three leagues of Castres, and being pursued and hardly
charged, having lost ten or twelve of his men in fight, he took a house
standing in the fields, where he held himself from eight of the clock in the
morning, till three in the afternoon, that aid came unto them from Castres:
whither one of the company ran in all haste to certify them. Having behaved
themselves valiantly within Castres, about six weeks after they returned to
Pamiers, which Pailles began to threaten, and brought a company with them
from Castres to strengthen the Town, which was about the eight of December:
and having trauersed many dangers, in the end they got into the Town. All the
month of January passed over, in devising of means to surprise and intrappe
them: where the end bredde mortal war. Wherein Honorat accompanied by two
valiant Gentlemen surnamed les Lombats, and eight and thirty others, made an
enterprise upon Tarascon in Foix. Tarascon in Foix.
The Viscount de Seres and his brother, with three hundredth men set upon them,
constraining them to take the Mountains, wherein they that followed them,
where themselves intrapped, in such manner, that not only the Vicount and his
brother were slain, but the most part of their men, the rest being scattered
in such sort, that Honorat returned quietly to Pamiers, leaving the Lombats in
their ordinary place, called les Cabanes: where not long after, (because they
had forsaken the train and company of Bandoliers, yielding themselves unto
the religion, by the means and instruction of two maids, ravished by them at
the sacking of Montsegur, and after married unto them) they were cruelly
pursued by those of the Romish Church, and in the end saved themselves in
Castres. The Priests of Pamiers for their parts, used all the means they
could to overthrow and spoil those of the religion: diverse enterprises being
made, whereof the principal being discovered by interception of letters, the
mischief sell upon the inuentors: for the soldiers entering into the Cellers
of four Friars that should have let in Pailles and others, dispatched (as
it is very likely) whatsoever they found therein: for after that time, they
were never seen nor heard of any more.

This report put the Priests and Chanons in such fear, that they fled to the
Town of Foix, their houses, as also the Bishops Palace, being sacked and
spoiled: whatsoever the Ministers and the Governor could say or do.
Whereupon the news of peace ensued: and in the beginning of May, there fell
so cruel a hayle, that came three times every eight days, and bear the
Country in such sort, specially about Foix, that there could neither fruit
nor green herb be seen in all the Country, no more then in the middle of
winter. The Chanons of Pamiers, to whom the common people imputed the cause of
that hayle, were constrained (to shun the Commons) to go out of Foix, and to
remain at Maugansy, where we will leave them, to come to Lyonois.

About the thirtieth of April, Monsieur de Tauanes came out of Burgongne,
Lyonnis.
and stayed within three miles of Lions: making account to assail the town,
but it fell out otherwise: although as then he had above five thousand men,
besides three thousand Italians, conducted by the Count de Anguesole, and
paid by the Pope. Those Italians being the greatest Brigands then living,
brought with them diverse Goats, and used the carnal company of brute Beasts,
which was the cause, that in every place where they came, men detested their
abomination.

All the Goats being killed and cast unto the dogs, Lions besieged.
by the Country Pesants, for the space of a month, while Monsieur de Tauanes
had that great company together, he had many brave skirmishes about Lions:
whereby the inhabitants durst not set their vines but in Gardens bordering
upon the Town. But because Tauanes pleased not the Triumuirat, they sent the
Duke de Nemours for General of the Army, with a great number of horses, and
the Rutters of the Count Rockendolfe.

Tauanes not knowing how to discharge himself of the displeasure he had
procured, by his affairs about Lions, was exceeding glad of the arrival of
the Duke de Nemours: and therevppon, under a fained coffeehouse, presently
withdrewe himself into his government of Burgongne.

Nemours with all his forces, went into Vienne, which he had by
intelligence, and while he soiournied there, victualles began to be scarce
with them of Lions. Whereupon Soubize called Des Adrets, and the Prouinceaux,
that thereby he might be strong enough to keep the field. But because the
hope he expected elsewhere failed him, he sent Des Adrets to fetch more aid
out of Dauphine. Which having done, and bringing his troop, being of four or
five thousand foot, and four hundredth horse, was set upon by the Army of
Nemours, hard by Beaurepaire, and put to flight: but yet with small loss,
which was done upon thee nineteenth day of October, whereby his troops
reassembling thither, met altogether, and not yet being pursued by the Duke
de Nemours, he at that time slipped an occasion of some great importance.

Des Adrets encamped himself within two miles of Vienne, and for the space of
three weeks that he lay there, he entertained the Duke de Nemours with
skirmishes: mean time, Soubize got victualles from diverse places.

About that time, it chanced that a soldier bringing a packet from Orleans
unto Soubize, delivered it into the hands of the Marshall de Brissac, who
therein having found a letter from the Admiral, where among other things he
said, that touching Adrets, as much as he might, he must endure the light
toys of his brain, and entertain him, least of an insolent person, they
should make him to become mad and without sense: whereupon in all haste he
sent Saint Sernin, a Gentleman of Dauphine, unto the Duke de Nemours and des
Adrets, to practice somewhat between them, By what means Adrets left the
party of the religion.
which at the first was secretly handled, but Soubize going to the camp, the
next day after that S. Seruin had spoken to Adrets, presently perceived some
alteration, which in time he provided for: and from that time setting some to
watch Adrets, they presently discovered his intent, who by messengers having
communicated with the duke de Nemours, and then speaking with him personally,
brake up his army. Nemours, who already made account to possess Lions and
Dauphinois, went nearer unto the town, and by skirmishes sought to impeach the
Town of victuals: upon the mountain of Tarare he ouerthrewe 80. horse, that
came from Orleans to Lions: and on the other side, stretched forth his arms
to gripe Romans and Valence. But because it was requisite to bear all his
body thither, thinking to come time enough to intrappe Lions, seeking to gripe
overmuch in one hand, he lost that hold he had. For marching straight to
Vienne with all his army, Soubize that slept not, presently made so many men
to issue out to fetch corn from Dombes, that he recovered great store.

Those that Nemours had left for guard, forsook keys, places, and barnes,
except forty that kept the Castle of Treuoux, who thinking to save the honor
of their companions by keeping a tower, nor being able to defend themselves,
neither yet yield it up, their obstinacy was punished by a train of powder,
that made them all leap higher then ordinarily they used to do, and to bury
their carcasses within the old ruins of that broken Tower. On the other side,
Soubize caused Adrets to be taken, and by that means the affairs and
pretenses of Nemoures touching Dauphine, converted into smoke.

But thinking to be more fortunate by Atturneys, then in person, he sent to
the Bishop du Puy, Escaladoes presented (but in vain) to take Lions.
and to Saint Chaumont, saying, that seeing Lions wanted soldiers, their men
of war being turned to be merchants of corn, they should assay to enter by
scalado into the town. But Soubize that spared not money to entertain spies in
every place, being well advertised thereof, took such order therein, that
Saint Chaumont in steed of approaching, was forced to retire. Nemours
determined to supply their default, and at two several times with all his
forces, upon hope that his participants within Lions would assist him, he
presented the Escalado in diverse places, but he was but badly served by his
men, both within and without the Town, and hardly repulsed by Soubize, that
gave him occasion to seek other means to get Lions.

He help himself with the news of the battle of Dreux, and about the end of
December, caused the King and Queen to write unto Soubize, to desire him to
yield the Town of Lions to the Duke de Nemours.

While Soubize made answer thereunto: one named Marc Herlin, one of the Kings
receivers within Lions, having for a time entertained certain soldiers, in
the end used to ride out well armed and horsed, and to skirmish with the
enemy. In the month of February 1563. having been taken in a skirmish,
thought upon a devise both to save his life, as also to deceive the Duke de
Nemours: desiring Lignerolles whom he knew, to get him license to speak with
the Duke, A device wrought against the Duke de Nemours.
to whom he was to utter some matters of great importance. Men that are
desirous of news, do in a manner believe whatsoever is told unto them: which
in any sort, may be any show of the effecting of their purpose: and so it
chanced unto Nemours, who by the discourse that Herlin made, believed that
Lions should be taken and surprised at Saint Iusts Gate, which Herlin
promised to keep open for him.

Whereupon Herlin was set at liberty, as if he had escaped away: and being
in Lions, having discovered all that had past between him and the Duke de
Nemours unto Soubize, he had more recourse unto Nemours, with whom the day
of execution was appointed to be, upon the 7. of March, 1563. about eight of
the Clock in the morning. Three thousand footmen, according to the sign
given unto them, entered without impeachment into the Subburbes of Saint Just:
which they found not strange, because they were well advertised, that no watch
was holden in those Subburbes: being entered, and marching toward the Gate,
Herlin that ran before them, and was their guide, having entered at the
wicket, presently shut it against them: and presently therevppon all the great
Ordinance was discharged upon them: besides two or three hundredth Muskettes,
which in the night time had been brought into the Bulwarks, and placed
along upon the walls, with three or four thousand Harquebusiers, discharging
all together upon that fearful troop: and the more to spoil them, they
sent six hundredth Caliuers of the best shot out of the Town, led by
Blacons, Poyet, Andefroy, and Entrages, that made an end of dispersing of all
them.

There you might have seen a marvelous spoil, and all kinds of death, some
being slain, others smothered and beaten down: the rest throwing themselves off
from the walls, or else intrapped in the snares: so that if the horsemen
conducted by Poncenat, had made haste to issue at the Gate assigned unto them,
and had marched thither, not one of all those three thousand had hardly
escaped. But howsoever it fell out, there lay four hundredth of them dead
within the Subburbes, besides those that dyed without: the hurt men being in
greater number: which dyed as they stedde away, either to the Camp, or to
Vienne, or else were borne away in Wagons. Nemours was not only auditor, but
an eye witness of this Tragedy: whereby he conceived such displeasure, that
he thought he should have dyed with grief: whereby he stirred not out of his
bed in two months after. Mean time, peace was concluded: by the which, those
of the religion had the exercise of the religion within the town, wherein they
made two Churches: the army being within and about it, retiring.

Now let us consider the estate of Dauphine, about the beginning of the month
of March 1562. the Parliament of Grenoble began to weake^ the Edict of January
as much as it might. Dauphine.
And not long after, Des Adrets, before being Colonel of the troops of
Dauphine, Prouence, and Languedoc, being by the gentlemen and notablest
Personages assembled in Valence, established chief commander in Dauphine, with
provision till they should receive some further and more certain
commandment from the Prince. Des Adrets made head commander in Dauphine.
Presently news came, that the Images were broken down in many provinces of
France, which was the cause that they could not be warrented within Dauphine.
Des Adrets advertised those of the religion in Grenoble, and by letters full of
authority, commanded the Parliament to drive certain seditious persons out of
the Town, which he named unto them, and among other, the second President: the
Attorney General: the Advocate of the Town: and the fourth Consul, whom he
threatened with death they neither stayed commandment, nor executioner, but
presently retired only to execute an enterprise which they had undertaken,
thereby to make themselves masters of the town, upon the next night ensuing:
nevertheless, their intent being discovered, they saved themselves in good
earnest: Which known, upon the first of May, those of the religion seized
upon the Gates of Grenoble, and by consent of the Deputies of the Parliament,
of the Chamber of accounts, and of the Council for the town, entered into the
Friars Church, which they cleansed of all her Images, and Alters: therein to
use the exercise of religion, not doing any other hurt unto the Friars.

After that, by common consent, they provided for the safety of the town,
wherein Des Adrets sent a company of footmen led by Captain Commung: and
after came thither with other troops, both horse and foot, thereby to resist
Monsier de Maugiron, that termed himself Lief-tenant General in Dauphine:
Against whom he published a decree to seize upon his body, terming him a
seditious person, and one that violated the Kings Edicts. All those Soldiers
assembled within Grenoble: first made war against the Images, and then entered
into the field, and took the Castles of la Bussiere, and de Mirebel. Des
Adrets, having made a course to Lions, upon the fourth of June, returned to
Grenoble, where he seized upon the relics, causing an inuentory thereof to be
made, al being waied and valued, amounted to 260. Marks of Silver, which was
sent to Valence: and the next day, the great Charterhouse lying three miles
distant within the Mountains, in a huge and very strong place, was taken and
burnt.

Massacre at Auranges.
Mean time, those of Aurange were Massacred in this manner, after the Massacrie
at Vassie. Those of the religion perceiving Fabrice Serbellonne, the Popes
kinsman, to lie with his forces within Auignon, being but a small half days
journey from thence, seized upon the Town. On the other side, in the end of
May, the troops of Prouence joined themselves with those of Fabrice at
Cauaillon, staying the commodity to enter into Auranges, where they had
intelligence: which those of Aurange sought to prevent, strengthening
themselves with six hundredth soldiers. Thereupon it chanced, that the
President Parpaille coming by Boat with provision of Arms, which he had
brought to Lions, was betrayed into the hands of his enemies, in a place about
five miles from Auranges: which moved those of the religion, with all speed to
send thither their greatest forces, conducted by Captain Saint Andre, to
relieve their prisoner: whereof Fabrice being advertised, the next day in the
morning came before Auranges with his army, and some cannons, wherewith he
began the battery.

Those that were gone to the relieuing of their prisoner, hearing the noise of
the cannon, stayed their course, being accompanied with diverse of their
neighbors, by means of Fabrices horsemen, and being surprised in the day
time, they were constrained to stay at Serignan, about a mile from Aurange.
Part of those of the religion remaining in a small number, perceiving the
breach, and their Citizens of the Romish Church ready to set up on them in
the Town, while Fabrice should assail them without, forsook the Town, and
saved themselves, with their wives and children, within Serignan.

Some stayed within Aurange, that determined to defend the breach, but upon
the sixth of June in the morning, they heard the noise of the assaylers, They
betrai^ each other in Aurange, whereof ensued a horrible murder.
who by diverse ways made open unto them by those of the Romish Church, entered
into the Town. The watchword of those that entered, was terrible blasphemy
of God, they contented not themselves to kill without distinction of sects,
age, nor quallitie, but made some die by diverse stabbes with poiniards and
rapiers, cast others upon the points of halbards: hanged and burnt others
within Churches, and cut off some of their privy members: old men of eighty
years of age, bedthred persons, diseased people in the Hospitalles.

The poor men inhabiting in the Mountains, came thither to reap, and having
no other weapons but their sithes and hooks, were likewise massacred. Many
women and maids were killed, others hanged at windows and Galleries, were
harquebused: young children sucking at their mothers breasts massacred: diverse
young wenches of five or six years, ravished and spoiled. The wounds of the
dead, were filled with the leaves torn out of the Bible.

The Town was wholly sacked, wherein happened a marvelous judgment of God:
which was, that the authors of the mischief, that had caused the enemy to
enter, thinking to be safe and preserved from danger, withdrewe themselves,
with their arms and wives into the Marketplace, The traitors receive their
reward.
where the enemy thinking they would have made resistance, fell upon them,
and put them all to the sword. Those of the Castle, having yielded upon oath
and promise made to have their lives saved, were part stabbed, and part thrown
headlong from the walls, to the number of one hundredth and nine men. About
evening, Suze caused the Castle, the Palace, and the Bishoppes-place, to be
set on fire, and three hundredth houses burnt, with diverse persons that had
hid themselves therein: and without an extraordinary rain that happened in
the night time, all the Town had wholly been consumed to ashes.

The next day, the walls were beaten down, and part of them clean rased to
the grownde. Those that were in Serignan, withdrewe themselves into
Montelimart, not being able to remedy so great mischiefs: as for Parpaille,
the Vicelegat of Auignon caused his head to be stricken off, six weeks after
the massacre.

Des Adrets moved at those murders, three or four days after, the massacre
of Auranges, Des Adrets reuengeth the wrongs (...) in Aurange.
ruuning about like thunder, in few hours battred and forced the Town of
Pierrelatte, where he put all those to the sword that bare arms: presently
therevppon he besieged the Castle, wherein were three hundredth soldiers
belonging to Suze: and while they were in parley, those of Serignan having
joined with des Adrets, entered by force, killing some, and casting others over
the walls, not suffering one to escape. Des Adrets with the like dexterity
having taken Bourg, and le Pont S. Esprit, that presented him with the keys,
went to force Boulene, a frontier Town of Contat, where the soldiers of the
company of Captain Bartelasse were slain. And as he prepared himself to
set upon Auignon, Maugiron sacketh Grenoble.
news was brought him that Maugiron had entered by treason into Grenoble,
wherein diverse of the religion had been sacked and slain, others cast off from
the bridge into the river of Iseire: upon the foureteenth of June, and some
days after, he stayed his course, and with an incredible dexterity entered
into Romans, which he held for himself: forced Saint Marcellin, and there cut
the throats of three hundredth of Maugirons soldiers, who withdrewe himself
into Bourgongne, where he remained with Tauanes. All such within Grenoble as
knew themselves to be guilty, saved themselves upon the five and twentieth of
June, cursing the cowardlynesse of Maugiron.

The next day des Adrets arrived therein, and used both great and small with
great courtesy, reestablishing all things in their estate, and holding his
army in good discipline. About the end of June he marched toward Forests,
where he used those of Montbrison, in such manner as I showed before.

Des Adrets persuaded by the Marshall de Brissac, that promised him maruels,
began to write to the Duke de Nemours, Des Adrets won by the Duke de
Nemours, in the end is taken prisoner.
and in the end they spoke together hard by Vienne: mean ttme, certain
Gentlemen talking together, among the which, one was merry, surnamed Poltrot,
who (because they spoke of the death of the King of Navarre) said: This death
will not make an end of these wars, but we must have the death of the dog
with the great collor. And being asked whom he meant? of the great Guisard
(said he) and lifting up his right arm, spoke in open audience: Here is the
arm that shall do the deed. Above three months before, he had many times
used those speeches among his companions: and intrueth he kept his promise, as
we have already showed. Of this conference made by Adrets, ensued a truce of
twelve days, from the five and twentieth of November, to the sixth of December:
which day in the assembly of the Estates of Dauphin, des Arets did what he
could to persuade the people, to accept the Duke de Nemours for their
Governor: but besides the particular reasons not long before by the Nobility
of the country made unto Adrets, they said it could not be done, but to the
utter ruin and overthrow of all the Province: and the letters of the
Lieftenant to Nemours being openly red, discovered the devise, because they
contained, that the Duke de Nemours was expressly sent to punish the seditious
and rebels. Whereupon the Estates concluded ( des Adrets himself not being
able to deny it) that before they could proceed further, it was necessary for
the Duke de Nemours to obtain other letters and graunts by the Kings lawful
Council, whereof the Prince of Conde was one, as supplying the place of the
King of Navarre his brother. This devise overthrown, des Adrets made a voyage
into Languedoc, and returning into Dauphine, Nemours to cool his courage,
showed him the Princes commissions, given to Monsieur de S. Auban, (overthrown
with his troops at Tarare) to command in Dauphine, and his commission to
Adrets to go to Orleans: which seen, des Arets used many practices to
establish the Duke de Nemours: and about the end of December, sought the means
to make him Master of Valence and Romans.

The tenth of January, by advise of the Nobility, he was taken prisoner, and
kept in Nismes until the peace: when he was set at liberty without
absolution or condemnation,, and being at his own house, he left the
religion: and after that, openly bare arms against all such as maintained the
same: but in that alteration finding no good success, but rather shame and
dishonor, he was constrained to with draw himself unto his house, despised
both of friends and enemies.

The second si^ge of Grenoble.
In base Dauphine, Monsieur de Crossol recovered Serignan and Aurange. On the
other side, upon the seventh of January, la Coche surprised the Tower of
Lemps, and discovered a great practice of Maugiron, to enter into Grenoble, for
the which he caused certain traitors to be executed. Whereat Maugiron being
offended, ouerranne the country of triefues, contrary to his faith and
promise. At the same time, those of Grenoble received certain losses, yet they
victualled their Town with corn and other munitions, expecting a new siege,
which happened unto them about the end of February, the enemies camp being
eight thousand foot and horse, with two great battering pieces, whereof the
bullet being of Brass, wayed about fifty pound, and three fair field
pieces. La Coche had nine Captains, some Gentlemen, with six hundredth good
soldiers, besides the Citizens. The battery began the first of March, and
continued three days and three nights: after that they offered a scalado,
where they lost many of their soldiers. They within the Town but five only,
with Monsieur de S. Muris, a Gentleman much lamented. Not long after, the siege
was raised and the Town freed. At the same time, a small troop belonging to
Captain Furmeier, surprised Romette, a small place walled, A notable exploit
of Captain Furmeier.
lying two miles from Gap, punishing certain boot-hallers that lay in it. As
Furmeier sent his footmen to enter into Romette, at the sound of the belles,
which the boote-hallers for certain hours before had rung in a steeple
wherein they saved themselves, and from whence they were thrown headlong down,
the Garrison of Gap, both horse and foot issued to aid them. But Furmeier,
accompanied with fourteen others on horseback, was so bold to stand against
all that troop, marching in order of battle, which was presently separated and
put to flight. The first that began to run, was Captain Andre a
Piedemontois, in such sort, that Furmeier and his companions, had work enough
to strike and lay upon them, killing them even to the gates of Gap, which
continued with a short bridle until the peace proclaimed, which made those of
the religion to reenter. And thus the affairs of Dauphine passed in those
times.

Prouence. Sommeriue makes war against his father and all his adherents
The Count de Tande perceiving the horrible discipation of all Prouence, and
that Sommeriue his son gave such liberty unto the bloody and desolate
companies of soldiers, thereby to commit the most cruel murders and
villainies that ever was heard of, whereby infinite numbers of houses and
families, were destroyed and wholly overthrown, came to Manosque, where he
assembled all the men he could, under the conduction of Cipierre his son,
Colonel of the horse, and of Cardet his son in law, leader of the foot, who
dealt in such manner, that all the Towns beyond the river of Durance,
continued under his government, only Petuis, which they besieged: but all in
vain. Mean time, Sommeriue having gathered his forces, and having been at
Aurange, by entreaty of Fabrice and de Suze, he came to Manosque, which by
Captain Coloux was yielded unto him, and having made a muster of fifty
Ensigns of foot, and certain Cornets of horse, the sixteenth of Iulie 1562.
he besieged Cisteron, wherein were the greatest part of all the families of
the religion, that had fled out of other places of Prouence, with eleven
companies of foot, under Monsieur de Beanieu, Nephew to the Count de Tande.
Furmeier came thither likewise with three hundredth men. Cisteron besieged.
Sommeriue caused the passages to be kept by one of his Captains named
Bouquenegre, a valiant soldier, but very cruel and dissolute, if ever there
were any in Prouence: but he was surprised in a village by twelve soldiers:
and one of his servants, whose wise he entertained, and not long after, found
guilty of diverse murders and violences committed, was hanged in the public
place of Justice, by his said servants hands, Bonquenegre hanged.
dying as he lived.

The eleventh of July, Sommeriue caused three assaults one after the other to
be given unto the Town, which continued from three of the clock after noone,
until evening: but he had a most brave repulse. The next day, the town made
certain skirmishes, and about eight days after, offered battle to Sommeriue,
which he refused. And at that time, they used such rigor unto each other, that
no man was put to ransom.

About the end of the month, Sommeriue fearing des Adrets, that had gotten the
battle of Vaureas, went to incampe himself within three miles of Cisteron. On
the other side, Cardet with all his forces approached, using all the means he
could to reassemble the troops, but it was impossible: whereupon the Count
de Tande wanting victualles, caused the camp to rise, whereof part were placed
in Cisteron, under the government of Senas, the rest sent to des Adrets, that
promised in short time to come and visit him with great forces, but he did not.

The second siege of Cisteron.
The 27 of August, Sommeriue with one hundredth and two Ensigns of foot, and
great store of horse, besieged Cisteron round about, and understanding that
Mombrun came to aid the Town, sent Suze to meet him, who upon the second of
September, surprised and ouerthrewe Mombrun, and 500. men, the Town enclosed
on all sides, but only in one place, which lies upon high and desert
Mountains, the way whereof is so straight, that two ho^ semen can hardly ride
in rank. Upon the foureteenth of September, Sommeriue made a cruel battery,
so that about ten of the clock in the morning, the breach was of one
hundredth and foureteen paces, without flancard or raueling to defend it.
Besides that, two demi Coluerins that shot from the Friars, struck the
soldiers in the Town when they came to the breach, which notwithstanding,
although the besieged seeking to rampire the breach, were stricken and hurt, and
some borne into the air with cannon shot, both men and women, the living
treading upon the dead, they used great deligence to bring earth,
fetherbeddes, dung, and other things, whatsoever might serve. At the same time,
that assault was given by thirty Ensigns of foot, and a Cornet of horse that
followed them, where the fight was great, and five times refreshed, till seven
of the clock at night, with such fury, that powder failing on both sides,
they fell to stones, rapiers, and other hand-blowes: in the end the assaylants
were constrained to leave the breach, and to retire with great loss. An
assault five times refreshed.
Notwithstanding Sommeriue began another battery, by which means about
evening, Senas, Mounans, and other Captains within the Town, that had lost
many soldiers, perceluing themselves destitute of munition, had no hope of
aid, charged with a great number of poor people, little experienced in
Marshall affairs, and considering the forces, minds, and insolences of the
assaylants, determined to leave that feeble place, and with all speed to save
that remnant of men that were within it: whereupon they got the straight of
the Mountain whereof I spoke, being the only place whereby they might
escape. This conclusion was presently disclosed to Sommeriue, A meruellous
resolution of the Town to leave it.
by one (that coming out of the chamber where they determined upon it) went
unto him: but the matter being debated by Sommeriues Council, that meant to
close that passage, one named Cental brake off that determination, alleging
so many reasons to the contrary, that it was concluded among them, that no man
should stir that night out of the camp, although that some of the besieged
made show to save themselves that way, but that in the morning they would
determine upon their affairs.

About eleven of the clock at night, the besieged began to issue forth, in
the sight of al their enemies, that might easily discry them from two places,
which commanded the Town, and by the lights that stood in the windows of the
houses, marching in order, (you may well judge what noise was made at that
departure among the children, sick, hurt, and old people, and women great
with child) and so with all their carriages followed on the way upon the
Mountain: all that night, not one of So^meriues camp once stirring, as if those
poor people had been safely guarded, until morning that Sommeriue caused
certain horse and foot to pass the river, and to set upon the backs of
them, where they found some poor women that stayed behind, whereof some were
slain, others brought prisoners: but they followed not long after them, as
well for the difficulty of the way, as the covetous desire they had, not to
leese the spoil of the Town, wherein Sommeriue durst not enter, (fearing some
treason) before ten of the clock in the morning.

They being entered into that desolate Town, slew three or fource hundredth
women and children, without any respect of age or religion, taking that small
booty which they could find. Sommeriue enters into Cisteron.
If the issuing of those of Cisteron was meruellous, so was their voyage upon
the Mountains, which continued for the space of three weeks: in the which
time, they escaped an infinite number of dangers, until the seven a and
twentieth of September, that they arrived in good safety at Grenoble, singing
Psalms and thansgiuings unto God, for their miraculous delivery: knowing
nothing of what had passed the same day in other places: as at Saint Gilles,
The battle of S. Gilles, Scafold of the Prouenceal murders.
where there enemies were wholly ouerthowne, and almost all slain, as we
showed in the discourse of Languedoc. From Grenoble they were safely conducted
unto Lions, and charitably aided in their necessities, until the edict of
pacification.

After the taking of Cisteron, and the overthrow of the Prouenceals at Saint
Gilles, Sommeriue continued Master of the Prouence, continuing the battle,
massacres, and great insolences begun before, and yet without impunitie. The
principal heads of the horrible confusion that reigned therein, until and
after the edict of peace, being Carces, Mentin, and Flassans, provoked by
certain of the Parliament of Aix, as Bagarris, Chesne, Saint Margaret, and
others, that ruled all the rest: and that in steed of obeying the edict of
pacification, durst conclude and say, that those of the religion should not
have any exercise: that such as during the troubles had been their Leaders, or
having had any office, Strange injustice.
absented themselves, should not be received nor entertained: and that the wars
still be followed: and that there should a stay be made of the punishments of
offenders, that had committed so great insolences during the troubles:
although the women with child had bin ripped open, the young children murdered,
many buried quick, others hewed in pieces, burnt, thrown down headlong,
their throats cut like sheep, drawn through the streets, and then
harquebused, beaten down with clubbes, and wounded in diverse places. In this
sort those good judges executed so many insolences, that the kings Council
after the edict of pacification, was forced to send the President de Morsan,
with certain numbers of Counselors from Parris to Prouence: which did such
execution upon some boot-hallers, and other insolent persons, that from thence
forward, Sound instice done upon the offenders.
although their weapons were many times in hand, Prouence never mutined in such
sort, as it did during those first troubles. Morsan and his companions, were
determined to have done justice without exception: but the multitude of
offenders, the qualities of some of them, the credit of others, and the
marvelous practices of Carces and the Parliament of Aix, hindered those
Justices to do as they pretended. In the end, by the solicitation of Carces,
the king released diverse of them, whereof their process was already made, and
that had well deserved to be put to cruel death.

Now must we say something of the Duchy of Bourgongne. Bourgongne.
The Parliament of Dyon did so much, that by letters of the first of March,
1562. commandment was sent by the king, to Monsieur de Tauanes his Lieftenant,
in the absence of the Duke d'Aumale of the house of Guise, not to permit any
preaching at Dyon, not in the Frontier-townes, so that whatsoever letters and
commissions, those of the religion obtained after that, would serve to no
effect, as long as the Court of Parliament resited.

The eight of May, Beaune.
those of Beaune were wholly bereaved of the exercise of the religion, and
within four days after, their three Ministers imprisoned: which done, the
Artificers and others, were driven out of the Town, to the number of seven or
eight hundredth, with women and children. Ventoux Captain of the Town, filled
their empty houses with soldiers, wherein they used great disorders, such as
were found therein being vilely abused, and so much detested, that they durst
not show themselves in the streets: which reduced them to extreme
necessities, their kinsmen and friends not daring to relieve them. The fines
imposed upon those of the religion, (whose goods were taken from them) was
marvelous, as well in that Town, as others in Bourgongne, as also in other
Towns and Provinces of the Realm. The one and twentieth of June, the house of
one of the principal of the City was forced and sacked. In the month
ensuing, diverse means were used, to cause such as were lest to abjure the
religion: some remained firm. In the beginning of October, the Parliament of
Dyon assayed to commit some of them prisoners, and summoned the rest to
appear: and such as appeared at Dyon, although innocent, were hardly handled:
others had diverse adventures, and some (yet very few) wounded and slain. So
that in Beaune there were not above two men, and some women of great
reputation, that made open profession of the religion, by the support of their
assistance.

Those of the religion in Mascon, upon the thirteenth of May made themselves
the strongest, yet without effusion of blood: and three days after, Mascon.
the Images were beaten down, as they had been at Lions, although the
Ministers and ancients were of the contrary advise. Mombrun having left
Chalon, and come down to Mascon, put the Inhabitants in such fear, that many
of them were of opinion to leave the Town. Whereupon Tauanes, First siege.
who not long before had made them many gracious offers, came before the Town,
minding to enter, which the people denied: which caused him to assemble all his
forces, and upon the third of June besieged the Town: his army being
Bourguignons of the Count, every man wearing a red scarce, which was an
occasion that the Townsmen showed the Kings Council, that it was no reason
that they being his natural subjects, desiring to live peaceably according
to his edicts, should be constrained to open their Gates unto Tauanes, being
accompanied with strangers, enemies to the Crown, and for many causes
suspected unto them. Whereupon letters were sent unto Tauanes, who withdrewe
himself in such sort, that not long after, having received an other packet,
he sought to cease upon the Gates under the Town, whereof he sailed, having
received a hard repulse.

And as he made preparation for a second siege, those of Lions sent Monsieur
d'Entrages to aid the Town, who by his conduction made many sallies and brave
skirmishes: Second siege
which notwithstanding Tauanes caused his trenches upon the one side of the
Town, and the third of July wanne the Subburbes of S. Lawrenre, the next day
making such a battery, that in less then two hours, all their defenses lay
upon the ground. And the same day, one Mussy, servant to Tauanes, was hanged
within the Town, for enterprising to cause the town to be surprised. Not
long after, Entrages being summoned to yield, made answer, that if he had
the Master in his hands, he would cause him to pass the same way his
servant Mussy had done: which set Tauanes in such a rage, that besides fifteen
or sixteen hundredth shot made against a Tower, they shot diverse hundredth
times against the breach, whereby diverse men were slain and maimed. But the
resolution of the assieged, hindered Tauanes from approaching, and contenting
himself to send twelve soldiers to view the breach, six of them were
slain: and about eleven of the clock at night, thirty soldiers issuing out
of the Town, cut the throats of certain Sentinelles, and entered so far as
to the Artillery, to try if they could stop it: which they had done, if
Tauanes in person had not come thither. The next day, although the Tower so
much beaten and defaced, had opened a new breach unto Tauanes, yet he stirred
not, but to the contrary, making show in great haste to return into
Bourgongne, suddenly raised his camp, leaving certain things of powder
behind him, with an ambuscado, if those of the Town had offered to come forth:
but Entrages being a polliticke soldier, and one that had not many men to
loose, suffered not his soldiers to issue. Tauanes thereby being deceived,
lodged his troops not far from thence, and went up again to Chalon, where
certain troops of Dauphine came to meet him.

At that time, it chanced that two Sheriffs of Mascon, having by their
authority in the night time laden certain boats, with the relics of gold
and silver, and other ornaments of the Temple of S. Vincents in Mascon, minding
to carry and sell them in Lions, Relics taken for booty.
being two or three leagues off, were discovered by one named Saint Poinct,
who being aided by certain Gentlemen of Dauphine, and a good troop of
footmen, passed the river above Belleuille, and setting upon the boats,
took them, and became Masters of all that was within them, valewed at the
least to the sum of thirty or forty thousand frankes. The Challices and
Images of gold and silver, were broken and parted between S. Poinct and his
companions, although they termed themselves Romish Catholicques. Whereupon a
young Lacquey came to Gascon, who having falsely charged two Captains, was
hanged, but the soldiers of those two Captains began to mutin, because
their leaders had been committed to prison, using many threatening speeches.
This being appeased, Entrages saying he would make a general muster in a
plain hard by the Town, caused those two companies of mutinous fellows first
to issue forth: Belleuille defended by astraunge accident.
which done, he shut the Gates upon them, by which means being constrained
to take the other part, they went to Belleuille, that held for the religion,
and arrived therein in good time, upon the 28. of July, for that the next
morning before the break of the day, S. Poinct with six or seven hundredth
foot, and two hundredth horse, and the Pesants of the country besieged the
Town, thinking to enter therein without resistance. But approaching near the
walls, and by chance discovered by the one that rose somewhat early, they were
so hardly received by the souldieis of Mascon, that they were constrained to
retire with shame and great loss: to revenge themselves, they drove away the
beasts of diverse Farms, and sacked the house of a rich Pesant, whom they
massacred, and cast his body into the Soane, but his body was taken up and
buried in Belleuille.

How the Queen mother her Regency.
Hitherto I have showed the estate of the particular Provinces of France, during
these first troubles: now let us return again unto the Court. The Queen
being delivered out of the hands of the Triumuirat, to assure her authority,
and to hold the greatest personages in some stay, thereby to serve her turn by
some of them, to check the rest: first she iuested the young Duke of Guise,
with the estates and offices of his father, and to appease the Parisians much
grieved for his death, she delivered Poltrot unto them, that was executed with
as grievous punishment, as if he had slain the king himself: which done,
something was to be done for the appeasing of those of the religion, that had
been spoiled and massacred as you have heard. The Prince of Conde being
prisoner, demanded naught but liberty, and his mind being peaceable and
courteous, to such as knew how to use him, would not much stand (as the Queen
thought) upon certain articles. Wherefore fearing least the Admiral, as then
busied in Normandy, being at Orleans, should seek the ratifying of the edict
of January, that might break the accord and renew the war, whereby would
ensue her disgrace: she used all the means she could to prevent him, in such
sort, that upon the seventh of March, there was a conference holden between
the Queen, the Prince, and the Constable, as yet prisoners, referring their
further deliberation to the next day, because the Constable had said openly,
Subtlety of the Constable.
that he could not consent to the re-establishing of the Edict of January,
wherein he used a fine shift, for that if he should have avouched it, he
had proved both himself and all his partners, guilty of treason, in having
violated and broken the Kings Edict.

The Prince evil counseled, permitted certain articles to be drawn, where in
truth he should have holden only unto the said Edict: but nothing being
resolved at that time, he obtained liberty to enter into Orleans, there to
confer with his Council, where he asked the advice of the Ministers as then
assembled therein from diverse places, being to the number of seventy two
persons, What was done by the Ministers, for preservation of religion.
who by their Deputies used all the means they could to persuade him to stand
to the Edict of January, not derogating any thing thereof, showing the dangers
that might thereof ensue: that done, they presented him with certain articles,
requiring that he would demand the observation of the Edict, without any
restrictions: that justice should be done for the massacre at Vassy, Sens and
other places, wherein there was not found the least point of hostility to be
committed by those of the religion, as also of diverse others most manifest
ruptures of the said Edict, besides the exploits of war.

The rest of the articles concerned the conservation of the discipline of the
Churches, and the reestablishing thereof, which notwithstanding the Prince was
so much persuaded by the Queens and others promises, after that, to make an
other and a better agreement, showing him, that the restrictions and
moderations, which as then were set down, were done at that time, only to
content and appease those of the Romish religion, and by reasonable means to
obtain a greater liberty, withal, that there were many that sought for peace,
what price soever it cost, that he consented unto the exceptions contained in
the new contract, causing them to be read before the Nobility, willing no
man to give his advise therein, but only Gentlemen bearing arms, as he said
it openly before the assembly: The improuidence of the Prince that believed the
promises of his enemies.
in such manner, that the Ministers from that time forward, were never called
to deal therein: by which means the Edict of pacification was concluded upon
the twelfth of March, drawing the exercise of the religion from the subburbes
of all the Towns in the Realm, and referring it to the houses and Castles of
Gentlemen, and in some small number of Baliages, not comprehending the Towns
which as then held for the religion, wherein the exercise was left free, and
all whatsoever the Prince and his adherents had done in those wars,
acknowledged and avouched to be for the service of the King.

The Admirals wisdom, but to no effect.
Two days after, the Admiral wrote letters from Caen unto the Queen, touching
the accusation made against him, concerning the death of the duke of Guise
committed by Poltrot. He besought her to command that the prisoner might be
safely kept, that the truth of the action might be known. Mean time, he
sent her a brief answer touching the intergatories of Poltrot, showing by
many and great reasons, that he was never made privy to the pretense or
conceit of Poltrot touching that action, whose death notwithstanding he
acknowledged to be the means to reduce France unto a quiet estate. The Queen
esteeming it not convenient for her affairs, to suffer the Admiral to live in
peace, but by this means seeking to entertain hatred among the Nobility, to
reign and govern in the middle of their deuisions, made no account of those
letters.

Those that with her had the processes of Poltrot to examine, perceiving that
the dispositions of the prisoner had no apparent ground, within three days
after sent to Parris, that they should dispatch him out of the way, that it
would be dangerous to keep him, and that he would deny what he had said.

Whereupon his process was made, he was diverse times examined, and according
to the torments given him, they found diversity in his speeches. And being
condemned upon the eighteenth of March, to be pinched with hot tongues, he
openly declared, that the Admiral knew nothing of his intent to kill the Duke
of Guise.

Nevertheless, certain Captains of Parris deposed, that he had confessed
the contrary unto them, after the first drawing of the horses. But upon his
variable depositions, Process and execution of Poltrot.
the quarrel between the houses of Guise and Chastillon, whereof ensued the
infinite mischiefs of the years ensuing.

The Admiral having ranged his enemies in Normandy, to a good point, as then
had a stronger army then he had before, The Admirals means made frustrate by
the substiltie of the Queen.
wherewith he constrained the members of the Triumuirat to fall to reason,
whereof ensued the quietness of France: but the articles of the peace being
almost all agreed upon on both parts, at the Princes request he issued out of
Caen upon the 14. of March, only with his horsemen, the Vantgard whereof being
led by the Prince of Portien, that took the way toward Lisieux: the rest
passing by Falaise and Argentan into Perch. In the way, such as would resist
his army were set upon and punished. And the three and twentieth of the same
month, the Admiral being arrived at Orleans with all his forces, found that
the Edict of pacification had been agreed upon, signed, and sealed in his
absence, five days before he arrived.

The next day he gave his advise in open Council before the Prince, and among
other things, showed, that they were to remember, that from the beginning of
the wars made by the Triumuirat, they had always offered the observation of
the Edict of January, Parris only excepted: and that considering the estate of
their affairs, those of the religion had more means then they had before, to
defend themselves from the violences of their enemies: of three authors of
those wars, two of them being dead, the third prisoner, and a good pledge
for the Princes assurance, that the Churches were restrained to one Town in a
Baliage, and other such exceptions, was as much, as if they should strive
against God, and overthrow more Churches by the dash of a pen, then all the
enemies forces could beat down intenne years space.

That the Gentlemen that would show their good wills, should soon see and
feel by good experience, how much more expedient and commodious it will be
unto them, to go to a sermon within a Town or Village near unto them, then to
receive a church into their house: besides this, that such Gentlemen dying,
would not always leave heirs of their opinions.

These reasons were so firm, that besides the disliking of those that were not
called to counsel, the most part of those that had agreed unto it, could
gladly have wished it to begin again. But the Prince to all that opposed the
promises made unto him, that in short time he should enjoy the estate of the
deceased king of Navarre his brother, and that then, those of the religion
should obtain whatsoever they could desire. Yet although many alleged to the
contrary, that all his promises were but words, and that when those of the
religion should be disarmed, and retired unto their houses, their enemies
would still devise the means to vex and trouble them, and that they should
be disgraced and naught esteemed. Yet would he never apprehended it, and what
pains soever the Admiral took, accompanying the Prince in diverse private
conferences with the Queen, the Edict continued in force, as it had been
decreed, and nothing else could be obtained, but only that certain Gentlemen
procured this point, that some of the best Towns in certain Provinces, should
be nominated for the exercise of the religion in the Baliages, but this was
but an accord in paper, that took small effect.

The Queen of England had assisted the Prince of Conde and his adherents, with
men and money during those wars, who for assurance of her money disboursed, and
for the retrait of her men, gave her the possession of the town of New-hauen,
wherein there lay an English Garrison.

The Prince by his Edict having not made any conclusion, that the Englishmen
should be paid, and peaceably sent home again, they stayed in New-hauen, to
keep it, till they had satisfaction on the other side. The Council of France,
by letters dated the sixth of July, proclaimed war against the Englishmen: and
fifteen days after New-hauen was besieged, The Englishmen driven out of
New-hauen.
the Constable being General of the army, wherein they drew the Prince, with
diverse Lords, Gentlemen, Captains, and Soldiers of the religion, some of
their adversaries vaunting after the siege, to have driven out the Englishmen
by those that brought them thither.

And that the Huguenots might be well assured, not to have any more aid out
of England, the Earl of Warwick lay in New-hauen with six thousand
Englishmen, having well provided all things necessary for the defense of a
place of such importance. But the fresh water being taken from the Englishmen,
the plague was very rife among them, and the battery most furious, upon the
eight and twentieth of July they grew to a parley, and the next day yielded the
place, wherein above three thousand of them were dead of the plague. Eight
months after this reudition, a peace was concluded and proclaimed, between
France and England.

The king of the age of 13 years and a month, declared of lawful years.
The Prince of Conde in the conclusion of peace, was made believe, that he
should have the place of Lieftenant general, by the decease of the king, of
his brother the king of Navarre: but after the delivery of New-hauen, the Queen
having no more need of him, to take all hope from him on that side, and to
breed new conceits in the heads of those of the religion, published a
declaration, to show the maioritie of the king, as then entered into the 14.
year of his age. And to make show the better unto this declaration, whereunto
was added a most severe Edict against bearing of arms, his subjects leagues,
and the pensions of foreign Princes, she caused her son in great solemnity
to sit in the Parliament of Roane, where to show her child to be sufficient
and capable to adminster the affairs of the Realm, she caused him to be
taught and learned by heart, to utter a lesson artificially devised, thereby to
bridle the Prince assistance thereat, which by many was termed his degrading.
The substance thereof was, that his coming into the Parliament, was to give
his officers to understand, that having attained to the years of maioritie, he
would no longer endure that any such disobedience should be used against him,
as had been showed since the beginning of the troubles: commanded that his
Edict of pacification should be observed, threatened the breakers thereof, and
such as made associations and leagues: which was done upon the sixteenth and
seventeenth of August.

Within short time after, the Parliament of Parris sent a declaration unto the
king, touching that Edict of maioritie, which confirmed that of pacification.
But the Queen caused him to speak with authority as he had done before, The
Queens proceedings against the Court of Parliament in Parris.
declaring his mother superintendant of his affairs, and said unto the
Deputies of the Parliament, that his meaning was, that they should deal with
nothing else, but only to administer good and speedy justice unto his
subjects: giving them to understand, that he would have them to know, that
they were not appointed by him in their offices to be his tutors, nor
protectors of his Realm, neither yet conseruers of his town of Parris. For
you are (said he, according to his instructions given) made believe, that you
are such: but I mean not to suffer you any more to continue in that error, but
command you, that as in the times of the kings my predecessors, you never used
to deal with any thing but with justice, that from henceforth, you deal with
nothing else. And when I shall command you any thing, if you find any
difficulty therein, I will be well content to hear your advise, as you have
used to do unto the kings mine ancestors, and not as my Governors, and having
given your aduises, having heard my mind, to be obedient thereunto without
reply.

In doing so, you shall find me as good and mild a King as ever you had:
but doing as you have done, since the time you were given to understand that
you are my tutors, I will make you know, that you are none such, but my
servants and subjects: willing and charging you, to obey my commandments.

The Bishop of Valence checqueth the Parliament of Parris.
Here you may see how they drove the dogs before the Lion, and the subtle
practices of the Queen, to establish her Regencie, under the warrant of her
son: wholely debarring the Prince of Conde from all his hopes: and to change
the Parliament of Parris somewhat more unto her will, she caused the the Bishop
of Valence in a large discourse, to confute that which the President de Thou
had propounded, touching the Kings Court: and that his mawrite ought first to
have been signified to the Court of Parliament in Parris: that the King ought
not to permit the exercise of two religions within his Realm: that the
inhabitants of Parris ought not to be constrained to leave their arms. The
Bishop in open terms seemed to charge de Thou and all his companions, to show
but small understanding in those affairs, and much less conscience. The
twenty four of September following, by Decree of the privy Council, the
mawrite of the King (or as some are of advice) the regencie and Sovereignty
authority of the Queen was confirmed.

The Pope abandoneth the Realm of Navarre to him that could take is by force,
whereunto the King opposes.
At the same time, an other devise was wrought against those of the religion.
The Pope faining that he could no longer bear with the reformation of religion
and doctrine used in the Realm of Navarre, and the Sovereignty: of Bearn, in
the month of September, caused a declaration to be published in Rome against
Ieane d'Albert, Queen of Navarre: who as then made publicque profession of the
religion, and had driven the Mass out of her Countries. This declaration was
made in form of an excommunication, and for a dispossession of all that land,
which as then remained unto this Princess, by whom soever would take it in
hand, to enjoy it as by conquest, and his own proper inheritance. She was
likewise cited to appear before the Consistory of Cardinals, within six
months after: for default whereof, the Pope declared her heretic, her goods
confiscate, and abandoned as aforesaid. The King formed an opposition against
this papal thunder, which as then was showed but in Rome. The King of Spain
having neither the desire nor the means to fall upon that Princess, and the
Council of France, esteemed it inconvenient, to give so manifest a shadow
unto those that were of the religion.

The death of Charles de Cosse Marshal de Brissac, that had done great service
for the Realm of France, in the wars of Piedemont, made an end of this
year, 1563. that dyed upon the last of December.

Ann. 1564
In the beginning of this year, it was permitted unto the Clergy by an Edict,
to redeem their lands that had bin alienated, to the value of a hundredth
thousand crowns, yearly rent. An Edict in favor of the Clergy.
All this was but a point of cunning, used to diue into the purses of those who
during the wars, and that France drowned in tears had sung, and for the most
part lived at their ease.

About the beginning of February, the Ambassadors of the Pope, the Emperor,
the King of Spain, and the Duke of Sauoy, came to Fountainebleau, desiring
that the King would cause the Decrees of the Council of Trent, to be wholely
observed within the Realm of France: for the which cause, The King solicited
by the Spaniard to break the Edict of pacification.
the Deputies were to be at Nancy upon the the twenty five of March, then
next ensuing: to read the same in presence of the Ambassadors of all the
Papisticall and Catholicque Romish Princes, assembled together, there to make
and frame a general league, against the Realms, principalities, and estates,
that had withdrawn themselves from the obedience of the Pope. They likewise
desired the king wholly to cease the alienating of the goods of the Clergy,
alleging it to be prejudicial both against him and his Realm, and
contrary to the word of God, that the king of Spain and the Duke of Sauoy,
could not be paid the moneys due unto them by reason of their marriages, with
the Cleargies money: desired that those of the religion might be openly
punished, whom they disciphered according to their accustomed manner. That the
pardon and the edict of peace should be made void: that the king should do
justice, specially of those that were consenting unto the death of the Duke of
Guise. And to effect these requests, they added most fair and great offers,
thereby to cast the realm into the burning flame of a second civil war.
Answer to the Ambassadors.
But the Queen and her Council perceiving it to be a ticklish matter, and
distrusting in the promises of such men, caused the young king to answer
them, that he thanked their Masters, whom he meant not to trouble, hoping to
maintain his subjects in peace, according to the institution of the Romish
Church. That he had made the edict of pacification to put straunges out of his
Realm: that as then he could reenter into a new war within his realm, for
certain reasons, which in writing he sent unto them: and that in those
affairs he would ask the Counsel and advise of the Prince of his blood, and
the chief Lords of his Council, and of the Crown.

The king of Spain with that Embassage, devising how he might see his
kinsmans house in new troubles, took no order for his own in the low
countries, where as then wars began to be hatched, which not long after
came forth, and as yet continue therein, to his great shame and confusion.

In the beginning of March, the Queen began the voyage of Bayonne, to speak
with the king of Spain, the pretense was, that the king being Mayor, and
about fourteen years of age, Beginning of the voyage to Bayonne.
would ride about his Realm to visit his Provinces, and that his presence
would be a means to remedy many complaints and discontentments, and withal,
strengthen and establish the edict of pacification. But the effect that both
approached and ensued, did partly show the intents and secret practices of
that woman and her Council.

The king began that voyage in Champagne and Bourgongne, from whence he went
to Lions, What a scita dell was built at Lions.
and to the end those of the religion should not have the means to fortify
themselves therein, as they had done at other times, a scitadell was then
begun to be erected: and although at that time the plague reigned within the
Town, yet the Queen and her Council would not stir from thence, and kept
the king there, until that scitadell was almost finished.

But in the end the plague being entered into the Queens Chamber, whereof one
of her Gentlewomen fell sick, the king was led from thence. While they built
at Lions, to bridle those of the religion, by that means to weaken their
forces, Defacing of Towns.
the Towns of Orleans and Montauban, were unwalled: in other towns scitadels
were made, which by some were called Chastre-villaines: by others, the Nests of
Tyrants.

Those of the religion endured all, contenting themselves with simple
declarations in paper, and receiving paper for payment. For that about the
beginning of this voyage, the Romish Catholics of Greuan in Bourgongne,
massacred diverse of the religion, being assembled therein to exercise their
religion: Massacre of those of the religion.
complaints thereof being made unto the Queen, she gave fair words,
promising to send Commissioners to Creuan, such as were honestly minded, and
not passionate, to inquire of the fact.

But in stead of keeping promise, at the same time an edict was made,
forbidding the exercise of the religion in the kings Court, An edict derogating
that of pacification.
and that in the Towns wherein by the edict it was permitted, the Ministers
should not preach, as long as the kings should remain therein: all eadging for
reason, that his presence might not endure the exercise of any other religion,
then that which he used: who as then was taught to rule and Court Ladies,
having Masters appointed for the purpose, the Court as then beginning to be
an example of all dissolution.

They likewise drove al ministers out of the realm, that were not natural
Frenchmen. The king being gone from Lions, went to Roussillon, where he staying
for a time, was visited by the duke d'Sauoy. There they erected another
disme^bring of the edict of peace, Another derogatiue edict.
forbidding all justices to use the exercise of religion in their houses,
freses, or Castles, other then in those that are appointed in the edict: That
the Ministers which should have exercised their charges, in places not
comprehended in the edict, for the first time should be banished out of the
realm, and being found therein again, to be corporally punished. That
Priests, Monks, Friars, and Nuns, that are married, should be constrained
to leave their wives and husbands, and to return again into their Monasteries
and Couents, or else to go out of the realm.

That it should not be lawful for those of the religion to hold Sinodes,
accusing them under that pretense to have made conspiracies, and raised the
greatest part of the realm. This edict abated somewhat of the edict of
pacification. From Dauphine, the king went into Prouence, and Marcellis, and in
the beginning of winter he entered into Languedoc: and being in Montpeslier,
about the end of December, prolonged the redeeming of the spiritual goods, for
the space of six months more. This winter was extreme cold through all the
realm of France.

The Cardinal of Lorraine pretending to enter armed into Parries, is repulsed
by the Marshall de Mont morency.
At that time, the Cardinal of Lorraine newly returned from the Council of
Trent, having stayed a certain time in Champagne, rid to Parris with his guard,
openly bearing arms, contrary to the express commandment of the king,
being accompanied by Henry Duke of Guise his Nephewe, as then but a child, but
yet invested with the estate of Great-maister of France.

His brother the Duke d'Aumale, lay not far from Parris with a troop of men.
The Marshall de Montmorency Governor of the Isle of France, being a wise
Gentleman, and a friend to peace, having discovered that diverse mutinous
companions attended the Cardinals arrival in that manner, to commit violence
against those of the religion, that daily increased: and foreseeing that so
bold an attempt openly to ride in arms, would breed some horrible tempest, if
it were not prevented, sent word to the Cardinal, that he should not presume
to enter into Parris with such a train, nor in that manner.

And because he made no account of the kings Lieftenants commandment, the
Marshall sent him word, that he forbadde him to enter into his government with
armed troops, which if he did, he would use his authority. But the
Cardinal not letting for that, about the beginning of January assayed to
enter armed into Parris, but he found the Governor and Sovereign Magistrate,
with thirty or forty men ready to resist him, all men of account: as Lords
and Gentlemen, and the Prince of Portian. But in stead of beating down the
Cardinal and his men, he contented himself to put them in fear. The
Cardinal, his Nephewe, and diverse of their followers, saved themselves in the
first shoppes and houses they could get into. Their men of war shunning the
danger with all the speed they could, but not once pursued. This chance made
the Cardinal wholly confused, and having stayed for a time within the Town,
he returned into Champagne, staying the Kings return from Bayonne. The Duke
d'Aumale his brother made more show, and for the space of certain weeks, no
other report ran abroad within Parris, and all the Isle of France, but only
of leagues and associations, made to be revenged upon the Marshall de
Montmorency, who being assisted by the Admiral and other Lords, held the
Parisians in peace, and caused his action to be approved, both in the
Parliament, and by the kings Council. But this blow renewed the despite of
the house of Guise, against those of Montmorency and Chastillon, and because
the assemblies made by the Duke d'Aumale, and the league he made with the Duke
d'Estampes, Martignes, Chauigny, and the Bishop of Man's, had constrained the
Marshall and the Admiral, to assemble certain Gentlemen to withstand those
pretended leaguers. The Queen fearing, least that beginning would breed some
mischief, that might break the voyage of Bayonne, and other expedients which
she esteemed to be most fit and necessary for the effecting of this
Council, presently dispatched letters pattrents, whereby the king commauned
those that as yet were not entered into Parris to approach no nearer: and such
as were therein, to depart from thence, referring the ending of this quarrel,
until his return out of Gascoigne.

The Cardinal offended that no better remedy was taken in his behalf
touching that disgrace, began another enterprise, making war against
Salcede, Bailiffe de Vic, The Cardiwalles war.
and Governor for the king in Marsault, that had ceased certain places
appertaining to the Cardinal, alleging he had reason to do it, because the
Cardinal had put himself into the safeguard and protection of the Emperor,
and had caused it to be published, without the commandment and license of the
king his Sovereign. But Salcede being ouerweake for so puissant an enemy
favored by the Queen, in the end was constrained to leave both Vic and
Marsault.

The ninth of June, Henry duke of Orleans, brother to the king, departed from
Bayonne, The coming of the Queen of Spain to Bayonne.
where not long before the Court arrived, and went to lodge at Saint John de
Lus, from whence the next day after he road to Iron, the first place in the
frontiers of Spain, situate upon the river of Marquery, which divided the
lands of the Kings of France and Spain. And having past that river, he went to
meet with his sister the Queen of Spain, beyond Aruany, where, after the
ceremonies and salutations ordinatily used at such meetings, they took their
way to S. Sebastians, where the Duke of Alue stayed. Not long after, the king
went forth to meet his sister, accompanied by diverse Princes and Noblemen,
conducting her unto Bayonne, where she stayed along time. The Duke d'Alua with
many of the Couucell of Spain, had diverse secret conferences with the Council
of France. There resolution being (as Monsieur de Noue says in his discourse,
Councels holden in Bayonne, between the Spantards and the Frenchmen, originals
of the mischiefs of France and the low Countries. The continuance of the K.
progress to the pre^udice of those of the teligion.
of the cause of raising arms in the second troubles) to root out those of the
religion, as well in France, as in the low Countries: and that it was
necessary to begin with the leaders, according to the rule of that Spanish
Duke, (that shortly after, put it in practice by cutting off the heads of the
Countes de Horn and Egmont, with other noble men in Brusselis) that they must
not stand to look for frogs, but first fish for the great salmons. The
Prince of Conde, the Admiral, and others in France, being in time advertised
by some, that were not far from their so bloody Councels, from that time,
began to look unto themselves, and to think upon their affairs,
aduertising those of the religion not to be negligent.

From Bayonne the K. took his journey to Nerac, where he restored the Romish
Catholicques to their goods: repaired their temples: brought in again the
Priests and Monks that had been thrust out: and commanded Monluc by his
letters pattents in firm of an Edict, to see all things performed: as also to
take order that the officers of the Town might be equally chosen out of both
religions, half of the one, and half of the other, and this course he
prescribed as a law to all those Towns, where those of the religion had
gotten the upper hand.

He did besides ordain, that such Monks, Friars, and Nuns, as had cast off
their coules, in purpose to reenter into the successions of their Parents,
should not be admitted orherwise, then according to the ancient constitutions.
He also gave audience unto the Catholicque and Romish Leaguers of Guyenne,
whom he likewise justified. Moreover, in all places where the King made his
journey, there was in manner no other speech, but of the complaints of those of
the religion, whom the peace did as much molest (and in some places more) as
the war.

The Council stopped the plaintiues mouths with sweet words, promising
redress in all possible love and equity: but their speeches vanished like
smoke: for of an infinite number of murders, from the publication of the
Edict, until that day committed, there were scarce six offenders punished,
and those but of the rascal sort, that else where and before time, had ten
times deserved the wheel or fire.

The rest of the year was spent, in the kings entries into the towns upon the
river of Loire, in banquets, triumphs, superfluous expenses, and ridiculous
pastimes, wherein the K. and his two younger brethren were altogether buried,
whilst the Queen with her Counselors mannaging the whole state of France,
guided it in such crooked courses, as still do remain of the storms, no
less dangerous then the former.

A fained reconsiliation between the houses of Guise and Chastillons.
We said before, that presently after the Edict of pacification, the Queen had
given access to those of the house of Guise, to ask some new justice of the
king, touching the murder of their kinsman slain by Poltrot, that had been
tormented and executed by four wild horses in Parris. And because those of
Guise had sufficiently declared, that their malice tended only to the
Admiral, and that the dissimulation of the Queene-mother, entertained the fire
of that quarrel. The Prince of Conde, that went not the voyage of Bayonne, had
from that time assayed wholly to quench it, and on the one side to stay
Magnanimity of the Prince.
the violence of the plaintiues, on the other side the subtlety of the Queen,
that desired nothing but the continuance of quarrels among the Nobility, that
she might reign by their division, and cry, stay there, when it pleased
her, following the advice of her wise Councillors: brave Pollititians (if they
might be believed) and great friends to France. To that end the Prince had
presented a declaration unto the Council, bearing date the fifteen of May,
1563. against those of Gusse, saying therein: that if there were any man, that
would once undertake to oppose himself in word or deed against the Admiral,
otherwise then by order of justice, which the Admiral himself desired: I will
(says he) make him well known, that it shall touch me, as much as if it
were done unto my self, being his friend, and he uncle unto my wife, by whom
I have diverse children: besides that, he is a brave knight, and one that is
able to do the king great service. The Queen remembering that, and seeking to
shadow her Council of Bayonne, in the beginning of January 1566. caused those
of Guise and Chastillon, to be summoned to appear before the king at Moulius
in Bourbonnois, where likewise appeared the Marshall de Montmorency, because of
the quarrel of Parris. She likewise sent for du Thou and Seguier, first and
second Presidents of Parris, Dafis, chief President of Thoulouse, Lagebaston
of Bourdeaux, Truchon of Grenoble, le Feure of Dyon, and Fourneau second
President of Prouence. The king being in his chamber, with diverse Princes and
Lords, the Chancellor made a long Oration touching the miseries of the Realm,
The Oration of the Chancellor.
and the disorder of justice and policy, whereof ensued certain orders
taken, which continued no longer then many other commendable ordinances, that
had been made within this Realm: that done, he began to touch the quarrel
between the houses of Guise and Chastillon, where diverse things on both sides
being debated, and the Admiral by oath clearing himself, not to be the Author
of the murder in question.

Agreement in the Court.
A certain agreement was made between the two houses, and therevppon they
embraced like friends, with many protestations of words and promises, never to
renew them more. The widows of the Duke and the Cardinal of Lorraine, were
the interlocutors in this tragedy: the young Duke of Guise not speaking a
word, as the^ lending his countenance to signs of threatenings and frowning
looks: whereof those of Chastillon made small account, because as then he was
but a child.

That which made them most to consider upon the matter, was, that they
perceived the Queene-mother to lean to the house of Guise, and the Cardinal
and she to be as two heads within one hood, they likewise took up the
matter between the said Cardinal, and the Marshall de Montmorencie, touching
that which had passed between them at Parris, during the voyage of Bayonne.

The rest of this year, was for the most part spent among Courtezans, in
marriages, banquets, and other pastimes, whiles all parts of the realm were
plunged in great disorders. The miserable estate of France.
The insolences of the Romish Catholicques against those of the religion
continued: the qualifications of the Edict, did by little and little fret it
quire a way: the threats of speedy reign to those of the religion, (whose
Captains and leaders are here and there slain, without justice or any
execution of the mutherers) did weakly increase: and the resolution concluded
at Bayonne, grew manifest both within and without the Realm.

The Prince nevertheless and the Admiral, lay still and rested quiet, being
content plainly to look upon the accurrences, and ready to advertise their
friends of all that was practiced, least they should be surprised. From diverse
parts they were advertised of the Spaniards preparatiues, who purposed a
terrible destruction to the low Countries, and withal, they foresawe, that
his enterprise would breed new troubles in France, whereby after so many storms
at Bayonne, there must needs ensue some great rage and strange events.

The Prince of la Roch Suryon, also a little before his decease, had revealed
unto them many particularities. Let them complain of any breach of covenants,
they should not want either sweet words, or courteous letters, to lull them on
sleep: In the mean time, in Faix and Bearne the troubles continued, wherein
the better sort were most unjustly dealt withal. There began a disputation at
Parris, between two Ministers and two Sorbonists, at the Duke of Neuers
lodging, which grew into very large writings without any resolution, as
indeed such parlying, do for the most part bring forth small fruit.

The executro^ of Simon May, a thiese and notable slaunderer.
About the same time, there was likewise a certain offender, named Simon May,
broken upon a scaffolde: this man was of mean birth, and dwelt in a country
house not far from Chastillon upon Loyn, where under pretense of an Hostrie
or Inn, he practiced his robberies. Him did Anmalle the late Duke of Guises
brother, hire to watch the Admiral as he went on hunting, and gave him in
hand a hundredth Crowns and a Spanish Genet. The Admiral before understanding
his wicked course of life, had sharply threatened him: and now by witnesses
finding him to be a notable thief, he sent the informations to Parris,
whereupon he was soon apprehended and brought into the Conciergery, where he
began to accuse the Admiral and some others, that they should have conspired
together, and so promised him great reward to kill the Queene-mother: but the
Councillors that were deputed to perfect his process, presently smelling out
the infection of this slander, and perceiving that in the boulting out of this
matter (which notwithstanding they ought to have done) they should have found
some of the house of Guise in more fault then the Chastillons: letting fall
this false accusation, and having auerred May his robberies and thefts, they
committed him to the wheel.

During the kings voyage to Bayonne, wherein he was accompanied only with
Princes and Lords of the Romish religion, Anotable process in Paris, between
the Jesuits and the University. The beginning of the Jesuits.
there happened a notable process within Parris touching the Jesuits, whereof
I will set down certain notes collected, verbatim out of the fourth book of
the Epistles and pleas made by me Stephen Pasquier a Counselor, that pleaded
for the University against the said Jesuits: his words are these. A
Nauarrois named Ignace, who had been a soldier all the days of his life
time, having been hurt in the Town of Pampelune, while he lay to be healed,
used to read the lives of holy fathers: by whose examples he determined from
that time forward to frame his life. Whereupon he entered into conference
with diverse men, and among the rest, with one named Master Pasquier Brouet.

They swear and aduowed a society, and Ignace being beheaded, they made
certain voyages to Parris, Rome, and Jerusalem, and in the end went to Venice,
where they continued certain years. And perceiving themselves to have many
followers, Their profession.
went to Rome, where they began to make open profession of their order, among
other articles, chiefly promising two things: the one, that their principal
intent was, to preach the word of God unto the Pagans: to convert them to the
faith: the other, freely to teach all christians the study of learning: and to
accommodate their name unto their deuotionss they called themselves religious
persons of the society of Jesus: presenting themselves unto Pope Paul the
third, Their name.
of the house of Fernese, about the year of our Lord, 1540. at the same time
that the Almaines began to arm themselves against the alteration of religion,
and because one of the principal disputations of the Almaines, was touching
the authority of the Pope, whom Martin Luther sought to deface, they with a
contrary profession showed, that their first vow was to acknowledge the Pope to
be above al earthly powers, At what time they began.
and above the general Councelles, and the universal Church. The Pope, who at
the first made doubt to allow them, and after, had permitted them to name
themselves religious, but with charge that they should not exceed the number of
sixty persons, began to hearken to this promise, and to open the gate to their
devotion: and after him, Pope Julius the third, until Pope Paul the fourth
named Theatin, the first Promoter of that order, authorized them fully and
wholly, with many and great privileges.

By whom they were received into France.
Now their affairs proceeding in this sort, it chanced that the Bishop of
Cleremont, Bastard to the Chancellor du Prat, began to bear them some
affection, and sought to plant that order in Parris, whither he brought
Pasquier Brouet, with three or four others. They at their coming, lodged
themselves quietly in a chamber in the College of Lombards, and after that,
established their habitation in the house of Cleremont in Harp-street, by the
permission of him that first brought them into France, celebrating their Masses
and prayers upon the Sundaies and other Festival days, in a Chapel that
stands at the entry into the Chartreux. How they intruded themselves.
And perceiving that their affairs began to take effect, they presented
themselves diverse times before the Court of Parliament, that there order might
be authorized by them. But the Attorney general named Brulart, Their boldness.
opposed himself against their requests: not that he favored not the
Catholicque religion, but for that above all things, he doubted and feared
such novelties, as mother of many errors, specially in religion. Whereupon he
showed them, that if their hearts were wholly estraunged from worldly care,
they might without enduring any new order, Who withstood them.
content themselves with the ancient professions of Saint Benet, Clugny,
Cisteaux, Grandmont, Premonstre and others, approcued by diverse Councels, or
with the four orders of begging Friars. The Court not content with those
oppositions, would not seem to be opinious of themselves, but for the same cause
had recourse unto the faculty of Divines, who by their decree censured against
them, partly because that some of their proposition derogated from the
privileges of the French Churches, partly because that terming themselves
religious, they wear not the habit, neither yet confined themselves (like unto
others) within Cloisters: which censure put them by their whole intent.

Not long after, the Bishop of Cleremont died, who by his will bequeathed them
great gifts, those legacies by them recovered, happened the first troubles, at
the beginning whereof, the conference of the French Church was holden in Possy.
From that time they began to break their long silence, and again presented a
request to the Court of Parltament, to be received and approved, if not in
sorme of religion, yet as a simple College. Their advancement.
The Parliament made account, that this request touched the superiors of the
Church, wherevpnon they referred it to the assembly at Possy, where the
Cardinal of Turnon was President, as the eldest Prelate, who had founded a
company of their name within the town of Turnon, by his means they obtained
license to be received in form of a society and a College: What they
obtained at the first.
with charge to use some other name and title, then that of Jesuits, and to
conform themselves wholly to the canonical order, without enterprising any
thing, either spiritual or temporal against their Ordinaries: and that
likewise they should expressly renounce those privileges that had bin granted
them by their bulls, otherwise for not performance thereof, or that thereafter
they obtain any others, this approbation should be void and of none effect.
This decree was set down word for word in the registers of the Court. Not long
after, they bought a house within Parris in S. Ieames street, called the house
of Langres, which they divided in two habitations, the one for the religious,
the other for Scholars. In this company were diverse learned persons, and among
the rest, Friar Edmond Anger, and Maldonnat: the first, a great Preacher: the
second, one that had bin instructed in all kinds of learning and languages:
Their supports.
a great Divine and Philosopher. They being sent to anounce their doctrine,
were well accepted, and by that means drew great numbers of Scholars unto them,
and perceiving the wind to blow with them, they presented a request to the
Rector of Parris, to be united and incorporated into the university, whereupon
a Congregation was assembled at the Mathurins, where it was concluded, Who
strove against them
that they should certify before they passed forward, whether they bare the
name and quality of regulers or seculers: which reduced them to great
perplexity. For that to deny themselves to be regulers, was as much as to
falcifie their vow: and to affirm it, Their denial.
would be a contradiction to that which had bin enjoined them at Possy:
whereupon for that they took no precise quallitie upon them, the University
denied them their request: yet for all that, they yielded not, but had recourse
unto the Parliament, to the end, that by force they might constrain the
University to grant that which otherwise they would not once consent unto. And
it was agreed, that the parties should plead upon the first day of the opening
of the Court. These are the words of M. Stephen Pasquier, adding thereunto. The
university vouchsafed me ye honor, The University pleaded against them.
to choose me for their Advocate. The cause was pleaded two forenoones, with
such contention, as the greatness of the cause required. M. Peter Versoris,
pleading for the Jesuits, and I for the University. Lowing the plea made by
M. Pasquier: I will set down some chief and notable points. The Jesuits
cause (says he) is full of dissimulatio^ and hypocrisy: their sect is
hereafter to be but a semenarie of partiallities, between the christian and the
Jesuit: the purpose and intent tends only to desolation, and surprising of
the estate both polliticque and Ecclesiastical. They bear the name of Jesus,
but with a false title. I am of opinion, that there is not any faithful
christian, or good and loyal Frenchman, but that will find the reasons and
conclusions of the university to be both just and good: which is, Certain
allegations to be noted in the declaration of the university.
that not only this new world, which by a title, partial, arrogant, and
ambitious, affirms it self only, to be of the society of Jesus, ought not
to be adopted nor incorporated into the body of our University, but that it
ought wholly to be bannished, tooted out, and exterminated out of France.

These new brethren, under a beautiful title, and exterior show, would enter
and make a breach into our peace and quiet estate. Ignace a maimed soldier,
not for the zeal and devotion that he bare to any new austeritie of life, but
perceiving himself to be impotent and unable anylonger to bear arms, entered
into familiarity with certain persons, and among others, with one M. Pasquier
Brouet, borne in Dreux, a man (certain exterior quallities excepted) that had
no learning, either in humane or divine laws. These two with some others, for a
time kept themselves in Venice, a town by certain Italian authors well known,
and acknowledged to be the receptacle of diverse and perverse things.

There for a time they used a certain hypocritical austeritie of life, and
perceiving that their superstition began to be followed, they were so bold as
to transport themselves to Rome, where they began to publish their sect. And
although the greatest part of them were neither seen in tongues nor divinity,
yet they began openly to promise two things. The one to preach the gospel to
the Infidels, so to convert them to the faith: the other, to teach doctrine
unto al christians without any reward. For that cause taking upon them the name
of religious people, as if al those that cleaued not to their sect, were
separated from their society.

Epithetes of the Jesuits.
In the same plea they are quallified with the titles of Subtle: Authors of a
superstitious sect: unhappy weed: A sect condemned by the faculty of
divinity, as being replenished with all superstition and damnable ambition,
invented and admitted for the desolation of all estates, either seculer or
reguler: men in state to grow great by other men's falls, advanced by the
ambitious and unworthy practices of the Cardinal of Turnon their supporter:
impudent: irreguler: disobedient: hypocrites: ignorant Teachers and wanderers:
deceivers: pardoners: new men patched together of many pieces: full of
ambitious superstitio. Then does he proceed to lay open their stratagems,
whereby they have devised in short time to incroach infinite wealth, yea even
whole kingdoms and countries: Their practices to grow great.
that their pretended society consists of two manner of people: whereof, the
first term themselves to be of the greater observance: the other of the less.
The first, besides the three ordinary vows of the Monks, do also make a
fourth: and that is, that they do acknowledge him to be Sovereign in earth
over all things, without exception or reservation, in whatsoever it shall
please him to command.

The others of lesser observance, are bound only to two vows: the one,
respecting their fidelity that they promise to the Pope: the other, their
obedience to their superior.

These latter sorts, do not vow poverty, but may lawfully enjoy benefices
without dispensation: succeed their Parents: and purchase lands and
possessions, as if they were seculer persons.

This is the course whereby they have at chieued such wealth and riches in this
new order: for all that falls to these lesser obseruantiues, by succession,
purchase, chase, or any other practice, is incorporate into the whole body of
Jesuits, without repetition or reuocation: for even they to whom it falls
have vowed obedience. We are moreover to note another especial vow of these
men, which imports, that they shall in all cases and in all places, obey
their General and superior, who always is a Spaniard and chosen by the K. of
Spain, as hitherto it has always fallen out: for among other the words of
this vow, they have these: that setting their eye upon their Geneneral, they
are to acknowledge in him, the person of Jesus Christ as present. From these
vows and distinctions have proceeded terrible enterprises: year even most
heinous attempts against the lives and persons of Princes, kings, and Queens,
as the Histories of the low Countries, England, and Rome, do plainly testify:
whereof also we will speak somewhat toward the end of the reign of Hemy ye
third. As touching the disorders happened in the two orders by the^ devised,
which are termed, the one the great obseruants, the other the Iesse: Two
decrees in the Jesuits sext, in favor whereof, they may subdue all the world to
the king of Spain their Sovereign.
Master Pasquier discoueret it at large, and time has veresied it, adding
these words: Seeing it is so (said he) that in their less observance, there is
neither vow of virginity, nor proverb, and therinto they receive all kinds
of people indifferently, both Priests and Laymen, married and vnmaired, and
are not bound to be resident with the great obseruants, but permitted to dwell
among the common people, only that at certain fixed days, they assembled at
their co^mon-house, to be participants with their outward ceremonies, so that
according to this law and rule, it is not impertinent to see a whole town to
be Jesuits. The communication which they have together by means of
confessions, serves to find out their booties, and to discover the secrets
both of great and small, and because they are particularly affected to the king
of Spain, their chief founder, for whom also they make particular, express,
and ordinary prayers, it is not to be wondered at, if since that time, these new
brethren both in France and elsewhere, have sought and traveled so much, to
make him Monarch of all the world. Besides this, Master Pasquier adds, that
the Jesuits alluring us with fair promises, are ordained to gripe and lay
hold upon our goods, and to fill themselves with our spoils: that they are
Sophisters, ye are entered like fearful foxes in the middle of us, therein by
process of time, to reign like Lions: that as the ancient Orators and teachers
of the people, by a kind of pleasing speech, by little and little got credit in
Rome: so by little and little they overthrew the estate, as all Pollititians
judged: we must attend and expect no less of the Jesuits, if in the beginning
both their race and root be not extirped.

The advice and decree of the Sorbonnists against the Jesuits.
In the same plea, he does also insert the advice and decree of the faculty of
divinity of Parris, in the College of Sorbonne, of the year 1554. importing
as follows. This new society after a new waner attributing to it self only,
an unaccustomed title of the name of Jesus, so licentiously admitting all
people, howsoever criminal, illegitimate, or infamous: using likewise no
difference from secular Priests in their outward habit, in their tousure: in
saying their canonical hours, either privately, or singing the same publicly
in the temples: in Cloister, or in silence: in choice of meat and days, in
fasts, or in other the several laws and ceremonies that do distinguish and
preserve the estates of religions, having attained so many and diverse
privileges, intelligences and liberties, especially in regard of Masses and
confessions, without distinction of place or persons, likewise in the question
of preaching, reading, or teaching, to the great prejudice of ordinaries,
Curats, and all other orders of Monks and Friars, yea even of Princes and
temporal Lords: contrary to the privileges of the Universities, and to the
great oppression of the people, do seem to pollute the honesty of monastical
religion, to weaken the studious, devout, and necessary exercise of virtue,
abstinence, ceremonies, and austeritie: yea even to minister occasion freely to
shrink from al other religions: to substract and draw away all obedience and
subjection due to ordinaries: does wrongfully deprive both temporal and
Ecclesiastical Lords of their rights, and breeds troubles in all estates,
either pollicke or religious, and many quarrels among the commons: as suites,
strife, discention, envy, rebellion, and sundry schisms. Al these
considerations, with many others, diligently wayed and examined, this society
seems dangerous to the estate of religion: a disturbance to the peace and
unity of the Church: and subuerter of all mockery, and an invention tending
rather to destruction then edification. Now let us see what follows. A bitter
censure against the Iejuiticall sect.
There never was (faith M. Pasquier, who protests himself to be of the
Romish church, in the faith whereof, he voweth to live and die) invented so
partial and ambitious a sect: neither any whose propositions imported more
pernicious consequence, then the Jesuits. In her principles she is a
schismatic, and consequently an heretic. Then does he compare Ignace with
Luther, and so concludes, that Ignace is more to be feared them the other: for
(says he) men's consciences may easily be surprised and made drunken with the
poison of the Ignatians, and Jesuits, in that they account them to be the
principal protectors of ye Romish religion against all hereticques, whereof
nevertheless they are the chief subuerters. Under pretense of supporting the
church of God, they do subvert it, and will at length utterly overthrow it.
Soon after, proceeding in his speech to the whole Court, he says: I hope
plainly to let you understand, that this sect in all their propositions,
works nothing but division between the christian and the Jesuit: between the
Pope and the Ordinaries, and between all other Monks and themselves: that so
long as they be tolerated, no Prince or Potentate can assure his estate
against their attempts. This sect was founded upon the ignorance of Ignace, and
ever since, maintained and vpholden by the pride and arrogancy of his
secretaries. After that, he reproacheth the^, terming themselves Jesuits, do
degrade the ancient christians, and blaspheme against God. Further, that in
Portingal and the Indes, they term themselves Apostles, says: that as certain
sectuaries in An. 1562. surnamed Jesuits, and others such proud persons, were
overwhelmed by the just judgment of God: so we are to expect no other thing at
the hands of this mean sext of Jesuits, what show soever it makes: that these
Ignacia^s, for attributing to themselves ye name of Jesuits, deserve a shameful
death. And the^ answering to the Jesuits vow, touching the Pope: Our faith
says he is otherwise. We in France acknowledge the Pope for supreme head of
our church, with all due honor and devotion: but in such sort, that he is
subject to the decrees of general councils: that he can enterprise no
authority over our realm, nor against the M. of our kings, neither yet against
ye authority of the decrees of our Court of Parliament, or to the prejudice of
our diuosians in their confines and limits. And thervpo^ he says: Jesuits
chief creatures and right slaves to the Pope.
that John Gerson teaches us in one of his books, that we may well be without
a Pope in the church: that it is in the power of a general Council, to
displace a Pope out of his seat, and therein to place an other, for the ordering
of the affairs of the church, as in effect it was practiced in the councels of
Constance and Basle. Thus having learnedly pleaded for the rights and
privileges of the French church, he discovers their subtilties, thefts,
dissimulatio^s, impostures, and rauenings, showing by diverse examples, that
they are mutenous, sowers of troubles, Atheists, and mockers of God. And ending
his plea, said to all the Court: You my Masters that tolerate the Jesuits,
Virtues of the Jesuits. True predition.
shall one day be the first Judges of your own condemnations, when by the
means of your permissions, you shall perceive the mischiefs that will ensue,
not only in France, but throughout Christendom.

Advocate Mesnil, who in this care pleaded for the kings Attorney, propounded
many matters against these sectaries, who he sufficiently proved to be a
plague to the Realm, but because of the kings voyage into Bayonne, and that
the Queens councels, and those of the house of Guise that ruled all, tender
only but to the ruin and overthrow of the Prince of Conde, the Admiral, and
those of the religion: the Jesuits process was for that time ordered by the
Council, that is, laid up by the walls. Afterward the second and third
troubles, together with the massacre ensuing, the Isuites set up their crests
in earnest, and compassed the strange practices, whereof ensued the horrible
tragedies that were played about the end of the reign of Henry the third, as
more at large shall appear: wherewith this year ended. Now let us consider
what happened in the year 1567, when the troubles and miseries of France began
again.

The king of Spaines intent against the low countries.
The king of Spain not being able to endure the increase of those of the
religion in the low Countries, and much offended with them, for the breaking
and throwing down of Images in Flaunders, Brabant, and other Provinces,
determined to proceed against them with fire and sword, not once regarding the
privileges of the country, nor yet the cruel extortions and iniustices of his
officers, against those of the religion, whose Ministers and principal rulers
opposed themselves by all the means the could, against the breaking of Images,
thrown down by a small number of men, and such as were of no great account, and
in so short a time, that it seemed they had fallen of themselves. For the
execution of this bloody council, which had bin decreed in the League made at
Bayonne, Fernando Aluares de Tolede Duke of Alua, that had been his Agent in
Bayonne, was established Liefetenant General, with most ample and express
commission: who in the beginning of the spring, in An. 1567. accompanied with
his two sons, and great troops of men, imbarking themselves at Barcelonne,
in the month of May arrived at Genes: and with an army of 9000. The Duke de
Alue comes to torment the low countries.
Spaniards, 1000. light horse, marched toward Millan. What followed thereof, is
at large set down in the Histories of the low Countries. The Q. and the Council
of France, under this pretense of the D. of Alues passage, made a certain
report to be given abroad, that it was to be feared, that the Spaniard would
attempt somewhat against France, under pretense of going into Flanders: and
thereupon began to leuy 6000. Switzers to keep the frontiers: but not long
after, they were brought further into the realm, for the Duches of Parma was
already gone out of the low Countries into Italy, as soon as she received
intelligence of the D. of Alues imbarking. The Prince of Conde and the Admiral,
with other Lords of the religion, Sundry councels holden by the Prince of
Conde, before he entered into arms.
calling to mind what had past since the edict of pacification, and perceiving
the Switzers to enter into the realm, and that the D. of Alue was already
arrived in the low Countries, assembled together in small number, there they
produced certain letters intercepted from Rome and Spain, wherein the
practices how to root out the professors of the reformed religion at one
instant, were at large set down.

In a short space they had three consultations of Vallery and Chastillon, where
met some ten or twelve of the chiefest Gentlemen of the religion, to debate
upon the present accurrences, and to seek all lawful and honest means of
safterie in so many terrors, without proceeding to the last refuge. In the
first two, the opinions rested very diverse, nevertheless, rather by the
Admirals counsel then otherwise, every man was entreated a while to have
patience, and the rather for that in matters of such consequence, as whereupon
depended so many miseries and calamities, it was more necessary to be drawn in
by necessity, then to make too much haste, or upon a greedy desire to run
on headlong: besides that, shortly matters would be made more apparent: but in
the last consultation they grew into a greater heat.

For besides all passed calamities or imminent dangers, also that they of the
religion were openly threatened, throughout most towns and Provinces, that they
should not long bear themselves so high, and that their time drew night to an
end, they received more advise out of sundry places: and both the Prince and
Admiral did plainly affirm, that they had express advertisement from a
certain Courtier very well affected to those of the religion, that there had
been holden a most secret Council: wherein it was concluded, that they should
be seized upon: that the one should be executed, and the other detained
prisoner: that at the same instant, two thousand Switzers, should enter into
Parris: two thousand into Orleans: and the remainder into Pointiers: that the
Edict of pacification should be utterly repealed, and an other made quite
contrary to the same.

Heerevppon they grew to earnest disputation: for whereas some urged a speedy
relolution of necessary defense, the rather because the foreign forces marched
already openly, for the utter ruin of those of the religion throughout the
realm: others that were not altogether so hot, showed, that albeit they
perceived the fire already kindled, yet they could not see any water to quench
it.

For if we should, said they (as many times heretofore) have recourse to
complaints, we do plainly find, that so we shall sooner stir up our
adversaries to more rage, then procure our selves any remedy. Again, if we
take arms, albeit it be for our most just, necessary, and urgent defense, yet
what obloquie, slander, and curses, shall we incur at their hands, who
although wrongfully do impute unto us the whole blame of whatsoever miseries may
ensue, and will turn their rage, which they cannot inflict upon us, against
our poor families scattered in sundry places? And therefore since of many
inevitable mischiefs, we are always to choose the least: it were better to
bear the violence of the enemy, then by beginning with them to make our
selves guilty of a publicque and general commotion.

Hereupon the la d'Andelot urging the necessity of the defensive, amongst
the other speeches, said: If ye linger and drive off, until ye be banished into
foreign countries: cast bound into prisons: ouerrunne with multitude of
people: contemned by the men of war, or condemned by the authority of the
greatest, all which is not now far from us: what good shall we reap of our
patience and former humility? what profit shall we reap by our innocence?
to whom shall we complain? nay, who will afford us the hearing? It is now
time for us to be better advised, and to have recourse to the defensive, which
is no less just the^ necessary, neither are we to care though we be accounted
the Authors of the war: which is leuyed only by those, who in so many sorts
have broken all publicque covenants and agreements, and brought even into our
bowels, six thousand foreign soldiers, that have already in effect
proclaimed it against us. Now let us likewise give them so much advantage, as
to smite the first blows, and so shall our mischiefs be past all care.

And after many meetings and determinations had among them, heerevppon they
resolved upon a prompt and ready defensive resolution, wherein there were
diverse means disputed upon, touching the execution thereof. In the end it was
concluded, to rise in arms, and in that beginning of war to observe four
things: the first, to hold but few towns but such as should be of importance:
the second, to raise a great army: the third, to overthrow the Switzers, by
whose means the Catholicques would always be Masters of the field: the
fourth, to assay if they could drive the Cardinal of Lorraine from the Court,
because many imagined that he only was the man, that still solicited the king
to destroy all those of the religion. But touching the two last points, many
and great difficulties were propounded, some alleging, that the Cardinal and
the Switzers marched continually with the king, and that setting upon the one,
and seeking to fear the other, it would be said, that the enterprise had
been made against the Majesty of the king, and not against them. Yet in fine,
they were confuted by this reply, that the effects would plainly show, what the
intent of the Prince and his associates was: as the event manifestly showed in
the actions of Charles the seventh, as then being but Dauphine, when he raised
arms, yet neither against his father nor the Realm.

Further, that it was well known, that the Frenchmen themselves never
attempted any thing against their Prince. Lastly, that if this first success
fell out favorably, that it would be the means to cut off the course of a long
and troublesome war, because thereby they should have means to let the king know
the truth of those things which were diguised unto him: whereupon might ensue
the confirmation of the Edicts, specially when those that arm themselves to
prevent, shall find themselves prevented.

The success of the Princes resolution
This (as says the Lord de la Noue in his discourses) was the resolution of the
Lords and Gentlemen, that at that time were about the Prince, who (as he
adds) albeit they were men of great experience, skill, valor, and wisdom,
yet all that they had so diligently pondered, and so well forecast, when it came
to the effect, fell out wonderful short of their expectation: whilst other
things whereof they had so far drempt, as thinking them over sure, or
difficult, redounded to their good, and stood them in stead. A while before,
they resolved upon this necessity, as the Switzers marched on, first the
Prince, and then the Admiral, made a journey to the Court, where they declared
each after other, to the king, to his mother, and to the Council, that there
was no reason, neither any just occasion, to make this levy of six thousand
Switzers, and to bring them into the Realm, unless paradu enture they had
some pretense to employ them upon the ruin of those of the religion, of whom
there were yet remaining a greater multitude then they imagined, whereof the
late wars might bear witness: withal, that if their enemies practiced
ought but good, they would stand upon their guard, and not have their throats
cut by thieves and perturbers of the public peace: and heerevppon also they
besought the king to take compassion of so many honest families throughout his
Realm: but they were denied and hardly entreated: yea, the Prince at one time
was in great hazard of his life: against whom the Courtiers had incensed the
Duke of Aniou the kings brother, who suddenly entered into a sharp braule
against him, seeking all occasions to do him a shrewd turn: but the Prince
both wise and eloquent, answered him so pertinently to whatsoever the
questions and violent complaints of him whom he was to reverence, who also was
at that time environed with those that would not stick to strike, that the
snare was broken, whereby he escaped, and from that time came no more to the
Court.

To return to the success of the enterprise of the Prince and his partakers,
they were forced of necessity either to oppose themselves against the cruel
resolution of their enemirs in France, The Princes preceedings.
or else to fly out of the Realm, and so to leave so many thousands of hou
sholds and families, to the mercy of their massacring enemies. For touching
the first point, they determined to surprise three towns only: that is,
Lions, Thoulouse, and Troys, all very commodious for the wars. But the means
used by those that took the charge upon them, were not well effected, in
regard they were over many people, and of small experience and sucfficiencie in
such affairs, who held their consultations of that which should be done while
they lay in their beds, or sat in their counting-houses. Touching their
strength in field, those of the religion had more in the beginning then the
Catholicques, but six weeks after the raising of arms, about the end of
September. they found themselves the strongest, whereby they constrained the
Prince and the Admiral to seek refuge in Almaine from Duke Casimeire.

The execution against the Switzers succeeded but crosly, because it was
discovered, and that the forces that should have met in time and place sailed.
The Cardinal of Lorraine saved himself in great haste, and fled from the
Court, and yet he kept his credit in the Court, being able to do as much
absent, as present. To the contrary, the Prince and his partaker fell into
great difficulties, by provoking the hatred and collor of the king against
them, because through their means he was constrained to go from Meaux to
Parris, with great fear, although he had six thousand Switzers about him;
besides horsemen the Prince at his approaching having between four and five
hundredth horse at the most, nevertheless, it was put into the kings head, that
he sought to attempt against his person, so that from thenceforward, he always
had a secret grudge against them. This entry into the war having had but a
hard beginning for the Prince, other effects recompensed the defaults of his
former fortunes: but more by the particular motions and dispositions of
certain Gentlemen and Inhabitants of Towns, then any Precedent deliberation:
whereby it fell out, that those of the religion seized upon Orleans, Auxerre,
Soissons, and other places. The general leuying of arms in one day by the
Prince and his participants, did no little abash those of the contrary part: as
also that with so small a number of horse, he durst approach so near six
thousand Switzers, whom he had charged between Me^^x and Parris, yea and
overthrown them, if the Harquebusiers on horseback, whom he attended, had
kept their appointed time, or if he had bin strengthened with 150. horse out of
Picardie, that came certain hours too late. But the Prince not daring to
venture upon so great a troop of Switzers, The Prince retireth to S. Dennis.
that seemed a forest, therein perceiving too much hazard, and too small
advantage for him and his troops, went unto Saint Dennis with his troops,
where not long after, he had more company, so that in few days he found
himself to be 2000. horse, and 4000. Harquebusiers strong, which not long
after were dispearsed: Monsieur d'Andelot sent with 500. horse toward Poissy,
and Pontoise, to hinder those of Parris, that have their victuals brought them
by water. Many companies of foot marched toward Argentueil, Pont Charenton, and
other places bordering on the same. The rest of the troops were sent part to
meet the troops of Guyenne, that should enter into Orleans, surprised by
Monsieur de la Noue, and part into other places where need required. So that
the Prince and the Admiral staying at S. Dennis, with certain Gentlemen, could
not have above 800. horse, and 1200. Harquesiers. The Constable had within
Parris above 3000. horse, 12000. foot, and the six thousand Switzers, with
artillery and warlike ammunition, as much as he would desire, yet stirred not,
fearing the hard resolution of the Prince his train, who by their troops
dispearsed, seized upon the passages both by water and land, whereupon the
Parrisians not used to fasting, began to complain. The Prince hoped to
constrain them to fight, and that his forces being united, if he might be
victor, to bring his enemies unto a more assured peace, then that he made
before: and if he were overthrown, the places which he held upon the river
of Marne and Seyne, would serve him for his retrait, staying for the Rutters
that began to stir, with his forces of Guyenne.

The Constable to the contrary, having taken the view of the Princes lodging
and forces, determined to give them battle, assuring himself to overthrow
the^ without resistance: for that besides his number of men, being ten for
one, he had great store of Ordinance, and pikes, and a fair field well
fitting for his troops and cannons. All these disaduantages notwithstanding,
dissuaded not the Prince, but that he, the Admiral Ienlis, and other leaders
of the religion, issued to assail them. The battle being given upon the
tenth of November, 1567. The battle of S. Dennis
continued almost three quarters of an hour, night separating them: the issue
being such, that those of the religion (that had advanced themselves above a
quarter of a League, entering with most strauge fury upon their enemies,
wearied with striking, their horses being breathless or hurt, namely that of
the Prince slain under him, and the Admiralles horse having borne him twice
through the thickest of his enemies forces, being a very strong horse in the
mouth, and in the beginning of the fight had broken his curb, and yet neither
of those two leaders hurt) were constrained to recuile, but retiring in good
order, most of the Constables foot did little service, but the Princes playde
their parts, the horsemen on both sides fighting with great courage.

The Constable himself was wounded to death, and died within short time after:
and before he died, Death of the Constable.
connielled and desired the Queen to pacify those troubles with all the speed
she might; but she followed other counsel, whereof she and her sons have
had leisure to repent them, and died before she had reeled up her spindle.

The Prince thinking his enemies would have set upon him again, to be
revenged upon a handful of men, that had held them play under their noses,
speedily sent for Monsieur d'Andelot, who about midnight returned to S. Dennis:
and it was well for those of Parris (as their leaders affirmed) that he came
no sooner: for if he had, it would have fallen out hardly with them. After a
little breathing, the leaders determined, that it would be necessary for them
to abate some of the Romish Catholicques pride and opinion of their advantage,
by showing them, that those of the religion had sufficient courage, and called
them to perform the battle.

Whereupon the next day in the morning, they entered into the field with their
small army, marching toward the subburbes of Parris, and there stood certain
owers in order of battle, burning a village and some Windmilles, in the open
face of the Parrisians, that never once issued forth, being busied to bury
their dead, to heal their wounded, and to survey their corners and companies:
and to be short, thought it no wisdom, to hazard themselves against those
whom they perceived to be strengthened and so resolute to fight. But the
Prince perceiving, that the loss of one man would be more to him, then one
hundredth to his enemies, that daily increased, and that to stay longer so near
Parris, would be the overthrow of his small camp, the next day marched forward,
toward Montereau, where the forces assembling at Orleans and Estampes, joined
with him. To the contrary, the kings army, Both the armies in the field, and
their exployts till the end of the year.
whereof was General, Henry Duke of A niou, brother to the king, a young
Prince, being as then about the age of sixteen years, assisted with a great
number of Lords, Gentlemen, and Captains, followed after the Prince, seeking
occasion to give him battle. The Protestants troops of Guyenne and Poictou,
composed of eighteen Cornets of horse, and three Regiments of foot, under
seven and twenty Ensigns, as they marched took le Dorat in Limosin and
Lusignan, and then took three pieces of artillery out of Orleans, wherewith
they battered and forced Pont sur Yon, taking it by assault: which done, they
joined with the Princes army, while the Duke d'Aumalle went into Lorraine, to
meet the forces of John William duke of Saxon, the Marquess of Baden and
others, that brought an army of Rutters to aid the Romish Catholicques: and
that young Lansac marched into Almaine, to divert the aid which Duke John
Casimeire brought to those of the religion: on the other side, the Duke of Alue
sent twelve hundredth horse and two thousand foot, under the conduct of the
Count de Aremberg, that joined with the D. of Aniou, notwithstanding the
Prince marched toward Lorraine, constraining those of Bray, and Nogent upon
Sey^^, to give him passage, and took Espernay lying upon Mar^: where for a
time he stayed to assemble all his forces. There young Lansac in his second
voyage to Almaine was taken, and being brought prisoner to the Prince, all his
business turned into smoke. In the month of December upon some motions of
peace, there were two truces agreed upon, each for two or three days, to the
end (as the voice went) to confer upon the points propounded. The first was
near to Montereau, and the other by Chaalons: but the last was like to have
bredde much mischief: for the Prince relying upon the promises of his sworn
enemies, rested in a very bad lodging out of the way, whiles their army
approached: And had it not been for an enterprise, that the young County
Brissac (a young Lord, by nature violent, and the Duke of Anious especial
fauoritie) had undertaken against certain companies of Argolets, under the
Captains Bois, Blossel, and Clery, who were then overthrown: the Prince, who
yet hoping upon two days respite, stirred not from that lodging, had surely
been intrapped and in manifest danger: but Brissacks rashness saved him: and
according to the proverb, mischief was good for somewhat.

The Prince waying the wrong that his enemies had wrought to their own
reputation, in weening to indomage him, determined no longer to trust their
promises, (in which conceit notwithstanding he did not long persevere) upon
his conclusion in three days space, he made his army to march above twenty
long leagues, through the rain and such hard passages, that it was wonderful
that the artillery and baggage could ever follow: and yet lost neither the one
nor the other, so good was his order, and so great their diligence.

The Duke of Aniou followed not: for some of his Council making great haste,
persuaded him that his very name had driven the Huguenots out of France:
whereas such as were indeed warriors, did contrariwise accuse the cowardlinesse
of those that had so suffered the Prince and his followers to escape, as not
daring to fight with them, either weak or half strong. The Prince arriving in
Lorraine, stayed some few days for his Rutters, not without some repugnancie
and perplexity of diverse.

VVarres revived in diverse places.
This Negotiation, which was but a string to stay the Prince, that afterward
they might with greater advantage ouerrunne him, being vanished on the one
side, they began to take arms in Poictou and about Rochel, which ever since
has been a refuge to sundry families of the religion, and so has happily
continued, as a bar to block up the purposes of the Romish Catholicques,
and the instrument that God has put in use to confound the infinite
conspiracies of the enemies to the Crown and state of France. On the other
side, the Duke of Aniou (but ouerlate) sought all opportunity (which before
he had let slip) to fight with the Prince and Admiral before they should
join with the Germans, whom they went to meet in Lorraine, and of whom they
received certain advertisement near to Pont a Mousson, from whence Duke John
Casimeire their General writ to the king, to desire him to think, The Prince
joins with his Germains
that he never determined to enter into France, for any his own private good,
or particular interest, but only for the support of such as were afflicted for
the same religion which himself professed, who had entreated him to aid:
protesting, that if it might please the king, to assure to them the liberty of
conscience, and general exercise of their religion, himself and all his
troops would presently retire.

Then fell there out great adoo about the satisfying of the Rutters, who looked
to receive a hundredth thousand Crowns at the least: here were they put to
their shifts, and forced of necessity, to make a virtue: and when the Prince
and Admiral had made use of whatsoever their eloquence, both to great and
small, upon this extremity they set all men a notable example, in that they
parted with their own silver vessel. The Preachers in their sermons persuaded
many, and the Captains also prepared the minds of their men.

Many Lords and Gentlemen likewise did most readily put their hands to their
purses: the rest, some for love, and some for fear, execeeded all expectation.
So general was this liberal contribution, that the meanest Page and veriest
varlet gave somewhat: yea, in the end it was thought a dishonor to have been
sparing, and many offered more then was demanded. In sum, the whole being
gathered together, both quoyne, plate, and chains of gold, The Rutters in
some sort contented.
it amounted to above four score thousand Frankes, wherewith the Rutters were
well quietted, and so joined with the Princes forces. Then was there a general
voice, that it was best to draw toward Parris, which was the apparent means
to obtain peace: as also their Leaders were not ignorant, that for their
better maintenance, it was requisite to provide artillery, powder, money, and
other such commodities as are to be wrested for the Merchant and Artificer:
likewise, that unless they drew toward Orleans, their true nurse, they should
want those advantages. Heerevppon they set forward, They drew toward Beausse.
and passed over Marne, near to the head thereof, not far from Langres, and
marching through Burgondie, at their passage over Seyne, were set upon by
certain Italian and French, whom Schonberg with a Regiment of Rutters and
French of the religion, charged and defeated, leaving the most of the
assaylants dead in the place.

Hence the Prince drew toward Creuant and Irancie, a small village taken by
assault, and so passed over the river of Yone, Loyne, and la Cure, and so set
himself at large, maugre the many hindrances of the adverse army, which
labored as well to restrain him from any purchase, out of the villages and
small buroughs, and to find opportunity to cut off part of his army.

How they provided for the victualling of the army.
In those days did France abound in all sorts of victualles, which
notwithstanding it stood the Prince and Admiral upon, to search their wits,
and have an eye, to the provision and victualling of their army, which
consisted of twenty thousand men, unpaid, and unprovided of any succor or
retrait into Towns: meanly furnished and marching through the midst of an
infinite number of irreconciliable enemies. They took order therefore to lodge
their horsemen scattering in the good villages: also to cause the commissaries
for victualles, besides their carriages, to keep in every cornet, one Baker,
and two horses of burden, who presently upon their coming to their quarter,
should fall to baking, and send their bread to the body of footmen.

These petty commodities proceeding from forty Cornets, being laid together,
was no small relief: besides that, they sent both flesh and Wine: yea the
Gentlemen were so willing, that from their lodgings they would send them
private carriages, to help to bring in the ammunition. As for the hamlets that
were taken, they were reserved for the munitioners, and the rest that had no
Garrisons, were threatened to be burned one league round about, unless they
sent in some ammunition. Thus the footmen, who lodged close, were usually
provided for, besides the booties and other commodities, that the most
aduenterous could catch from the Romish Catholicques, that incroached too near
upon them.

Their form of lodging.
Upon two principal reasons, was the Prince forced to scatter his army in
diverse places: First for the benefit of victualling: next, to lodge them under
covert from the rain, snow, and other discommodities, Their form of lodging.
wherewith they had been spoiled, if they had lodged in the field. The
footmen were lodged in two bodies, namely a battle and an Auantgard: and the
horsemen in the nearest villages: upon any alarm the horsemen drew to the
Prince and Admiral, so that if any straggling lodging chanced to be assaulted,
it had present succor: among the cornets they had some store of Harquebusiers
on horse, and presently after, the troops were come into their quarters, the
ways were sufficiently fortified, and many times they used both Churches and
Castles, whereby to be able to hold out some two hours, that their succor
might come in. The Lord de la Noue, who in this discourse of the discipline of
the Princes army, we do follow, says: that sometimes he saw the Prince or the
Admiral march with five or six thousand me^, to the rescue of a lodging
assaulted by a contrary party: but in such roads still there fell out some loss
on either side. Besides, for the preventing of any notable surprise, the Prince
had framed the head of his troops toward the enemy, of five or six hundredth
good horse, and as many Harquebusiers on horseback, with small store of
baggage, except some horses of burden, to the end still to hold the enemy
occupied, to hinder his enterprise, and to find opportunity still to give
warning to the whole camp, which bare it self under the discreet conduct of
their leaders. While the Princes army in Beausse joined with the Rutters,
making head against the puissant army of the Duke d'Aniou, Troops gathered in
diverse places for the prince
who for his part had almost all the advantages, only not resolved to fight,
Messieurs de Acier, Sipierre, and other Gentlemen of Languedoc, Prouence and
Dauphine, gathered forces in diverse places, seizing upon Nismes and
Montpeslier: the Gascons rose up in arms under the conduct of their Vicountes,
and forced certain places upon the Romish Catholicques, and joining themselves
with Monsieur d'Acier for the religion, for whom likewise Poncenat and
Verbelay, assembled certain troops in Bourbonnois and Auuergne, which were
broken by the troops of Guyenne, marching to the Duke d'Aniou. The Duke de
Neuers likewise brought out of Italy, four companies of lanciers, 2.
companies of light horse, and 6. companies of fantasins, and being arrived at
Lions, and stre^gthened with new companies, with 6000. Switzers new raised, he
made an army of 14000. men, with the which he besieged and took Mascon: The
Duke of Nemours for the Duke Aniou.
and certain weeks after, being desirous to go see the Duches his wife, he was
set upon by 80. horse, and certain foot that issued out of Autra^, co^ducted by
Beaunais, and Burgony. Between the^ there was some loss on both sides, the D.
himself was hurt with a Harquebus-shot in ye knee, yt while he lived he went
lame. In Guy. Messs. de Monluc with diverse others, followed with 4000. foot.
and 700. horse, enterprised upon ye Isles of Sain. surprised and killed between
3. or 400. me^: which don, they determined to besiege Rochel, but their intent
being deferred took no effect. Mean time, the troops of Dauphine and others,
that held with ye Prince, advanced themselves, being under the conduct of the
Vicounte Mouans and others, at Ganap in Auergne, overthrew all the horsemen of
the country, assembled by S. Heram Governor, accompanied with S. Chaumont,
Gordes, and others: whereof ye boldest were slain, the rest saving themselves
with their heels: but in their retrait they found themselves in a new mischief:
for ye having given charge and express notice to al strong towns, and other
places therabouts, not to receive any that fled, whatsoever liuerie he bare,
upon the vain hope they had to have the victory. The Pesants made havoc of
the^, in such sort, that ye troops led by the Viscountes and others, arrived at
Orleans, and constrained Martinenghe, Richelieu the Monk, and other leaders
participants with the duke of Aniou, who before that, used to run even to the
gates of the Town, to seek some lodging further off, and to keep themselves
in covert, and not contenting themselves to have driven them away, followed
them: which done, they marched toward Blois, where Richelieu with eight
hundredth men has made his retrait, Blois taken.
who at the first made some resistance: but perceiving a breach to be made,
they bled at the nose, and yielded by composition, lives, arms, and goods
saved: nevertheless, the Gascons not contenting themselves to use blows, made
such means, that Richelieus soldiers were for the most part spoiled of all
they had, what means soever the horsemen made to impeach them. The Prince
understanding the arrival of those troops from Gascon and Dauphine, sent them
word to be in a readiness: and to those of Orleans, that they should provide
powder, bullets, and three or four battering pieces. The siege of Chartres.
After that, he sent three thousand horse, above 20. leagues from thence, to
besiege Chartres, a town of great importance, and one of the barnes of the
provision of corn to serve Parris, which being taken, served the Prince in
some sort, to preserve the places that lay behind him. Monsieur de Lignieres
commanded therein with 22. companies, that were strengthened by a regiment of
foot, that lay about 4. miles from thence, that got into it before the Prince
had executed his pretense. The manner of this siege was diverse, because the
Prince had but 5. pieces of battery, and 4. small coluerins, which did no
great matter, specially against so many soldiers as were in it. Also in two
days and two nights they made such trauerses and trenches, that no man durst
force them: but it was concluded, that a battery should be made against a
place that seemed very weak. The Duke of Anious army lay on the other side of
the river of Seine, but would not hazard it self, nor once approach the Princes
camp, assaying nevertheless to aid the besieged, who in fine would have been
taken. Therefore to refresh them, he sent M. de la Valette, a valiant Captain,
with 8. cornets of horse, with charge to surprise some of the enemies lodgings,
to indomage their forrages, to cut their victuals from them, and to molest and
weary the Princes forces by continual alarms. He to execute his commission,
The Duke of Anious Cornets overthrown.
approached within 4. leagues of the camp, lodging very close, from whence he
began to make his courses. The Admiral being advertised thereof, took upon him
to prevent it, and as he always used to march with a good company, fearing
(as he said) to loose the pray, he chose 3500. horse, and departed in so good
time, that at sun rising he found himself in the middle of the quarters of
those 16. cornets of horse, that were charged with such force, by M. de Nouy,
that marched before the Admirals troops, that diverse of them being laid upon
the ground, and 4. cornets taken, the rest were put to flight. La Valette
lodged in the town of Houdan, reassembled 4. or 500. horse, and made a
reasonable good retrait: but after that, neither he, nor any of the rest of his
troops, would once approach so near, fearing a new charge. A new motion of
peace.
The Q. foreseeing of what importance the taking of the town of Chartres would
be, began to parley of a peace, saying: that in time of need she would do more
with three sheets of paper, then all her soldiers could do with their arms.
The Prince sent the Cardinal de Chastillon, with certain Gentlemen, to meet
with the Q. Deputies at Loniumeau hard by Parris, where in few days a second
edict of peace was framed, whereof the first article imported, that those of
the religion should enjoy the first edict purely and simply, and that it should
be executed in every point and article, according to the form and tenor,
taking away and abolishing all restrictions, modifications, declarations, and
interpretations, made since the day and day thereof, until the publication of
this second edict, made the three and twentieth of March, 1568. there were
diverse other articles in this edict full of many fair words and promises. As a
good peace was much desired, being most necessary, so in the mean time, few
men considered well what this might be: Discourse upon this matter.
but as if the name had been like to the effect, most part of those of the
religion stayed upon it, saying that it would be necessary to accept it, not
considering the evil will hatched in the king against them: the subtilties of
the revenging spirit of the Queen Mother, the hopes and triumphs proposed to
the Duke of Aniou, capital enemy to the Prince: the intents and devises of the
house of Guise against that of Chastillon: the furies of the Clergy and the
Frenchmen, against those of the religion: who without waying these things, with
an infinite number of others, thought their sworn enemies would leave arms
as soon as themselves. ^his inclination evil desiested, constrained the Prince
and the Admiral to consent to the receiving of paper, perceiving so great a
disposition (specially in the Nobility) to accept it: which was as a tempest
that bare them away, not being able to resist it. It is true, that the Prince
being a friend to peace, had likewise some inclination thereunto: but the
Admiral perceived the infruction thereof, and that this edict was but a snare
to entrap both great and small. For that as then certain babbling Romish
Catholicques could not refrain to say, that the day of their revenge
approached. A Gentleman that accompanied the Cardinal of Chastillon, sent word
that he had oftentimes heard such speeches, and perceived a great indignation
hidden in the hearts of some of the Deputies for the Queen, and that they should
look unto it: as being a sign and foreshewing of some sinister chance.
Likewise there were some of the Court, as well men as women, who sometimes
gathered words cast out upon the sudden, that sent unto their kinsmen and
friends in the Princes camp, to certify them, that without all doubt they
should be deceived, if they wrought not wisely, which in a manner was to waken
those that desired nothing but to sleep upon the soft pillow of peace. But what
advise soever was given, it was impossible to stay that tempest of minds,
ensuing in Mass of mischiefs, shadowed with the veil of a royal
pacification.

If any man think it strange, how these two commanders that had so much
credit with their participants, could not as then persuade the^ for their
benefits, let them consider what voluntary soldiers are, and the great desire
man has to return unto his house, and then he shall well perceive, that it
is wholly beyond man's power, to stay such as were borne away with so impituous
a storm of humane passions. Before the siege was raised from Chartres, many
whole cornets, and diverse particular persons, The Prince is constrained to
accept the peace.
departed without leave of their superiors, marching toward Saintonge and
Poitou. This humor entered among the footmen, specially those that dwelt
far off, and many of them said: seeing the king offered the last edict of
pacification, they could not refuse it.

Some of the Nobility desired to return into their Province, for the
presernatio^ of their families sacked by the enemy. The footme^ also complained
that they were not paid, and that they wanted victuals: so that the commanders
of those of the religion, could not stick unto the aduises given unto them,
neither yet refuse the peace: because their forces began to diminish. Their
reason was, that the body of their French forces forsaking them, they should
be constrained to put themselves to defensive war, which they esteemed not
to be good for them, seeing as then it was in the month of March, a time when
commonly all armies use to enter into the field, to separate the Rutters, and
so to distribute them in their towns, was as much as to devour themselves:
and to incampe in a strong place, would be a remedy but for a time. So that
to conclude, they resolved, that of force they must hazard that posted and most
dangerous peace, which would constrain those that as then left their camp,
to acknowledge (but too late) their fault committed. Then they could well have
desired to have had some towns of the assurance: but when they asked other
assurances then the Edicts, promises, and oaths, the Queen, her sons, and
their Counselors, cast fire out of their mouths, crying out and saying: that
those of the religion sought to despise, and not account of the kings
authority. To be short, and evil shame caused them to receive a peace in
paper, couerture of a bloody war, which stayed not long to show it self. The
peace being published in the Princes camp, Duke John Casimeir speedily made
haste to return into Almaine with all his forces. What ensued of this peace.
The Prince, the Admiral, and all the Lords and Gentlemen of their side, with
their horse and foot in small troops, returned to their houses, laying down
their arms, leaving the places by them holden for the space of six months:
those of least consideration, thinking their enemies would do the like. They
contented themselves only to promise it, alleading according to the doctrine of
their church, that they are not to hold faith given to heretics: for so they
esteemed those of the religion. Presently therefore as soon as they had Orleans,
and other towns into their possession, presently order was taken, that those of
the religion should not be able to set soot in them again, their weapons
never went out of their hands, but began to keep the towns, to make war,
place Courts of guard, and Sentinels, as in time of open war, to set Captains
and soldiers at the entries of bridges and passages of rivers, not suffering
any man either on horse or foot to pass, without examining him: sacked and
murdered in the fields and towns, more men in the space of six weeks, then
they would do during the space of six months. To be short, before the end of
the month of May, Preparation for the third civil war.
those of the religion for the most part, found themselves enclosed within
towns, or between rivers, expecting nothing else but when they should be
murdered: and some of them that had been so instant for the peace, were then
constrained to acknowledge, (but somewhat too late) that they must of force
drink the cup of their own follies. The Prince had withdrawn himself to his
Castle of Noyers, a small Town weak and unfurnished of men: where from day to
day, he had intelligence from all places, that the passages of all rivers were
stopped, that almost all the D. of Anious horsemen remained about Parris, with
five or six thousand foot, under pretense of new guards for the persons of the
king, his mother, his brethren, and their Capital town: that Monsieur de
Tauannes was sent with great forces to take him in Noyers, which made him to
know, that his affairs went not well, and that there was no remedy, but of
force to seek to save himself in some place of better assurance. The Admiral
not daring to remain in his house of Chastillon sur Loing, being but three
days journey from Parris, went to lie at Tanlay, a small Castle belonging to
Monsieur d'Andel^t his brother, from whence he went to lie nearer to the
Prince, that they might cousult together what was expedient for them to do, and
as he went, there happened (...) strange and memorable thing unto him: which
was, that in the way to Auxerre, hard by a village called Moulin, there is a
pond, which the ^dmirall approaching, a certain old man, one of his ancient
and faithful servants, called Grippier, a man that had made many great and
long voyages at sea, discovering a dark cloud, driven by the wind, and that
came toward tha^ pond, persuaded his Master to make haste, Anotable accident.
and with all speed to get into the next village, otherwise, he said a storm
was coming, that would overthrow both him and his company: which done, and
thinking he would have believed and followed him, in great haste he went on
before. And being scarce out of sight, the Admiral having hardly past the end
of the Causies that past over the pond, he was taken with a tempest and force
of wind, that many horsemen were overthrow, and diverse horses stricken to the
ground, wherewith their fell a hayle so thick and great, that the force
thereof, hurt many of them. The wind blew away the Admirals hat, which they
could not find again, but one of his Gentlemen was constrained to send him
his hat, and he himself was hurt, but (very lightly) upon the ancle of his
foot, with a haile-stone. So that both he and his company confessed, that if
the tempest had taken them in the middle of the Causie, they had surely bin
utterly cast away. The tempest past, the Admiral encouraged his men, giving
hearty thanks to God for his deliverance, adding these words: Before long time
be past, we shall be inuiroued with many dangers, but I trust God will defend
us. Being arrived at Noyers, although both the Prince and be well perceived
that their continuance in ye place, was a means to sharpen the evil wills of
their enemies, What means the Prince used to stay the third civil war.
notwithstanding to omit nothing of their duties, they sent diverse messengers
to the king, whereby they showed themselves to be assured and certified, that
his M. sought to apprehend them, humbly besoght him to have pity upon his
country of France, sacked and desolated by the two former civil wars, without
seeking by the ruin and overthrow of his realm, to quench the fire which
those of Guise kindled therein, as also that it would please him wisely to
prevent the danger then approaching. The Admiral likewise wrote to the Lady
Margaret of France, Duches of Sauoye, whom he knew to be beloved of the
Queen Mother, desiring her most instantly, to oppose her self against the
desolatio^ of the realm of France. The answers from the Court were shadowed
with excuses, protestations, The Admirals Letters to the Duches of Sauoy.
and promises: mean time, Tauanes an old servant to the house of Guise, and not
long after, made Marshal of France, arrived in his army, therewith at one
instant to enclose both the Prince and the Admiral within Noyers, the Councels
resolution being to besiege and force them, before they could procure aid from
any place, the passages being shut up. These unfaithful devises being
discovered unto ye prince and the Admiral, by diverse of those yt were of the
same enterprise, they determined with all speed to dislodge from that place,
and in great have to get to Rochel, that would not open their gates unto ye
troops which the Marshal de Vieleuille thought to put therein, the Inahbitants
being advertised yt they should be spoiled because of the religion which they
defended, together with their ancient rights and privileges, The Prince and
the Admiral ready to be taken, save themselves.
which wholly exempted them from all Garrisons, and other warrelike forces,
wherewith kings help themselves to use other towns at their pleasures: which
to do, they were to pass the river of Loyre, being very high, and about the
beginning of Summer, the Prince was likewise constrained to take the Princess
his wife, and six small children with him, among the which, one was of the age
of eleven months and certain days.

Their discommodities because of their passage over the Loir
The next day they were followed by the children of the Admiral, and Monsieur
d'Andelot, who hatting trauersed the river of Loire in Berry, met with the
horsemen, that conducted them. At which time happened a strange thing, for the
Prince making his account suddenly to pass over in an unaccustomed place,
with two or three small boats hired for the purpose, being come to the river
not far from Sancerre, his men found a shallowe foord, which he past over,
followed by fifty horse, the Princess, her women, children, and servants,
passed over in the boats, but they were scarce gotten out, when suddenly the
day being clear and fair, the river rose in such sort, that they of
Sancerie, and other Inhabitants of those countries, were constrained to
acknowledge a particular favor of God showed to that small troop, which had
been prevented, if the Prince had deferred his passage but two hours longer.
Being over, he dispatched messengers Monsieur d'Andelot into Britain,
desiring him to raise all the men he could, and to march toward Poitou.

The Queen, those of Guise, and their Councillors, understanding that the
Prince and the Admiral were escaped, grieved that they had no sooner sent
Tauannes their Deputy in that action, began to send commissions into all
parts, appoynting their troops to meet in Poitou and Cuyenne, while the Duke
d'Aniou General of the army, took his leave of the Ladies in the Court, and
that preparation was made for his departure. It fell out well for the Prince
and the Admiral, that they were not speedily pursued, and that they had such
adversaries, who for the first week of their retrait, contented themselves to
laugh and jest, saying: that the Prince had no need to make such haste to be
gone, for that their meaning was, not to hurt him. But his answer to such as
told him of it, being upon the way, was, that he had rather leave them the
emptienests, then they should take the birds: and if that he had well thought
upon the promise made by them, to be revenged for their flight from Meaux, and
to make those of the religion run their town, he had departed in a better
time, that he might have traveled with ease. The collor of the Queen, her
children, their adherents, and Catholicques, at the beginning of these wars,
discharged it self upon diverse particular persons of the religion, Hard usage
of those of the religion.
who in Orleans and other places, were pilled, sacked, and cruelly put to
death. The Prince arrived in Rochel upon the 19. of September, having in his
way certified those that commanded in the Towns and Provinces where he past,
that he meant not to undertake any war, but only to stay for an answer to
the petitions by him sent unto the king: the Gentlemen of high and base Poitou,
not long after, assembled themselves to join with him: at the same time, the
Cardinal de Chastillon was constrained to leave Beauuaisin, and yet so swiftly
followed to the sea side, that being constrained to leave his company, he
entered into a ship, that bare him safely into England. The Queen of Nanarre,
Retrait of the Cardinal de Chast^lion, and of the Queen of Navarre and her
children.
taking with her the Prince her son, and the Princess her daughter, went
likewise to Rochel, so to avoid the pretenses and intents of her enemies,
against her and hers: Descars and Monluc, that commanded at Perigord, Limosin,
and Guyenne, used all the means they could to hinder her: but the troops that
conducted her, having three Regements of foot, and eight Corners of
light horse, assured her way, whereupon she certified the king, the Queen,
the Duke of Aniou, and the Cardinal of Bourbon, of the causes of her voyage.

The deportements of the Prince at Rochel.
Immediately upon the Princes arrival at Rochel, where his brother the Count
of Roche foucaud was come a little before, he assembled the Citizens, and unto
them represented the miserable estate of the realm, requiring their succors in
defense of religion, the Commonwealth, and the Crown of France. Withal,
promising particularly to assist them against al such as sought the oppression
of their lives and liberties.

The Mayor in the behalf of all the Citizens, whose affairs he commended
unto him, offered him their lives and goods, as also the eight and twentieth of
September following, he did to the Prince of Navarre, as well inregard of his
Lieftenancie in Guyen, as also in hope that he should inherit his Parents,
not only in lands and livings, but also in the love and favor that they
always had borne to the Rochelers, whereof he assured them. The Lord
d'Andelot the four and twentieth of September, The adventures of the Lord
d'Andelot in coming to join with the Prince.
entered the confines of Britain and Maue, with four Cornets, one company of
Argoletiers, and four Ensigns of footmen, where he found many other
leaders, so that his whole company amounted unto a thousand good horse, and
two thousand harquebusiers.

With these troops, Andelot coasted toward Loyre, to find some commodious
passage, whereby to join with the Prince. The same day that he gat to the
rivers side, and within two hours after that his men had taken up their
lodgings in the scattered villages, the Duke Martiques Governor of Britain,
going toward Saumur to the Duke of Montpensier, had intelligence that sundry
troops of enemies (not naming who) had taken up their lodging in his way. He
had but three hundredth lances, and five hundredth brave Harquebusiers, with
whom he passed courageously through all d'Andelots troops, who in regard they
lay scattered, were not able either to defeat him, or to force him to retire,
so that having marched eight leagues, and had sundry skirmishes, by the
shutting of the night, he gat to Saumur, he and his men, with the loss of
some twenty men, among others of his Lieftenants: but by the way slew
fouretimes as many, and carried away an Ensign.

This was the fruit of his close and orderly march, together with his
resolution worthy a grave and wary leader: neither could this surprise or
abridge d'Andelot of his hope to pass over the river of Loire: for having
reassembled his forces into two troops, he caused the river to be gauged all
over, so that at the last he found a foord, where never any man in our memory
had passed: there did he and his, with great joy for this unexpected good
hap, pass the river the next day.

Before this foord was found, as the Lord de la Noue demanded, in case the
passage were stopped, what they were best to resolve upon: What should we do
(said he) but follow an extreme resolution, either to die as soldiers, or to
save our selves as soldiers? A brave resolution in necessity.
adding moreover: I think it best for us to join together, and so to retire
some seven or eight leagues into the open country, thence to scatter some
rumors, whereby the Duke de Montpensier and Martigues, may be advertised of
our departure in manner of a flight, every man seeking to save one, for this
will easily be believed. In the mean time. let us prepare and encourage our
men to the field: so that if they draw after us (as undoubtedly they will, in
hope rather of spoil then of battle) we may valiantly encounter them: so shall
we give them such an overthrow, that we shall not need to fear any troop,
that may dare to meet us for one months space, but that we may at ease either
pass the rivers, or get into Germany.

Martiques by this passage purchased great honor: but d'Andelot more
commodity by his, by bringing himself and all his troops into safety, whereby
within eight days he joined with the Prince. Then was there sundry
consultations about their affairs, how to imploye both men and the time,
whilst they leuyed a mighty army for the duke of Aniou, and that the duke of
Montpersier assembled diverse troops in Anion, and the countries thereabout, to
go to it in earnest. The Prince bringing some cannons out of Rochel, set upon
such towns of Poitou and Xaintongue, The Princes first exployts.
as were but weak and meanly furnished with Garrisons: seizing upon Nyort,
Fontenay, S. Maixaut, Saints, S. John d'Angely, Ponts and Coignac, Depuys,
Blay, and Angoulesme, whereof some were gotten easily, and others by force and
assault. To be short, within two months space, the Prince and his partakers, of
poor vacabondes as they were at the first, became so wealthy, that they were
able to continue a long war. In all these places they lodged some thirty
companies of footmen, and seven or eight cornets of horse, which was a great
saving for the field, and they formed a most pollitieque and military order
as well for the French, as for the conduct of their army. Thus through
necessity, together with occasion, they of the religion found means to make
use of both: and the Admiral was wont to their adventure, to attribute the
ancient proverb of The mislocles, saying to his familiers: Had we not been
lost, we had been lost: Meaning, that had they not committed an oversight, they
had not had so great a recovery, as that which did far surpass their former
condition. The delays of the Romish Catholieques stood the Prince in great
stead. But if in time they had foreseen, that those who^ he had caused to
dislodge in so great have, went to settle themselves farther off, The delay of
the one, served for the others good.
and made speed to impeach them, by all appearance the Prince had remained
enclosed within Rochell, and the wars had not continued. But god by those
obscure beginnings, made an entry into the notable judgments which after that
appeared. It may be, that the joy they had at Parris, to see the Towns and
Provinces left, which had made so long and hard war against the Parrisians,
during the first and second troubles, made diverse of their hearts so much in
flamed, that they disdaind their enemies that were so far off, esteeming that
Rochel alone could not resist them, but y^ within 3. month, after, they should
be enclosed therein: which discourses are commonly made when our prosperity is
geater then we expect. The Q. and her Councelors presently caused an edict to
be published at Parris, Edicts against those of the religion.
by y^ which, after a long declaration made, touching things happened to the
realm, by of the religion, the king among other things, declared, that the
Edict of january, by the which he promised the exercise of religion, was but
prouisionall, until his Maioritie, and that he was not determined to have the
Edict made, before that touching the religion should be any more observed.

For which causes being atiained to the said age of Maioritie, he fore bad
all exercise thereof, in the countries of his obedience: commanding without
reuocation, that there should be no other exercise of religion, but only that
of the Romish Church, upon pain of loss of body and goods. And upon the
same pain, commanded all the Ministers of the religion, to depart out of the
Realm, within fifteen days after the publication thereof: commanding
nevertheless, that those of the religion should not in any sort be troubled
for their consciences, so they would live peaceably in their houses.

At the same instant an other edict was published, certifying, that from
thencefoorth, the king intended not to be served with any offices, being of
that profession, from that time forward discharging them of all their offices,
commanding them to yield them vpto him within fifteen days after, otherwise
he would take some stricter order therein.

These Edicts had been long hatching: but their hope was to intrappe the Prince
and the Admiral: The effects of such edicts
wherein having failed to get money of the Clergy and the third estate, the
Queen and those of Guise served themselves with this devise, which was to no
great end. For that besides the great charges of the Duke of Anious army,
wherewith the most dearest Catholicques were twice grieved and offended, before
the war was half ended, diverse of the religion entered into the field, who
otherwise would have stayed the rest and quietness promised them by the king,
and not have left their houses. But at this alarm they assayed to join with
the troops: further, the commanders sent certain declarations into England
and Almaine, to show, that they were not pursued as seditious persons, or such
as desired a Crown, (as their adversaries reported) but only because of the
religion, which the Romish Catholicques sought to extirminate France: which
served the^ well, for the furtherance of the levy of Rutters, which the next
year came into France, under the conduct of the Duke de Deux Ponts. Also there
were many about the king, the Queen, and the Duke of Aniou, that desired
nothing else but to see all the country flaming with fire: some to rob and
spoil without punishment: others to execute their vengeances and reuenges: the
Pensionaries of Spain, to cause the Frenchmen to cut each others throat, those
of Guise by little and little to attain to the advancement of their
deseignments, which discovered themselves in the end of the reign of Henry the
third, as you shall read.

After these Edicts, the Duke of Aniou made preparation for all things
necessary for his voyage, and so puissant an army, whereof by the king he
was made Lieftenant general. That which increased the Princes troops, was the
Regiment of foot, which Monsieur d'Acier brought out of Dauphine, Prouence, and
Languedoc, not long before the Prince had written unto him, as also to diverse
Captains in those Provinces, that they should use all the means they could, to
provide him a certain number of men, therewith to withstand the army royal,
that came to assail him: that the Princes, Lords, and other commanders, might
not endure so great disadvantage, to be assieged within a town: and it fell
out so, that Acier, Mouuans and others, not neglecting this commandment, made
so great a troop of men, Forces out of Dauphin, Prouence, and Languedoc, for
the Prince.
as it seemed that they had wholly unpeopled those three Provinces, having at
the least sixteen or seventeen thousand Harquebusiers marching along.
Gourdes, Governor of Dauphine, used all the means he could to impeach their
passage over the river of Rhosne: but they having seized upon diverse places
that might be commodious for them, and with ease crossing that great river,
went to Allais, and so marched toward Millaud to enter into Perigueux. Now as
on the one side, this troop of footmen was the strength of the Princes army,
so was it the cause of the loss of diverse places, which the Catholicques
seized upon after the departure of Acier and other commanders, whereof diverse
repented themselves to have leuyed so many men, whereof the half would have
sufficed, marching close and in good order: but the jealousy among the
principal leaders, the staying of some, and the aduauncing of others, was the
means that they could not join with the Prince, before they had received a
hard check: two of their regiments being defeated by the Duke de
Montpensieur, because that Mouuans and Pierre Gourdes Colonels, perceiving
themselves hindered by lodging so close as they had done, till they were not
far from Perigort, sought to separate themselves and lie in a village called
Mensignac, being of opinion, that with two thousany Harquebusiers they might
withstand a whole army. Mouuans had both valor and policy, as much as any
Captain of footmen ever had in his time. But his courage caused him at that
time to take upon him too great a charge: for being set upon on all sides, The
overthrow of Mouans and Gourde.
and by six times as many men, yet he refused not to fight valiantly: but in
fine, both he and his companions were slain in the field, with the number of
a thousand of their men, and to impeach Acier, lodging about two small leagues
from thence, with six thousand foot, from coming to aid them, at the same
time that Mouuans was charged by the Dukes footmen, they sent eight or nine
launciers and diverse Harquebusiers on horseback toward Acier, that cried
battle, and made a great noise with trumpets. A stratagem to hinder aid
Whereat Acier was so much busied to look unto himself, that in the mean time
Mouuans and his troops sustained the force of their enemies, selling their
lives as well as they might, in such sort, that the Catholicques lost above a
hundredth men, and were so moyled with the fight and the travel their horse had
made at that same day, that they could not pursue nor charge Aciers troops,
abashed at the report of those that had escaped, that made the Duke of
Montpensiers forces to be far greater then they were.

What the two armies did lying so near together.
After this overthrow of Mouuans, the Duke of Montpensieurs army returned to
Chastelleraut, as fearing least the Prince being grown so strong, by the
arrival of the Dauphinois of their companions, should have set upon him in
some place of disadvantage. There he found the Duke of Anion, accompanied with
very resolutetroupes, and a great number of Noble men and Captains greatly
affectionate to this poor Prince. There had not been many days seen two such
armies of French men. The Prince of Conde, his places furnished, had eighteen
thousand Harquebusiers, and three thousand good horse. In the Dukes army they
had no less then ten thousand footmen, besides the Switzers, and four
thousand lances: so that on both sides there were five and thirty thousand
Frenchmen, all trained men, and peradventure as good soldiers as any in Europe.

They of the religion considering their strength, endeavored to have come to
handie blows, and came within two leagues of Chastelleraud, but the Prince
being given to understand, that the other camp was lodged in a very
convenient place, and almost environed with a small marish, helped with some
slight intrenchment in diverse places, would not make any rash attempt, but
soght all other means to draw his enemy to the field. The Prince seeks
battle, and way.
Hereunto was he especially invited, in regard as well of his number, as their
forwardness, withal, fearing that such armies wanting scope sufficient, could
not continue or hold any long time: besides that, the winter, which this year
was most extreme, would soon duminish the same. The Romish Catholics were
not altogether so outrageous, but expected a supply, withal, thinking
themselves able in time to weary their enemy, and by little and little to
break them.

The two leaders were very desirous to join, namely the Duke of Aniou, who
fretted mightily to see so many men at the Princes command: besides that, he
heard that the Germans were bustling and preparing in the spring to come into
France for him.

Moreover, they both had one intent, namely, each to live upon the enemies
country, and so to spare their own from the extreme waste committed by the
man of war. But the providence of the almighty, The purposes of both the
leaders.
would not permit the French to put in execution the malice of their hearts:
for had they then buckeled, the sinues of the kingdom had been cut in pieces,
and by all likelihood it had been past recovery, and been made a pray to any
mighty foreign enemy, that lists suddenly to have seized thereupon. Now let
us behold how his wise providence ordered all matters at that time. Both the
armies breaking up, drew toward Lusignan, near whereunto there lies a small
quarter most fruitful, where each pretended to lodge: The Admiral and his
brother in danger of an overthrow.
and albeit they were so near together, yet did not the one know of the other,
whereby it fell out, that the general Rendez-vous of both armies, was
appointed in a great Burrow called Pampron, some five leagues from Poictiers, a
town plentifully provided of victuals, where the Marshals of both the camps
met in manner at one instant with their troops, so that twice or thrice they
drive and were driven, each side coveting that lodging which at length was
abandoned. But knowing that they should be relieved, neither side would fly,
but took their stands, some quarter of a league off, where they put themselves
in array: for the support of the one side, came the Admiral and his brother
with five cornets of horse: and for the Duke of Anious part, some seven or
eight hundredth lances.

Now are we not said the Admiral, to stand upon lodgings, but to fight, and
so suddenly advised the Prince hereof, who was a long league behind, willing
him to come forward, whilst he kept the enemy play. Then did he set his men
in order upon a little rising, the rather to take from the Romish Catholicques
the sight of a small valley, whereby they might have had a perfect view of him,
as also to make them think that the said valley had been full both of horsemen
and footmen. Standing thus within cannon shot each of other, the Admiral
commanded a Captain of Argoletiers, to march some five hundredth paces, and
there to stay near unto a hedge: but as such men are not always of like
wisdom, courage, and readiness, the one half immediately made to the
skirmish, whom their Cornet followed to relieve them. The Duke of Martigues,
leader of the other side, weening that they would have fought, stood close, and
sent forth three or four squadrons of lanciers. The Admiral and his brother
greeuing that they had not foreseen the folly of this Captain of the
Argoletiers, wist not whereupon to resolve, because they saw the enemy much
stronger then themselves: but coming to give their opinions, they both
concluded contrary to their custom and nature. Andelot a knight without fear,
and one that never found any thing too hot, A notable example of the
infirmity of man's judgment in matters of importance.
though it best to retire a soft pace, and so give a foil to the enemy, that
was much stronger then they, which was to be preserred before the danger,
which being once avoided, besides the profit, they should also reap honor. The
Admiral thought it better to stay, and with a good face to hide their
weakness, and thereupon immediately called back his skirmishers, whereupon the
enemies lanciers made at. This counsel had best success, notwithstanding the
other seemed the better, and of more safety. For Martiques afterward gave out,
that had he known the Admiral and his brethren to have been so weak, it
should have cost him the lives of all his lanciers, but he would have had those
two Lords either quick or dead: that he took their five cornets to have been
the troops of the Marshals of the field, whom they had charged, and so doubted
they had been supported by some store of Harquebusiers, which he seemed to
discern in a village behind them, who indeed were no other but their varlets:
besides that, for want of footmen, whom he expected, he had lost the
opportunity of a field. The Prince loses opportunity to defeat the D. of
Anious anuantgard.
Thus do the hazards of war depend upon very sudden moments. Within one
hour after this adventure, they all looked for a field, for on all sides ye
might discern the footemens Ensigns and troops of horsemen come marching on:
but it was late before they were all come together, so as they had only a
hot skirmish, which the night brake off. There was no more but the D. of
Anious auantgard, whose leaders perceiving the Princes camp to be too strong,
devised a policy to make them think it to be their whole army: for they
caused part of the French drums to strike up the Switzers march, forbidding
their soldiers not to disband, but only to defend themselves, least by the
taking of any prisoner, the enemies should have known the truth: for had the
Prince known of it, this auantgard had been ouerthrown and defeated. Besides
they doubled their guards, made great fires, and caused their soldiers to hang
burning matches upon the bushes. and so having taken their repast, they
departed with small noise, and drew some to Iasenueil, where the D. of Aniou
lodged with his battle, and some to the borought of Sanssay, which is within
one league of it. The Prince at three of the clock after midnight, had notice
of their going, and at five followed with his whole army, as doubting that
theirs came not then. Thus in one day we may see two notable opportunities
lost, the first by the Duke, the second by the prince: yet may we not greatly
blame either ye one or the other, for such occasions are hardly found at the
first, and in two or three hours they are passed. Then it is, that some small
advertisement might plainly have revealed them: but that is a benefit of
felicity, which depends not upon the Captains sufficiency. All that we
have spoken of the former days work, is nothing in regard of that which
happened the next day at Iasenueil, where it seems that God verified the
saying of his Prophet: that he would subvert the counsels of men: also that all the ways of the mighty are in his hands, as well as of the meaner. For many
things fell out rather by hazard, and at all adventure, then by any counsel or
advise. The Princes determination was, to follow his enemies camp, that as
then dislodged, The battelt of Iasenueil.
and wheresoever he found it, to fight with them: whereupon the Admiral and
the Prince pursued after them. Now coming to two ways, the one leading to the
village called Sanssay, the other to Iasenueil: the Prince left the first and
took the last, which he did because of a mist that rose before the break of
day. The forefront which the Admiral had set before him, and was very strong,
about eight of the clock in the morning entered into Sanssay, wherein five or
six hundredth horses were lodged, that were presently constrained in haste to
dislodge, having lost all their carriage, and were pursued very far. Mean
time the Prince keeping on the way which he had chosen, having marched above
two leagues, found himself in the face of the army of the Duke of Anion, not
knowing what was become of his vantgard. He perceiving himself to be so
near, determined not to retire: and because the country was strong, he caused
his Harquebusiers to be placed in the head, being above 12000, beginning to
skirmish, sending to the Admiral, whom he knew not where to find, to certify
him that he was constrained to make show to fight, finding himself so near to
the D. of Anious camp, and that he should make all the haste he could to come
unto him. Before the messenger was half way, the Admiral advertised by the
ca^non shot, doubted the woorst, and in all haste made toward the noise, with
those troops he could assemble. But at his arriual the sun began to go down,
which kept them from determining, viewing, or enterprising upon the great
armies. Al doing nothing, but skirmished in such sort, as of long time the like
had not been seen: and which put the D. army in some fear, as being in a
place of great disadvantage: although it made a good show, not one seeing the
other: being hidden within the hedges and valleis, none but the Harquebusiers
being scattered, could be perceived. The Princes side was very courageous, A
pleasant conceit.
but their co^duction not answerable, shooting as in a show of pleasure very
close, a whole Regiment discharging together. To the contrary, the Dukes were
separated, shooting at leisure and in small troops, in such sort, that 200.
Harq. stayed a whole regiment of ye Princes. The loss fell on both sides, and
many hurt, as it happens in such conflicts. At the same time there chanced a
merry conceit, that put many in great fear, while they made alte, all the
Princes carriage stayed along by ye wood, not far from the reaward of the
horsemen, where the Pages and other Ieruants placed themselves, thinking they
should have camped in that place, making at the least above 4000. fires: and
perceived not the army to retire, because it was night, in such manner, that
diverse of their masters supped but sle^derly that evening. Some of ye D. army
that held ye watch, perceiving so many fires and great noise, they thought
verily it had bin the Princes army, whereby they looked for battle the next day
in the morning, which made them use more diligence to fortify their passages.
Cap. Garies offered to view the^, but they would not hazard themselves against
those brave warriors ye sat prating by their fires. About midnight, ye Prince
was certified yt al his carriages were entangled, and made account they were
lost, nevertheless he deferred not to send four or five cornets of horse to
fetch them, commanding that an hour after, a thousand horse, and two thousand
Harquebusiers should march thither to aid them, if the enemy should follow.
The first that arrived among them, found them in goodly ordinance, warming
themselves, singing, and making good cheer, and being far from them, you
would verily have thought they had been above ten thousand men, they thinking
no more upon the matter, then if they had been within a walled town. They
began to laugh at the behavior of those brave fellows, who ordinarily are as
fearful as hares, although they are in safety, and there being ready to be
slain, they did nothing but hoope and hollow, because they supped well with
their Masters victuals. The first of the Princes horsemen being come to the
head of this goodly camp, were not over courteously received, for that the
most assured among them, had placed their guards and Sentinels, and as far as
they could discern a man, although they cried at the least a hundredth times,
friends: yet they answered not but with caliuer shot, withal, crying out like
mad men, but in the end they knew each other, and perceiving where they were,
their resistance turned into fear, and dislodged themselves without any
trumpet.

These two armies having somewhat breathed themselves, for the space of a the
Prince marched toward Mirebeau, which he took, and the duke retired to
Poictiers: The enterprise of the Admiral against County Brissacks Regiment.
each of them lodging somewhat more at large to rest their wearied troops.
Withing 8. or 10. days the Admiral devised an enterprise, whereby to cut off
County Brissacks Regiment, which was well lodged and blocked up at Ances, a
village within one league of Poictiers. Now he imagined that all the Dukes
auantgard had still lodged in that subburb of the town that led to the said
village: but indeed more then the one half was passed over the water the day
before, only the Switzers and some few horse stayed behind: and therefore he
brought with him 6000. Harquebusiers, and 1500. horse, that by break of day
came to the village, and after some small resistance forced it. The Regiment,
with the loss of fifty or sixty men, saved it self, by the favor of a
small valley in the camp, where they found but small support: how be it they
set so good a face of the matter upon a bank with their varlets, that the
Admiral, who could not take any certain view of them, and was loath to hazard
any thing, left them, and carried away the most part of their carriages. The
two armies after so me small rest, fell to their former resolution of fighting.
The Duke taking the field, recovered Mirc^eau, where covenants were but
slenderly kept, for after the yielding of it, many of the soldiers, contrary
to promise were slain: whereupon Andelot soon after, taking the Abbey of S.
Florent near Saumur, put the whole Garrison to the sword. The Duke meaning to
come nearer to the Prince, took up his lodgings about Monstrueil-Bellay and
Thouers, for the better commodity of victuals. Here he was advised, that it
was not amiss to seize upon the town of Loudun, which lay in his way, and was
kept by one of the Princes regime^ts, to the end there to lodge his army, and
the^ to bear himself according as things might fall out: for by keeping of
that, he should cut off his enemies from a plentiful country, able to feed
his army for one month. The Prince confidering this devise, rather then to
take such a scorn, as to see one of his regiments cut off before his face, and
so by loosing a Town able to hold out, to prove himself either faint-harted,
or too feeble, resolved to march night and day toward Lodun, and so at his
coming quartered all his footmen in the subburbes, five or six hundredth
horse in the town, and the rest in the next villages. The Dukes army the
night before, had encamped within a small French league of the place, in part,
weening that the Prince would not obstinately adventure his forces for the
observation of so mean a place: but the next day the D. understood that the
Princes army fell into battle array along the subburbes, whereupon he caused
his men to do the like: and the artillery on both sides began to play even
into the squadrons, and sometimes not in vain. There might a man have seen
above 4000. men, almost all French, in battle array, not far asunder, as
fierce in courage, as gallant in countenance, who for the most part did all
expect only the watch word to fight. There was between both the armies only a
plain field, without any advantage, which might cause me^ to marvel, that for
four days space, both the armies lying in sight, and within cannon shot each
of other, they never came to handy blows, neither to any skirmish of
importance, and that but seldom in respect of other times. But the^ we are to
remember, that there was not so sharp a winter in 20. years before, The cold
kept the Frenchmen from killing one another.
because that as it was a most hard frost, so the sleete that fell continually
made it so slipperie, hat the footmen were not able to stand on their legs:
yet much more dangerous was it for the horses, neither could a horse get over a
bancke three foot high, so slippery was the grownd. Many such bancks there
were between the two armies, which had bin cast as partitions of men's lands,
which were even so many trenches, whereby he that would have given the first
onset, must needs have been disordered: and that was the cause that each stood
fast, looking upon other, to see which side would so unadvisedly adventure the
hazerd. Thus they stood straining of courtesy and this first day there fell
out only some small skirmishes, whereupon all the troops an hour before night
retired into their quarters. The next day the armies set themselves again in
battle, and saluted each other with cannon shot: some there were that as the
day before went out to skirmish, but they either brake or unjointed their arms
or legs, so as there were more hurt so, then by the small shot. The third day
they did the like, but could never find any means to join without incurring
great inconveniences. The fourth day the D. whose men for the most part lay in
the open fields, retired a league off, to warm his troops that were starued
with cold, and in his retrait lost three companies, one of Switzers, and two
of Frenchmen, that were surprised in a village: within a while after, the
soldiers fell into such vehement and grievous diseases, that in one month
there perished on both sides some 8000. men, notwithstanding through the
presence of their Generals, and their own earnest desire to fight, they were
content to bear all: but the Dukes men had the woorst, as they that were not
so well provided either in lodgings or victuals, as their aduersaties. Some
cornets of horsemen of both sides, were lodged some half league or three
quarters asunder, but in the evening returning to their lodgings, they were so
benumbed with cold, that they made no great haste to molest their enemy, no
not so much as with one alarm, as if they had been at truce. The gallant
enterprise of the Admiral against the Dukes army


The next day after this departure, the Admiral imagining that the Dukes men,
who not long before were lodged half under the hedge, after they were gotten a
little way off, would scatter into the good towns (as indeed they did, leaving
in the body of their army three or four hundredth horse, and about twelve
hundredth shot, the rest being gone a league or two off) about nine of clock
in the morning, when the Princes horse were come in, brought forth twelve or
fourteen thousand shot, and 4. field pieces, in full purpose to make to the
dukes maine army, which was not past a league and a half off. The Captains
knew of a brook that was between, with certain foords, as their guides
reported, not very dangerous. The night before having taken the view, and
tried the guards, they found them forceable: but the Princes shot coming to
the foord, which was within a quarter of a league of the Dukes army, found it
furnished with footmen, whom they did courageously assault, but could not
force. Hereupon the camp having taken a hot alarm, shot off their ca^nons to
call in their scattered troops, and as they came, sent supplies to keep the
passage: but within a quarter of an hour after, the Admiral set upon another
place, which was stoutly defended, and had they not stood fast there, the Duke
had been quite ouerthrown. For before a thousand men could come in, the
Admiral had brought 1500. horse, and 6000. shot, that would have shaken them
shrewdly. Some two hours after, by that the D. had gathered almost all his
troops, and sent some pecees on unto a little bank, after some volees on
either side, thy could drive every man away. On both sides, as well the gentry
as the common soldiers, murmured mightily against their leaders, for that to
no purpose they brought them forth into most extreme frosts and cold,
complaining also, that they were in manner besieged with hunger and famine,
adding withal, that unless they might be better provided and fenced in place
of safety, themselves would go and lodge as they thought good, as being
unable any longer to endure such extremities. In this suite they found no
co^traction: for their leaders were soon inclined to yield to their desire. The
Duke went to winter beyond Loire, about Saumur: and the Prince at Thouers,
Monstrueil-Bellay, and thereabout. Thus did the cold scatter those that itched
to be doing, and sought all opportunity to fight.

Timoleon de Cosse, County de Brissac, a young Lord, courageous, and for his
years very wise, The gallant enterprise of the County Brissac, against the
Admiral and his brother d'Andelot.
but carried away with an excessive desire to show his valor: and withal,
hardened on by the Duke of Anious favor, who among all other made most of him:
undertook a gallant enterprise, which albeit it had no great success, does
notwithstanding deserve to be known. The Admiral and his brother, with their
cornets, were lodged in the town of Monstrueil-Bellay. Hard at hand in a
little subburbe, lay two companies of footmen, as simple guards both to their
lodgings and the goods. The Gentlemen did no more but walk their rounds at the
ordinary hours about the walls, which they thought to be sufficient, for by
reason that upon the highway from Saumur, in a great subburbe beyond the
river, their lay six or seven Regiments of footmen, Monstrueil was on that
side sufficiently safe: On the other side, for the space of one whole league,
there were great fens, not passeable but in some few places: also 9. or 10.
cornets of horse lodged in the villages round about, that night and day lay
bearing of the ways. Al these helps made it so strong, as there was small
appearance that it should incur any peril. Now, as in all civil wars each
party had always good aduertisements (for commonly the secret enemy looks
within some men's bowels) the County was informed of the small guard at
Monstrueil. Next, that by going two leagues about from the bare high way, he
might get thither without danger of the Admirals strength or guard of the
horse: which notwithstanding he would not adventure, until for his more
assurance; he had sent a French Captain and an Italian, in the evening to take
a view: these men went unto the wall, and with a long pike, a cord, and an Iron
hook, they got up, (for the walls were not high) and so came to the Admirals
lodging about nine of the clock at night, and then returned again unespied:
as one of them since reported to the Lord de la Noue, who was the^ at
Monstrueil with the Admiral. The County glad of this report, laid his plot
thereupon, as follows. He purposed with a thousand shot, choice men and very
active supported with 500. horse, to march at such time that he might come to
Monstrueil about 3. of the clock in the morning, that so he might have full
two hours of the night to favor his retrait, in case his enterprise should not
speed: but if he got his purpose, then to raise great fires upon the towers of
the castle, whereby to give notice to the dukes army lying at Saumur, to march
with all speed to his succor: as resolving to stand sure until he were beaten
out with artillery, and his succor might arrive within six hours. Thus should
he take two notable Captains in the midst of their assurance, and at the
least 100. Gentlemen of name: besides, he should utterly break the whole
auantgard, lodged therabout, which would never have stood the coming of the
enemy, so great would the confusion have been, besides sundry other
inconveniences that might have ensued. I have heard the Lord de la Noue, from
whom I have heard this report, which himself has put into his discourses, who
was then as I said, with the Admiral, say that Brissac might have achieved
this enterprise: but as we are to pray to god to watch over such as sleep, and
the conservation of their fates: so as the County was upon the way about the
performance of his purpose, a small chance crossed, yea utterly subverted all
his devises. For coming with a dozen of lathers, and his men very reolute,
being within two leagues of the place, he met with 200. of the enemies horse:
who seeing this small army at that time of night in the field, retired in
have, and raised an alarm at Monstrueil and other places thereabout, where
their horsemen were lodged, whereupon the County was driven to retire:
afterward the Admiral strengthened his night watches better, and beat the
fields more often, yet never could find any news of the enterprise, or know
how it was until the next peace. After this, the Prince and other commanders
withdrew themselves toward Rochel, Other exployts to the advantage of those of
the religion.
determining upon means to provide money for the furnishing of those wars, and
began to sell the goods of the Romish Clergy, finding such as would hazard
to buy them, who therein used the matter to their advantage, the Rochelers lent
fourscore thousand frankes. The Q. of England sent 50000. pound, six cannons,
certain thousand weight of powder, and great store of bullets, for the which
she was paid in salt, woolls, and bell metal. All base Poitou being in the
hands of those of the religion, except the Abbay of S. Michael in Loire, where
lay a good Garrison of Friars and soldiers, which served for a restraint to
many courses into the country, but some soldiers of Poitou obtained license
of the Prince to besiege the Abbey, which sustained two light assaults. At the
third assault it was battered and taken by force, and 4. or 500. men that were
in it put to the sword, because of their wilfulness.

On the other side, Martineugue, Entragues, and la Chastre, Governors of Gyon,
Orleans, and Bourges, accompanied with other leaders, and certain troops of
soldiers, The siege of Sancerre.
besieged Sancerre, a small town, being the refuge of diverse families of the
religion, and gave diverse assaults, which the besieged sustained and repulsed,
wearying the enemy in diverse sorts, who having lost six or seven hundredth of
their best men, left that small town in peace: but after that, the Sancerrois
seeking to enterprise to build a sort upon the river of Loire, they were
surprised, and having lost fifty of their men and the fort, were content to
keep good watch within their town.

In the beginning of the year 1569. the war began to renew, the Viscounts
of Bourniquet, Montclar, Paulin, and Gourdon, with seven thousand
Harquebusiers, and some horsemen, made war for the Prince against those of
Thoulouse and others, the town of Montauban being their chief retrait. And
being summoned by the Prince to join with him, Piles punishes the pesants in
Perigord.
made answer, that they had rather keep that Province, and defend their own
Countrymen from Monluc and other enemies, then leave them as a pray, while they
bare arms in an other Province. Captain Piles, that had charge to conduct
them, gathered certain troops in Quercy, Agenois, and other places, and
having taken Bergerac and Saint Foy, he made a road into Perigord, where he
burnt all the villages, and slew all those that he suspected to be at the
overthrow of Mouuans and Gourde. And not long after, he marched with twelve
hundredth Harquebusiers, and about two hundredth horse, to join with the Prince.

Diverse warlike exployts.
About the beginning of February, five hundredth horse coming forth of Saumur,
surprised and defeated the Court of Bressant of Anigeuin near unto Thours, and
within eight days after, County Brissac had like to have defeated the troops
of Montgommery, whose brother he took prisoner with some others, and slew some
eighteen or twenty men.

The seventeenth of the same month, the Castle of Lusignon holden in the name
of the Duke of Aniou, was surprised by intelligence, the Garrison thereof
being for the most part gone into the town to banquet and make good cheer.
But for want of speedy aid, the surprisers, to the number of nine or ten,
were slain: there was likewise many other enterprises in diverse places: as
against New-hauen and Deep, but they took no effect.

The Protestants that bare arms with the Prince, tired with the winter toil,
and so many skirmishes, found some sweetness in resting in Poitou, whither
they were retired.

But about the end of February, the Prince began to gather his army, report
being given out, that the Duke was already in field, and marched with all his
forces to Angoulesme.

To armies enter the field.
To whom the Count of Tend had brought three thousand foot, and some horse:
besides two thousand Rutters, under the leading of the Rhingraue and
Bassompierre, that were come to supply him. Whereupon he purposed to end the
war, either by forcing the Prince to fight, or else constraining him to shut
his men within the towns. The Prince and Admiral thereupon having assembled
their forces, determined to march along by the Charante, a river in Poictou, to
behold the dukes countenance, but yet not to hazard himself. As also to aid
their towns, which they strengthened with men, making their army so much ye
weaker. But nothing worth memory was done, until the Duke came to
Chasteauneuf, a town cituate upon Charante, where at his arrival he took
the Castle kept by a Scot, and some Harquebusiers, that yielded themselves with
their lives saved, but with small honor. The taking of Chasteauneuf, occasion
and beginning of the battle of Bassac.
And because the bridge of Chasteauneuf had been broken in two places, the
Admiral desirous to know the countenance and passage of the enemy, went
thither, followed by seven or eight hundredth horse, and as many Harquebufiers.
There he had a light skirmish with certain troops, that had passed in
certain barks, or over certain plankes speedily cast over. The Admiral
thinking that the Duke would pass over, and thinking to have time to advertise
the Prince to provide for him, minded to stop that passage, until the next
day. And appointed two Regiments of foot to lodge within a quarter of a mile
from the bridge, and eight hundredth horse somewhat further off, whereof the
third part should keep watch hard by it, as well to advertise, as to offer
fight: which done, he withdrew himself to Bassac, about a league from the
bridge: with ye rest of the vantgard, the Prince came to Iarnac, which lies a
league further: but this commandment was not executed. For both the horse and
foot, knowing that in the places appointed them to stay, there was but few
houses, with less victuals and fourage, having wholly forgotten how to incampe
themselves, and to be without commodity in their lodgings, went to find some
other quarter. Whereby the most part of this troop left that place, to lodge
themselves with more ease, and left but a small number of men in place, that
lay about half a league from it. This great fault produced another: which
was, that the watch was too weak, A notable fault.
which could not come time enough to hear, nor give alarm to the enemies
troops, as they had been instructed, thereby to make them think, that all the
Princes Auantgard lay there. The Dukes army being very strong, resolved to
seize upon the passage, although all the Princes power had opposed themselves
against him, and by the diligence of Monsieur de Biron, not only repaired the
bridge, but made a new bridge of barks, which are carried with armies royal,
and before midnight had finished it: which done, without great noise they began
to pass over, both horse and foot. The Princes men, that stood in guard with
fifty horse, about a small quarter of a league from the passage, in a manner
could scarce perceive them to pass, until about the break of day, wherewith
they presently advertised the Admiral, who knowing that most part of his men
had lodged in other places, namely, on that side where the enemies came, sent
them word that they passed, and with all speed to march toward him, that they
might retire altogether, and that in the mean time, he would stay for them at
Bassac.

At the same time also, he commanded, that all the carriage and footmen
should retire: which was presently done. If then within one hour after, all
his forces had been assembled, he had easily retired without much labor,
Slacking of things, dangerous in war.
but the time (being about three hours) that passed in staying for them, was
the principal cause of their overthrow. The Admiral would not loose those
troops, being nine Cornets of horse, and certain companies of foot, whereof
the Coronels were the Count Montgommery, Acier, and Puuiaut. Being all come,
only Acier, that took the way toward Angoulesme, all the Dukes army being
past, and hard by the Admiral, the skirmish began so hot, that each man
perceived that day would be a battle, being the thirteenth of March: which
made the Prince turn back, being half a league from them, passing forward,
for having understood that he should be constrained to fall to blows, he
having a Lions heart, would be one among the rest. When the Admiral for his
retrait came to forsake a small chanel, which might be passed over but in two
or three places: the Duke was counseled to advance the flower of his horsemen,
composed of seven or eight hundredth horse, which overthrew four cornets that
made the retrait, where la Noue and la Love were taken prisoners, The Princes
magnanimity ended not but with his life. Valiant charges.
having couragiosly sustained the fight, as also Coronel Puuiant, who not long
after, reassembled his dispearsed troop the same horsemen of the Dukes camp
not long after, charged d'Andelot in a village, but he valiantly resisted them,
and slew Monsalez, and diverse others of good account, to the number of fifteen
or sixteen, the Prince and the Admiral ranged in two great squadrons of
horse, perceiving that the enemy went about to enclose them between all the
Dukes forces and Charante, prepared themselves to give the charge. The Admiral
began: the Prince seconding, which was with greater force then the first, and
at the beginning made al those that flood against him to turn their backs:
after that, sustaining a new charge, where for a time the battle was hot and
fierce, but in the end he and the Admiral having all the enemies army upon
them, and the Prince being fallen under his dead horse, thereby ensued the
overthrow of the horsemen, having lost about one hundredth Gentlemen, and among
the rest, the Prince himself, who lying under his horse, could not be
relieved by his troops, and yielding himself to Monsieur d'Argences, at the
report of his taking, The death of the Prince of Conde and others.
a Gentleman of Gascon called Montesqueon, Captain of the Dukes guard ran
thither, and discharging a Pistol at him, shot him in the head, wherewith he
presently died. His death bredde great sorrow among those of the religion, and
much joy to diverse that loved him not, namely to the king, the Queen, the Duke
of Aniou, and all the house of of Guise, specially the Cardinal of Lorraine,
who the next day after the news was brought unto the king, (as then being at
Metz) touching the battle (wherein the Catholicques had lost two hundredth
Gentlemen, among the which were diverse Lords and men of name) coming to salute
the king, after the manner of Courtiers, smiling said unto him: your Grace as I
suppose, is now better disposed then you were the other day, being eased of
much corrupt blood. In that manner iested he, who upon the bodies of the
Princes of the blood, and the Nobility of France, placed the foundation of the
rule and government, which his family would after have usurped, as you shall
well perceive. From Metz they sent certain cornets that had bin taken from the
Prince, unto the Pope, whereat that good Pastor so much rejoiced, that he went
a foot on procession from his Castle of Saint Ange, to the temple of the holy
ghost, withal the Cardinals, to thank his Imagess with out flattery this
praise may well be given unto the Prince, of whom we will now speak, that not
any man living in his time, did ever surpass him in courage nor courtesy. He
spoke very wisely, more by nature then art, liberal and ready to all men, an
execellent leader in war, yet a lover of peace: most firm in his religion:
invincible in adversity: but mild in prosperity: a great iester, subject to
vanity, lover of women, and collor, but one that gave place to reprehensions
and aduises of such as he loved and respected, but by this overthrow we may
gather, that when a matter of importance and hazard is to be effected, it
ought not to be done by halues, for that either we must leave it, and not be
ashamed to retire, or else do it withal our forces.

If the Admiral and the Prince had had all their forces, the Duke would not
have set upon them, also when armies lie scattered, they fall into
inconveniences, which the sufficiency of the best leaders cannot remedy.

After this battle the Duke sent to besiege Cognac, and began to embrace
diverse other enterprises, as if nothing had bin impossible unto him, Exployts
after the battle of Br^ssac.
for that not long before, certain places in Poictou had been taken from those
of the religion: but Cognac stayed the course of this victory, in such sort,
as that after the Duke had lost the boldest of his footmen in that siege, he
thought to get as much by intelligence against Saint John d'Angely, where
doing nothing, he summoned Angoulesme, that made him no other answer, but
with threatenings to send him away with loss and shame, if his army came
thither: while the Dukes Council were consulting of the means to employ his
forces in other places, those of the religion had time and leisure to join
themselves together.

The Admiral brought the Princes of Navarre and Conde from Saint John to Tone
Charante, where he met the Queen of Navarre, to encourage such as were in
doubt, and to take Council what was to be done. Their horsemen were mustered,
whereof the Prince of Navarre was appointed General, to whom all of them,
being the number of four thousand Gentlemen, made oaths of fidelity.

The young Prince of Conde was joined with him, d'Andelot went to the Garrisons
to take a view of the footmen: which done, he made a voyage into Poitou to
assemble the dispearsed troops, to provide for money, and to bridle the courses
of the enemies: but coming from thence, The death of Monsieur d'Andelot,
being taken with a burning fever, he went to Saints, where he died upon
the seventeenth of May: to the great grief and sorrow of all his friends and
servants. His body being opened, was found to be poisoned: which not long
after, was practiced against diverse Lords and Gentlemen of the religion, by the advice of Rene de Birague an Italian, as then Keeper of the seals, and after
Chancellor of France, who used openly to say, that it was not necessary to make
war with so much labor and charges, but to employ the Cooks, meaning
prisoners.

The estate of Colonel of the French Infanterie was given to Acier, and his
company to Beauuais la Nocle his Lieftenant: but the charge of all the army,
and the care of the principal affairs fell upon the Admiral, much respected
by the Queen of Navarre, Princes, Lords, Gentlemen, Captains: and to be
short, of both great and small, that as then made profession of the religion.

The siege of Mucidan where Pompadon and the County Brissac are slain.
As concerning the Dukes army, it ouerranne Xaintoigne, Angoulesme, and Limosin,
taking in some places, namely Aubeterre. The County de Brissac Colonel of the
French footmen in that army, and Captain of a Regiment of forty Ensigns,
with the most part of their forces, took upon him the siege of Mucidan. They
that were within, after they had a while defended the Town, set it on fire and
retired into the Castle, which they held valiantly, and abide some assaults,
slew the notable men of the regements of Brissac, Monluc, and Cars, among the
rest, the Vicount of Pompadou: lastly, Brissac himself, who coming near to
view the breach and defenses, had no sooner put forth his nose, but a
Harquebuse pierced his head, and laid him stark dead upon the Counterstarp:
he was between five and six and twenty years of age, and was much bewailed
of many that hoped to have seen him in time, one of the greatest leaders of
our days.

A while after, the besieged yielding upon composition, to have both lives and
goods saved, were scarce out of sight of the walls, but that contrary to
faith and promise, the most part were cut in pieces by the besiegers, upon a
desperate revenge of the death of their two Coronels, and their best soldiers
that they had there lost.

The taking of the I Will of Medoc.
On the other side, Captain Piles took the Isle of Medoc, lying between
Rochel and Bourdeaux, where all the soldiers enriched themselves. And the Duke
abandoned Guyen, and took his way toward Berry, there to join with the
forces of the D. d'Aumale, that together they might stop the Dutch army,
brought in by the Duke of Deaxponts from joining with the Princes. The Lords of
Nouy, Ienly, Moruilliers, Fequieres, Esternay and others, soon after the
beginning of this third civil war, A small French army comes in fit time
to the Rutters through France maugre all the enemies armies.
had gathered together some fifteen or six hundredth horse, and two thousand
Harquebusiers, whom when in regard of the difficulty of the passages, they
could not bring into Guyen, they led into Brabant to the prince of Orange and
County Lodowick his brother, who after they had a while with variable success
continued war against the Spaniards, passed over the river of Meuse, maugre
the duke of Alue, to whom they offered battle, which the Spaniard refused, as
hoping to waste them with want of victuals, which grew so short, that they were
driven to pass into France, where coming to Vitry, they consulted upon their
affairs, whether it were best to pass further into the Realm, already
daunted with so many armies: and to return toward Germany, and so to join
with the army that VVolfgang, Count Palatine of Rhyne, and D. of Deux Ponts,
leuyed for the Princes: but the second advise took place. Now more narrowly to
consider what a long walk this Dutch army made, from the Rhine even unto
Limosin, together with their great and continual impeachment, it cannot but
breed much marvel, that a foreign army watched so narrowly, and having so
many backe-friends, could thus compass their drifts. True it is, that civil
wars have at al times made a plain path to foreign nations, who otherwise
durst scarce look toward the Gates, without the support of the one party.

But where the favor is but small on the one side, and the resistance great on
the other, we are the more to admire the exployts of those that do so adventure
themselves. It was a great comfort to the German Duke, to have the assistance
of the Prince of Orange, the County Lodowick, and the County VVolrad of
Mansfield, The description of the Dutch army.
with the French before mentioned. His troops contained five thousand
Lansquenets, and six thousand Rutters. With this small army he marched,
publishing by writing the causes of his journey to the Princes.

The kings Council finding themselves to seek, did speedily conclude of a
small army, under the leading of the Duke of Aumale, to stop this succor, yet
doubting of the weakness of such a Leader, unskillful and unfortunate in
matter of war, levied yet an other, under the conduct of the Duke of Nemours,
a man in manner like unto the other. These two bodies assembled in footmen,
far surmounted the Dutch Dukes, but in horsemen he was the stronger.

They were resoluted not to linger until he entered France, and so make
havoc, but marched even to the borders of Germany, and near to Saumur,
where they defeated the regiment of Captain la Coche of Dauphine, composed of
sundry parcels patched together, which purposed to have joined with the
Lansquenets. Notwithstanding this defeat, the German Duke proceeded into
France through Bourgongne, where the enemy coasted him, until he had gotten
to the river of Lotre (having marched full fourscore leagues) they never left
him, but were still in his flancke, or upon the tail: yea, many times the
armies were each in sight of other, and had many great skirmishes.

The Prince of Orange has since sundry times reported, that he marvelled that
in so long and difficult a passage, the Romish Catholics could never find
fit opportunity, considering that many occasions befell them, and the rather
by reason of the impeachments of their maine carriages. For besides these great
forces of the Dukes of Aumale and Nemours, the towns, country, and rivers,
were at their command: they also knew the purposes of their adverse army,
which consisted in making haste, and either by force or surprise winning
passage over Loyre, whither it came maugre all their policies and devises. It
was said, that through some contention between them, they lost sundry good
exployts which they ought have performed, had they been at union: besides,
they doubted the vigilancie of Moruilliers: the industry of Feuguieres: and
the readiness and valiancie of Nouy, Esternay, and other Captains, who held
them in continual alarm: and had not the news of the battle at Bassac
comforted them, Aumale and Nemours had been either defeated or forced to
license their troops, and so to retire into the towns.

If fell out well for the Germans that they made such haste: for this great
block, this river of Loire, would have been a second and most grievous
difficulty to stay these rivers, as well for that it was not so shallow, as to
yield any foord: as also for that all the towns standing therevppon were
enemies, yet was the passage so necessary, that it made the^ to use great
speed, courage, and invention: for contrary to all expectation of their enemies
on each side the river, they assaulted a town called la Charitee, where they
had a good bridge.

Among all the ouersights of the Romans Catholicques, who were reenforced with a
supply of Italians from the Pope, of twelve hundredth horse, and four thousand
foot, this was not the least, that they left la Charitee destitute of men:
whereupon the Protestants lay so hard to that place, and terrified it with so
many mines and threats, that before it could have any relief, they had won
it to their incredible joy: which nevertheless was abated by the decease of
Feuquieres and other Captains poisoned by the way, according unto Biragues
precepts.

Had it not been for this prize, the German army had bin hard bestead, and
their leaders forced to have returned back to the head of Loire, which was
sixty leagues off: yea, which was worse, taking that course, they should have
entangled themselves in a hilly and wood country, where their horse would have
been but a hinderance.

The Admiral accounted this passage impossible, and still harkened after their
overthrow, The Admirals opinion touching the passage of the Rutters.
many times telling his familiars that he could not help this succor, in
regard that the Duke of Auious army still lay before him, and the Rutters and
French had two armies more watching upon them, besides a most difficult passage
over the river: withal, that albeit they had passed over, yet their enemies
joining their forces, must needs defeat them before they could come near them
by twenty leagues to help them. But hearing of the success of the siege of
la Charitee, he grew again into some hope, saying: This is a good
prognostication, let us perfect it with diligence and resolution.

The Princes with their troops marched immediately toward Limosin, that so
they might come nearer to the Duke of Anious power to keep it in awe, albeit
in continual fear, still looking to hear that all the enemies armies being
so strong, should have swallowed up their Rutters: which fell out contrary: for
they took so good opportunity, and used such speed, that they out went them,
under the conduct of the French troops, where among the rest, Nouy bare
himself more valiantly in sundry roades of the enemies, whom diverse times he
sent back, and gathered to the place where the Admiral had appointed to meet
them with one thousand shot, and two thousand and five hundredth horse.

Thus toward the end of June the two armies joined in great joy, albeit
somewhat abated by the death of the Duke of Deuxponts, who died of a fever a
little before, into whose place the County Mansfield succeeded. This journey
and favorable passage, may put all Captains in mind, that notwithstanding
whatsoever great difficulties, they may be environed, yet are they not to
distinct: for they shall not need past one sole favorable accident to free
them, and such do commonly favor those, that shunning sloth, do take a good
heart.

Discourse of the encounter at the Rochebelle, where Strossy was ouerthrown,
with two regime^ss of foot.
The two armies as then very strong (that of the Duke of Aniou being above
thirty thousand men, and that of the Princes five and twenty thousand) were
constrained to depart one from the other, to find commodity of victuals,
because the country of Limosin is vnfertile, but they reapproched toward S.
Yrier la Perch. The Admiral perceiving that the sterilitie of the country
made his troops to lie scattered, and because of the hills and woods, the
places of battle were often with disadvantage, determined rather to prevent,
then be prevented. Not long before, the Princes had sent an humble request
unto the king to have peace, but the Duke d'Anion would never grant Passeport
to their Deputies: whereof the Admiral made great complaints to the Marshall
de Montmorencie. And perceiving that his enemies sought nothing but war, he
counseled the Princes to surprise the Dukes army, not far from thence in a
place named Rochebelle. To the which end, they departed before the break of
day, resolute to give battle, and arrived in so good time, that they were
within a quarter of a league from the head of their enemies, before they gave
the alarm. The strong lodging served those that were there in guard, and stood
them in great stead: and Colonel Strossy at the noise, hasted in with 500.
harquebusiers, for the strengthening of 300. of his me^ that kept the
principal passage, where he found the skirmish begun. His valor served well
for his partakers, for that for the space of one hour, he held 4000. of the
Princes shot good play, whereby the D. army had opportunity to assemble and
set themselves in array. The Admiral wondering that they could not force that
passage, sent Brucil a wise and skilful Captain, who immediately espied the
fault. Hereupon having ordered certain troops, and disbanded 4. cornets of
horse to scar them, he began a sharp onset, wherein upon the breaking of certain
Pallissades that covered Strossy his regiment, his men were so disordered, that
the suruiuers fled, leaving dead behind them 22. of their leaders, and five or
600. foot, besides their Colonel prisoner, without whose resistance, the
Princes auantgard had gotten to the D. ordinance with all impeachment. But
withal, it began to join and so continued, that the victors were forced to
retire. The next day they were employed upon alarmes and skirmishes, in one of
the which, 200. Italians, with some sallies of the company of the D. of
Nemours, being somewhat too far advanced, were charged by the Lord of Mouy, who
slew some, took some prisoners, and sent away the rest faster then they came,
as in deed they were mounted to the advantage upon Spanish horses fit for such
retraits. Immediately after this encounter, While the Duke took his ease, the
Princes seized upon sundry places
the D. licensed his army to refresh themselves until the beginning of October.
putting his footmen in Garrison, in such places as bordered nearest upon
Guyenne. The Princes in the mean time kept the field, took Tiuiers, S.
Sulpice, Brantonne, Chasteau, l'Euesque, la Chapelle, Confolant, Chabanez, and
S. Genais: some by force, others by composition. The County du Lude Governor
in Poictou, had promised the Duke to do wonders, and while the Princes army
lay in Limosin, followed by five thousand foot, and some cornets of horse, he
besieged Nyort, a town of consequence, wherein Puuiaut valiantly entered with
certain horse and foot, in despite of the assailants, that were repulsed in
three assaults, and certain scaladoes: and after in the beginning of July,
constrained to raise their siege, having lost above five hundredth men before
the town, not accounting four Cornets of horse belonging to the County,
which la Noue not long before had overthrown at Fontenay, half a league from
Nyort.

Terigny being sent to aid the besieged, was the cause that the County
hasted his retrait, lodging the rest of his army at Saint Maixant, Lusignon,
and Mirebean: mean time the Princes approached Poictou, and the 12. of July
took Chastelleraud by composition, and three days after, battered the strong
Castle of Lusignon, that upon the 21. of the same month was yielded unto them
by composition, establishing the Barron de Mirebeau for Governor therein, with
two Ensigns of footmen, great store of cannons, and sufficient ammunition to
resist a puissant army. Two days after they marched toward Poictiers, took
Couhe (where the Garrison of Catholicques chose rather to burn themselves in
despair with and in the Castle, then to yield themselves to Verac Lord of the
place that held them besiesieged) Sanssay, Viuonne, and other little places
near thereabouts, thereby to enclose those of Poictiers, and to impeach them of
victuals. Before we depart from the siege of Poictiers, Diverse exployts of war.
let us add some notable accidents that happened in diverse places.

In the month of July, Castillon sur Loing and Chasteau-Regnard, places
belonging to the Admiral, were surprised, and the Admirals mooueables carried
to Parris, where part were sold in the open outcrie, the best stoien and
conveyed away, by those that find nothing either too heavy or too hot.
Certain horsemen to the number of forty, departing from the Princes camp
after the taking of Strossy, lodged themselves within Regeane, a Castle
belonging to the Bishop of Auxerre, but they were presently besieged, battered,
and slain within it, only captain Blosset, and some other that escaped. Among
those on whom they exerciled most horrible vengeance, was one of Auxerre
surnamed Coeur de Roy, who being taken prisoner, was led to Auxerre, and
there presently stripped, slain, and hewed in pieces. The murderers pulled
the heart out of his body, and cutting it in pieces, was laid on the coals,
and eaten by certain of his desperate enemies, that during his life, had
threatened him with that canniball entertainment: Horrible cruelty.
behold how zeal transporteth these Romish Catholicques.

The Lord of Terride Governor of Quercy, was sent into Bearne, Foix, and the
la^d of Nauarrois, there to bring al into the kings obedience, in case the Q.
of Navarre and her son the Prince, The County of Montgommeries exployts in
Bearne against Terride.
would not forsake the religious side. Terride accompanied with Negropelisse,
S. Colombe, and diverse others, had easily seized upon all, and had laid siege
to Nauarron in the only place that held for the Q. The Princes having notice
thereof, dispatched away the County of Montgommery to withstand him, who with
200. horse went and received the forces of the vicounties in Gascon, so that in
the month of July with a small army of four thousand shot, and five hundredth
horse, with great diligence and unwonted speed (which was the safety of his
voyage, as deceiving the Garrisons of the enemy, namely the troops of the
Marchal d'Anuil^, Monluc, Gohaz and others, that with 1000. horse, and 4000.
shot, marched but a days journey from the camp) he came safe with one days
journey of Nauarrin, forced Terride, who had lain encamped from the beginning
of June, to raise the siege and save himself in Orthez, by reason his troops
for their more commodious victualling lay disbanded. The County followed
Terride, and to abridge him of all means to reassemble or muster his men,
besieged, assaulted, and forced the town with great slaughter: then did he as
suddenly plant the cannon found in the Town against the Castle, Terrides
refuge: who terrified with such terrible charges yielded, with the safety of
his life, together with six knights of the Order, and many Captains, who all
enjoyed the benefit of the compositio^, except 5, Colombe, the Barron of
Pordiac, Gohas, Fauas, and some others that were executed, because they were
found to be the Qu. subjects, and consequently guilty of treason, for seizing
upon her places, causing the most part of her subjects to revolt, and seeking
to deliver the land into the dominion of a new Prince. This mishap of Ter.
being bruted abroad, so terrified other the towns and strong holds, that ye
usurpers making their packs in time, Na. Foix, and Bearn were suddenly subdued
to their princess, al fauing the town of Peu, the principal wherein commanded,
one named Pere, who had promised Monluc to defend it, and had executed some
officers, and slain the ministers: yet upon the su^mons of a trumpet sent by
Montgom. he departed with speed, leaving the town to the right owner. In the
mean time, Monluc practiced some treachery with Captain Bassillon, who had born
out the siege of Nauarrin against Terride. This practice discouerd, Bassillon
was slain, and Monluc coming to seize upon Nauarin, was forced to retire,
whereupon joining with la Vallete, he forced the town of Mont-Marsan, where he
discharged his rage upon the besieged, who were in manner all put to the sword.

Montgommery furnishing the places of his conquest came to Nerac. and for a
few days warred upon the next Garrisons, and there with all speed returned
to the Princes army, with some plenty of quoine gathered in his conquests,
and five hundredth horse that followed him.

The Duke d'Aniou considering how much the passage imported, which the Princes
had gotten upon the river of Loire at la Charitee, not much fortified since the
taking, resolved to take that place from them, The siege of la Charitee by
Lansac, and the issue.
which was well advised, for that winning it, he should bereave them of all
means to molest the Provinces on this side the river of Loire, and reserve
unto himself the sinues of the wars, with infinite commodities for the
refreshing of his army. But in stead of marching thither, in all diligence
after the passage of the Rutters, he contented himself to command M. de Lansac
to take order therein. He never having had any commission of such importance,
thought that by strength of men and cannon shot, he would do something. And
upon the sixth of July accompanied with 7000. footmen, assembled out of the
Garrisons of Orleans, Bourges, Chartres, Neuers, Gyan, and other Towns. With
five or six hundredth horse he besieged la Charitee, charged and recharged his
battery three or four times, sparing neither powder nor bullet: and having
made a breach to enter both with horse and wagons, he commanded his soldiers
to give an assault, who being men used to brave it in the streets of a Town,
and to discharge their pieces in the presence of Ladies: when they perceived
that the besieged resolved themselves to a stout and bold defense, their hearts
were turned to lyuers, so that their Captains, Ensigns, Sergeants, and other
officers, were forced to supply their places, of 100. of them: there returned
five again, but all overthrown at the entry of the breach. An other thing
was, that a false report ran in the camp of Lansac, that the Princes army
came to aid la Charitee, and that Captain Blosset was already in Berry with
200. horse, to mark out their lodgings, and to give the first charge:
wherewith the assailants made such an alarm, that without further inquiry,
they spied their Ensigns marching day and night, to nestle themselves in their
Garrisons. The siege continued almost a month, where, and in the retrait, the
assailants lost almost 1000. men: the town about 100. and being delivered from
this siege, and not long after strengthened by the companies of Blosset, Boys,
and others, that had left the camp to visit their houses, and to refresh
themselves: the leaders made account to fourage the country, and to seek
adventures far and near. With this resolution they took Douzi, Pouilli,
Antrain, S. Leonard, and other small towns about the water, running into Berry
Niuernois, and the countries bordering upon them, to the great hurt and
displeasure of the Romish Catholics. The Princes being in possession of
Lusignan and Chastelleraud, A brief discourse of the siege of Poictiers.
diverse of their Council were bent to the siege of Poictiers. Twice they
debated the matter in Council, where sundry were of a contrary opinion, as
nothing liking of the siege of so greata town among the rest, the Admiral, who
wished them rather to follow their first purpose, namely to get S. Maixaut,
where they should find Onoux, Colonel of one of the late County Brissacks
Regiments (who soon after entered into Poictiers) then to seize upon Saumur, a
town at that time of small strength, standing upon the river of Loire, and
with all diligence to fortify the same, to the end afterward to have a ready
and safe passage in Antomne, to transport the war to Parris, the fountain of
all the storms that thus molested all France. He alleged, that together with
the Dude of Guise and Maine, there were come diverse Captains and companies,
both on horse and on foot to Poictiers, which at that instant was as well
provided of soldiers as any town in France: likewise that such great towns
well guarded, are ordinarily the graves of great armies: and with all
concluded, that the best course was, to march to S. Maixaut which could not
long hold out: but the chief Lords and Gentlemen of Poictou, as well in
Council as else where, urged them not to omit so good opportunity, withal,
alleging that the town was of no estimation: that the more people were
therein, the greater was the body: that getting this place they should have
all Poictou, a rich Province, and so defeat the Dukes army of a very
convenient retrait: but the authors of their Council, had forgotten to speak
the resolution of those that kept Poictiers, the great helps that they had for
their defense: their own small store of artillery, munitition and powers to give
their assault, with many other their discommodities. For albeit the town in
regard of the situation, were wholly environed with mountains, commanding in
it so near, that they might greatly annoy the defendants, yet had the Princes
at that time such want, that having begun in one place, they were not able
courageously to go through with their battery and other works, but must
needs give the enemy two or three days respite, which was enough to
refortifie it again, whereby they should be forced to begin their batteries
again in an other place, where they should incur the like discommoditie.

The siege having continued some few weeks, sundry breaches being made with
some assaults, skirmishes, and sallies: lastly, necesitie set upon the
besieged, and sickness, together with want of munition, the besiegers, whereby
their troops were driven by little and little to break: the besieged had lost
diverse of their best Captains, and a number of soldiers, and their necessity
grew to such a famine, that asses and horses grew to be good meat. The D. of
Anion advertised thereof, The siege of Chastellerand.
as also of some discipation of the Princes army, took counsel to besiege
Chastellerand, being a good means to make the Princes leave Poistiers, if the
Princes were not negligent to loose a place wherein their men were enclosed.
But this resolution of the Duke served well for the Princes, as being a good
occasion for them to leave the siege, which notwithstanding they had done, not
having means to stay any longer before it. And to conclude, both defendants and
assaylants were not in long time more troubled. Then those of Poictiers, and
the Princes, the valiant leaders following their haughty desires, for that
having high minds, they applied them to such objects as best fitted them, but
the common saying is most true: that he which gripeth too much, can never hold
fast any thing. The Dukes of Guise and Maine got the honor in their youths, to
have bin of the number of commanders, that kept so bad a place against their
puisan^ enemies. Touching the dukes army, it being before Chastellerand, and
having made a breach, the Italians sent by the Pope, made request to give the
first assault, which sell unto the^ by chance of dice, whereunto they went with
bold courage, the besieged using subtlety with them, suffered the^ to mount
up, and being upon the breach, fought hand to hand with them, and having slain
the leaders, and some hundreths of the most resolute soldiers, constrained the
rest to put themselves in disorder, Italians beaten at Chastollerand.
leaving in the breach five Ensigns, and above 250. men dead. The hurt men in
great number died soon after: this happened the 7. of September.

The Frenchmen appointed to second the Italians, disdained to follow them, and
having been beholders of this spectacle, which well rebated the presumption of
the remainder, determined to proceed to a second assault, but they found the
besieged so well assured because of their victory, that they durst not begin.

The Duke of Anious retrait from before Chastellerand.
The Duke not having all his army together, and perceiving that the siege was
raised before Poictiers, presently after the assault given to Castellerand by
the Italians, fearing to be surprised, in all have caused his artillery to
be drawn away, and by man's strength besides horses to pass the river,
thereby to set it in safety.

The eight of September toward evening, it was resolved that the whole army
should retire into a strong place called la Celle, beyond the river that
passes by Hay in Touraine, six leagues from Chastelleraud. At this passage
they left two thousand shot, and some cornets of horse, to stay the Princes
forces from assayling the Princes army, at that time too weak to hold out
against them. The Duke with the rest of his troops was lodged in a place of
great advantage. In this retraict the Masters of his camp used such diligence
and good conduct, as deserved to be noted among the most notable feats in all
this war, and was the principal means of the Dukes victory, which soon
after he obtained at Chastellerand, where he had at leisure reassembled all
his forces, before dispearsed and scattered abroad. The Princes advertised of
this sudden retraict of the Duke, followed him, and marched all the night, so
that being first passed the river, they drew straight to the port of Pills,
there to pass the river of Creuse, and so to set upon the maine battle. But
the guard which the Duke had before placed in the same place, forced them to
skirmish almost all the day: the Admiral perceiving the place too hot, seeking
other passages, found one somewhat higher upon the right hand, where all the
army did the next day pass over the Creuse, between the port of Pills and
Hay in Touraine, in full resolution to force the Duke either to fight, or else
to retire into the City of Tours, where the king then was. The Corpse de Guard
at the port of Pills fearing to be enclosed, retired in great haste to the
Dukes army, where still there arrived men from all places: both the armies set
themselves in battle array, but between them there ran a brook, environed
with marshes and bogges, very discommodious for any general fight: because no
man could pass but by one and one, as also the artillery could not be
brought without danger of loss.

The Duke lodging in a village called la Celle, well trenched, flangued, and
fortified, having on the one side a river, and on the other a wood, feeling
himself yet too weak, would not come down into the plain: the Princes not
able to force him in so strong a hold, having for the space of two days with
continual skirmish sought to bring him to the field, for want of victualles
returend over the Creuse, and so over the other river named Vienne, the
thirteenth day of September, and were lodged at Fay la Vineuse, and within two
days after, the Duke came also within four leagues of the same place.

A traitor executed.
The 21. was Dominique d'Albe, the Admirals Groom of his chamber, put to
execution, as being convicted to have promised la Riuere the Captain of the
Duke of Anious guard, for the sum of one hundredth Crowns which he had
received in hand, with assurance of the place of a Groom of the Dukes chamber,
and some other large rewards, to kill his master the said Admiral with poison,
which the said la Riujere delivered him. The Prince of Orange departing from
this place, upon a necessary journey into Germany, passed with a small
train by la Charitee and Vegelay: and so following on his way, arrived without
disturbance at his iourneyes end, leaving his two brethren Lewis and Henry
with the Princes.

Eight days before the execution of Dominique, the Parliament of Parris had
published a decree against the Admirals life, accusing him of rebellion and
treason, with promise of reward of fifty thousand crowns, of the sum to be
leuyed upon the Towne-house of Parris, to any that could bring him in alive or
dead: the same they also executed him in picture, as they did likewise the
Vidame of Chartres and the County Montgommery.

The battle of Moncontour won by the Duke of Aniou.
The Duke of Aniou having gathered all his forces, and passed Vienne upon the
six and twentieth of September, came to Loudun, within three miles of the
Princes camp, which being in a country much fouraged, and of bad cituation,
were counseled to go to Moncontour, where they might have good lodging and
great store of victualles. The carriage marched on the one side, and the
Admiral and his army on the other side, not thinking that the Duke would so
soon approach, but being near a village named Saint Cler, the one not
knowing of the other, the Dukes vantgard conducted by Monsieur Biron, met
sidewaies upon the Princes army. He perceiving occasion given, gave a charge
with a thousand lances upon Nouy, that made the retrait for the Princes, with
three hundredth horse, and two hundredth Harquebusiers, this small troop was
presently overthrown and put in disorder, with loss of about thirty or
forty horse, and almost all the foot. This furious charge being done with
great force and upon the sudden, with the noise of four cannon shots,
bredde such fear in the Princes troops, that every man began to be
abashed, and without a certain passage, whereon above twenty men at a time
could not pass, that stayed Birons launciers, all the Princes army had in a
manner been wholly overthrown at that first charge.

The Admiral running to that disorder, showed himself unto his men, and
reassembled them in such sort, that at his coming were given two or three
great charges and recharges, of fifteen hundredth or two thousand horses at
once, and such as passed, were soon driven back again by the others. There
the Counties Lodowic de Nassau, and VVolrad of Mansfield, behaved themselves
valiantly. The two armies placed themselves in battle, one here, the other
there, about a long musket shot distant from each other, that of the Princes,
being soon under covert: to pass that place, no man durst be so bold, for
the danger that might ensue, because diverse squadrons would soon have spoiled
such as had ventured. But the Dukes artillery being there, and the Princes
already at Moncontour, his cannoniers took the advantage and hurt some
squadrons of the enemy, which notwithstanding brake not rank, but held firm
until night, by which means each man retired.

The next day in the morning, the Duke would visit Moncontour, to put the
Princes in fear. But he found them in the subburbes well fortified, having no
means to come at them, but by one way, where he gave a skirmish both of horse
and footmen. The Dukes army was composed of eight or nine thousand horse, and
seventeen or eighteen thousand foot, comprehending fix thousand Switzers,
and fifteen pieces of artillery. The Princes had six thousand horse,
Frenchmen and Almaines, six thousand Harquebusiers, four thousand
Lansquenets, six cannons, two coluerins, and three other pieces, having left
therest at Lusignan.

Before the battle, two Gentlemen bearing arms in the Dukes camp, being
strayed, came to some of those of thereligion, Notable advertisement neglected.
having certain ditches between them, and having protested unto them, that
they bare no malice unto the Princes, willed them to advertise the Admiral to
keep his army from fighting, because the Dukes army was very strong, by
reason of new strength, but that he should drive off the time for the space of
a month because all the Nobility had protested, not to stay any longer, but
that if they were employed within that time, they would do their best to
advance his service. That it was dangerous to strive against the French fury,
which in short time would be abated, and by that means the Duke with his
Council should be constrained to seek for peace, and to grant it with
advantage to those of the religion: which aduertisment given, those two
Gentlemen retired.

Those of the religion went presently to the Admiral, to certify him thereof,
which counsel liked him well. They showed it likewise to others of the
principal commanders, whereof some rejected it not, and desired it might be
followed: but the greatest part esteemed it to be but an artificial devise to
put them in fear, adding, that although this advise seemed to be good, yet it
was not to be accounted of, because it proceeded from suspect persons, and such
as usually exercise deceits: commonly such as are near to any mischief,
despise the good counsel wherewith men seek to relieve them. The Princes
Council assembling to resolve upon their proceedings, some said it was best
for them to get to Ernaux, and to set the river which runs by it, Evil
counsel followed.
between both the armies, and to depart about nine of the clock in the
evening, and to march all night, that they might get thither in safety,
because the Duke was at hand. Others replied, that those nightly retraits, put
fear into such as make them, imbasing their reputations, giving courage to the
enemies, and that it were best to depart about the break of day. This second
advise, (being the woorst) was followed.

The Admiral as then was in great distrust, fearing that the Rutters would
mutin for want of pay, and that three or four of his Regiments of far
countries would leave him: because they had already asked him license to
depart.

He knew likewise that diverse Gentlemen were retired unto their houses,
wherefore to hold the army in unity, he besought the Princes (that were at
Partenay) to come thither: which they did, bringing with them one hundredth and
fifty good horse. The next day in the morning, the horsemen were ready
mounted to ride to Ernaux, all in white cassockes, the better to know them, if
they should be forced to fight. But then the Lansquenets refused to march,
except they might have money. And within a quarter of an hour after, Blind
avarice cause of a great mischief.
five cornets of Rutters said as much, by which means, above an hour and a
hafe past over, before they could be appeased, whereby the troops could not
have the means to get a place, wherein they could hardly have been fought
withal.

And having marched a quarter of a league, they discovered the Dukes army,
advancing it self in such manner, that all the leisure they had, was to range
themselves in order, and to place themselves in a valley, in covert from the
cannon shot. After this ensued an other mischief in the Princes army, which
was, that the Admiral perceiving the Dukes vantgard to set forward, (wherein
was nineteen cornets of Rutters in two squadrons) and to come right upon him,
he sent to the County Lodowicke that commanded the battle, that he should
send him three cornets of horse: which the County did, but he himself led
them, and at that instant began the battle, he remaining in fight: whereby
the body of the battle remained without a head, not knowing how to govern it
self: and it is thought, that if the County (a wise and valiant Gentleman)
had been there, the body of the battle had mades good resistance, The body of
the battle without a head.
seeing that being so discovered, it had almost put the dukes battle to fight.

The fight having continued almost three quarters of an hour, the Princes as
yet very young, being not long before retired, and with them diverse others,
under color of safer conduction of their persons: the Admiral likewise being
hurt in the face at the first conflict, in the end the Princes horsemen were
constrained to leave the field, part of the foot being slain, the rest
flying to save themselves.

The artillery and Ensigns of the footmen were taken: County Lodowicke was
pursued a whole league, Notable retrait.
but made a gallant retraict with three thousand horse in one maine. The rest
of the troops having gotten away before, the leaguerors made show many times
to set upon the County: but he always turned so bravely upon them that they
durst not join. In this manner he marched toward Eruaux, and from thence to
Partenay, where they arrived about ten of the clock at night, five hours
after the overthrow, where the rest likewise came.

The Princes in this battle of Moncontour, lost four thousand Launsquenets'
fifteen hundredth French soldiers, and great numbers of pages and other boys:
of the horsemen about three hundredth, and many horses dead or hurt: of men of
name there were slain Puigreffier, Autricourt, Biron, brother to him that
led the Dukes vantgard, and Saint Bonet Cornet of the Admirals launciers. La
Noue and Acier taken prisoners: the Rutters carriage was sacked, only the
horses which the boys saved: but the French carriage being further advanced
toward Partenay and Nyort was saved: of the Dukes troops there was not many
footmen slain, but of horse about five or six hundredth, and twice as many
more wounded, most part of them dying not long after: and of men of name, the
elder Rhingraue, the Marquess of Bade, and Cleremont of Dauphine.

The number of slain on both parts.
The Duke caused the dead to be buried, and commanded the villages and towns
near there abouts, to bury such as lay nearest unto them. Such was this days
chance, whereof diverse discourses have bin published, whose vanities I have not
undertaken to tet down, contenting my self to have approached nearest unto
the truth, which of it self will sufficiently be desended.

The Marshall de Rez was presently willed by the Duke to ride to Tours, to
certify the king and the Queen of his victory, wherewith all Europe was
presently filled, and as the report is made greater by passing through many
men's mouths, nothing was then spoken of in Italy and else where, but of the
utter overthrow of all the Princes army.

Consultation in the Dukes council, what was to be don after the battle of
Montcontour.
Immediately after this victory, the chief Leaders of the Dukes army were
assembled to debate what was best to be done: the opinions were diverse, and
the woorst followed. Some alleged, that since the Princes footmen were quite
overthrown, and that they had few horsemen but Rutters, who were already
wonderful discontent for the loss of their baggage, the best course would be
with all speed to follow them, so should they compass one of these two
effects, either utterly overthrow them, or force them to compound for their
retraict into Germany, which might easily be performed, by giving them some
two months pay.

Heereto adding, that the Admiral a wary Captain, and one that knew how to
shift out of the briars, had he but even very small leisure, would repair his
forces, adding some replies out of Gascon and Languedoc: so that in the spring,
they should be assured to have him in the field with a new army, wherewith he
would waste sundry Provinces, and transport the wars even to the Gates of
Parris. Besides, the presence of the Princes among their daunted troops, would
by little and little harten them again, and stir up the stomachs of many
others that were now quailed in other places, unless with diligence they were
abridged from making profit of the time. In sum, they concluded that the Duke
with the two thirds of his army, should follow the Princes, whereby undoubtedly
he should drive their leaders for refuge to shut up themselves in some weak
place, whereby the wars might be ended.

Others thought it better to reap the assured fruit of the victory, by
taking in the towns that were holden in the Princes names, which in this
astonishment might easily be done, but would hereafter be harder, and in
manner impossible, in case they had respite to suruay their own estates, whereby
there would be new stirs: for the Protestants would never be subdued, so long
as they had any places of retrait: but once shut out of their starting holes,
they would have no great stomach to be busy. That their towns that were to
be taken in Poictou, Xaintongue, and Angoulmois, were not to hold out any long
time against a victorious army, so mighty, and every day increasing: also
that so Rochel seeing her self left post alone and open to them, would soon
quake: as for the remainders of the defeated army, or that the Admiral and
Princes were gotten into safety, all that would waste of it self: and for the
hasting of the execution thereof, they might send after them some one thousand
horse, and two thousand shot: and withal, raise the whole power of the
Provinces where they should stay. In the mean time with all expedition to send
for artillery and munititon to perform this purpose, which being achieved,
would inflict a mortal wound upon those of the religion, who already halted
of the one leg.

This latter advise took place, yet but in part neither, namely, so far as
concerned the taking of towns, yet not of all: but as for pursuing of the
Princes, the Duke and his Council never thought more of it, but employed their
time in that which seemed most easy. The Admiral did since report to the Lord
de la Noue, that had they chearefully pursued the Princes and him, when they
transported the remainders of their army into Gascon, they had utterly
indaungered them, considering that passing through the country of Perigort,
and other straights, the Pesants and petty Garrisons wrought them much
trouble, by reason they had none but horsemen, and those in part tired, and in
part astonished: but there sort that they had to refresh themselves, to
strengthen their power with footmen, and to gather in the booties of the good
country as they went, restored their courages, and put them in new hopes.

The Princes having reassembled their forces after the battle of Moncontour,
and taken speedy advise in Partenay what they should do, What the Prince did
after the overthrow.
presently issued forth, and at three of the clock after midnight departed to
go to Nyort, hoping that that place would for a time stay the Dukes army,
therein leaving Nouy with his Cornet, and two Regiments of Harquebusiers,
besides pikes, and the Townes-men: from thence they went to Saint John d'Angely
to provide for it: wherein lay Captain Pills, to whom they committed the
guard, giving him more strength of five hundredth harquebusiers, with the cornet
of la Motte Puiols, and the harquebusiers of la Mure, and then gave order for
Rochel and Angoulesme. The Duke following the resolution of his Council,
caused his army to march toward Partenay, where it found no resistance, but
the gates open and the Town void.

The reprise of sundry towns, for the Prince of Anion.
In the mean time, the Barron of Mirambeau being in Lusignon, a place
accounted impregnable, well furnished with artillery, soldiers, and
sufficient provision, did notwithstanding upon some summons and parley, yield
up the place to his Cousin the young Lansac, thereby incurring great mislike
with both parties, and of his cowardice, reaping only reproach, scorn, and
shame.

Soon after, the Duke sent to summon Nyort, and finding part of the garrison
wavering, caused his skouts and forerunners to show themselves even at the
gates, so to terrify them the more: Money who wanted neither courage nor
strength, therevppon took the field with his cornet, and when he had scarred
away these adventurers, sounded the retrait, wherein as he was one of the
hindermost, and called Maureuell of the Country of Brye, who a little before
departing from the Dukes army, under color of being of the religion, had
yielded himself to Mouy, Mouy unworthily entreated, and his adversary rewarded
by the Catholicques.
and so was admitted into his cornet, bestowed upon his Captain and
benefactor a Pistol-shot in his back, whereby he was grievously wounded, and
being well horsed, saved himself in haste with the Duke, who sent him to the
Queen, where he was rewarded with a sum of money out of the Townhouse of
Parris, and afterward well advanced and welcome to the Court, afterward also
employed against the Admiral, as hereafter you shall understand: and lastly
slain in the midst of his safety at Parris, by the Lord of Mouies son, who
came not behind him, but came to his face and did it with his sword through the
default of his cuirats which he usually ware even in time of peace.

Mouy being thus wounded retired into Niort, where he thought to have held
out: but afterwise being otherwise advised, he came to S. John's to confer
with the Princes, and so went to Rochel, where he yielded up the ghost.

He was a wise, valiant, and very godly Gentleman, a terror to the Romish
Catholicques, and as upright in his conversation as any of our time. Upon his
retrait from Niort, the place was immediately abandoned, and so consequently
without difficulty, was possessed by the Duke. Thither came the king, the
Queene-mother, and the Cardinal of Lorraine soon after, and there reloiued to
besiege Saint John d'Angely. In the mean time Puuiaut forsook Fontenay, as not
able to stand against such an army, and so came to Rochel, where he craved
and obtained succors to defend Marans the keye of that country.

The Protestants troops retire to la Charity.
The Princes Garrisons of Chastelleraud, Chauuigny, Roche-pose, castle d' Angle,
Prully, Cleruant, and other small places, departed to pass through Berry, and
so with Briguemaut to draw to Sancerre and Charity. They took breath at Bourg
Dieu, lately surprised to their use by Captain Gournay, from young Monluc, for
by the way, the Commons of Berry and Chastre, the Governor of the Country had
greatly molested them: but Guerchy Governor of Charity came to free them, and
maugre all the endeavors of Chastre, and the resistance or a few Priests of
Chasteauneaf, a town standing upon the river of Cher (who foolishly and with
the loss of their lives, had changed their portuises into swords, and their
copes into corslets) brought them into covert. Asconcerning those of Dauphine
and Languedoc, Viuarets and Auuergne.
some of them to the number of six or seven hundredth horse, with the princes
leave took their way homeward, purposing by leisure to provide for some places
in Viuaretz and Auuergne, where after many difficulties they did arrive,
loosing by the way some hundredth men, besides such as were stripped: for no
sooner could any man scatter ortarrie behind, but he was presently taken up by
the Pesants, who studied only how to rob and spoil.

The chief of these troops that retired thus, were Monbrun, Mirabel, and
Verbelay, who afterward commanded in Orillac in Auuergne: from whence Saint
Heran the Governor did his utter endeavor to debar the Princes entry: for
indeed there was aspeech, that they purposed to come and winter in the plain
country called la Limagne: but they went an other way: for having provided for
Rochel, Saint John d'Angely, and some other places, they passed over Dordogne,
drew toward Quercy, and below Cadenat passed over the river of Lot, from
whence they followed that course which hereafter we will set down.

Among other Towns that served the Princes in these wars, we must not for
get Rochel, a port of the sea, well known to all men, Rochel a great refuge
for the Princes.
for that among other commodities which it did for those of the religion, it
rigged and prepared great numbers of ships, that took many rich prizes,
whereby great profit ensued for the common cause. Although at that time they
took but the tenth part for the Admiraltie, yet the profit amounted unto above
three hundredth thousand frankes: and diverse courses were made by many Captains,
among the which, Sore bare a great name, wherewith the Spaniards were not well
content.

Nismes in Languedoc served likewise greatly for the Prince, after they had
taken it from one named Saint Andre, As also Nismos in Languedoc gotten by a
notable denice.
by means of their participants in those quarters, that got it by a notable
device, entering by a grate of Iron, filed diverse nights with a soft file, by a
soldier living at hazard.

This grate stood at the foot of the Town wall, shutting in a sink, through
the which there ran in a fountain out of a little spring, for the commodity
of the Inhabitants. The enterprises whereof, one named Captain Saint Cosme was
the leader, being entered by this conduct, were presently discovered by the
Sintinell that stood upon it: In such sort, that the fluee of a mill not far
from thence, was presently left open upon them, and some pieces out of the
Castle shot against them. Nevertheless they shunned it, and being entered and
dispearsed in troops, Saint Cosme went to the grate called Carmes, where he
put a court of guard to the sword, consisting only of Priests: and going to
the Crown gate, he met a Corporal, whom he constrained to give him the
word, forced an other court of guard, and slew them all.

The gate being opened, certain soldiers that stayed withour, entered with
their boys, and running with three trumpets through the streets of the Town,
made a great noise: Chaissi, Mingelle, and other Captains, companions of Saint
Cosme, went round about the Town. Saint Andre and his Liefetenant, not having
the means to get into the Castle, and being hardly pursued, (for they went to
be revenged upon them, because of their wicked lives, and as then also they
had those of the religion, that had fled from Nismes against them, to whom
they had done a thousand mischieses) threw themselves off from the wall into
the ditches, where the one brake his neck, the other his thigh, and the next
day being taken was slain. Captain Astoul, that commanded in the Castle, held
out almost three months against the Town, but having lost part of his
soldiers by a mine, others dead of sickness, and the rest poor and
miserable, he agreed to yield, lives and goods saved, and so this town
restored to the commandment of the Princes, did after serve them to great end
in many of their affairs.

The fiege of Vizelay by Sansac, with the success thereof.
After the battle of Moncontour, the Duke of Aniou commanded Sanssacto take
from those of the religionall that they held beyond Loire. According to this
commission, Sanssac with two and twenty Ensigns of foot, and eight cornets
of horse, four cannons, and two coluerins, entered into Donzi, which being
very weak, had been abandoned: took Noyers upon composition, that the
besieged should enjoy both lives and goods, which notwithstanding the most part
of the souliers were transported to Troy in Champagne, and threescore of them
slain by the people in the streets: Irom thence Sanssac mached toward Vezelay,
a town standing upon the top of a high hill, having but one way to come at it,
whereby the Inhabitants came in and out. All other ways are so steep; that
without many breathings, it is impossible to climb to the foot of the walls,
which are reasonable thick and strong. Therein were enclosed these Captains:
Blosset, Sarasin, Besansen, and Ribourpierre, with three companies of footmen,
and two Cornets of horse. Most of these soldiers were such as had come thither
as to a place of resuge. The 8. of October. Sanssac caused three companies to
make the first approach, but the besieged came forth very resolutely, defeated
two companies; and slew their Captains, and about forty soldiers: the third
saved themselves in a valley among Then did Sansac with greater forces make his
approaches, and within two days after began the battery, which continued
eight and forty hours, then gave the assault at two breaches and an escalado,
near the Franciscan Friars. But he had as sharp a repulse with loss of
three hundredth men and above, as also the defendants lost some thirty men,
with their Captain named Sarazin. Then did Sansac remove his battery into
diverse places, and gave an assault, which the besieged did valiantly defend,
and slew even without the breaches, and in the retrait, many of his men. Then
finding bis bullets and powder in manner quite spent, and his cannons broken
and spoiled, raised his siege and went to setch a new supply, and so with all
diligence returned with twelve pieces more: the rather for that he was by some
traitors of the Town (of whom two were found out and executed) given to
understand of the departure of the most part of the Gentlemen that were at the
first siege, who now had taken the field.

At his first coming he began a long and furious battle, wherein he
enlarged the first breaches, beat down the defenses, and made the rampires
plain, then gave he a general assault, wherein his men at length had the
repulse, with the loss of his brauest soldiers, slain upon the breaches and
in the ditch. Here upon, considering, that three thousand cannon shot, the
death of fifteen hundredth soldiers, and among others of Foyssy, the Colonel
of his foot men, could no whit abate the courage of the besieged, heretired and
thought it enough to shut them up toward the end of the year: but Briquemaut
and Guerchy found means to relieve Vezelay, and to send Sansac to seek his
fortune elsewhere. A notable defense of a woman besieged in her own house.
As small honor did Montare the Governor of Bourbonnois, Moncequie, and other
Captains obtain, who with three thousand men, some foot, some horse, and
certain Cannons, besieged and for fifteen days space, did beat the Castle
of Bonegon, holden and courageously defended by Mary of Brabancou, widow to
the Lord of Neaui, with some fifty soldiers for the guard of that her house.

The besiegers lay before it near two months: so that in the end, this
virtuous Lady having lost the most part of her soldiers, who were slain in
the assaults and ordinary skirmishes, was forced to yield to the enemy, who
sent her prisoner to Moullins, from whence she was afterward delivered at the
entreatie of such as respected her godliness and virtue. Her Castle they
sacked and threw down, for spite that they had lost so many soldiers, and
reaped as great dishonor as might be. This siege began about the beginning of
November.

The siege of Poictiers had been the beginning of misfortune of the Princes,
The siege of S. d'Angely, ruin of the D. of Anious forces.
but in exchange, the siege of Saint John d'Angely was the stay or period of
the Duke of Anious victories. For if he and his troops had not flayed there,
but rather pursued the Princes and the Admiral, the war had soon ended, as
all men were of opinion, considering the fear which those of the religion at
that time had, together with the difficulties which as then presented
themselves. The Duke proud of the taking of Partenay, Nyort, S. Maixant,
Fontenay, Chastelleraud, and Lufignan, sent according to their determination,
to summo^ the town of S. John d'Angely to yield unto him. Piles that commanded
therein, assisted by la Motte Puiols, la Ramiere, Paluel called Serido, les
Essars, la Guard, and Montant, to whom Monsieur de la Person was sent with
certain horse, made answer, that he kept the place for the Prince of
Navarre, Governor of Guyenne. The Town was presently besieged, beginning upon
the sixteenth of October, where those within, made many sallies and skirmishes
to impeach the enemy from approaching: five days after, the besieged with
forty horse charged the enemy, where they slew diverse of their souldies, who
being surprised, were taught to run faster. But the loss they had the next
day after was greater, for then the besieged slew a great number of their me^,
bare away two Ensigns and a half, and a good quantity of arms, Captain
Parisol slain, and his brother taken prisoner, without loss of one man of
those in the Town.

Five days after, the Queen brought the king her son, as then of the age of
nineteen years, with a great train unto the siege, to the end, that he
might likewise have part of the honor of so many conquests in his realm, and
against his own subjects. But not long after, he could well complain that
his mother had brought him thither to drink of the shame, and to favor the
Duke of Aniou her other son, whom she sought to advance. It was thought as
then, the besieged would have yielded themselves within two days after: but
those two days continued above six weeks. Captain la Ramiere was so sore
hurt at the beginning of the battery, that he died not long after, much
lamented by those of the town, for his valor and resolution. At the first
assault given about the beginning of November, the kings army loft diverse of
their Captains and best soldiers. Montesquiou, that slew the Prince, was
there cruelly wounded, whereof he languished certain weeks, and then died.
Biron General of the artillery, perceiving that this resolution of the
besieged would spoil the assailants, began to mollify them by Artificial
practices, and to use a treaty of peace, Person having Pasport granted him
to go unto the Princes. Whereupon a truce was granted for certain days,
which being expired, although Person was not returned, Piles was often
summoned by Biron to yield up the Town, because he had conditioned to
capitulate, if within the time of the truce, he had no aid not answer from
the Princes. In the end it was agreed, that if the next day by ten of the
clock in the morning, being the tenth of November, the besieged were not
relieved, they should yield up the place: as all the Town was in a maze, and
many weeping for greese, about the break of day they began to cry out,
saying: that the aid (which a Gentleman named Fombedoucre, had gone to fetch
with the great danger of his life, and continued after that with great
fortune, to hazard himself for the good of the town, by doing such special
services, and in the end was taken by his enemy) was at the gate of Mattas,
whither Piles presently went to receive them. It being Captain Saint Seurin,
who with forty horse was come from Angoulesme to S. John, passing by the
enemies camp, that lay about the town, having under the name and pretense of
a friend, finely circumuented the watch: at the time appointed Biron appeared,
that received an other answer then he expected. The hostages delivered on
both sides, the Romish Catholic cannons began to play, daily continuing,
whereunto the besieged opposed great diligence, by making rampires of earth.
There Schastian de Luxemberg Duke of Martigues, Governor of Britain, was
slain with a harquebu shot, a great enemy to those of the religion, and much
lamented by the contrary part. Not long before as in an interview, he stood
talking with la Motte Puiols, persuading him to yield, he said: trust not you
unto the Princes nor the Admiral, but remember the battle, wherein your
strong God forsook you, and that at this time you have occasion to sing: Help
us now O Lord, for it is time. La Motte answered, that for the loss of such a
battle, their hope in the strong God, (of whose aid they were assured) was
not diminished. And the next day after this parley, was made the sallie
aforesaid, wherein Partso^ was slain, and at their return into the town,
they sung the 50. Psalm, beginning: The mighty God, etc. And not long after,
Martigues felt that the strong God is living, to aid the weak, and to abate
those that think themselves to be stronger then he.

During this battery, la Motte Puiols, and S. Seurin, with eighty horse, and
two hundredth foot, made a brave sallie upon the besiegers court of guard, which
consisted of four Ensigns: slew fifty or sixty of the principal, wounded a
great number, cloyed six coluerins, and burned fifteen barrels of powder
belonging to the munition: also la Motte charged the Switzers that kept the
store house, wherein were some hundredth barrels and more: slew part of the
Switzers, and scarred the rest, so that had they not made speed to the rescue,
all the powder of the army had vanished in smoke. The besieged retired with
two Ensigns, many dru^mes and weapons, and great booty, without loss of any
one man. Afterward the fury of the cannon was redoubled, and the besiegers
resolved to abide, but not to fight but with cannon shot.

Finally the siege having continued for the space of two months, there was a
capitulation signed with the kings own hand, importing, that the besieged
should issue out, with their goods, arms, and horses, their Ensigns wound up,
and that for the space of four months after, they should not bear arms for
the general cause of the religion, that as well strangers as others, might
retire whither they would, with all security: and that they should be
conducted by Biron and Cosseins. Now it remained that they should provide to
depart the next day, being the third of December. which they did every man as
well as he might. In the mean time, the sick and wounded, the aged,
impotent, and women, took on mightily, neither was there anything heard, but
weeping and lamentation, especially at the departure, which was about noone.
The Duke of Aumale was at the gate of Mattas, where the footmen were the first
that came forth, The un worthee dealing with those that came forth of Saint
John d'Angelie upon compesition.
under the leading of Captain Serido and other Captains, to whom Marshal
Vieillenille, said: Follow me, and let your men come after you. Being come to
the midst of the subburbs, the Romish Catholicquesouldiers began to discharge
upon therest, and with force drove them into their lodgings, where they
stripped them of their arms, apparel, and money: the marshal being hereof
advertised, commanded his me^to follow him with their weapons ready, but as he
ran one way, there was much injury offered an other. Whereupon Serido went
twice to complain to the D. d'Aumale, and to summon him to see the kings
promise performed: but Aumale in liew of going himself, commanded certain
Captains to take order for it. About 50. paces without the subburbs stood the
D. of Aniou, whose countenance did somewhat repress the insolency of ye
Rutters, but so soon as they were passed him, his foot me^ spoiled their
cariages, seized upon their spare horses, set the horsemen besides their
saddles, and robbed them. Neither did they ye escaped this first spoil, go
scot free, for passing by S. Iulians, which was half a league of, they
incurred greater injuries then before. The regiment of Sarrieu that stood there
at guard, suffered not any to escape, but took from them all that they could
find, even to their hose and shoes, yea sometimes to the very shirt. Many
were beaten, murdered, and slain, and some cast into the river. Thus were the
footmen entreated, that upon the kings faith royal, came forth of S. John
d'Angely. The horsemen at their departure did Biron and Cosseyns bring forth,
which notwithstanding they were stripped by their carriages, armor, and
horses: and being passed Saint Iulians, three cornets appointed for their
conduct, began to strip and injury any that scattered never so little: yea
even at Siech, whither they were that day to march, diverse were robbed,
stripped, and slain. And the next day upon the way to Saint Cibardean, this
disorder continued to the contempt and infamy of the authority royal,
notwithstanding the kings safe conduct, his Herault and Trumpet, whom Biron had
commanded to bring them to Angoulesme, where both foot and horse thus hardly
entreated, arrived upon Sunday the fourth of December, about ten of the
clock in the morning, where they were honeftly received by the Lord of
Mesines, the Gonernour, and diverse other Lords and Gentlemen, that wondered at
the former treachery, and advised to complain to the king and other
principal men, and to crave amends. Aumale and the rest made much ado, but in
words only: so that thus the solemn promise was broken, and the dignity
royal exposed to infamy, neither could the Captains notwithstanding their
complaints, procure any satisfaction. Indeed some few of the veriest rascals
and treachers were bannished the camp, and recompense promised for the loft
baggage: besides that, the king seemed to be mightily discontent, that his name
should be so villainously profaned: but this second promise was as well
observed as the first.

Piles and some others, accounting themselves in regard of this treachery,
freed from their promise contained in one of the articles of the capitulation,
departed from Angoulesme and went to the Princes, notwithstanding the
disturbance by Vauguyon, and eight Cornets of horse, offered at the passage
over Dordogne. In this siege the assaylants loft above 10000. men of war, and
discharged 35000. cannon shot: 25. or 30. commissaries of the artillery were
slain by the besieged, who for want of munition, let 12. or 15. pieces mounted
upon wheels stand unoccupied: many left the camp, which found it self
diminished of 18. or 20000. men, yet little esteemed in respect of the D. de
Martigues, and other co^manders. Whilst the Romish Catholicques army lay
spending themselves before S. John d'Angely, la Chastre and others, warred upon
the religious in Berry, and the borders with variable success on both sides.
The protestants in two or three places, trusting to their enemies promises,
were hardly entreated: but they had their revenge by weapons and valiant
resistance in sundry places where they bare out sundry assaults, and forced
their enemies to retire. The kings army by want of victuals and other
discommodities, presently after, went from Saint John de Angely, leaving the
Princes and the Admiral to think upon their voyage. And the king about the
end of the year went to Angers, assigning the Princes Deputies to be there in
the beginning of January to entreat of peace.

The King, 1570.
the Queen, the Duke of Aniou, and their Council, thinking that the Princes
had lost courage, and after the battle of Montcontour, Why a parley of peace
was made about the beginning of the year.
to be wholly destitute of all means to aid themselves, determined to sound
them, to see if they would enter into request and acceptance of peace: hoping
that having brought them to the point, there could be no condition, how hard
soever it were, but they would gladly accept it, so they might be assured of
their lives, and the possession of their goods in their houses. And according
to this advise in the month of November, 1569. a meeting was practiced
between the Marshall de Cosse, and the Deputies of the Queen of Navarre, the
Deputies having presented their articles, although the matter ought rather to
be handled by conference then by writings, which have no replies, the means
therein used, and the delays practiced for aunswering thereunto, made the
Princes know and perceive, that their enemiesment to help themselves by that
device to hinder their affairs.

After the first audience given unto their Deputies, they were given to
understand, that the king could not endure the exercise of their religion, and
that they ought to content themselves with the liberty of their consciences.
An other device was wrought, which was, that messengers were sent into England
and Almaine, to certify them that the peace was made: by that means to stay
the aid that they might procure from thence. And on the other side, Posts
went in all haste to procure money and foreign soldiers. They discovered
diverse practices against them, both within and without the Realm, the effect
being, that first they would disarme them, and then use them and all those of
the religion, as the judgment given against the Admiral sufficiently showed.
Notwithstanding they determined to send Messieurs de Beauuais, la Nocle, and
Theligny, to Angers, to enter into conference with the kings commissioners: and
on the other side, to pursue their warlike affairs, and so make peace with
weapon in hand.

After the battle of Moncontour, we see how the forces of the Protestants were
scattered in diverse Provinces. Such as were dispearsed in Berry, determined
through intelligence with a certain soldier that betrayed them, The Progress
of the warlike exployts in Poictou, against the Prostestants.
to surprise Bourges: but missing of their purpose, by a counter intelligence,
lost in that exployt some 30. men, besides as many more taken prisoners, having
but homely entertainment, with the cannon were forced to retire from the town,
whereto they had brought 1000. horse, and 2000. foot. The County of Lude,
Puigaillard, and Sanzay, Colonel of the Arrierebands of France, after the
recovery of Poictou, got possessions of Marans, whereby the whole Province
round about was won for the Princes, except Angoulesme and Rochel, where the
Protestants were shut up, after that Sanzay had gotten the Castle of Beau^oir
on the sea, from young Rohan. Lusignon was lost through the cowardice of the
Barron of Mirambean, whom the soldiers made their scoffing stock, witness the
scoff of the L. of Losses, who coming to speak with the Queen of Navarre at
Rochel, said openly, that Mirambeau came to composition, not for want of
victual or munition, but be cause he could get no more mustard to eat with his
poudered beese. The Council weening to terrify the L. of Pardaillan, Governor
of Blay, caused the King to write his letter unto him importing both threats
and promises, to cause him to yield up the place (which gotten, they hoped to
have Rochel cheap ynogh) which he held for the Princes, into the hands of
Lansac, who in his letters threatened Pardaillon, in case he denied to obey.
But Pardaillan answered the K. discreetly, and Lansac as courageously, to whom
he wrote thus. You can conceive no greater grief in enterprising to force me
in this place, then I should by yielding, reap shame, loss, hinderance, and
confusion, whereto I doubt not to put you, or any other that shall put me to
it. Neither am I or any under my charge, so base minded to grant you any
greater advantage, then the like force as you pretend against us.

Lansac finding nothing to be had there but stripes, turned an other way and
tried Romegou, the Governor of Tayllebourg, whose answer was not unlike to
Pardaillans. Then because the Isles of Xaintongne, Marennes, and Brouage, had
much molested the army that besieged Saint John d'Angely, by letting their
Garrisons rode up and down, and cut off their victuallers, they now sent the
County of Lude, Puigaillard, and Riuiere Puitaille, with eight cornets of
horse, and twenty Ensigns of foot, who took all by force, and there slew
the remainder of the Lansquenets that escaped at the battle of Moncontour, so
as there were left alive, not above three hundredth fighting men, or thereabout.
Whilst the wars continued in those quarters, in a rode they caught a soldier,
whom Riutere Puitaille sought to practice for the surprising of Rochel: Sundry
warlike exployts on either part in Poictou and Guyenne.
but the soldier labored a double intelligence, whereby Riuiere and others in
hope to take, had almost been taken, but having warning thereof by the way,
they returned to their Garrisons. On the other side, la Noue the Princes
Lieftenant in Guyen, sought to recover Brouage, a place that greatly annoyed
the Rochellers: but as he went about it, he discovered an other enterprise
practiced by the Barron de la Guard, against Thonne Charente, so as the
purposes of the one countermaunded the other. At that time, which was the
beginning of the year, Rochel was as it were blocked up on every side. For
toward Poictou the County of Lude and Puigaillard had a great army: Riuiere
Puitaille the elder held Marans and other places thereabout, and the younger
commanded in Brouage.

Landereau the Viceadmirall, a sworn enemy to the religion, which before
himself had professed, lay in Olone: then the Brittons and Bourdelois by sea,
did what they could to cut off all victual from Rochel, wherein also the
Barron de la Guard, then General of the galleyes, did greatly annoy them,
running many times even to their haven. He now to the end on all sides to
block up the town, with the help of the younger Puitaille, broached a
practice against Thonne Charente: to the effecting whereof, he sent Captain
Beaulieus Lieftenant to make the first descent. La Noue understanding his
device, undertook to keep the place, and so ordered his Harquebusiers, that
had they forborne until the soldiers of this Galley had landed, they had
caught either dead or alive, not only these, but also their followers, who
came on^ row into Charente, and so purposing to land, had cast away themselves
in Sparte. But they forgetting their Captains direction, so soon as Beaulieus
Lieftenant was coming on shore, received him with such a storm of shot, that
they slew him and l'Argoussin: withal, they proclaimed liberty to the
Galley-slaues, who therevppon let go their owers, and so la Noue took the
Galley and all that was in it.

The prisoners were carried to Rochel, and the Galleye to Taillebourg,
wherewith, as also with an other Romegouse, did afterward make sundry voyages,
and took diverse prizes from the Romish Catholicques. The Barron retired with
his loss, and brought his Galleys back to Brouage, where he practiced by
policy, that which he could not compass by force: but he lost both time,
men, and money: to be brief, he did just nothing.

First parley of peace.
The Princes Deputies arrived in Angers, in the month of February to parley of
a peace, the king having understood their declarations and demands, made
answer, that for their exercise of religion, they should be permitted to
dwell and live peaceably within his Realm, in liberty of conscience, without
being troubled in their houses. And for security he granted them two Towns,
which Biron should nominate, wherein they might do as they thought good, without
interruption, with condition that there should be some sufficient Gentleman
appointed, to be superintendant over those places, to see that nothing should
be done by them contrary to the authority of the king and his Realm.
Minding that in France there should be no Ministers, nor any other exercise of
religion then his own, they should be restored unto their offices, except to
such as by injustice they had bin put from: And by the kings commandment,
who had sold them to get money for the affairs of war, he demanded to have
them disarmed, that they should speedily discharge their foreign soldiers,
and yield up all the towns holden by them.

The Deputies having other commission, having conferred with the Queen and the
Kings Council, at Chasteaubruiant in Britain, returned to the Princes,
without any conclusion for that time. During these affairs, War about Rochel.
Puigallard with other the Captains thereabout, determined to enclose Rochel,
and to that end began at Marsilli, Enandes, Noaille, and other hamlets within
a league or two. But Scipion an Italian Enginer, to whom the Princes in
consideration of his service, had given the revenues of Noaille, understanding
what was done, with the help of la Noue and Puuiauts shot, surprised the
enemy in the village, and slew a good number. The others that were shut up in
the Castle with condition of life and goods, yielded to Noue, who was come with
some forces out of Rochel.

The same time died Riuiere Puitaille, the Elder and Governor of Marans,
whereupon la Noue, Puuiaut, and other Captains, determined to seize upon the
Borough, Castle, and Bastille of Marans, where the new Governor named
Chaperon, found as small obedience as might be. Their enterprise they happily
achieved: stripped Chaperon, whom they sent empty away: turned a company of
Italians that held the Bastille, and were loath to fight too long, into their
hose and dubblets, and their weapons, purses, garments, and horses, furnished
Captain la Gardes soldiers.

A notable over throw in favor of the Rochelers.
This conquest gotten toward the end of February, awaked the enemies Garrisons
round about, whom la Noue pursued so hotly, that he drove them out of ten or
twelve fortes about Rochel. Then took he in hand an enterprise against the
sons of Olone, which failing the first time, by reason of the roughtnesse of
the sea, which kept away five hundredth shot that should have come in Barques,
Chaluppes, and other small boats, under the leading of Captain Sore, was set
on foot again the fifteenth of March, and so resolutely prosecuted, that the
defendants were forced, and for the most part slain. Landereau, who commanded
in that place, carried to Rochel, where in regard of his intolerable
demeanours he had been executed, had it not been for such protestant
Gentlemen's sakes, as being in many places prisoners, might thereupon have
been the more hardly entreated: the borough was given in pillage, where the
soldiers found a wonderful booty, much goods and plenty of silver ready
quoined: there were taken sortie good vessels, and many prisoners that
remained of four hundredth, slain in fight. The Conquerers took also above
thirty small pieces of artillery, besides what was in the ships.

A gallant fight of an English ship against five galleys.
About the same time the Barron de la Guard weening to recover his losses,
sought in a calm with his five Galleys, to inuest an English ship of 25. or
thirty tun, that rid near to Rochel, laden with merchandise. But the
Englishmen bare themselves so courageously, that the Barron with the loss of
fifty men whom the English slew with their muskets and cannons, was glad to
return empty, with his galleys shrewdly bruised. The Englishmen lost ten
men, and all his tackles which was torn: but the Queen of Navarre gave him in
recompense, one of the ships that was taken from Landereau.

These fresh springs of the Rochelers procured the sending of Puigaillard, with
fourteen companies of the ordenances, and ninteen Ensigns of footme^ to war
vvpon them. Fernaques, who lay in Fontenay with seven score sallets, made an
enterprise against Langon, and the foord of Velugre, which he won, taking at
the foord thirty prisoners, and killing eight soldiers which cost him
fifteen of his. The taking of this place, with the loss of Lucon, did greatly
annoy Marans and Rochel, and therefore the same day that the Italians came to
lie at Saint Gemme, namely the seven and twentieth of March la Noue departed,
Exployts of both parties in Giuenne, Xantoigne, and Angulmois.
and entering into Lucon, put the keepers to flight and led away their horse:
but in his return, the Italians of Saint Gemme followed him with a pretense to
charge upon him: yet seeing their leader, a man of valor named Sforce, beaten
down and slain, they retired. Puigaillard taking the fields, surprised the
Tower of Maric, the Castle of Grieve, Talmond, and the Castle of Chise:
otherwise not greatly regarding whatsoever his capitulations with such as he
besieged.

On the other side, Puuiaut Governor of Marans, went forth the foureteenth of
April, against Captain Dante, who with his cornet ouerranne all the country
of Poic^tou. Him he surprised at Tire, flew in the place and overthrew his
company, which never after did any thing, as being for the most part all
wounded or slain. Young Riuiere, Puitaille, and Guitiuiere Governor of Saint
John d'Angely, that came to the siege of Chise, in their return were charged
by Chaumont and Goulene, with two Cornets out of Angoulesme: where Guitiuiere
being slain, Riuiere saved himself, their men defeated, left two ancients
behind them, which were carried to Rochel. The Garrison of Angoulesme, that
held for the Princes, hearing that Captain Herbelet, with his company, and two
companies of Italians fouraged those parts, sent forth the Lord de Coignees
with two hundredth horse, who finding himself enclosed between Herbelet and
the Italians, resolved to charge the foremost, which he so valiantly performed,
that Herbelet was slain, his corner taken, and his men either killed or taken
prisoners. Then prosecuting his victory, he set upon the Italians, entered
their troops, put some to the sword, led away the rest, and won some
hundredth or six score horse, about the five and twentieth of May.

Second parley of peace.
I said before, that the first answer made by the king to Messieur de Teligny
and de Beauuais, and la Nocle, Deputies for the Princes, to parley of a peace
at Angers, was such, that after it, the war was rather increased then
diminished. For those of the religion, perceiving that they sought only to
overthrow and destroy them, determined to proceed, and to make of necessity a
virtue. And as time breeds changes, those that happened were to their
advantages, in such sort, that their courages were increased, and their hopes
fortified.

The king, the Queen, and their Council, perceiving that since the loss
received before Saint John d'Angely, they found themselves new to begin,
determined to begin a parley of peace: wherein for their part, Biron was
employed, with charge (as like wise Teligny, Deputy for the Princes) to say
unto the Admiral, that the king and the Queen his mother, desired more then
ever they did, to receive him into their favors, with many such like words:
whereof the effects may well be seen in the discourse of the year 1572. The
king was grieved that the continuance of war bereaved him of his pleasures,
overthrew the love and obedience due unto him, fouraged his country,
diminished his treasures, and consumed his forces. His wicked Councillors
ceased not to kindle in his heart the fire of rancor, and desire of revenge
against the Admiral, his associates, and all those of the religion, because of
the journey of Meaux, in the beginning of the second troubles, and of so many
resistances as they had made. The Queen his mother was much offended, because
that from the beginning of the first troubles, it was discovered that her
intents were to rule, and to cause the one part to spoil the other: Her chief
object being wholly against those of the religion, specially against the
Admiral and other commanders. There was too much pain and danger to bring
them to her bow by dint of sword: murderers and impoysoners durst hardly
approach, the Princes applied themselves to the time, and from their youths
began to know the friends and enemies of rest and quietness of France.

On the other side, the Queen of Navarre and the Admiral, as also diverse great
Lords of their part, affected to the good of the Commonwealth, and foreseeing
that the ingrafted enemies thereof, desired nothing but the weakening of the
same, by the means of civil wars, there to erect their practices, and to
open the way to their ambitious devises, desired by an assured peace to see
some end of the miseries of France: hoping that men's minds being somewhat
cooled, good counsel would be taken for the benefit of the Commonwealth, to
the utter confusion of the secret and open enemies thereof: the divine
providence of the almighty God and ruler of the world, directs our affairs
partly according to our desires, but for the most part, it guides all things
in such manner, that calling to mind that which past after, until the death of
the Duke of Aniou, which was Henry the third, we cannot mark nor say
otherwise, but that the judgments of God are unsearchable, and that his ways
are impossible to be found out.

To return unto the Princes, they were constrained after the battle of Of the
great voyage made by the Princes after their tourney of Moncontour until the
peace.
Moncontour, to keep themselves far from the Dukes army, to assure their
troops, to stay their enemies about towns, and so to consume them, while they
strengthened themselves and became busier then before, thereby to constrain
those that took so much pleasure in war, to seek for peace. This counsel was
good, because of the improuidence of the Romish Catholics, who without
resistance, suffering this small snowball to retire, in time it became as great
as a house, for that the authority of the Princes drew and moved many people.

The Admiral by his providence, surmounted the occurrent difficulties, and the
Rutters to the number of three thousand horse for the field, gave reputation to
the army. They endured much, until they entered into Gascon, where they
strengthened themselves with Harquebusiers, being most necessary for them,
specially to defend the horsemen, nightly surprises much used in that country,
because of the nearenesse of Towns and Castles. They were mingled among the
Cornets of Rutters, and other French troops: in such sort, that both plain
countries and covert, they were always ready to defend the^. Staying of the
Princes Army.
The longest way that this demi army made, was toward Agenois and Quercy,
where it stayed almost all the winter, and by the good entertainment it
received there, both great and little spedde well. In this voyage the Princes
abandoned the enemies country, for a pray unto their soldiers, and whosoever
would hazard, wanted no means, those Provinces were so abundant.

Monluc went about to hinder their passage over Garonne, but the diligence of
la Love, that led the Princes light horse, having taken those places that
served for resistance, forced him in all haste to retire to Again: so that in
the month of December 1599. all the army passed over Garonne at Saint Mary's
port, without impeachme^t at the second time, for at the first, Monluc had
broken their bridge. The twentieth of the same month, Captain Piles joined
with the Princes army, and having obtained three Cornets, made them fly that
followed him so near. La Love and his Argolitiers, made diverse courses and
picorees into Agenois and the countries thereabout. The first forces that
joined with the Princes, were those of the County Montgommery, coming from
Bearn, and it is not to be doubted, if he were welcomed at his return.

The two and twentieth of December, Bole a strong Town was taken: that done,
Exployts of this army in their voyage.
that army went to lie at the Bastille Saint Surin, two leagues from
Thoulouse. The next day, and others ensuing, began a manner of war most
violent, by reason of the burnings that were permitted to be made about that
great Town, only upon the houses of Presidents and Councillors of the
parliament, it being alleged that they had been most earnest, and as it were
enraged to burn and massacre those of the religion, beheaded Captain Rapin,
that brought them the Edict of peace from the king, and committed diverse
insolences and oppressions, for the which as then it was requisite to punish
them: for that omitting that occasion, it would possible not be found again.

The Marshall d'Anuille Governor of Languedoc, la Valette, and diverse others
of account, were within Thoulouse, accompanied with five hundredth Gentlemen,
and 9000. harquebusiers, as well strangers, as of the country, wherewith they
made many sallies with diverse effects: yet never went far from their walls,
for fear of some surprise: after Thoulouse had received those small checkes,
the army went toward Carmaine, Thoulouse checked.
a small town which was forced, and such as resisted put to the sword. The
like was done to those of Oriac, la Faye, Lesbos, Montestruc, and other places:
and no place at that time was besieged in vain, but that of Saint Felix, where
the Gascons were repulsed from the assault with the loss of fitie men, and the
Vicount of Montclar wounded, who not long after died at Castres.

The army soiourning in those quarters of Albigeois, was strengthened with
five or six hundredth horses, brought from Rochel through many dangers, by
Beaudine and Renti, who by diligence made void the intents and enterprises of
Vanguiou, Descars, Pompadon, and others, who being followed by three thousand
men, meant to surprise and hew them in pieces. The Princes commanded Piles to
enter into the County de Ronsillon, where they sacked the country although it
belonged to the Spaniards: while the Princes were at Monreal, three miles from
Carcassoue, the kings Deputies arrived, with Theligny and Beauuais, to parley of
some pacification. The Princes, the Admiral, Deputies to entreat of peace.
and the Rutters, from that place wrote most large letters unto the king, to
testify their sincerity in all things that had past. All the Nobility
likewise made answer by word of mouth by one of them unto the kings Deputies,
most humbly thanking him for his inclination unto peace. The ligny, Beauuais,
and la Chassetiere, the four and twentieth of the same month departed with
the other Deputies, to ride to the king, and to make some good resolution. Mean
time the Princes army marched along by Languedoc, and hard by Montpeslier,
lost la Love Marshall of the camp, a wise and valiant commander, but then for
want of good advise was surprised and slain, with two companies almost all
spoiled, part put to flight, and some slain and hurt: the army approaching to
Rhosne, the County Lodowicke with part of the forces passed over it, and in
short time the army had her revenge for the loss of her Marshall, upon
diverse commanders, and Romish Catholicque soldiers, The Princes army still
marching.
overthrown and slain diverse places and encounters. The principal intent of
the Princes was, to have some Infanterie out of Dauphine, therewith to
strengthen the body of their army, as also they thought to have done in Gascon
and Languedoc, which there they could not well effect. For when the soldiers
understood that they should march toward Parris, they set before the^ the
miseries which they and their companions had endured the last winter, each man
shunning it as a mortal poison, and desired rather to stay and make war in
their own country. Yet they assembled above three thousand harquebusiers,
determining to travel in all places, which disposed themselves by Regiments:
but all on horseback. Necessity constrained them thereunto, because of the
long way, and the rigor of winter. And although that such manner of riding many
times proved troublesome, yet it procured profit herein, that occasions
happening, the footmen found themselves busy and fresh, and not many sick men
among them, because they were always well lodged and entertained.

Advice of the Admiral.
The Admiral beaten in those affairs, seeing well, that although a parley of
peace was then in hand, that it would be very hard to obtain a good one, if
the army approached not to Parris, knowing also that beyond Loire, he should
find more strength, made him to hasten the voyage: but the difficulty to
pass the mountains Seuenes and du Viuarets, made some stay, and much more a
fever that seized upon him at Saint Estienne in Forests, that was thought would
have killed him: his Phisitia^s being constrained to let him blood three times
in one day. If then he had died, it may be other Council would have ensued,
for that having lost ye foot, which turned the gate of so many affairs, they
could hardly have found the like. County Lodowicke was a brave Commander, and
well accounted of among the Frenchmen, but yet he had not obtained the
authority of the other, nor his experience, but in the end he recovered, to
the great contentment of all the army, which after that marched with such
speed, that in short time it entered into Bourgongne, and went to Renele Duc,
Encounter of both armies at Rene le 'Duc.
strengthened by new forces that came from la Charitee and the Garrisons
thereabout.

There it was thought a terrible sentence for the peace would have bin given,
which nevertheless served but for the advancement thereof. Marshall de Cosse,
that commanded in the Romish Cotholicque army, in the absence of the Duke of
Aniou, had express charge from the king, not to suffer the Princes army to
approach near Parris, and to fight with it if he found convenient time and
place. And having found it in a place of advantage, he would have put them
from it with his artillery, whereof the Princes were unprovided, and by
certain Harquebushot, make them leave certain places which they held, one
only was left, at the beginning there were made great charges and recharges of
horsemen, each pursued in their towns. The Commanders that charged first for
the Marshall de Cosse, were Valette, Strossy, and la Chastre, that behaved
themselves valiantly: those that sustained them on the Princes side, were
Briquemaur Marshall of the camp, Montgommery, and Genlis: in this encounter
the Princes, although very young, by their countenances showed the desire they
had to fight, whereby many judged, that in time they would be two excellent
Captains. In the end, the Romish Catholicques that lost many men, slain,
hurt, and taken prisoners, perceiving the difficulty to force their enemies,
sounded the retrait. The Princes likewise considering, that staying there would
be hurtful unto the^, not having any artillery nor powder for their
soldiers, marched in have toward la Charity, and other towns that held for
them, where their army refreshed themselves, and was furnished with necessaire
commodittes. This was don about the end of July, the Princes having
strengthened their troops with some new companies taken out of la Charity,
Sancerre, Antrain, Vezelay, and other towns of their party, The Princes army
marches to la Charity.
prepared three long coluerins, certain mortiers, and pass volants,
determining to march to Parris, but being ready to mount on horseback, the
king sent them certain articles of truce between them and Marshall de Cosse,
which they accepted for ten days, beginning upon the fourth of July.

In the mean time weapons were walking slowly in Dauphine, where Gordes
endeavored (but in vain) to bereave the Protestants of a small Town called
Loriol: Warlike exployts in Poicton.
hotly in Guyenne and thereabout. The Rochelers had for their enemies, their
near neighbors, the Barron de la Guard, Puigallard, and la Riuiere Puitaille,
who had resolved by new indenors to get the upper hand in all those quarters.

Whereupon Puitaille laid siege to the Castle of Rochefort in Xaintongne,
which stood upon the highway to the Isles and to Rochel: but la Noue
dispatched him quickly away, killing a number of his men, and putting the rest
to flight.

Shortly after, Puitaille and Puigaillard charged certain Argolitiers
belonging to la Noue, who were so scarred, that they so scarred also all the
rest of the troops, both horse and foot led by Noue, Soubize, and Puuiaut,
that without regard of their leaders and co^manders, all the companies retired
into Rochel without any loss: for at that time they showed their heels to
Puigaillard and his company, who being refreshed with diverse Regiments both of
horse and foot, seized upon all the strong holds that they had lost in
Poictou, since the surprise of Marans: Besides, the nearer to coope up the
Rochelers, they erected a Fort at Lucon upon the highway into the fennes,
where they lodged four Ensigns of footmen, under the charge of Captain
Mascaron.

Then did Puigaillard with draw his forces into high Poicton, there did he
spredde a rumor that the Princes had obtained a great victory, also that the
king had sent for him to come with his forces in all diligence. By this
stratageme he looked to have brought la Noue, Puuiaut, and others,
Puigaillards enterprise to get the upper hand.
and others, out of Marans and Rochel, to besiege the Fort, which he pretended
presenly with all diligence to relieve with his whole army, so to overthrow
them, and withal, to atchiue a conquest royal. Upon this practice as it fell
out in Roussiere, a Gentleman of Poictou, did not think it much amiss, to
show Puigaillard some sport in a hunting: and on the other side, Puuiaut
hearing of the sport, would needs make one without entreaty. By the way
Mascaron laid an ambush for him, but freeing himself therefro, he struck up
to Roussiers lodging, whom he found not at home: In the return Roussiere was
met withal, and carried away prisoner with others, by whom Puuiaut learned,
that the Fort of Lucon was but meanly manned, and so might be easily had,
whereof withal speed he advertised la Noue, who with greater speed marched
forth of Rochel with four cornets, eleven French Ensigns, and the rest of
the Lansquenets, to the humber of three hundredth. The Fort of Lucon befieged.
The Fort besieged Puigaillard with nine companies of light horse of the
ordenances: twenty Ensigns of light-horsemen, all old soldiers, and the
kings guard, leaving the rest of his troops (such was his haste for fear he
should not come time enough to shut up la Noue between Marans and Lucon) he
marched so fast, that he made his men march two days and one night without any
repast, except that they rested a while at Fontenay, almost so long as while
they might leave and lay up their carriage to go the lighter.

Coming to Saint Gemme within half a league of Lucon, the foureteenth day
heetooke his bed, giving out that he was sick of a burning fever, and under
pretense of redeeming Roussiere and other prisoners, he sent a trumpet with
charge to aduow his sickness, and withal, to take a view of the whole
manner and estate of the besiegers. His troops were even tired with the way,
and many compelled to rest some hours at Fontenay.

Puuiaut being at Saint Gemme, suspecting the matter, finding that the
trumpetter could not well keep his countenance, Puigallards dissimulation
discovered.
laid hold of him, and so forced him to confess the truth. Whereupon
immediately the scourers were sent out to keep the ways, who toward night
surprised foam of Puigaillards soldiers, whom they brought to Puuiaut, by whom
he understood of the approach of such a great power: la Noue being also
advertised hereof, every man provided for the field, by the advice of their
captains, namely of Puuiaut, who persuaded them that they were to deal with
tired people, and such as came to offer themselves to the slaughter: thus
humbly commending themselves unto God, they prepared to the onset.

Soon after that, Puuiaut and all his men, were departed out of S. Gemme to
join with la Noue: Puigaillards footmen approached, assaulted the barriers,
and without resistance entered into ye borough, but finding no body, some fell
to sleeping, some to feeding, and some ran to tell Puigaillard yt the enemies
fled: he thinking never to come time ynogh, entered Saint Gemme before day,
crying out in every corner to call forth the soldiers, and to bring them into
array to pursue the runawaies, who were said to retire confusedly to Marans.
He sent fifty Argolets before, who told him an other tale, namely that the
enemies were at hand, and in battle array.

The territory between Saint Gemme and Lucon is a vine ground, well fenced
with hedge and ditch, with some fields divided with a highway of reasonable
breadth, The batiell of Lucon, where Puigaillard lost his footmen.
on each side beset with bushes. La Noue came first, and provided well for his
troops: Puigaillard could not have any such advantage, especially in regard of
his horsemen, which by reason of ditches were forced to come on a row: this
being considered by Captain Stephen, a leader of thirty sallets and some
shot, backed with twenty horse, under the conduct of Bruneliere, he began
the charge by la Noues appointment, and valiantly set upon the first troops of
Puigaillards horsemen.

Puuiaut perceiving them on every side to stagger, who were some hundredth and
fifty Masters, he brake into them, killed some, feared the rest, who fell
upon their own footmen, and fled with Puigallard as fast as the horse might
drive to Fontenay, which was four leagues of: and such as were but badly
horsed, were beaten down and presently slain.

Then were their footmen on every side beset, and being in the plain field,
drawing toward the bushes, they were beaten down with shot, neither would the
horsemen let them run far, but cut them in pieces: but of all other, the
Launsquenets showed most cruelty, obiecting to the Kings guard the battle of
Moncontour.

Had it not been for la Noue and Soubize, all Puigaillards footmen had
been quite rooted out, so sore were the Launsquenets bent against them. They
took sixteen Ensigns and two Cornets: five hundredth old soldiers slain in
the place, with many Captains and Lieftenants of the Regiments and companies:
and seven or eight hundredth prisoners sent away with a white staff in their
hands.

Puigaillard lost but thirty horse, the rest escaped with him. This army thus
ouerthrown, after thanks giving to God, la Noue, Soubize, and Puuiaut, marched
to the Fort, which upon safety of his life, and his troop, Mascaran yielded
up, whose four Ensigns with the other eighteen, were carried to Rochel. The
Co^querors following this good beginning, besieged, beat, The Fort of Lucon
yeelden to the conquerers, who took many other places.
and took Fontenay le Comte upon composition, that the besieged should save
their lives and goods, and so they retired to Nyort, but la Noue lost an arm
at the siege: Puuiaut, Soubize, and other the protestant Leaders continuing
their conquest, chased the Romish Catholicques out of Obiron, Marens, Soubize,
and Brouage, where Riuiere Puitaille, one of their chief Captains, was so
wounded, that he died immediately. To be brief, the Protestants took from
them all that they held about Rochel, excrept Saint John d'Angely, where they
nestled themselves.

The Barron de la Guard had for a while kept the sea with his Galleys, but
hearing of the taking of Bronage, he retired toward Bourdeaux, whilst Sore
for the Princes scoured the Ocean, where he daily light upon some booty.
Among other his exployts, about the beginning of July he took a Portugal
ship, laden among other merchandise with some forty Jesuits, that were
traveling toward India, but they were stayed, and the most part leaped
ouer-boord.

This victorious success of the Protestants in Poictou and Xaintongne, were
the occasion that to prevent any greater conquests, the Prince d'Auphin was
appointed to come down into Poictou, there to reassemble Puigaillards forces,
which now hopped but upon one leg, Succourd deputed for Puigaillard.
and those of the County of Lude, to the end to come to some new practice.

The eleventh of August after, the two great armies lying about the river of
Loire, news was brought unto them of a peace agreed upon between the king and
the Princes, all precedent modifications and restrictions abolilished: the
second Edict of peace confirmed and allowed, The 3. Edict of peace.
this peace was received of all men, with hope of reunion between the two
parties, through all the Realm. The peace published in the Camps and Towns,
the armies were discharged, as soon as they had conducted their strangers into
Lorraine, and the Princes accompanied with County Lodowicke, in the beginning
of October returned to Rochel: the king by the Edict granted four Towns,
Rochel, Montauban, Cognac, and la Charity, Towns for assurance.
to be kept in the Princes names, for the space of two whole years: for
assurance of this third Edict of pacification, in the pursuit whereof,
Teligny, after son in law to the Admiral, and Beauuais la Nocle employed
themselves most faithfully, with great credit and reputation of all men.

Touching the Admiral, if there were any Commander on both sides that desired
peace, it was he, as by letters dated the second of March at Montreal hard by
Carcassonne, written to the king, the Queen, and the Duke of Anion appeared.
For being friend to military discipline (abolished in those miserable civil
wars) and enemy of vices, oftentimes beholding such disorder, he said: that
if it pleased God to send peace in France, he would desire to die a thousand
deaths, rather then to fall again into those confusions, The Admiral desires
peace.
and once again to see such mischiefs, leaving to all the rest of the
commanders the praise which they obtained, if in civil wars praise may be
given, it may be said, that the Admiral traveled much both in body and mind,
having sustained the heauiest part of ye affairs of ye wars with much
constancy, fidelity, and facility, and behauing himself with as great
reverence toward the Princes his superiors, as modesty to his inferiors, he
never spoke of the king, the Queen, the Duke of Aniou, and those whom he knew
to be his capital enemies, but with honor, without subtlety or counterfeit
speeches, being the man among all those of the religion, specially among the
Commanders in the war, who in a special manner reposed himself upon the
providence of God.

The prisoners that fell into his hands, were favorably used by him, as
courteous when he had put up his sword, as fierce when he held it naked in
hand. Pity by him was always had in singular commendation: as also love to
justice, wherein he continued both private and public, in time of peace and
war, until he died: which made him both esteemed and honored by those whose
part he held. He sought not ambitiously to have commandments and honors,
but shunning them, he was constrained to accept them, by reason of his
wisdom and good government in mannaging arms: it might well be seen, that
he had as good knowledge therein, as any Captain of his time, and always
exposed himself courageously in any dangers: wise in counsel, and valiant in
fight: in adversities magnanimious, and adorned with wisdom to auoydethem.

And to conclude, he was a man most worthy and fit to restore and
re-establish a feeble and corrupt estate: but it appeared in an unfit time, and
that which after happened unto him, she weth an exterior appearance, that virtue
is but hardly assured here on earth. Peace concluded and published, as it has
been said, the Admiral Teligny, la Noue, and diverse others, withdrew
themselves near unto the Princes in Rochel, there with more security to
attend the advancement and execution of the Edict.

They put Garrison for the Princes in the Towns of assurance, except in
Rochell, which was maintained in her ancient privileges. The Emperor
Maximilian the second, not long after, married his eldest daughter to Phillip
king of Spain his brother in law: So that the uncle married the Niece. The
king married to Elizabeth of Austria.
Elizabeth his youngest daughter was after given in marriage to king Charles
the ninth, whom he espoused in the Town of Mezieres, about the end of
November: and the four and twentieth of December going to Parris, at Villiers
cost Rez, he gave audience to the Ambassadors of Almaine, that desired unto
he made an answer that contented them, wherewith they were honorably
discharged. About the same time the Princes exhibited sundry complaints
concerning the Edict, by the hands of Briquemaut, Teligny, Beauuais, la Nocle,
and Cauagnes. Teligny was the chief Agent, and seemed to be highly in the
kings favor, to whom he propounded the complaints of the Protestants,
whereupon the king sent forth sundry Commissioners throghout all the Provinces
of his kindome, among other, the Marshal de Cosse, together with Proutiere,
Master of Requests, who made a voyage to Rochel, as well to confer with the
Queen and Admiral, concerning some convenient means to maintain the realm
in peace, as for other matters, that we will shortly speak of.

The first of January there began a conference between the Marshall de
Cosse, la Proutiere, with the Admiral, and other Deputies for the Queen of
Navarre, and the Princes at Rochel, Proceeding with the Q. of Navarre, the
Princes, the Admiral, and those of the religion, in the second years of peace
that the third edict of pacification continued.
touching the difficulties and interpretations of diverse articles of the Edict.
On both sides complaints were made, touching the infraction thereof, with long
replies, whereof ensued certain resolutions, that were to be sent unto the
king. I his assembly served for a couerture, to a parley of a marriage between
Henry de Bourbon Prince of Navarre, and Lady Margaret sister to the king: as
also to a conference with the Admiral touching the war, which the king said
he would begin against the king of Spain in the low Countries. And all
this propounded and devised to draw the Queen of Navarre, the Princes, and
the Admiral, to the Court of France, with all their principal servants: and
there to give them that entertainment which after fell out. In March the Romish
Catholicques at Roane, murdered diverse protestants as they returned from a
Sermon, and beat others shrewdly, meaning to have proceeded further, had not
Marshal Montmorencie, whom the king sent, made the more haste to suppress the
violence of the seditious, who after many pursuites hanged up three or four:
the rest escaped, albeit 400. were guilty of innocent blood. Six weeks
before, the protestants had been most cruelly murdered at Aurange by their
enemies, whom Berchon (soon after made Governor by County Lodowic, found
means to entrap and punish accordingly.) Not long after, by the kings consent,
those of the religion were taxed to pay the 5. part of their revenue, toward
the payment of the Rutters, which produced much discontentme^t. About the same
time the king and the Queen made their enterie upon several days into the
capital town of the Realm with great pomp. The protestants also held a
Sinode national at Rochel, wherein they confirmed the articles of the
confession of their faith, and discipline of their Churches, in the presence of
the Queen of Navarre, the Princes, and many other of the Principal among
them. The king having made his entry the eleventh of March (the Queen being
crowned the 25. of the same month at Saint Deunis, and the 29. received with
great magnificence into Parris) he went to sit in his place of justice in the
Parliament, where he made a long Oration to his officers of the Court, for the
observation of his Edicts: In witness whereof, in the month ensuing, the
people of Parris began to mutine against those of the religion, sacked
certain houses, and began to proceed further, provoked by their Preachers,
because of a certain Cross placed in S. Dennis street, (in a place where in
times past stood the house of Phillip de Gastines, rased to the ground, because
that certain sermons and the Lords Supper had been made and celebrated
therein, Gastines for that cause having been executed to death, during the
troubles) that had been carried into S. Innocents Church-yeard. This mutiny
appeased, the king that showed great favor to Teligny and his companions, sent
them to the Q. of Navarre and the Princes in Rochel, to assure them that all
his desire was to maintain the peace, and that for his own part, he bare them
great affection, procuring that the Q. his mother, and the Duke of Aniou his
brother, should from day to day leave off their rigors.

And at their departure gave them diverse presents, giving them likewise to
understand, that his mind was to proceed with war against the Spaniard in the
low Countries, and to marry his sister to the Prince of Navarre. Biron was
sent after to certify the like, and men began to speak of that marriage in
diverse sorts, their opinions being divided, some esteeming it to be a snare to
entrap those of the religion, others deeming the contrary.

The king caused certain consultations to be made in Rome, because of the
alliance between both the parties. Pope Pius the fist seemed to be much
troubled about the same, for that effect sending Cardinal Salutati into France,
who (having had certain conference by word of mouth with the king) returned
satisfied.

The effect of that the king said unto him, was, that the king would always
show himself to deserve the name of the eldest son of the Romish Church,
and that all his intents tended to no other end, but only to the surety,
honor, and advancement of the Catholicque religion, whereof the Pope should
receive great testimonies before long time should pass. But notwithstanding
that diverse marvelled much at this sudden alteration of the king, the Queen
of Navarre much sought unto by diverse great persons of both parts, went to the
king, followed by the County Lodowicke, and great numbers of Nobility. The
king and the Queen his mother were at Blois, where they received and welcomed
her with great joy and good countenance, and after many disputations touching
diverse particular points, specially the ceremonies, the agreement upon the
marriage of her son with the kings sister was concluded, and the place of the
espousals assigned at Parris. Not long after the Prince her son, accompanied
with five hundredth Gentlemen came to Blois, where the marriage of Nenry de
Bourbon Prince of Conde, with the youngest daughter of the house of Neuers was
agreed upon. During these parleyes of marriages with the Princes, the Admiral
that had buried Lady Charlotte de Laual his wife, a woman of excellent piety,
that died at Orleans in the second troubles, being in Rochel, married the
Counties of Ancremont in Sauoy, and gave Louyse his daughter in marriage to
Monsieur de Teligny.

At the Court one named Lignerolles, a simple Gentleman, made knight of the
Order, Captain of a company of launciers, Governor of Bourbonnois, and one of
the Duke of Anious mignions, was slain openly in the Court, for discovering
certain of his Masters secrets, Lignerolles slain.
by the D. committed unto him, touching ye enterprise that was meant against
those of the religion. On the other side, Death of the Cardinal of Chastillon.
the Cardinal of Chaste, being ready to depart out of England, to go to his
brother the Admiral, was poisoned by one of his Chamberlains, and died to the
great great grief of all his friends and servants. The prisoner that did the
fact, Rochel was executed.

Articles of marriage between the Prince of N. and the kings sister.
This is the year wherein is set down the arriving of the Queen of Navarre,
the Princes and the Admiral in the Court: the articles of the marriage of the
prince of Navarre and the kings sister, were made at Blois the eleventh of
April. The County Lodowicke at the same time traveled with the king,
touching wars to be made in Flaunders, to the which end preparations were
made at sea, by Strossy and the Barron de la Guard: but at the end of three
months Flaunders was found to be Rochel. Long before the king had caused the
Admiral to be solicited to come unto the Court: and to draw him thither, he
caused those of Guise to retire, who thereat counterfetted to be discontent.

The Marshall de Montmorency by letters assured his Cousin the Admiral, that
the king was fully determined to make them friends, and to reconcile him with
the Duke of Guise, the better to be served by him and his Council, touching
the affairs of his Realm, and began to favor those of the religion, and to
put the Admiral out of all distrust, the king sent him letters that he might
bring fifty Gentlemen armed with him unto the Court, whither in fine, the
Marshall de Cosse conducted him with diverse Gentlemen. At his coming he was
honorably received and welcomed by the king, that called him his father.

Welcomes to the Admiral and others of the religion in the Cout.
And when the Admiral kneeled down to do his duty, the king protested, that
in all his life he had not seen any day more agreeable unto his mind, then
that wherein he assured himself to see the end of all the troubles, and the
beginning of a firm rest and quietness in his Realm. And among other
speeches used, smiling he said unto him: We have you now here with us, you
shall not go from hence when you would. The Queen Mother, the Dukes of Anion
and Alancon, and almost all the chief Courtiers received him with greater
favor then he expected. All these courtesies were suddenly seconded by a
great liberallitie from the king, that caused a hondreth thousand franks to be
given him out of his coffers, in recompense of the losses he had received by
the forepassed wars, gave him like wise a years revenues of all the benefices
holden by the Cardinal of Chastillon his brother deceased, made him a note of
his hand, to have full power and authority to seek for the mooueables, that
had been taken from him at Chastilon sur Loing, and to cause them by express
commandment to be delivered unto him again.

Teligny his son in law, was likewise honored with certain favors,
Cauagnes Counselor of Toulouse, Agent for the Princes, touching the
observation of the Edict of peace, was provided of an office of Master of
Requests. Diverse other Lords and Gentlemen of the religion, at that time felt
the liberallitie of the king, wherewith their adversaries were much displeased,
specially that the Admiral was restored to be one of the privy Council, and
that the king privately asked his counsel in his affairs of importance,
touching the wars in the low Countries, which the Admiral affected very
much, as being one of the most assured means to hold France in quietness,
alleging, that by just reason he might do that to the Spaniard, which
unjustly he had done, and would do unto France: War against Spain consulted
upon.
which was, to trouble him at home, to impeach him from spoiling other men, he
showed likewise to the king, (that fained to like well of that advice) that it
would be good for him to agree with the Qu. of England, and the Princes of
Almaine, the easiler to make the K. of Spain believe by an ample discourse
proved unto him, that the foundations of the war in the low Countries is
just and profitable.

Pope Pius Quintus being dead, who in his life time seemed a stay and
hinderance to the marriage of the Prince of Navarre, and the kings sister: the
Cardinal of Lorraine faining to be in great fear, took his voyage to Rome,
about the election of a new Pope, although before his setting forward it was
done, and being in his voyage, letters that were sent him by Cardinal Pelue,
(who of a Scullio^ in the College of Montague in Parris, afterward following
his study, varlet to the Cardinal of Lorraine, had in few years attained the
red hat) directed to his Master, the contents whereof imported: that in regard
of the good course that he see the king, the Queen Mother, and the Duke of
Aniou take, he could not but hope well of all the affairs. That at the
Admirals return to Court, the king showed himself so wary, as his most inward
friends did wonder at it, for thereby he had brought the Admiral out of all
suspect, so that now the matter that the Cardinal wist of, might the better be
put in execution. That there was much speech of war against the King of
Spain, whereto the king seemed to incline, the rather thereby to stay the
Admiral: that such policies were to be practiced, until they might find
opportunity to put in execution the secret counsel. That the king of Spain
was sufficiently informed of the whole, least he should find himself agreeued
at this present provision for wars, which was never meant against him.

Whereupon he besought his Master, notwihstanding whatsoever packets he
might receive, to assure himself that the king would never vary from the
resolution. That the Queene-mother and the Duke of Aniou bent their whole
endeavors to that matter.

Touching the marriage of the Prince of Navarre, that he hoped the same would
shortly be effected: that the same was the entry to the execution, and in the
mean time, the day drew on for delivery of the Towns of hostage. And
although the Admiral had the copies hereof sent him, he made no great
account thereof, no more then of other aduertisements, expressly given him both
before and after. His mind being altered by the countenances and words of the
king, The Admiral trusts upon the kings words.
who in all things seemed to contrary his brother the Duke of Aniou, for whom
he practiced the voyage of Polonia, that he might send him to play the
Great-maister somewhat far from France.

In the Admiral, who always showed to be wise and diligent in his affairs,
appeared that wisdom fails in wise men, when it pleases the only wise
Governor of the word, to dull the most sharp and excellent wits, and make
passage unto his terrible judgments: as not long after they showed throughout
all France, the which ever since that time, until this present, has felt the
waightinesse of his mighty blows, whose hand as yet is stretched forth
ready to strike again.

A national Synod at Nismes.
Some men of each faction of a good meaning to the state of France, especially
some protestants already apprehending the terror of that terrible storm that
followed, trembled, and bending their necks, lay looking for the fatal blow.
At Nismes they held a national Sinode in the month of May. Others of a more
stirring spirit (after the manner of Frenchmen, who do perform much in
prosperity, and never fear any adversity until it comes) would needs be
busy about discipline, but they were soon put to silence. Many men's
consciences began already to be wavering, and few there were, that showed
themselves zealously bent to religion: but all both great and small, thinking
deeply upon worldly matters, built them goodly castles in the air.

The Princes trusting to an assured peace, three months before the time,
restored the towns of assurance, wherein the king placed his Garrisons,
satisfying the Princes with letters, which he had sent to all his Courts of
Parliaments, wherein he declared his great good liking of the good meaning of
the Princes, in that they did him so much honor, as faithfully to rely upon
his Edict, which he wished to be inuiolably observed. The Rochelers, whom
Strossy, Landereau, and the Barron de la Guard watched upon, would not accept
of any Garrison, but stood upon their privileges, so that at length for fear
of scarring of others, they were let alone. The Marshall of Montmorency was
sent into England to practice a league, who returned sooner then he was looked
for: but toward the marriage gat him home to his own house, and might he have
been beloved, the affairs had been otherwise managed then they were.

At the same time was Captain Minguetiere, sent away with a ship well
fraught, and a Portingall an excellent Seaman, Sundry practices.
to discover the landing places about Perou, and to epsy some means to molest
the Spaniard. But withal, giving notice of his voyage, he was followed and
set upon near the Isle of Hispaniola, where his men were slain, and himself
put to the Galleys. The Admiral himself was set on work with the practicing
of a league with the German Princes: and the Duke of Florence was solicited
to lend money to prosecute the wars in Flaunders, for the which, Saucourt,
Ienlis, and la Noue, levied soldiers.

In the beginning of May, the king desired the Queen of Navarre to go to
Parris, there to provide for all things necessary for the marriage. Where she
arrived the fifteenth day of the same moonth: and the fourth of June fell sick
of a fever, proceeding as some said from her lights, where of long time
certain impostumes had bredde, which being moved and stirred by great
heates, and by an extraordinary travel, which she always took while she
was in health, inflamed and bredde that fever: Death of the Queen of Navarre.
whereof she died within five days after, to the great sorrow and extreme
grief of all her servants. Three days after she fell sick, being in perfect
memory, she made a most christian testament and last will, dying with the
witness and testimony of singular piety and joy in God.

She was a Princess of great experience, both by many adversities, wherein she
showed an invincible constancy, and heroical greatness of courage: most
affectionate to her religion, very careful of the bringing up of her children
in the fear of God, charitable toward them whom she often advertised of
their duties: in words most grave, and full of motherly affection: she had a
ready wit and well advised, but endowed with great zeal and integrity,
pitiful and easy to be persuaded: no offender could avoid her censure:
she opposed her self against vices, and liberally maintained that which she
judged to be good, and conformable to the will and pleasure of God.
Prosperity hindered her, her mind much given to pleasant conceits, being of a
lean complexion, and very agreeable with her ingeniositie, having great
viuacite to comprehend all things, and grace lively to represent them by
writing or word of mouth: with a iesture of all the body, and a countenance
well liked of all men: she died in the four and fortieth year of her age,
upon the ninth of June.

Some say she was poisoned by the smell of certain perfumes, and to bereave
men of that opinion, she was opened and curiously visited by learned Doctors
and Surgions, that found all her noblests parts to be very fair and whole,
only the lights perished on the right side, wherein had ingendered an
extraordinary hardness, and a great impostume, a disease which they all, so
far as lay in man, judged to be the cause of her death. They were not
commanded to open her brain, where the mischief lay, by which means they
could not give advise, but upon the outward appearance.

Certain days after, the king desired his brother in law the king of Navarre,
to go to Parris, there to solemnize his marriage, as it had been agreed
between them. While that at Blandie in Brie preparation was made for the
marriage of the Prince of Conde, that married his wife in the beginning of the
month of August.

The Admiral at that time lay in his house of Chastillon sur Loing, where he
received many letters and messages from the king, The Admiral comes to
Parris.
and because he stirred not, the king sent Cauagnes and Briquemaud to fetch
him, to determine upon the wars of Flaunders: and special commandment was
given to the Provost of Merchants in Parris, and other the chief me^, to take
order that not any noise nor rumor should be used or raised at the Admirals
ariuall in the town, who being provoked by so many men, and desirous to
bannish wars out of France, measuring the kings thoughts by his own,
resolved to ride to Parris without staying, at the many and diverse
aduertisments of his servants, and other honorable persons most affected to
his preservation, that both within and without the Realm desired him, that
seeing he could not conceive any sinister opinion of the king, Confidence of
the Admiral.
his mother, and the rest, that at the least he would consider into what place
he went about to thrust himself, and among so many enemies, but he resting
upon the testimony of a good conscience, and the providence of God, remitting
those aduises, as if they proceeded from men covetous and desirous of new
troubles, which he abhorred worse then death, went with a small company, and
being in Parris, to the great astonishing of all the town, was honorably
received by the king, his brethren, the Queene-mother and others.

A little before, la Noue, Saucourt, and Ienlis, accompanying County Lodowic
into Flaunders, had from the king received commission, to find means to
surprise some frontier town: on the other side, the Duke of Alue had
intelligence of every step that County Lodowic set, which notwithstanding
such was his diligence, that he seized upon Monts in Hainaut. Wherewith the
Duke was so nettled, that he said that the Queene-mother had sent him the
flowers of Florence: but he would return her Spanish Thistles: with many
other threats, which upon particular advice of the course of their affairs,
namely of Ienlis return, of his license to levy men for the succor of Monts:
of the time of their departure, and of the course of their journey, were soon
quenched.

The seventh of July, the King published a proclamation, tending to the
impeachment of all quarrels, as well in Parris as in his Court, and commanded
all strangers and men that had nothing to do within the Town, The Princes
come to Parris.
to depart from thence. After the arrival of the Admiral at Parris, so many
letters and messengers were sent unto the Princes, that in fine, they came
thither almost at the same time that the king arrived, who had before lingered
thereabout.

Many Lords and Gentlemen of the religion, accompanied the king of Navarre, and
the Prince of Conde, whom in manner all the Court went to meet.

Further, under pretense of the wars in Flaunders, the king at the same time
sent for other Lords and Gentlemen of the religion, who otherwise would have
stayed in their houses. Ienlis marched not into Flaunders, notwithstanding he
were solicited thereto: besides the solemnization of this marriage royal, was
for a time deferred, by reason of the scruples and doubts made by the Cardinal
of Bourbon to celebrate the same, without a dispense from the Hope, that would
be prayed and entreated thereunto, and in the end grant a dispense: but
because it was not ample enough to the Cardinals mind, counseled by men
subtiller then himself, they were forced to send to Rome again.

Great was the expectation of Ienlis adventures, who had gathered four
thousand footmen, and five hundredth horse, Ienlis and his troops defeated.
for the succor of County Lodowicke and la Noue, whom the Duke of Alue had
besieged in Monts. In the mean time comes the new dispensation toward the
end of July, wherewith the Cardinal seems satisfied: and the eighteenth day
of August is nominated for the marriage. In the mean time comes the news of
Ienlis surprise and adventure, whereat the king seems to be much agreeued,
who writes to his Ambassador in the low Countries, to procure by all
possible means the delivery of the prisoners taken in that surprise: as also
he suffers the Admiral to send all the succor he may, to join with the
Rutters, whom the Prince of Orange had buried at the same time, causing him to
have money delivered for the footemens pay, who were thought to amount to four
Regiments, besides some thirty companies of men at arms.

The Ambassador of Spain seemed to be malecontent, because the king went
about to make war in Flaunders, and for the same cause withdrew himself out of
France: the Queene-mother also played many parts in this tragedy, faining not
to have known the kings proceedings, and knowing them, made as though she
would have left the Court: in such manner, that the Admiral, Teligny his son
in law, and other Lords, confirmed themselves more and more, that the kings
actions were correspondant to the Admirals advice: which was to make war in
the king of Spaines countries that had kindled it, and pretended to make war
in France, thereby in time to cease upon it.

Rochel invested, provides for it self.
The last of July, the Rochelers wrote unto the Admiral, that the army at sea
approached near them, and that it spoiled the plain Countri-men, coming
every day from Xantongue and Gascon, using terrible threatenings against their
town, openly speaking of the spoil thereof, sending to ask his counsel
therein, specially touching the receiving of eight hundredth men for Garrison,
which they sought to put into the Town. He made them an honorable answer,
dated the seventh of August, assuring them of the care he had over them: and
added, that he saw the king so well disposed to the entertainment of peace,
that all men had cause to commend him. The Rochelers notwithstanding neglected
not to look unto themselves, and to fortify their Town.

In other Towns their ran diverse mutterings, and many were the threats of
the Romish Catholicques against the Protestants, which daunted some of them.
Others relied upon the Admiralles presence in the Court, and trusted to his
answer: delivered as well by word of mouth, as by writing, unto those that
asked his advice upon all accurrences, whose speeches were in effect as
follows.

That as concerning the Guisians, whom they so urged, the King had taken order
by setting them at unity, and causing both parties to swear friendship: that
the marriage of the Lady Margaret, whom the King gave (says he) not to the
King of Navarre only, but as it were to the whole Church of the Protestants,
to join with them in an indissoluble union, was the type of their peace and
safety.

Heerevpon he often besought such as sent him any packets, gave him any advice
of the hatred of the King, the Queene-mother, the Duke of Anion, or the house
of Cuise, against either himself or the Protestants, no more to trouble him
with any the passed calamities, but rather to be content with their daily
prayers to God, to whom they were to give thanks, that he had vouchsafed to
bring all matters to so quiet an end. In brief, the Admiral, ever like
himself, stood fast in all these motions: not that he knew not of the malice
of infinite his adversaries that environed him: neither that being at Parris,
he lay in the very goulf and deepest pit of death: but because through
constancy and long continuance, he had framed himself to rely upon Gods
providence: as also for the having secretly laid open unto the King the very
springs of the civil wars in France, and most lively painted forth the
practices of his secret enemies and treacherous servants, that aimed at the
sovereignty (since it has manifestly appeared) he supposed that he had left
him in a fair path to prevent them.

For sure it is, that the King, albeit as then but young, had a very good wit,
and could reasonable well perceive the course of his affairs: so that had not
such bloody and furious Councelles prevented and crossed his capacity, France
had not incurred those calamities, that since have almost subverted the whole
estate thereof. For in the end he found, albeit ouer-late for his person and
crown, that they that termed themselves his servants, meant nothing less: but
were his most cruel enemies, and such as had exiled and murdered his best
subjects, to the end afterward with more facility to rid their hands of
himself, and so to seize upon the Realm.

There happened yet an other matter, (as the ways of God are marvelous and
incomprehensible) that more and more stopped the ears of the Admiral,
Negotiation of Polonia.
not to way so many aduertisements as daily were given him, to depart out of
Parris, and to take with him out of Parris, such Lords, Gentlemen, and
Captains, as the Queene-mother, the Duke of Anion, the Guisians, and the
Parrisians, most vehemently hated. For certain weeks before, it had been
determined in the Council, to send Ambassadors into Polonia, king Sigismond
being dead, to desire the Estates to choose for their king the Duke of Anion,
whom the Admiral accounted an irreconcilable enemy to the Protestants.

The Admiral therefore perceiving that the king was earnest to further that
matter of Polonia for his brother, that had great credit throughout the Realm
of France, judged that the king had a good insight, and desired to reduce all
things to a sure and firm peace, that the Duke of Anion confined in Poland,
his adherents would be constrained to become milder: that the house of Guise
destitute of such a stay, and doubting the king, that many times looked with a
fierce countenance, would be careful not to be too busy: that in time and
not long, the Queene-mother would be constrained to leave the conductions of
the affairs of the Realm unto her son, whereunto he began to frame
himself, and perceiving that the King and the Queen appointed John de Monluc
Bishop of Valence, a man of great judgment, and one that had effected many
serious enterprises, and at other times, had traveled into Polonia for the
same purpose, which voyage he began the seventeenth of August, it put him in
better hope.

Monluc to the contrary perceiving the tempest at hand, desired nothing more
then to get him out of France, that he might not be a witness nor forced
Counselor to the mischiefs which he perceived ready to fall upon those of
the religion. A little before, he had wished the County of Rochefoucaut and
other Lords, never to meddle in this imaginary flemish war, but rather with
speed to return to their houses: telling them, that they had no great cause to
rely too much upon the fair shows of the Court, neither to soiourne long
there, considering the envy and malice that most of the greatest, and
generally the whole city of Parris did bear them: but God would not suffer
them as then to hearken to this good counsel. In the mean time, the Barron de
la Guard posting from Brouage to the Court, The Rochelers stand upon their
guarde.
and returning in great haft, wrote the 14. of August to the Rochelers,
exhorting them to give credit to the king, to his mother, and to the D. of of
Anion, and not to mistrust the soldiers that lay round about: withal, promising
them for his part al favor, and entreating them to entreat his men well that
came to their Town for their necessaries. Heerevpon they grew the more wary,
and with like quoine and as good speeches paid this spy, who writ himself
their most assured friend. The 17. of August, Henry king of Navarre, and Lady
Margaret of France, sister to the king, in the evening were conducted to the
Louure, The espoufals and marriage of the king of Navarre and Lady Margaret.
and the next day married by the Cardinal of Bourbon in the sight of all the
people, upon a great scaffold made before the gate of the great Church of
Parris. That day passed over in banquets, daunces, and maskes, with strange
mixsture of those of the religion with the Catholicques, whereat diverse were no
less moved, then at the bloody butcherie which already they began to doubt,
and that happened not long after. While every man employed himself to be
merry and make good cheer, diverse that were sent for by the King, the
Queene-mother, and the Duke of Guise, that they might be the stronger part,
arrived in the town. The conclusion having been made not long before, and then
fully performed as well in Parris as at S. Cloud, wherein the Dukes of Anion and
Guise, were the principal actors, not to suffer the Admiral to depart, but
rather to dispatch him in Parris, with all such as would defend him. The
Queen Mother with two or three of her most faithful and secret servants had a
counsel a part, the end whereof, tended not only to kill the Admiral,
Counsel against the Admiral and his adhere^ts.
but also to set other at strife, that they might rule with more ease. Those of
Guise pretended to extirminate the Admiral, and causing those of the religion
to be massacred by the people in the kings name, and to save such as they
might, to make the king, his mother, and his brother, so much more odious, and
so by little and little to advance their desires.

The Marshall de Montmorencie being come to the wedding, perceiving such
confusion, and doubting the Ambuscadoes of the house of Guise, mortal enemies
both to him and his, under pretense of riding out to hunt, went home to his
house, which fell out well for him, his absence being cause that his brethren
were not slain.

The 22. of August, as the Admiral came out of the Louure, where all that
morning he had been with the Marshall de Cosse, Upon friday the Admiral was
hurt.
and Tauanes, to end a quarrel between two Gentlemen, going to dine in his
lodging, accompanied with twelve or fifteen Gentlemen, being on foot about
one hundredth paces from the Louure, and reading a petition, one shot at him
with a harguebuze, the bullet whereof, took away the forefinger of his right
hand, and hurt him in the left arm. He that shot it had a horse ready at the
back-doore of his lodging, whereon being mounted, he escaped at Saint Aut^omes
gate, where finding a Ienet of Spain held ready for him, he took post and
got him to a place before appointed for his retrait. The door of the house
being burst open, the harguebuze was found therein, with a Lacquey and an other
servant, it was known that one Chally a Steward of the kings house, and a
dealer in the Duke of Guises affairs, the day before had brought that
harguebusier into that house, belonging to Villemeur Tutor to the Duke,
recomme^ding him most earnestly unto the Hosts, that the same Friday in the
morning the Harguebusier naming himself Bolland one of the kings guard, (but
it was Maureuel) sent his Lacquey to desire Chally to provide that the Duke of
Guises Groom of the stable, should provide the horse that he had promised.
The Admiral brought to his lodging, showed most singular piety, constancy,
and patience, under his Surgeans hands, and was visited by diverse Lords and
Gentlemen of the religion, the king of Navarre and the Prince of Could, asking
license of the king to depart, as being but hardly assured within Parris.

The king complained to them of the mischief happened, swearing and promising
to use and execute such justice upon the offender, that the Admiral and his
friends should think themselves satisfied. In the mean time, he stayed them
with promise shortly to take order therein: and presently commanded pursuit
to be made after the offender: on the other side, willing the Provost of
Merchants in Parris, to appoint certain men to be ready prepared to execute
what should be given them in charge by the Duke of Aniou, caused all the gates
to be shut, swearing and blaspheming (as his manner was) that he would not
that they which had done that fact should so escape: suffering two gates to
stand open for such as passed out and in, where a great watch was holden, that
no man might pass through without license: and faining to take order for all
things touching that search, caused all the town to rise in arms. As also he
appointed sundry Lords and Gentlemen Protestants to be lodged in the Admirals
quarter, and round about him, for fear (said he) least lying scattered abroad
in the Town, they migh encur some danger: but there should be defended by the
soldiers of his guard. Maureuel was but easily pursued, and Chally went to the
Duke of Guises chamber, where no man sought for him.

Two hours after noone, the king went to visit the Admiral, to whom in
presence of the Queene-mother, the Admiral made a long declaration, wherein
he forgot not to maintain his fidilitie to the service of the country of
France, and of others miseries of the same, by reason the peace could not be
well observed, specially touching those of the religion, whereof he specified
some particularities, desiring the K. to do justice upon the offenders: to have
regard unto his faith and promise, and to the quietness of the realm. The king
made answer, that he accounted him an honest man, a good Frenchman, and one
that loved the increase of the Crown: that he esteemed of him as of a most
discreet and excellent Captain, and that upon that opinion he had so far
entered into his former resolutions, that his whole desire was to have his
Edicts of peace fully executed, and yet desired the maintenance thereof: and to
that end sundry commissioners did pass through all the Provinces of the
Realm, as the Queen his mother could well witness. And she affirming it,
saying: that the Admiral himself knew it full well. It is true, Madame (quoth
he) Commissioners were sent, among the which, there were some that had
condemned me to be hanged, and promised fiftiethousand crowns to him that
would bring you my head. The king promised to send others, with more oaths and
swearings, that he would do justice upon those that hurt the Admiral. Many
other speeches he used to assure the Admiral, who in the end forgot not to
put the king in mind to remember such aduertisements as he had many times
given him, concerning the mischeeuous practices of some against his estate and
Crown, withal, exhorting him to think upon himself, so far forth as he
loved his own life.

Soon after that, the king departed from him, John de Ferriers, Vidame de
Chartres entered into the chamber, that began to comfort him, and in an
assembly not long after holden in a chamber of the same lodging, he showed the
king of Navarre and the Prince of Conde, with others the chiefest Lords of the
religion there assembled, that their surest way was, presently to depart out of
Parris, and to make their account, that that blow was the beginning of the
tragedy, which would soon after be performed, but the advice to stay and
trust to the kings promise, was determined upon, and the other rejected. The
same day the king by letters wrote to all the governors of Provinces, to the
principal towns of France, also to his Ambassadors with foreign Princes,
aduertising them of all that had happened: withal, promising to take such
order, that the authors and all that were guilty of such a fault, should be
known and punished according to their deserts: commanding them to make known to
all the world, how much he was offended there with the Queen Mother wrote the
like. And whilst the Secretaries were thus occupied, the Dukes of Aniou and
Guise, late in the night consulted together, what they should do the next night
following. Saturday in the morning, What happened upon Saturday before the
massacre,
a report was spread abroad about the town, wherein might be a million of
Komish Catholicques, that those of the religion (being but a handful of men
in respect of the^, and craved nothing but justice, in almodestie without
outrageous word or deed) did mightily threaten those of ye house of Guise,
whereupon the Duke of Guise and Aumale, in a great rage as they made show, went
to find the king, saying: that they had well perceived that the king bare but
small favor unto them, and that if they thought that departing home to their
own houses would please him, they were ready to perform it.

The King seemed to show an angry countenance, and with sharp words said
unto them, that they might go whither they would, and that he would fetch them
well enough, if he found them culpable of the injury offered unto the
Admiral. They departing from the kings presence, well accompanied, about noone
mounted on horseback, but not to go out of Parris, where the Parliament spoke
as much as dumb men. Certain were appointed to go from house to house, and by
writing to take the names of all such as made profession of the religion,
delivering the register unto those that had set them on work. Not long after,
those of the religion began to discover, that some bloody counsels were
intended against the Admiral and his friends. For first the king caused a guard
of 50. harquebusiers to be set at the Admirals gate, under the charge of
Cosseins, dislodged all the Romish Catholic Gentlemen out of that street:
which done, he commanded the Admiralles familiar friends to lodge in that
quarter, that they might be near about him: caused great store of arms to be
brought into the Louure, and about evening all the people in the town began
to be in arms. The Council assembled for the last time in the Admirals
lodging: Vidame de Chartres held his first advice, and sought very earnestly,
that they should presently assay to bear the Admiral out of Parris, and that
his familiars and friends should presently dislodge: he showed sufficient
reason for the same, which notwithstanding were not followed they stood to the
first, which imports to crave justice at the king hand, upon whose promise
they were to rely. Vidames de Chartres counsel was most assured, but (in man's
judgment) as then impossible to be effected. And yet after that, men durst
report and that openly, that at that Council where the king of Navarre, the
Prince of Conde, and diverse great Lords were assembled, they had determined to
kill the King, the Queenemother, and all the principal of the Court: a
slander as false as falsehood it self.

About evening, certain Protestant Gentlement offered themselves the same
night to watch with the Admiral: which Teligny his son in law would not suffer
them to do, saying it was unnecessary, and so dismissed them with very good
words for their good will, so that there stayed no more with the Admiral, but
Cornaton (from whose mouth I gathered the greatest part of this discourse)
La-bonne, Yolet, Marlin a Minister of Gods word, Ambroise Pare a Surgean, and
certain of his men. In the Court there were five Switzers of the king of
Nauarres guard. Night being come, the D. of Guises Lieftena^t in this action,
which at this present is to be declared unto the Duke of Aniou, sent for all
the Captains of the Switzers, Description of the massacre of the Admiral.
and companies of strangers still entering into the Town, showing him his
commissions to kill the Admiral and all his partakers: exhorting the^ to be
courageous in shedding of blood and spoil: and appointed their troops to be
placed where he thought meet. About midnight an other assembly was made in the
Towne-house, where the Provost of Merchants, the Sheriffs, and Captains of
every quarter, were advertised in like sort, that throghout the realm the like
should be done to all those of the religion: and that the watchword of the
general massacre should be the bell of the Palace, which should be rung at the
break of day, and the badge of the executioners, should be a white handkerchef
tied upon their sleeves, and a white cross in their hats. If the great
personages were moved, the meaner sort were no less ready to exececute that
cruel commandment, presently watches were set in every street, the Duke of
Guise being come to the Louure had charge, with the knight of Angoulesme,
bastard to Henry the 2. the D. d'Aumale, accompanied with Cosseins, Goas,
Attin, Besmes, with some of the kings Harquebusiers, and all the Duke of Anious
guard, to begin at the Admiralles lodging. The noise of armor and running up
and down with so many torches, soon after midnight, made diverse of those of
the religion that were lodged near the Admiral, to come out of their lodgings
into the streets, to ask the first of their acquaintance what that
extraordinary noise and arming meant at such an undue hour, but being answered
with doubtful speeches, they went forward toward the Louure, where first they
were quarrelled withal, and set upon by the guard. The noise begun, they
rung S. Germans bell. Cosseines perceiving the Duke of Guise and his troops
to come, knocked at the Admiralles Gate, between two and three of the clock
in the morning, upon Sunday being the four and twentieth day of August.
La-bonne came to the gate, and having opened it, was stabbed by Cosseins: the
second door going up the stairs being soon burst open, and one of the
Switzers of the guard slain with a harquebush. While Cosseins stood iumbling
at that door, Cornaton ran up, and being asked by the Admiral (who had
caused the^ to lift him out of his bed, and in his night gown had assisted his
Ministers fervent prayer, and humbly commended his soul to his Savior Jesus
Christ) what that great tumult meant, he said: My Lord, it is God that calls
for us, the house is entered by force, and there is no means of resistance.
The Admiral began to say: It is long since I disposed my self to die: save
you your selves if it be possible, for you cannot save my life: I commit my
soul into the hands and mercy of God. Presently al of them, except his
Interpreter for the Almaine tongue, got up into the top of the house, and
having found a window to issue out upon the roof, and into the gutters,
began to save themselves, but most of them were slain in the next house:
Cornaton, Merlin, and one or two more escaped, and were miraculously preserved.
There stood four Switzers upon the stairs, whereof one being slain, the rest
fled as well as they might. The Admirals chamber opened, seven or eight men all
armed, and with their targets entered into it, and one named Besmes servant to
the Duke of Guise, with a naked sword in hand went to the Admiral, offering
him the point, wherewith he began to say: Young man, thou ought to respect
my age and infirmity, yet shall thou not shorten my life: with that Besmes
thrust him into the body, and redoubling the blow upon his head, every one of
the rest gave him a blow, in such sort, that he fell upon the ground, and so lay
gasping. The Duke of Guise and others staying below in the Court, hearing the
blows, asked if they had done: commanding the body to be thrown out of the
window, which was presently done by Besmes and Sarlaboux, who took him up and
cast him out: the blow he had upon the head, and the blood covering his face,
made the Duke of Guise not well to know him, so yt stouping down, and wiping his
face with a handkerchef he said: Now I know him, it is he: and therewith giving
a blow with his foot upon his face being dead (whom all the murderers of
France feared so much being alive) he went out of the house, followed by his
company, and began to cry about the streets: Courage fellow soldiers, we
have made a good beginning, let us now to the rest. The king commands it,
repeating that with great Majesty the king commands it, it is his pleasure,
it is his express commandment.

Presently therevppon the Palace clock struck, and then a noise was heard
about the streets of Parris, saying that the Huguenots (for so the Romish
Catholicques termed the Protestants) were in arms, (they being in their
beds) and meant to kill the king) to whom the Admiralles head was carried and
presented, and to the Queene-mother also: and then imbalmed and sent to Rome to
the Pope and the Cardinal of Lorraine. The common people ran to the Admirals
lodging, where they cut off his hands and his privy members, and drew his
body for the space of three days about the Town: which done, it was borne to
the Gibbet of Montfaucon, and there hanged by thee feet.

Beginning of massacres in Parris.
The Gentlemen, officers of the Chamber, Governors, Tutors, and
houshold-seruants of the king of Navarre and the Prince of Conde, were driven
out of their chambers where they slept in the Louure, and being in the Court,
massacred in the kings presence. The like was done to the Lords and Gentlement
that lay round about the Admiralles lodging: and then throughout the Town, in
such sort, that the number slain that Sunday at night, and the two next days
ensuing, within the town of Parris, and the subburbs, was esteemed to be above
ten thousand persons, Lords, Gentlemen, Pages, servants, Justices of all
sorts, Scholars, Lawyers, Physicians, Merchants, Artificers, women, maids,
and boys, not sparing little children in the cradle, nor in their mothers
bellies.

The Courtiers of the kings guard, and strangers that massacred the Gentlemen,
said: that in one day, by weapon and disorder, they had ended those processes,
which pen, paper, sentences of Justice, nor open war could not find the means
to execute in twelve years space.

Thus these honorable Lords and Gentlemen protestants, slanderously accused of
conspiracy and practice against the king, being stark naked, thinking only
upon their rest, scarce awake, unarmed, in the hands of infinite, cruel,
crafty, and treacherous enemies, not having so much leisure as to breath, were
slain, some in their beds, others upon the roofes of houses, and in
whatsoever other places where they might be found.

It would be over long to recite at large the names and surnames of all the
honorable personages of diverse quallities, that as then were slain and
massacred. It suffices that their names are registered in heaven: and that
since that time, in that which happened to king Charles the ninth, his brother
and successor, his mother, his bastard brother, the house of Guise, the Town
of Parris, and to all the Realm of France, in the space of twenty years after
this massacre, has sufficiently appeared, that God reuengeth the blood of
innocents, and that their death (although shameful in the sight and presence
of the children of this world) is precious in the sight of his most holy
Majesty. Some escaped
The Vidame de Chartres, the County Montgommery, and diverse other Lords and
Gentlemen of the religion, lodged in the subburbes of S. Germain des Prez,
right over against the Louure, upon Sunday in the morning about five of the
clock, being advertised as it were by miracle, what had past within the
Town, minding to know if it were true, upon the river discovered certain
people that came to murder them, whereupon some on foot, other on horse back,
and most of them without either boots or spurs, leaving all their stuff,
saved themselves as well as they could, being pursued for the space of half a
day by the Duke of Guise and others. Now let the reader here in consider, how
strange and horrible a thing it might be, in a great Town, to see at the
least 60. thousand men, with Pistolles, pikes, courtelasses, ponyards, knives,
and other such bloody instruments, ran swearing and blaspheming the sacred
Majesty of God, throughout the streets and into the houses, where most cruelly
they massacred all whosoever they met, without regard of estate, condition,
sex, or age: the streets paued with bodies out and hewed in pieces, the gates
and enteries of houses, Palaces, and publicque places died with blood. A
horrible plague of shoutings and hollowings of the murderers, mixed with
continual blows of Pistolles and caliuers, the pitiful cries of those that
were murdered, the bodies cast out at windows upon the stones, drawn
through the dirt, with strange noise and whistlings, the breaking of doors
and windows, with bills, stones, and other furies: the spoiling and sacking
of houses, Carts carrying away the spoils, and others the dead bodies, which
were thrown into the river of Seine, all red with blood, which likewise
ran out of the town, and from the kings own Palace.

The king of Navarre and the Prince of Conde being called to speak with the
King, and by his own mouth were certified what had past, adding, The
entertainment of the king of Navarre and the Prince of Conde.
that he saved their lives upon condition, that they should renounce their
religion, and follow his: otherwise, that they should look for the like
punishment that their adherents had and should receive. The King of Navarre
besought the king to remember his promise of the alliance newly contracted, and
not to constrain him in his religion: the Prince of Conde more fervent,
answered, that the King had given his faith to him, and to all those of the
religion, with so solemn protestation, that he could not be persuaded, that
he would falsify so authenticque an oath: In respect of the obedience which
the King required of him, he had faithfully yielded unto him, not minding in
time to come to depart from it in any sort whatsoever. But touching the
religion, whereof the king had granted him the exercise: and God the knowledge
to whom he was to yield account, for his body and goods, he left them to the
Kings disposition, to do with them as pleased him: but for his religion, he
said he was fully determined to remain constant therein, which he would
always maintain to be true, although it were with the loss of his life.

This answer of the Prince set the King in such a chollor, that he began
to call him rebel, seditious, and son of a seditious person, with horrible
threatenings to cause him to loose his head, if within three days he took not
better counsel, which was done in presence of the Queene-mother, the Duke of
Aniou, Birague, and others of his secret Council, whose other proceedings must
be set down.

They perceiving that the massacre of Parris would not quench the fire, but
rather kindle it more, because those of the religion might assemble and unite
themselves together, (as it happens in such miserable chances) give them new
work: these Councillors made two messengers, the one from the same Sunday, to
the Governors and seditious Catholicques of Towns, wherein were diverse of the
religion, with express commandment to massacre them. The other message
contained certain letters to the Governors of Prouence, by the which he
charged those of Guise with the murder committed upon the person of the
Admiral, because of their particular quarrel, and of the sedition happened in
Parris, ceased the same day it began, (as those letters of the four and
twentieth of August specified) by the authority and vigilancie of the King,
whose meaning and commandment was, that his Edict of pacification should be
holden as much as ever it was, Strange devises to root out those of the
religion, and to cover the action of the massacre.
through all his Realm. Whereunto he added these words. And because it is
greatly to be feared, that such execution (which by other letters was
published to be made upon a very small number) should cause my subjects to
rise one against the other, and that great massacres should be committed
within the towns of my Realm, which would be great grief unto me: I pray
you to publish and make it known in all the places of your Government, that
every man should live in peace, without raising arms, nor offending each other
upon pain of death: causing our edict of pacification to be carefully observed
and kept, and to punish the contradictors, and ouerrunne those that would seem
to rise and be disobedient to our will: you shall presently assemble all the
forces you can make, as well of friends as of your ordinary companies,
aduertising the Captains of the Towns and Castles of your government, to
look well to the safety and preservation of the said places, that no fault
may be escaped, aduertising me as soon as possible you may, what order you
have taken therein, and how all things pass within your government.

Other notable practices, but all to the eternal confusion and reproach of the
authors.
The same day were likewise dispatched other pattents, prohibiting the carrying
of all forbidden weapons, all fraudulent assemblies, orrepugnant to the Edict
of pacification: under the benefit whereof, the king commanded all his
subjects to live in quiet and peace each with other. The Queene-mother likewise
wrote her letters to the Governors and Ambassadors in like substance as the
king.

It was agreed between the King, the Queen Mother, his brother, Birague, the
Duke of Neuers, and the County of Retz, and other the Guisians, should avoid
Parris, and immediately after the deaths of the Admiral and his partakers,
withdrew themselves in some of their houses, that so the French and their
neighbors might the rather think it to be some particular revenge, that bred
also the tumult in Parris.

Upon this counsel the King had in his Sunday letters, laid the whole rage
upon the Guisians, who considering more deeply the inormitie of the act,
wherein they had not spared an infinite number of learned men, honorable old
age, honest Ladies, chaste matrones, women with child, young scholars,
virgins, sucking babes, but most cruelly cut their throats: perceiving that so
they should bring upon themselves and their posterity, the indignation of all
men endued with any spark of virtue, or that had any regard of humane
society: and consequently, make themselves the mark for every man to aim at,
as the sole authors thereof, and men guilty of the most wicked action that
could be devised: refused to forsake Parris. But contrariwise, insisted and
most earnestly labored, that the king should aduow all that had been done.

This did they and their Council so cunningly manage, besides that they were
very strong and greatly in the peoples favor, who had been followers of the
Duke of Guise in this execution, that the king with the advice of his Council,
soon after writ other letters to his Ambassadors, Governors of Prouin ces
and chief Towns of France: wherein he gave them to understand, that
whatsoever had fallen out at Parris, was nothing concerning religion, but was
done only to prevent the execution of a cursed conspiracy, practiced by the
Admiral and his confederates against him, his mother, and brethren: and
therefore commanded that his Edict of pacification should be most firmly
observed: But if it should fall out that any Huguenors, incensed with the news
of Parris, should gather in arms in any place whatsoever, he commanded his
said Governors to assist the scattering and dispearsing of them.

Also to the end the studious of novelties should not commit any sinister
practice, his meaning was to have the gates of all his Towns well and diligently
kept, referring therest of his mind to the credit of the bearers. According
to the purport hereof, at Meaux in Brie, Trois in Champagne, Orleans, Bourges,
la Charity, Lions, Thoulouse, and Bourdeaux, those of the religion were handled
as they were in Parris: not speaking of those that were sacked in other Towns
and Villages of the Realm, as also in the fields, when they thought to save
themselves by going out of the Realm, so that in few weeks, above thirty
thousand persons were massacred in France, because of the religion.

The king aduoweth the massacre to be done by his commandment, but specifieth
no cause why: and the next day writes contrary letters.
Upon Tuesday the six and twentieth day of August, the king accompanied with his
brethren, and the chiefest of his Court, went to his Court of Parliament,
where sitting upon his bed of justice, all the chambers assembled, he declared
in express terms, that whatsoever had happened in Parris, had been done not
only by his consent, but also by his commandment, and of his own motion: and
therefore that his meaning was, that all should be attributed to himself.

All which his speech was approved and allowed by Christopher de Thou, chief
President, in the name of the whole company. The next day letters were sent to
the Sheriffs and other the kings officers in the Towns, giving them to
understand, that to his great grief, his Cousin the Admiral, and others his
partakers, besides sundry particular parties in sundry parts of Parris had
been slain: whereof he thought good to give them notice, to the end they
might repress all commotion and murder, which might breed his incredible
grief and sorrow: enioyning them in his name to make proclamation, commanding
every man to remain at home, not to take arms, nor any to offend other under
pain of death: also to take order that his Edict of peace were well and
diligently observed. Thursday the twentieth, in Parris was celebrated an
extraordinary Iubile with general procession, wherein the king was assistant,
and whereto he had (but in vain) solicited the king of Navarre with sweet
words and flattering speeches, and the Prince of Conde with threats.

The kings new declaration.
The same day he made an other declaration, importing that by his own express
commandment, the Admiral with his adherents and confederates had been
slain: not upon any cause of religion, or breach of his Edicts of
pacification, which he always had, and still meant to have observed, kept, and
continued: but thereby to prevent the execution of a damnable conspiracy
contrived by the Admiral, the chief deviser thereof, and his adherents and
confederates against the said king, his estate, the Queen his mother, his
brethren, the king of Navarre, and other Lords and Princes his attendants.

Withal, that he took into his protection all other the protestants: but
forbad them all assemblies or preachings, upon whatsoever occasions. To this
declaration were there soon after added sundry restrictions, qualifications,
and amplifications. Such of the protestants as in sundry places relied upon
them, had but bad success. The wiser sort ffed out of the realm, which
notwithstanding their goods were seized: their mooueables partly sold to the
most giver, and partly stolen, and their immooueables put to the cry.

There was a long Commentary made and added to the same declaration, by one
Gui de Fuur, Lord of Pibrac: as it was avouched before that of religion, who
durst affirm that witnesses had been examined before the kings Council,
Commentaries upon this matter.
that affirmed a conspiracy made by the Admiral, not naming who, neither yet
specifying any circumstance of appearance of truth, for the which cause,
certain sharp aunsweres were made thereunto, wherein all the cauillations of
the said Commentary, were amply and particularly resuted.

Within Parris it self, all men that had any wit or understanding in their
common and ordinary talk, touching this horrible and cruel injustice, said,
that there was neither shaddowe nor any appearance of truth in this accusation,
and to think to make men of any judgment to believe, that the Admiral had
wrought any thing against the king and his adherents being within Parris,
Defense made in the Admirals behalf.
were vain, it being a thing which all men knows, that in the Court there is
an ordinary guard of Gascons, Switzers, and Scots, both for day and night,
besides the other companies, specially then, when the most part of the Princes,
Lords, and Gentlemen of France, were there to honor the marriage, that in
less then three hours within Parris, they may assemble and gather at the
least sixty thousand men well armed, who at the first word had devoured the
Admiral and all his friends, and if they had been six times as many more:
that the Lords and Gentlemen that had accompanied the king of Navarre and the
Prince of Conde, bringing thither their wives, servant, and kinsmen, brought
but their swords, and thought but to run at the ring, and to show their brave
apparel. That the declaration did neither specify the time, place,
adherents, nor means of this coniuration. Before the Admiral was hurt, as he
received all favor of the king, so he held and accounted him for one of his
most faithful servants, whereof the Admiral made proofs with all sincerity.
Being come to Parris upon the word, and iterated commandments of the king,
where no man living ever understood other thing from his mouth (what advise
soever was given him to issue out of Parris) because he was hated, evil
willed, and environed with enemies, but only that he trusted in the faith and
promise of his Prince, that heedemaunded nothing but peace, whereunto he
perceived the king to be inclined, and to lay the war upon the shoulders of
the hereditarie enemy of France, which is the Spaniard: if this conspiracy
had been made after he was hurt, how durst a man being cruelly wounded with
two dangerous wounds, about Friday at ten of the clock, and flaine upon
Sunday at two of the clock in the morning, of great years, troubled in both
his arms, whereof one, the Surgeans were in counsel to cut off, accompanied
with three hundredth Gentlemen unarmed, all natural Frenchmen, most affected
servants to the King, having neither goods, parentage, alliance, pleasure, nor
contentment with their families, but in France, be so bold, or could set
upon sixty thousand men, prepared to fight. Nay, were it only against the
Priests and Friars of Parris aided by their servants, only with fagget-sticks
in their hands? or how could he have leisure in so short a time, or would have
bin so mad with his adherents (unwise only in this, that they trusted the
kings word, and believed not the advice of those that counseled them not to
put themselves into the Lions claws, that watched for them under that great
hedge) to consult upon an action so important, execrable, and of the greatest
consequence that possible may be? Besides this, after he was wounded, the
Physicians and Surgeans had enjoined him silence, and all the Councels holden
in his chamber, tended resolutely to expect justice to be done upon those that
had hurt him, as the King and the Queen Mother had sworn and promised. The
King of Navarre and the Prince of Conde were always at those Councels, and to
conspire against the King, was as much as if they had soght to stab themselves,
and to stain their house with the most detestable ignomie that could be
devised. And to be short, it is as much as if they should transform the
Admiral and his friends into brute beasts, as to attribute such consultations
unto them in such a time and place, and against so many good Frenchmen: and
again, if he were suspected of such a crime, was it not in the kings power
(seeing so many armed men about his lodging held him enclosed, and at the first
word could have seized upon him) to cause him to be poisoned presently upon
the suspicion, without danger of tumult by those of the religion, whose
weakness was well known at the time of the massacre?

The number of those that were termed adherents to the Admiral, being nothing
in comparison of the murderers, and of women, maids, and young children
cruelly massacred, that neither knew where the Admiral lay, nor yet what he
said^, holding him prisoner, they might without resistance or danger have made
information, and so have proceeded against him according to the laws of all
Nations... If there were witnesses, they might have maintained and affirmed
their depositions before the Admiral and his adherents, which by Pitrac is
written to have been reported to the king: further, if it should be so, that
the Admiral and his adherents, after his hurt, did utter any angry speeches,
having known the cause, he might have contented himself with his own house
and family, and not in a tumult and barbarous fury, by sound of bell to move
the people to assemble all the Town, he ought to have hindered the massacre of
so many Ladies and young Gentlewomen, and of so many Gentlemen, wise, learned,
and reverent old men, of so many little children, that conspired not but
against their mothers breasts, or else to get out of the wombes. It may be
asked of the Councillors of this inhumane justice, why so many women great
with child and half dead were thrown into the river? wherein so many thousands
of honorable and innocent persons were massacred, without inquisitio^,
condemnation, form, or figure of process? and which is more, if the Adm. had
never so little attempted against the person or life of the K. and his two
brethren, who is he that knows not, that al ye Provinces, towns: and to be
short, al sorts of people and of all estates would speedily have taken weapon
in hand, in a moment without difficulty had put the culpable and all his
adherents to the sword, with all strange motions, would both approve and
allow, as most expedient and necessary? And touching the king of Navarre,
every man detested the imposture of the declaration: Was he not in the Admirals
hands for the space of four years? did he not profess the like religion?
who is ignorant of the humble and sincere respect which the Admiral bare unto
this Prince, and the great affection he showed unto the Admiral? could those
of the religion get any thing by the death of the king of Navarre? was he not
loved as well of the Catholicques, as those of the religion? Could the Admiral
hope for a Prince more favorable then he, or that could better revenge the
outrage that had been done unto him?

Other circumstances touhing the massacre.
Now let us return to other circumstances and the course of our History. By an
other declaration of the 30. day of August, the king gave to understand to the
Governors of his Provinces, that the Admiral and Gentlemen of the religion
that were with him in Parris, without expecting the justice that he had
promised to execute upon the wonder of the Admiral, had conspired against his
Majesty, his mother, his brethren, the king of Navarre, and other the Lords
and Princes about them, and against the estate: yea, that some of the chiefest
and adherents to the conspiracy, acknowledging their fault, had confessed it.

These principal adherent confessors he names not: as indeed there were
none, unless he means Bouchauanes of Picardie, who upon Saturday had been
present at one of the consultations, wherein the Vidame of Chartres the second
time with vehement speeches in the pesence of the K. of Navarre, the Prince of
Conde, and many others, had urged the remove of the Admiral out of Parris,
wishing his friends and familiars to follow after: as hourly discovering many
things that put him in more doubt. He was in manner the only man that was of
that opinion: for the rest, they stood upon it, that so they should do the
king wrong, in that they should call into question his faith and sincere
meaning: that it might suffice quietly and modestly to crave justice at his
hands: that the matter was yet fresh, and therefore it might be feared, least
the king should be offended if they proceeded so hotly. Other report could not
Bouchananes make in honor or with a safe conscience. Concerning Briquemant and
Cauagues whom they meant to use, we will speak hereafter. Only I will here
add one note taken out of the seventh book of the remembrances of Monluc one
of the Marshals of France, and a sworn enemy to the Protestants.

He speaking of the murders, says: Albeit I was then Master only of my own
house, Monlucs testimony.
yet the Queen did me that honor to write unto me, and to send me word that
they had discovered a great co^spiracie against the king and his estate. I wot
what I believed: but it is not good to anger a man's Master. The king never
forget the chase that the Admiral gave him from Meaux to Parris swifter then
ordinary. We forget our selves when we come to the pinch: and never think
that kings have greater stomachs then we, and withal, that they can sooner
forget a good piece of service, then any offense.

These be Moulucs words, who a little before had said, that the Admiral was
unwise to thrust himself into Parris, to the end, to make the world to think
that he ruled all. I wonder how a man so wise and polliticke in worldly
matters, could commit such a gross oversight. But he paid well for it: for
it cost him his life and many more.

Why the defense of the massacre is here set down
I have drawn the declaration or defense before said out of diverse treatises,
at that time imprinted, without overmuch thrusting mine own judgment into such
discourses. And also the innocence of the massacred, might well maintain it
self, and enjoy an assured reward, much better then the judgment of humane
sense can comprehend. I thought it no prejudice to these recuiels, to insert
this extract of their defense.

Touching the particularities of the massacres in other Towns of the Realm,
they having been set down and particularly noted in other books as yet extant,
I mean not herein to present this sea of innocent blood, which being hidden in
the ground and mixed with the waters, has cried unto heaven, and procured so
many blows from thence, upon the authors and adherents of so many murders.

Diverse councils to surprise Roche.
Now there rested no more but one small moate within the eyes of the king and
his Council, which was Rochel, to the Inhabitants whereof, Strossy and Poulin,
surnamed Barron de la Guard, wrote certain friendly letters, dated the last of
August, offering them men to keep their Town, and asking them great store of
victuals to furnish the kings Navy by sea: but the Rochelers having good cause
to furnish themselves by a letter dated the second of September, answered with
all modesty, that they had no need of men to defend them, desiring to live
peaceably in their ancient privileges, and that they wanted victualles,
whereby it was impossible for them to help others.

Montpesac Seneschall of Poictou sent them a long letter, wherein he mocked the
Admiral, and sought by long preaching to persuade them, but by silence they
abated his babbling: by letters dated three days after they sought to pacify
Strossy, perceiving that the enterprise of Flaunders was found to be but a
smoke. After the news of the massacre, they withdrew themselves into Rochel,
with their arms and furniture, wherein after that, they did good service.
Fifty Gentlemen, one thousand five hundredth soldiers, five and fifty
Ministers, as well of Poictou and Xaintongne, as of other Provinces, saved
themselves therein, and a public fast was solemnized among them upon the
ninth and eleventh of the same month.

The Councillors of the massacre perceiving that Strossy did nothing,
appointed Biron Great-maister of the artillery, to be their Governor, by
commandment from the King, using many fair speeches, and promising much unto
the Rochelers, to whom Biron, that during the massacre had been in danger,
wrote very favorably. The Rochelers spared neither paper nor Ink, holding
them close and in covert.

And against Sancerre.
An other Town namnd Sancerre upon Loire, not far from Parris, served also
for retrait to diverse of the religion, escaped from the sword of the massacres
of Bourges, Orleans, and other places.

The Inhabitants behaved themselves with all good will toward such poor
fugitives, notwithstanding letters of the 3. of September. were sent unto them,
by the which it was enjoined them to receive of their Captain, him that should
be sent them by la Chastre Governor of Berry, and into the Castle such
troops as he should think convenient. In the mean while, the Romish
Catholics triumphed in Parris, thinking to have gotten all the world, in the
middle of their triumphs and feasts, about the first of September, certain
good persons by night went to the Gibbet of Montfalcon, and took down the
Admirals body, which they buried in so secret a place, that what inquisition
soever his enemies could make, it could not be found.

They nevertheless loath to loose such a Relicque, which they daily visited
very devoutly (whom the king himself went to look upon, saying to a certain
Lord that wished him not to go near, that the savoring carrion of a dead
enemy was most sweet) had rather hang up a bottell of hay in form of a
man, then have nothing at all.

A Minister named du Rosier, a man of a ready wit, but turbulent and insolute,
being cought as he was flying from Parris, began to halt, and soon after
revolted from the religion which he himself had maintained in his sermons and
writings, and seduced other prisoners: for being brought to Parris, he joined
with sundry Sorbonnists, and began to oppugn the profession of faith of the
king of Navarre, of the Prince of Conde, and of diverse Ladies and Gentlewomen.

In the mean time, in the prisons they murdered such as continued constant in
their religion, whose bodies they cast into the rivers by night. I told you
before, that the king had sent a precept or large declaration to the Rochelers,
also that Biron their appointed Governor, The proceedings in the expeditions,
to catch the Rochelers.
had written to them very favorable letters.

Audeuars the king of Nauarres Steward, charged with such packets and very
ample instructions, arrived at Rochel the seven and twentieth day of September,
where he forgot no part of his charge, as well to the Mayor and other
Magistrates, as to sundry particular persons, for the most part of the
religion, and encouraged by a number of their brethren commen to them for
refuge. A few days after Audeuars coming, having deliberately and at large,
communicated of their affairs in full assembly, they made an ample answer to
the commandment unto them enjoined in the kings name, concerning the admission
of Garrisons: saying that they could not aduow that commandment to proceed
from the king, to the testimony of whose letters dated the 22. and the 24. day
of Aug. they appealed, wherein he lays the whole burden of the sedition and
massacre upon the house of Guise, protesting that he had much ado to keep
himself safe in the castle of the Louure with his guard. Their defenses.
Further, that they could not possibly believe that ye K. should be so far
deuoid of counsel, as to cut off his own arms: to pollute the sacred marriage
of his sister with the effusion of so much noble and innocent blood: defame yt
French nation, and his royal name with so cruel an actio^: either Minister an
argument to al historio graphers: to write so tragical a History, as neither
antiquity of time has seen yt like, or posterity can hear of without horror.
That this co^spiracie was continued in Rome, and hatred in Parris, by the rage
of ye Guisians, who pretended to seize upon the kingdom. Withal, they defended
the Adm. innocence, and craved to be permitted to live in their privileges.
Other remonstrances they made to Audeuars, concerning some points of his
commission: as yt exercise of religion, etc. and as he clawed the^ with
infinite flatterings, so they returned him more Court holy water then he was
ware of, and in this necessity wanted no polliticke wisdom. Biron in the
mean time gathered toward them, and the Barron de la Guard began openly to
threaten them, which caused them to look better to their business.

The kings excuses to his friends.
The king sent his excuses to the Pope, and to the Duke of Alue, touching the
rumor of wars in the low countries, he called the Spanish Ambassador and
showed him, that all the former counsels tended only to the rooting out of the
Huguenots, and that he meant to continue in peace and good correspondence with
the king of Spain, to whom he sent a Gentleman purposely with letters of his
own hand, to assure him of his intent. On the other side, upon the foureteenth
of September. there was a precept sent to the Governors of the Provinces to
inquire of al such protestants, as during the troubles had borne any office in
the armies or towns of war. In Prouence, Precepts against the Protestants.
through the discretion of the County of Tend there was no murder committed:
neither in Bourgondy through the subtlety of the Guisians, who purposed to lay
all the hatred upon the king, notwithstanding themselves were the executioners
in Parris, and that their servants, Troyes in Champagne had shed the blood of
sundry innocents, as also in sundry other Towns. Some murders, but indeed
but few, were committed in Auuergne and Dauphine: Picardie and Britain were
reasonably quiet.

The two and twentieth day of September, there was a new precept sent to the
Governors and Lieftenants of Provinces, for the disgrading of all protestants
from their estates and public offices which they exercised, notwithstanding
they were content to renounce their religion, except such as had inferior
offices, whom the king permitted to enjoy them, in case they would abjure
according to a form devised by the faculty of Sorbon, and adjoined to the
same precept..

Excusers of the massacre.
Besides all this, they hired certain writers to excuse the massacre, and
thereof to publish their books both in Latin and French. Some Lawyers were
dealers that way: but they met with those that so took them up, that
afterward, a hundredth times and a hundredth, they condemned such purposes. The
Rochelers spent the whole month of September in consultations upon new
letters from the king, the Quesne-mother, the king of Navarre, the Duke of
Aniou, and Biron: also upon sundry negotiations for the receiving of the said
Biron for their Governor, who to that end was come within half a days
journey of their Town. Their final resolution was this: not to accept of
Biron before the whole army at hand were cassuered and quite scattered,
retaining the free exercise of religion, and that Biron should not bring them
any other troops.

In the beginning of October, those of Sancerre were invested by certain
Garrisons that began to molest them: but they made so brave a sallie, that
having forced the barricadoes of their enemies, slain 45. of them in the
streets and houses, scattered the rest, and taken some prisoners, What
entertainment the King of Na. and the Prince of Conde had after the massacre.
they were released of the^ for a few days. The Rochelers at the same time
were su^moned either to accept of Biron, who would have entered with certain
troops, without causing the army to retire, or else to accept the war, while
they consulted thereupon. Let us see what entertainment the king of N. and the
Prince of Conde had within Parris, their enemies not content to have led the^
to ye Mass, after abiuration of ye religion, made the^ be assistant at the
ceremonies of S. Michael, published in their presence so many precepts and
libels, made and devised against the innocence of the massacred, constrained
them to hear the means devised for the extirping of therest. Besides, their
said enemies aided themselves by the Cardinal of Bourbon, uncle to those two
Princes, to induce them to acknowledge and do homage to the Pope: in such sort,
that messages dated the third of October, were sent in their names, whereby
they desired to be received into the bosom of the Romish Church. The Pope
sent them his pardons upon the first of November.

To return to the Rochelers, that persisted in their determination. About the
beginning of October, the enemy began by sundry means to cut off their
victualles and provision, under pretense of relieuing the Navy that might
depart far enough from them: but they soon blew up that mine. Then was there
an other advise, which was this: Diverse Gentlemen and good soldiers were
withdrawn thither for succor, who purposed to set a large price upon their
skins to any that should assail them: and many others likewise were departed
the Realm. Heervppon the king by his letters pattents of the eight of October,
says: that as a good householder he pittieth his subjects that live in penury
out of their own houses: and so emoyneth his Governors of Provinces throughout
their jurisdictions, by public proclamation to call home such as were absent,
whose goods he decrees to be confiscate, in case they return not within a
certain time limited them. The same day the Barron de la Guard, intruding
himself by letters to threaten the Rochelers, had his answer: That they were
the kings faithful servants, though he were none, who wrongfully molested them
with his Galleys, and would not retire: That they prayed God to mollify the
Barrons heart, that he might not trouble them, but set them at liberty: That
they were resolved to maintain themselves in their privileges: to keep their
town safe from like murder as were committed in other Towns, which they
accounted innocent from the crime of rebellion, wherewith the Barron charged
them.

That so long as they heard and beheld such and so horrible novelties, and were
by the Barron so boldly entreated as they had been, they might and would,
justly pour forth their complaints to God and the King. Whilst Biron and
others did thus, but in vain, solicit the Rochelers, there was at Parris
contrived an Edict of the tenth of October, in the name of the king of Navarre,
wherein he prohibited all public exercise of any but the Romish religion
throughout his countries.

But his subjects of Bearne, even at the first discovering manifest falsehoods
in that writing: withal, knowing that their sovereign was in his enemies
hands, neither had about him any servants, but such as were foisted in by the
Queene-mother, or the house of Guise, made no account of that paper: but using
all lawful means to avoid surprises, did with many difficulties bear
themselves in that estate wherein the Queen had left them: hoping if their
king might once escape prison, he would tell them another tale. The one and
twentieth day of October, Troubles befallen the Rochelers, and how they
remedied the same.
Biron writ by du Vigean to the Rochelers, who would not grant this Deputy
entry, albeit he came upon safe conduct to Tadon, a village near unto the
town, when he had his answer in like term as the former.

He going the next day to lie at Sigongnes, which was three leagues thence,
certain soldiers of the company of Saint Stephen forced his lodging, slew
three of his household servants, gave him five wounds with their swoords in his
bed, carried away his horses and best stuff, which the next day they sold to
the most giver, in a village where Captain Saint Stephen was lodged. This
scandal troubled the Rochelers, who ended it thus. That Stephen and Guymeniere
should depart from Rochel: Besides the answer expressly given to Biron, the
Rochelers by several letters did greatly excuse themselves of this mishap,
which fell out without their notice, and to the great grief of their Deputy,
beseeching him, as also they did du Vigean, not to impute unto them such an
action, whereto they had given neither counsel nor consent: but were
wonderfully sorry, that Vigean should be so wronged at his return from his
Embassage.

Many misliked that Vigean a Gentleman of the religion, and a man of calling,
should take upon him such a commission: but his reward caused him to be
afterward better advised. Now the Rochelers being diversely advertised, that
shortly they should see an army before their walls: also that their Town was
the mark whereat their enemies aimed, gave a new onset upon the Country of
Montgommery, the Vidame of Chartres, and other Noble men fled into England,
to crave some succor at their hands. Their Deputies set sail in the evening,
the five and twentieth day of October. Thus was it open war: for so many as
were known to be Rochelers, were every where taken prisoners and put to their
ransom: all vessels sailing toward their haven stayed: all merchandise found
to belong to any Rocheler, seized and confiscate: to be short, all actions of
hostility put in practice against them.

Neither were the Sancerreans at that time much quieter: for Cadaillet one of
the Grooms of the chamber, and the kings Hunter, sometimes servant to the
Earl of Sancerre, a man well known in the Town, was sent to confer with them.

He played the cunning Courtier, setting debate among them that before were
good friends, whereof ensued a tumult, whilst one would grant, and an other
would deny the coming in of the Lord of Fontaines, who was sent to root out
the protestants. Hereof grew murder and confusion, whereof we will speak
hereafter.

For the advancement of the Bishop of Valence, Negotiation in Poland, where the
French name was miserably rent in pieces, and to cut off the devises of the
protestants, both within and without the Realm.

Diverse devises to extirpe those of the religion, and to root out their
memory.
The king was persuaded that it would be good to take some of them that were
found to have escaped the massacre, and as then kept in prison, and to make
process against them in form of justice, and to put to the torture some of
those that had escaped the massacre, and being fetched out of their corners,
had been committed to prison, that they might be condemned by sentence of
certain Judges appointed for the purpose, and so executed in the presence of
the people: and to the same, to add a sentence against the Admiral, of whose
body (taken away as I said before) they should make a similitude or image,
which the executioner should draw along the streets, and then hang it on the
Gibbet.

Then that there might be published the kings letters pattents, wherein it
should be decreed, that the protestants should be preserved both in body and
goods, and suffered to live in all liberty of conscience, so to allure them
peaceably by this declaration, that afterward they might speed as the rest:
besides, to publish many books in excuse of all that was past, and the same to
dispearse in all places, especially in Poland and Almaine: and withal, to
charge the Ambassadors in England, Suizerland, and other foreign countries,
to justify the king and the Romish Catholicques. All this was diligently put
in execution.

Notable persons executed under color of justice
Touching the first point, Briquemant the father, a Gentleman of the age of
seventy years, one that had valiantly employed himself in the service of the
kings of France, having been found in the house of the Ambassador of England,
wherein he had saved himself while the greatest furies of the massacre were
executed: was put in close prison, with Cauagnes, Master of the Requests.

These two bare great affection both unto the religion and the Admiral, and
otherwise were of great reputation in France, they were threatened to be torn
in pieces upon the rack, if they would not write and sign with their hands,
that they had conspired with the Admiral to kill the king, his brethren, the
Queen, and the king of Navarre: but they having constantly refused to avouch
so horrible a lie, against their innocencies and themselves, they were racked
and cruelly tormented, and by sentence of the Court of Parliament in Parris,
dated the seven and twentieth of October, were declared guilty of treason, and
condemned to be hanged upon a Gibbot: which was executed. The Queen Mother
leading the king, her two other sons, and the king of Navarre her son in
law to see the execution. Her Councillors thinking that at that last exployt
it would be wrought, if Briquemaut in presence of all the people would ask
pardon of the king, sending some unto him to certify him, that so he might
easily save his life: that the king was merciful, and that he should have
pardon if he asked it, confessing this fact wherewith he was charged.
Briquemaut answered boldly and with a good courage, that it belonged not unto
him, but to the king to ask pardon of God for such an offense: that he would
never ask pardon for a fault wherein he had not offended, but knew himself to
be innocent, whereof he called God to witness, desiring him to pardon the
kings so great disloyalty. Cauagnes did the like until he died: in such
sort, that this execution served to no other end, but more to publish
theiniquitie of so many pernicious councels.

Asnare discovered and anoyded.
With these two notable persons, they hung a man of hay made like the Admiral,
against whom also was pronounced a small sentence of death. Touching the
declarations in favor of those of the religion, the Duke of Guise discovered
the snare, so that few of them were taken. For that by letters sent by his
mother, the same day that Briquemaut was executed, she wrote unto him, that
the king had the said day, determined with his Council, wholly to root out
those of the religion, whom he termed seditious vermin, not sparing the
children, nor strangers, that had given them aid, therein discovering
enterprises against the Prince of Orange and others: which vanished like smoke.
Among the Ambassadors that excused the king, Monluc was one, the easiler to
advance his affairs of Polonia, whereof we mean not to recite any
particularities, as not pertaining properly to our intent. The beginning of
open war against the Sancerrans.
Ye heard before how Cadaillet had sown division among the Sancerreans, now
shall you see the harvest of that grain.

The ninth of November, the Lord of Fontaines brother, surprised the Castle by
intelligence, with some of the Inhabitants that enclosed themselves therein
with him: albeit through the valor and resolution of the rest, namely of the
protestants, he was forced to avoid again within four and twenty hours
after, even as Fontaines was coming with a strong succor. After this, the
Sancerrcans began to stand better upon their guard, having about 650.
soldiers under diverse Captains and Lieftenants, and Martignon, Pilard,
Martinat, la Fleur, Chaillon, Montauban, Buisson, Paquelon, la Minee, Doriual,
whose General was Andrew Ioanneau, Bayliffe of the Town. They had moreover
one hundredth and fifty labourours in their Vinyeards, who upon necessity
bare themselves very well, either upon the walls at the assaults and
scalings, or in the sallies, with their slings, which were termed Sancerrean
Pistolles. Neither were their women slack during this siege, which began
about the twentieth day of November: but now for Rochel.

The seventh of November, the Barron de la Guard sent two Galleys to take a
view of the Town, under pretense of sending his letters. But the Lord of
Essars, whom the Rochelers had made their General, Also against the Rochelers.
sent the next night after, the Barrons two Galleys, whereof the one was taken,
an Inginer slain, and an other taken, and the other hardly escaped. Heerevpon
ensued the publication of the Kings letters pattents, dated the sixth of that
month, but not yet published, wherein he denounced open war to the Rochelers.
Howbeit before any defy, there rested yet the last stratageme to be put in
practice, because the king was loath to enter into arms, as doubting least so
he might fall into new troubles, which he hoped to be now quite quenched.

The King, the Queen Mother, and others, had earnestly sa^luted la None, (whom
the Duke of Alue after the taking of Montz in Henaut, had sent back into
France) to labor that the Rochelers (who in regard of his virtues both loved
and honored him) would grow to composition: he after many excuses, as well in
regard of the impossibility, as also because in conscience he could not
counsel the Rochelers to yield their throats to their enemies, upon
commandment accepted the message, rather in purpose to serve the Rochelers as
he did, and so to get from the Court, then to hurt the professors of the
religion, which himself most constantly professed even to the death.

For after he had performed his commission in the company of the Abbot of
Gadagne, and given account of his Embassage to the Lord of Biron, who lay at
Saint John d'Angely, he returned straight to Rochel, where he so bare
himself, that he was one of the chief instruments that God used for the
preservation of the Town during the siege. Whereas contrariwise, Captain Saint
Stephen, withdrew himself to his own house, and his Lieftenant Guymeniere,
who had a long time made profession of religion, went to Landereau and others,
to help to war upon the Rochelers.

Sundry places of refuge for the Protestants.
Besides Sancerre and Rochel, the Inhabitants of Montauban, Nismes, Milliaud,
Aubenas, Priuas, Mirebel, Anduze, with other hamlets as well in Viuaretz, as in
Seuenes, began to help themselves, yet not without many impeachments, even
from those that ought most to have encouraged them. For at that time throughout
all those parts, it was a question whether it were lawful for the subjects to
stand upon so just and necessary a defensive. Some wished patience, others
fight, and the rather for that they could not possibly resist: that every thing
seemed to be past hope: that there were not left either great Lord or famous
leader to gather in the protestants: also that there was not any foreign
Prince, that made any offer to stand in their defense. Nevertheless, the
resolution of the two first named Towns, drew diverse to breath upon the
matter, namely those of Montauban, who shut their gates against the
murderers.

Nismes stood in a mummering, but through the wisdom of Clausonne, (a man of
great credit in those parts) upon summons to accept of a Garrison, the
Inhabitants with common advice made answer, that they would not open their
gates until a more quiet season: they were threatened and intimidated, but that
made them in the end but the more valiant. Other Villages at the beginning
diversely espied, were in great danger: but the carriage of some Captains, men
of small account, and many particular persons, the king and his officers were
brought into other conceits. Mombrun also, a wise and valiant Gentleman of
Dauphine, was ridden up and down in diverse wise: but he defended himself, and
afterward stood the protestants in good stead.

The ninth of November there was a blazing star seen in the air, as great
as the day star, hard by Cassiopee, having a form of sour corners like a
lozenge. A new and wonderful star in the air.
Cornelius Gemme and other learned Doctors in Astronomy, that imprinted books
thereof, said that it stirred not from the place for the space of three weeks,
esteeming it to be like the star that appeared to the wise men, that came to
worship Jesus Christ in Bethlehem presently after his birth. It continued in
the air for the space of nine months together or thereabout.

The ninteenth of the same month, the king published an Edict, repeating the
former to revoke his subjects to their own houses, under pain of loss of
goods, yet to small purpose: for all men were before so scarred, besides that,
they now saw such provisions for war, that this reuocation was in vain.

Such Cantons of the Switzers as made profession of the religion, were
solicited to bannish out of their Territories such as had there saved
themselves, but they would never consent to the Ambassadors petitions in that
behalf.

Sommieres besieged and yielded.
Toward the end of the month, Marshall d'Anuille Governor of Languedoc,
besieged Sommieres, holden by the protestants, and at four months end took
it by composition, having dispearsed an army, whereof men spoke diversely. In
the beginning of December, Gordes the kings Lieftenant in Dauphine, by friendly
letters solicited Mombrun, Mirebel, Diguieres, and other Gentlemen, to forsake
their religion, and to turn to the Romish, withal adding, that the king was
resolved to suffer no other within his dominions.

The fourth of December, by the kings commandment, Monsieur de Biron, with
seven Cornets of horse, and eighteen Ensigns of foot, entered into the
country of Onis to enclose the Rochelers: and as then began open war. All
the rest of the month was employed in skirmishes, with some loss to those of
Rochell, only in one, wherein they lost Florac, a Gentleman of Xaintongne,
much lamented for his valor.

1573. The siege of Sancerre.
Most part of the year 1573. was employed in the sieges of Sancerre, Rochel,
and other places, in molesting those of Languedoc, and more and more to trouble
the poor country of France.

The principal circumstances we will set down, beginning with Santerre, that
we may end in order, and then consider of the Rochelers and others.

In the beginning of the year, those of Saint Sancerre began their courses,
to furnish themselves with corn, but not so well as they should have done,
upon the opinion that some of their principal Townes-men had, that the
Catholicques would go to some other plaae. This vain imagination procured
great misery to those of Sancerre, who beside the famine, looked not unto
their fortifications as need required.

The ninth of January there appeared some troops of horse, to the number of
some four hundredth Masters, and the next day five Ensigns of the old bands
of the Regiment of Goas, with sundry other troops gathered thereabout.

The same within fifteen days after, were refreshed with eight Ensigns of the
old bands of the Regiment of Sarrieu, and five other new companies, some bands
of the countries therabout, under the leading of certain Gentlemen enemies to
the Sancerreans: besides also diverse Pesants that gaped after the ruin of that
small receptacle of the Protestants. There came also sixteen Ensigns of
Pioners, so as the whole army amounted to some four or five hundredth horse,
and some five thousand foot, besides the Pioners and Pesants.

The Lord of Chastre General of the army, sent a drum with letters to
summon the besiegers to yield upon composition, which he promised should be
reasonable. His drum they stayed and made no other answer: which afterward
proved very prejudicial unto them, albeit in the beginning they made many
gallant and profitable sallies. In the beginning of February, the besiegers
erected a Fort within four hundredth paces of the Town toward Fontenay, and
bringing their artillery by boats upon Loire, namely twelve cannons and four
coluerins, they made a bulwark of earth upon the highway to Saint Thibaut,
also a Pallisade in Saint Ladres field, and cut off the highwaies and paths
round about the Town, planting ten pieces in the said field of Saint Ladre,
and six more upon VVolphes elm, which is a high mountain on the South side
of Sancerre, and commands the town, as afterward they found by experience. In
four or five days space they discharged above three hundredth cannot shot,
wherein fell out sundry things worthy memory.

All this thunder hurt not any of the Inhabitants, but one maid, who was slain
with the breath of a bullet, at one of the four first shot: so fierce was
the storm, that the stones of the towne-wall, the pauing stones, and shiuers
of the timber of such houses as the cannon came unto, flew whistling in the
air, broke the stocks of the harguebuziers in their hands, and upon the
shoulders of the besieged soldiers, rent and pierced their mandillians, hose
and hattes, yet never touched their bodies. Namely, one bullet carried from a
soldier, named Pauilloy, the crest of his murrian, but otherwise hurt him not.

An other cannon shot piercing clean through the wall, came with such violence,
that lighting upon a barn, it bare away a great quarter of stone, which fell
upon a worthy man's back named Petit Boys, yet hurt him not. An other shot
lighting upon the Courtin and Parapet of the Town, cast down above a
Cart-load of stones and brickbats, hard by the Minister of la Charity, named
John de Lery, (from whom we have the whole discourse of this siege, whereat he
was from the beginning to the end) so as some flew between his legs with
such violence as any man may imagine, yet hit him not. As an other Minister
named Molet, was in the Pulpit upon Sunday the eight of March, both he and his
whole auditorie were in manner overwhelmed with the stones of a house, which a
cannon shot had beaten down, yet not any man slain or wounded, only some
few as it were a little scratched.

Now albeit the like battery was still continued so suriously against the
walls, that were but weak before, wherein the besiegers discharged above six
thousand cannon shot against the Town, yet of the besieged there were not five
and twenty slain by that means.

About the end of February, the besiegers labored to surprise a rauelin,
where they were fiersly repulsed, and lost Captain Diuory, with five and
twenty soldiers of the old bands that mere slain in the place, besides a
number of wounded that they carried away. Of the besieged, Buissiere la Flews
Ensign was hurt with a Harguebuze shot, and died scone after. In March a
soldier coming from the camp into the City as aspie, could not counterfeit
so well, but the Governor took him in many contrarieties, whereupon putting
him to the torture, he died in prison. The continual rain and snow did
wonderfully annoy both parties, especially the besiegers, to whom the besieged
with artificial fires burned a wooden bridge covered with hardies, where under
they used to come safe to the foot of rauelin without disturbance, and it was
thought that they should have either stopped or mined that rauelin and
therefore the besieged did immediately dig Wels to countermyne that side.

Also because the besiegers had immediately made a stronger bridge then the
former: withal, that they hallowed the Rauelin, in the evening the besieged
caused Captain Montauban to go forth with fifty shot, who brake through a
Corpse de guard, and slew thirteen or fourteen soldiers, and brought in two
prisoners, who assured him that they mined under the ranelin, and in an other
place, whereupon in the morning they began 7. wels in sundry parts of the
Town ditches to blow up the said mines, as also they looked to other their
fortifications according as necessity commanded and appointed.

Three days after, toward nine of the clock at night, The first assault
coming undesired through their trenches, entered the ditch, not far from
the breach of Londis, which they found so welkept, that with the loss of
sundry of their men slain, and a number of wounded, they were forced to
retire. During the whole conflict, which was both long and sharp, the besieged
continually sung Psalms, whereupon the besiegers discharged some shot, from
the artillery that lay upon the hill called the VVolphes elm, which sell into
the rampire, even under the feet of the besieged soldiers, which was
therewith shaken, yet had no farther hurt or harm. Having likewise learned by
certain Pioners taken in a sallie, that the besiegers went about to sap the
Ranelin of the old gate, in one night they cut intwo, and thereof made as it
were a second and new one, which by the next morning was made defenceable.

Upon the seventeenth of March, there sallied some forty soldiers, who
surprised a corpse de guard, slew some eighteen or twenty soldiers, and
brought in a prisoner, who assured the^ of that besell the next day, namely
that they should be beaten with sixteen great pieces, which indeed made a
great breach.

The next day, the besiegers having with all their pieces planted in three
places, namely in Saint Ladres field, the VVolphes elm, and the Smithes
Carroy, battered and beaten down all the towers and walls of the town, and
continued and made plain the breach, which was above three hundredth paces
wide, their white Ensign Colonel, followed by the rest, showed it self in
order of battle, all their men coming under covert, A general assault in sun
dry places.
through their trenches even to the edge of the Town ditch, where they gave
the assault as follows.

Sarrieu his Regiment struck in at the end of the breach toward the
Goose-gate, in a place called Londis Grange, where the fight was greatest, and
to second him, came in the Lord of Chastre General of the army, with his men
at arms, who with other Masters alighted, and that day fought on foot.

This first assault was famous, for the assaylants came in good order and very
resolutely to the breach: whereupon they cambered, and seven or eight of the
best armed and covered came to handie blows: namely, Captain Ri^ Sarrieu his
Ensign, who carried his Ensign and brought it back again. After their
repulse, the Lord of Bonniuet, the Gentlemen of the country, and Captain
Cartier, gave the second charge, whereto they came with such resolution, that
some of them twice entered the breach: among others, Fontain Carters Ensign,
one that was revolted from the religion, who was there hurt, and so returned
lame and halting. In this second onset, four Ensigns accompanied with four or
five hundredth soldiers valiantly entered the ditch, but in liew of marching
straight to the breach, they joined close with the corner of the wall, which
they did still bear with the ordinance, where they stayed with their Ensigns,
and could not be indammaged by the Townsmen, who were not able to stand upon
the wall that parted them, by reason of the volies of cannon shot.

Easily might they have been beaten away with muskets and harguebuze-shot, out
of some flanquers that yet remained toward the Goose-gate, but at that time
there was neither muskettier nor harguebuzier there about. Yet sell there out
one adventure to the preservation of the besieged, and that was this. As the
cannoniers did without intermission, continue the battery from a place called
the Smithes Carroy, thinking to lay the wall flat, and so to discover the
patforme, whereupon the besieged did fight, they followed their purpose so
obstinatly, that with the dischrarge of two or three valleys of cannons, they
beat down so many stones upon the four Ensigns and their soldiers, that
they were forced to retire: as also it fell out well with the besieged, that
the cannoniers in this battery wanted powder: for had they beaten down six
or seven foot more of the wall, the platform from whence the besieged fought
in flancke, and was their chief defense, had been laid open and made a bridge
for the assailants, without let to have entered the Town: for this platform
being made on the sudden, was not behind cut off from the side of the
Town, and in other places they could not have resisted.

The six Ensigns of Goas Regiment, assaulted the Rauelin of the old gate,
and Boudins platform, supportee by the Lord of Montigny, Liestenant to the
County of Brienne, and some other Gentlemen: there was Cabassoles, a Captain
of one of the companies of the old bands, a valiant man and greatly bewailed
among the besiegers.

The new companies, except Tessiers set upon the great breach, and gave the
assault from the platform of the old gate, even to the other end of the
breach toward Saint Andrews gate. Captain Tessier presented the escalade to
Caezars gate, which was at the other end of the Town, that so the assault
might be general, and the besieged busied in every corner. Of the
Sancerreans, Captain Flur, his Lieftenant Chaillou, and Montauban, his Cornet
defended the breach of Londis, but before they could come to it, or set their
soldiers in array, two of their men were carried away with a cannon shot. The
rest of the Captains, had every man his quarter appointed, where they all bare
themselves most valiantly: and the walls were every where furnished, besides a
number left in the principal places, to serve for accurrences. During the
assault, the fifteen hundredth labourours in the vines before mentioned with
their slings, furnished with stones by the women and maids, wrought wonders,
and wounded many of the enemies: Even in the chiefed of the fight a woman
caught hold of a soldiers pike, and strove to wrest it out of his fist.

A young man of the Town named Ialot, being in fight taken by a target-man,
and led away, as he descended into the ditch, called to his companions
rather to shoot at him, then to suffer him to be carried away: whereupon one
of them lying on his face, aimed so right, that he killed the target-man, and
then Ialot with his dagger slew an other that had hold on him, and so escaping
returned through the breach to his fellows. The defendants had no other fence
but their small shot, swoords, and slings: neither could they make use of their
other Engines, in regard that this general assault was given sooner then they
expected, by reason of the battery that had continued all the morning.

The Sancerreans in this assault had seventeen soldiers either slain or
wounded to death, beside a wench that was carried away with a cannon The
assailants left in the ditch some threescore of the valiantest: besides some
two hundredth that having their deadly wounds, died in their tents and
lodgings, and as many more wounded, who albeit they did in time recover, yet
carried the marks to their graves. The assaila^ts determination to famish the
Town.
Thence forth the assaylants understanding the state of the Town, resolved to
shut up and starve the Sancerreans, through the multitude of forts that they
erected hard by their walls: which being made fenceable, notwithstanding
whatsoever the defendants skirmishes, they planted two coluerins in the
greatest, and so returned the rest of their pieces to the towns where they
took them, always leaving sufficient strength round about to stop the
besieged from coming forth, or receiving any relief out of the country. In
the beginning of April, one of the town soldiers slipping down the
Towne-wall, came to the greater fort, and assured them that the defendants
began to famish. Within two days after, the besieged in a sallie slew some of
their enemies, who the surer to girt in the Town, erected five new small
forts, and nightly stood very carefully upon their guard, so that the
defendants perceived that they meant to take them rather by the throats then by
the fifts. Heerevpon they sent abroad for succor: but some of their messengers
were taken prisoners, others put to death, one Cap. Fleur, others came no more
again, or could not reenter, neither could they whersoeuer they became, get any
such succor as they pretended, neither in deed was there any means by man's
help to relieve them. Being thus every way shut up by their irreconcilable
enemies, from the beginning of April the want of flesh had in one month
dispatched all their asses and moyles. A note of the famine in Sancerre.


In the end they were constrained to eat Horses, Cattes, Rattes, Moles, Mice,
and dogs: hides of oxen, calves and sheep skins, parchment, horsehoues,
horns of lanterns, halters, and furnitures for horses, girdles of leather,
herbs, and wild roots: and in the end of June, the third part of the
besieged eat no more bread, such as could get linseede and other seeds, which
they never thought on, caused them to be ground or beat them in morters, and
made bread thereof, as also of all sorts of herbs mixed with a little bran, if
they could get it. They eat bread of straw-meale, of powder of nutshels, and of
slate: suet, old ointment, and other old grease, served to make pottage, and
to fry the excrements of horses and of men, and the filth in the streets were
not spared. And the twentieth of July, a poor labourer and his wife were taken
and executed, for eating the head, the entrails, and the brains of their
daughter of three years of age, that died by famine and misery: having
dressed all the rest of the body to eat it at other times: an other old
woman lodged in their house, and that had eaten part of that costly banquet,
died in prison not long after her apprehension. There were that were found
guilty of other faults, but that which agrauated the latter fault, was, that
the same day when they did the fact, they had bin comforted with certain
pottage made of herbs and wine, which might well have satisfied them in that
time of necessity. Such as went and were put forth of the Town to seek
relief, seeking to pass, were either slain by the enemy, or constrained by
blows with staves to turn back again. And staying without, as not being
able, or else would not enter into the town, they lived of the sprigs of vines,
blackberries in hedges, of red snailes, and of herbs. And most of them died
between the trenches and the ditches. Among other pitiful spectacles, the
body of a laborour and his wife, were found dead one hard by the other, among
the vines, and two of their children weeping by them, the lesser being but six
weeks old, which a reverent and charitable widow in the Town took home to
her house. If many died among the vines hard by the trenches and in the
ditches, there died many more in the houses and streets, where they fell down
in every place, and some days they buried five and twenty or thirty that
died for hunger: almost all the young children under the age of twelve years
died: great pity it was to hear the poor fathers and mothers lament and
mourn: the greatest part of them nevertheless strengthening themselves with
the assurance of the grace of God, of the which I will recite two notable
accidents. A young boy of the age of five years, having languished certain
weeks, running along the streets, in the end nature failing, fell down before
his father and mother, who at that instant perceived the sinues of their infant
to shrink in, as if they had been cut, and presently the body died. An other
young boy of ten years of age, lying at the point of death, hearing and
seeing his father and mother weeping and lamenting about him, whom he felt
upon the arms and legs, that were as dry as wood, said unto them. Why do
you weep in this sort to see me die for hunger? I ask you no bread mother,
for I know you have it not: but seeing it is the will of God, that I should die
in this sort, I must take it thankfully. The holy man Lazarus had he not
hunger? have I not red that in the Bible? and saying so he yielded his spirit
unto God. Upon the thirtieth day of July, the means that stayed the death of
all this people, in the end of July was certain horses of service reserved for
the extremity, and six kine kept, to give milk for certain young children,
which beasts were killed, and the flesh sold to comfort those that lived, with
a little corn, which some by stealth brought into the Town, cut and gathered
by night, where is pound of corn was sold for half a crown, but this means
continued not long by reason of the watch, which the enemy kept straight. The
war killed but eighty four persons within Sancerre, but famine killed both
within and without the Town, above five hundredth, besides those that
languished: who having escaped, had much pain and labor to recover
themselves. During these miseries, diverse soldiers and fugitives in Sancerre,
got out by several means, shunning the famine, desiring rather to die by
sword: some of them being slain, the rest kept prisoners, and some executed.
So all hope in man's judgment failing to those of Sancerre, the king having
sworn that he would make them to devour each other, the providence of the
king of all kings help them by a strange means. Through the endeavors of the
Bishop of Valence, By what means they were delivered.
Henry Duke of Aniou brother to the king, and his Lieftenant general in
France, had been accepted for king of Poland, by the states of the realm, as
hereafter we will more at large declare in the siege of Rochel. It fell out well
for those of Sancerre, that the Ambassadors of Poland came into France during
their extremity of famine, to fetch the Duke of Anion: for they understanding
that Sancerre was yet besieged, solicited the Bishop of Valence and Lansac his
associate, to keep the promise they had made and sworn unto them, in the name
of the king their master, to set at liberty all the towns and people of
France, that were molested for the religion, which not being wholly to be
denied, the poor Sancerreans half dead for hunger (as yet al resolute to end
their days in that sort, one after the other, before they would yield unto
the enemy, that had so oftentimes threatened them with a general massacre)
were delivered by means of those good me^ y^ came out of so far a country, and
as it were from the end of the world, their neighbors and those of the
countries next adjoining, not having the means, neither once seeking to aid
them. So that in the end, Composition with Sancerre.
after certain conferences meeting and iournying too and fro, hostages being
given on each side, it was agreed that they should issue with their arms and
goods, and such as would stay, not to be called in question for any thing
past: permitting the^ to dispose of their goods as they thought good, with
promise to preserve the honor of women and maids: upon condition, that the
Inhabitants and other fugitives, should pay the sum of forty thousand
frankes, to Monsieur de Chastre, who by that agreement entered upon the last
of August. The Ministers, diverse Inhabitants, Captains, soldiers, and refuged
persons retired with pasports, with safe conduct, some to one place, some to an
other. Not long after, Sancerre was wholly unwalled, some houses thrown down,
the clock, the belles, and other furnitures of the Town taken away, the
Bailiffe Ioannean massacred by night, within one hundredth paces of Monsieur de
Chastres lodging. The twefth day of September. la Chastre being retired to
Bourges, the Bailiffe of Berry was left governor of that desolate place: with
two companies of foot, and some other troops, there were made diverse strange
sackings and pillages, in such sort, that it is wonder that Sancerre should
stand upright, and be inhabited as at this day it is, and besides the
restoration of the walls, buildings, and repeopling, it has the free exercise
of the religion in this year 1595. when we finished this collection or recueil.
Now consequently according to our purpose, let us consider of the siege of
Rochel, together with the end thereof, in the year 1573. At the beginning, A
discourse of the siege of Rochel, even from the beginning until the peace
granted to the besieged.
the Lord of Biron tried again to find some means of agreement, but could
not compass any: for the Rochelers could not perceive anything but danger in
all their negotiations, as deeming their best safety at ye time to rest in
mistrust. In the mean time, it chanced that two soldiers very forward to the
field, not regarding that the Council upon good considerations, would not at
all times suffer such to go forth as would, gat down by a long lather into
the ditch, in a place since that time very famous, and named the Bastion of the
Gospel. These having passed the Counterscarp, found playynough, for one of
them was slain, the other escaped, but gave so hot an alarume at the gate,
that they could not possibly retain the soldiers or their Captains.

La Noue understanding that many were in danger, did suddenly gather his
forces both on foot and horesbacke, and made haste to the succor: the
skirmish begun in sundry places, continued above five hours. Of the town,
three or four were slain, and twenty wounded: but of the camp, they lost
one hundredth, and fifty wounded, besides two Captains carried prisoners into
the town. Among others, to the skirmish came a certain young Gentleman, Nephew
to Puigaillard Governor of Angiers, who with horrible blasphemy, boasted that
he was one of the Ad. murderers, and showing anaked curtelasse, which said he,
he brought from so famous a conflict, he threatened to make a butcherie of ye
Rochelers flesh: now being in place of trial, his heart failing him, and
seeking for his feet he was taken prisoner. Hereupon all the sense of his
tongue failing, he could nevertheless use any wit, but seeking to escape lost
his life: for finding some that could outrunne him, he was overtaken, slain,
and stripped, and so left naked in the fields, where in the night the dogs
had torn his face: how be it in the morning at the entreaty of the L. of
Floyacs widow, a Gentlewoman well bent to the religion, his wretched carcass
was brought and buried in the Town, which in his life time he had so
threatened. After this skirmish, Biron began to renew the negotiation
committed to the Abbot of Gadaigne, who was deputed to bring the Rochelers to
some composition: but it took no effect, because that daily they detected some
new conspiracy. And in deed at the same time, a Gentleman in Rochel revealed
to the Mayor and chief of the Council, such intelligence as Biron and others
had continued with him for the surprise of the town.

He wished to allure into Rochel the stoutest Captains of the camp, with some
good number of soldiers, where they might be easily put to the sword,
whereby the assaylants might be so much weakened. Besides that, he was at the
point to have received some good some of money. Heerevppon the seventeenth and
eighteenth day of January, there came in diverse of the companies of
Puigaillard and of Martin, surnamed the Lutherian: but the Mayor conferring
with four or five of the principal, in their resolution found it better to
perform some small assured execution, then to adventure upon any dangerous
enterprise, and therefore without further delay, thought it good to rid those
that were already entered, and not to stay until either they had gathered
more strength, or corrupted others. Of these traitors already enrolled into
one of the companies, five were slain the same night, and their bodies cast
over the walls beneath the new gate, and three were committed to prison, who
after they had disclosed the particularities, passed the Hangmans hands.

Thencefoorth the Rochelers spent some days in burning such farms, houses,
and milles without their town, as to their annoyance might have stood the
assaylants in great stead. A pleasant adventure
The Town had bestowed upon Captain Normand a certain mill standing very
near, whereof he took some small rent, for the preserving all that might be
worth the taking in the said Mill. There did Normand in the night leave one
soldier. Thither came the assaylants with the choice of their footmen, the
three and twentieth day of January, and brought two coluerings to force the
same, which by moone-light they planted very near, and discharged sixteen
shot. The soldier likewise discharhed some small shot, whereupon his Captain
hearing the alarm came to the rampire on that side, and called to his
soldier, as if there had bin some number in the Mill: Courage good fellows,
courage, yield not, ye shall have help by and by.

But at the last this soldier craved parley, and compounded for all that were
in the Mill: howbeit when the enemies perceived that he was alone, and spiting
at his resolutenesse, they kept him prisoner, and afterward seeing him unable
to pay the ransom that they desired, they concluded to send him to the
Galleys: but being powled and in his slavish attire, he found means to
escape, and so returned safe into the Town.

La Noue they chose for their Captain in arms, without prejudice to the Majors
liberties and authority in all other matters. La Noue made General of the
wars in Rochel.
They also sent new Deputies into England for succor, which the king hindered
in all that he could. And among all other devises, he caused the Queen of
England, with the Empress, and the Duke of Sauoy, to christen his daughter,
who being borne the seven and twentieth day of October, was baptized the second
of February, and died young.

The Earl of Worcester addicted to the Romish religion, coming into France
about this ceremony, had like to have been robbed by certain rouers, who
slaying some of his men, rifeled one of his ships, but there upon such
French and Wallons as could be caught in any English Haven, sped but evil
fauoredly. The daily skirmishes continued between the Rochelers and their
enemies, wherein as well the sufficiency of the leaders, Continual skirmishes.
as the courage of the Soldiers did evidently appear, yet not to the hurt of
the Romish Catholicques, against whom their enemies made many prosperous
sallies, being always provided of a near and sure retrait. In the beginning
of February, the Duke of Aniou, General of the army royal, being come to
Saint Maixant, sent his letters to la Noue, to summon him to deliver up
Rochel, with promise of life and goods: withal importing, that if within three
days after his appointed arrival in his camp, this were not performed, he
was resolved with his whole forces as well in camped, as to come after him, not
to linger any minute, but to besiege the Town, to force it, and so to punish
those that should be taken, that their execution might be an example to all
others. Now did the Rochelers begin better to consider of the defensive, and
to labor about their fortifications: but because the camp usually hindered
their men from cutting and bringing in of faggots and other convenient stuff,
La Noue informed of their ro^des, upon the sixth of February laid an ambush
both of horse and foot so fitly, that suffering their skirmishers to come well
forward, he enclosed them between his troops and the town, and then cut in
pieces all that were so ensnared. Besides, not so content, he set upon the
lodging of Captain Ports company, where he slew sixty soldiers, and
without loss of any more then one, that day he returned with forty prisoners,
who the next day were sent back without ransom, in regard that all the money
that would be made of the^, would never counteruaile their expe^ces for a few
days: yet such as were found to be murderers, were worse entreated. In the
town there were at that time a good number of Gentlemen and horsemen: eight
companies of the Inhabitants, nine of strangers, besides the Majors company,
and one of Voluntaries, formed by la Noue, and consisting of twenty
Musketeers, fifty five Pike-men, each in his corcelot at proof, and 30.
harguebuziers: of this company two parts were Gentlemen, and such as had born
office in the wars. The D. of Aniou arrived within 7. leagues of Rochel, wrote
unto the Nobility and Inhabitants two letters, dated the 10. of Feb. wherein he
exhorted the^ to yield, A notable skirmish. The Duke of Aniou his letters with
their answers
and threatened the^ in case they refused. Hereunto did ye Rochelers answer in all humility, declaring the necessity of their defensive, and entreating the
D. to provide for the tranquillity of ye realm, and to take such order, that
they might serve God in ye exercise of their religion. As for ye gentlemen,
their answer imported, that albeit they were affected to the kings service, yet
that through the malice of flatteres and as could brook no peace, they were
brought into his disgrace: withal, they showed a reason for their taking of
arms, which was not voluntary, but necessity that enforced them thereto, as
finding no better means to preserve both spiritual and temporal, but to
retire into the Forts and places of defense, their lives, until it might please
the king to take some order by a lawful assembly of the Estates and general
Councels.

They also besought the Duke of Aniou to consider of their just complaints, and
not to impute unto them that which proceeded of other men's faults, and so
offered to the king and him all obedience and service. The next day the Duke
arrived in the camp, accompanied with his brother the Duke of Alencon, the
king of Navarre, the Prince of Conde and Dauphine, the Dukes of Longueuille,
Bouillon, Neuers, Aumale, and Guise, the young County of Rochefaucaut, the
great Prior, and other great Lords, who took their lodgings at Nieul, a long
league from Rochel, where they remained until the peace. This one thing stood
the Rochelers in good stead, that in the enemies Council they had many heads,
that showed as many and diverse imagations and purposes.

Monlucs judgment of the siege of Rochel.
Heereto will I add the same that Monluc toward the end of his remembrances,
has written to this purpose, and of this whole enterprise, in these words:
See, all the world is come to Rochel, my self among the rest am bidden to the
banquet: but when I resolved to go, I made account to die, and there to take my
grave. Being come, I wondered to find there so many people of so diverse
humors, that would have been loath it should have been taken.

The siege was great, long, and gallant, well assaulted, and better defended. I
will not stand to write all that was there done: for I was but one, neither
will I speak hardly of any. Monsieur, who after was king, and was General in
that siege, so far honoring me, as to use some conference, whereby to gather my
advise, knows well enough I told him frankly what I thought. This siege may
teach all that were then present, or that shall come hereafter, that in those
days, Towns of such importance must betaken by famine and enclosing: by little
and little. One great oversight was there committed, and that was the
aduenturing of so many men in the assaults: and a greater in keeping so bad
watch to keep the town from succor of powder, which came in by sea.

For to say my mind as others, whatsoever shift the Rochelers could have made,
we had had them, they cannot deny it: I say with the halters about their
necks: for the succors that the County Montgommery brought, was retired, and
we ready to buckle with them: for all things failed them: but at the same
time my brother the B. of Valence was in Poland, to procure the election of
Monsieur for their King, which he archieued, and the glory thereof I think
due to him alone: but that caused all men to think upon capitulation, which at
the last was compassed. The Polonians Deputies came thither to salute him for
their king. All the troops retired, and leaving many dead, and the Rochelers
Lords of their Town, prepared to come to the feast of this new Crown.

By Monsieurs speeches, at his departure it seemed he had no great liking of
this kingdom, yet do I think it was a great honor to him and us, that so
remote a kingdom should seek a king from us. This is Monlucs judgment. Now
let us consider some particularities of this siege, Continuatio^ of the siege
of Rochel.
so far as the purpose of these collections may bear. The town besieged both by
sea and land about the midst of February, continued her skirmishes until
all was ready for the battery: ^he assailants from the Carraque discharged
many cannon shot into the Town and straight, in case any vessel offered to
pass in the night or mistes: but of many hundreths, none took, either to kill
or hurt, except some two or three persons. The 23. day of February, after many
consultations and messages, the Lords of Byron, Strossy, Villequier, and the
Abbot of Gadaigne, held a parley at Coignes gate, with la Noue the Lieftenant
general, Mortiers and Morisson Deputies for Rochel.

The Abbot discoursed of the kings intent and clemency: alleging that
hereafter there would be no hope to move him by any entreaty or prayer:
that he had done more then beseemed his greatness: that all other his
subjects of the religion would think themselves happy, if they might obtain
but half of that he offered to the Rochelers: and so exhorted the Deputies
well to consider of it, and not to let slip such an occasion. La Noue and the
other three, giving their advise as particular persons, answered: that as
concerning their commission, it extended only to receive such articles as the
king should send: to take notice of Gadaignes authority, and to refer the
whole to the Council of the Town, which was composed of one hundredth men,
Sheriffs, and Peers, whereof the Mayor was chief. The same time the Duke of
Aniou caused Captain Cadet, a Turk by nation, to be executed at at Nieul, for
the manifold robberies and spoils whereof he was convict, albeit many great
Lords and Captains labored mightily for his life, whom the D. denied, and
therefore of all good men was well thought of, and feared of the wicked.

The articles which Gadaigne delivered, in number seven and twenty, conuined a
protestation of the kings sincerity, both in the old and new profession
against the Admiral, whose remembrance written with his own hand (never
before spoken of) were then alleged. Next, he summonned the Rochelers to open
their gates to Biron, or any other that should have commission to enter their
Town as they ought: (that is to say, with such troops as he should think
sufficient) to maintain the authority royal, and to take order that it might
come no more in the hands of seditious persons. In so doing, they should enjoy
the exercise of their religion, in like liberty as was granted by the Edict
of pacification, without alteration or diminution: and to that end should have
whatsoever letters they should think good. Withal, he cut them off from all
hope of succor out of England. The Rochelers declaring the equity and
necessity of their defensive: the iniquity of the Barron de la Guard and
others, do like of the kings declaration concerning his Edict of pacification,
and desire that the same may be maintained not only to them, but for the ease
and quiet of all other protestants throughout the Realm.

Three days after this parley, the Rochelers understanding of two and thirty
battering pieces within half a league of them, withal, that their enemies
meant to skirmish after dinner, and to empty their forces, resolved also to do
somewhat, and so sallied about noone. This conflict continued above six
hours, and la Noue had two horses killed under him, besides some small shot
that light upon his cuirace, but hurt not his body: he lost one chief
Captain, two Captain Ensigns, and five soldiers, and brought home twenty
wounded. The dead he also carried away and buried in the town. In the camp
were slain and wounded some hundredth and fifty, among them diverse Captains.
The women that day bare themselves wonderfully, in carrying wine and comfits to
the soldiers, relieuing the wounded, and putting themselves very forward in
the fight. Among the rest, one adventured to strip one of the dead enemies,
whose harguebuze and sword she carried away, and made thereof a trophee. The
ba^^ell begun the last of February, with eight cannons and two coluerins,
seemed to have heat and encouraged the besieged, who most cheerfully followed
their fortifications. About three of the clock after noone the battery
ceased, and they made a sallie, wherein Captain Normand slew a great number of
assaylants, with the loss of one soldier, and two that he brought home
wounded. In the beginning of march, for three or four days together, they had
many parleyes, to the end to get the Town without fight.

They offered the exercise of religion in the Town, which was abolished in all
other Towns of France: and the Duke of Aniou conceiving the succor out of
England to be but a vain imagination, spoke more sharply then ever before.
The day before, Claud of Lorraine, D. de Aumale, and the Duke of Guises uncle,
being behind a Gabion, was slain with a shot from a piece planted upon the
Gospel Bulwark, which pierced the Gabion and the Duke: who looked for nothing
less then what befell him. He was greatly bewailed in the camp: but the
besieged praised God, who weakened their enemies, and in him punished the other
murderers that expected their course.

The fifth of March, the whole Council of the Town was assembled, wherein after
sundry opinions, it was resolved that they should abide al extremities, rather
the^ to yield to any unreasonable demand: also that they should send no more
Deputies, but return their answer by a drum. The whole being imparted to
the people, The resolution of the besieged.
assembled to that end, they wholly answered, that a just war was to be
preferred before a shameful and suspected peace: that yet they had means
enough to hold out: and that one day of parley did them more hame, then ten
years of war. Six or seven days after, the battery being again begun
and continued, la Noue finding his presence to be unprofitable to the
Rochelers, upon diverse occasions withdrew from them, and departed to the Dukes
camp with Champagny, la Roche Esnard, la Salle, The retrait of the Lo. de la
Noue.
and diverse soldiers. As his presence had hitherto stood the Rochelers in
great stead, so being without, did he continue with great policy, and did
them better service far off, then nearer at hand, as the besieged afterward
very well perceived.

In this months space, the enemy discharged above thirteen thousand cannon
shot, besides sundries skirmishes and surprises, wherein the assaylants still
had the woorst, who in a few weeks lost above twenty Captains. The 16. day of
March toward evening, Captain Fond standing at watch at a Casemate without the
gate, chose above a dozen of his soldiers, and marched straight to the
Spittle-house, where he surprised nine or ten Gentlemen and Captains at the
table, that were all slain. Four days after, about ten of the clock at
night the Townsmen made a sallie: passed even to the enemies Gabions, overthrew
all, won the first trenches, slew some sixty men, wounded twice so many: put
the rest in disorder, and had done more, had not succor come in of all sides.

The battery having continued the six first days of April, the seventh day
about six of the clock in the morning, began more fierce then before, and
with such violence, that along wall from the old fountain to the Gospel
bulwarcke was laid flat: the bulwarcke dismanteled, and the Cognee tower the
assaylants came to the assault, cast a bridge over the ditch, which they
stretched even beaten down. The first assault.
Toward five of the clock at night against the bulwarcke, and took two
Casemates, which they held but a small while: for with one cannon shot into the
Casemates, some were slain, others being speedily charged by resolute
soldiers, were in part cut in pieces, and the rest saved themselves by flight.

During this conflict in the Casemates, the enemy came forward courageously
over their wooden bridge, with two hundredth targets and corcelets, who were as
valiantly withstood by the besieged, notwithstanding the cannon played
continually, which slew fifteen of their men, and hurt diverse. This
notwithstanding the women and Maidens deuoide of al fear, as if they had
neither seen nor heard any thing, ran resolutely up and down casting out
their scalding water, circles, stones, and such like, which slew diverse
assaylants, who were forced to forsake the ditch with the loss of diverse
Captains, Gentlemen and soldiers. Of the Town there were slain in this
assault about sixty: among others, Captain Fronsac, the Ensign of Riuiere
Lis, and Captain Normands Lieftenaunt, and the enemy discharged above two
thousand five hundredth cannon shot.

The second assault.
The next day about nine of the clock in the morning, they came to the second
assault, which was valiantly sustained by the Rochelers: and the enemies forced
to retire into their trenches. Toward the evening they set a face if they
would have returned: The third.
but seeing the resolution of the defendants, they did no more. The tenth of
April by six of the clock in the morning, the enemy returned with great
fury to assault the aforenamed bulwark, as also at the gate of the two mils,
there appeared a great number well stored with lathers: likewise toward Tadon,
the County de Lude came with his regiment to the windmil tower, but no further
for fear of the small shot that rained shrewdly in those quarters.

As for those that brought the lathers, they had leisure enough to rear them,
and to climb up: but so soon as they were up, the Townsmen overthrew them
with such force and actiuitie with pikes and hallebardes, and in such number,
that breaking arms, legs, and heads in the ditch, their fellows were forced to
give over and fly in such sort, that some cast themselves into the fennes,
which the women had taken to keep, who with fire-forkes and spits made an end
of the wounded and stripped them. Those of the bulwarcks and Casemates, who
never lost shoot, with the women, maids, and servants, with their cauldrons
and artificial fire, so bestirred them, that the assaylants were forced to
retire with the loss of three hundredth men and more. pour days after, about
four of the clock at night, The fourth*
the companies of the assailants standing ready in array to come to the
assault, discharged almost all their pieces, and immediately in great
resolution came to the breath, where they foght valiantly on both sides, until
the night parted the^. The besieged were shrewdly annoyed with the cannon,
which overthrew the forepart of the bulwark, that slew many of their
soldiers, and hurt others, to the number of fifty, yet the assaylants lost
more, namely one of their Captains. But the next day they began again to
beat most fiercely, and about five of the clock at night, they blew up their
first mine at the bastion or bulwark of the Gospel: and withal, gave a most
fierce assault, which they still renewed five times on a row, The fifth assault
five times renewed
where they had as friendly entertainment as in the rest with great loss,
besides three hundredth men caught in their mine, which played clean contrary
to their expectation, and fell especially upon themselves. Two days after,
about eleven of the clock at night, the besieged made a sallie, slew a great
number of men, and carried into the Town great store of murrians, cuiraces,
partuisans, halbards, and courtelasses: and burned a wodden bridge: in revenge
whereof, the enemy discharged certain cannon short, which with the breaking
of the stones hurt five or six: besides Captain Musse, who had don great
service in that siege, was that day so wounded with three small shot, that he
died soon after.

The sixth.
The five and twentieh and seven and twentieth days of the same month, they
parleyed again: but all was but delays, until the next day, when very early
in the morning the assaylants approached to Saint Nicolas gate, where some of
their Captains did very well: for passing the Counterscarpe, they entered the
ditch, but were repulsed with the loss of many soldiers. The next day before
sun rising, their ordinance played upon the Bulwark, and toward eleven of
the clock they redoubled their battery: besides, their troops came in on all
sides: The seventh.
yea even out of their Carriques and Galleys they shot lustily, which caused
every man to run to arms: namely, the women with men's hearts on their heads,
marched in haste with pikes, halbards, and Iauelins in their hands, fully
resolved rather to die in the place, then to suffer the enemy to enter.

The assault continued five hours, wherein the defendants lost some twelve or
fifteen men, besides five and twenty or thirty wounded: but the assaylants a
great number in the first charge, so as they durst no more come in small
troops: and the most resolute retired, because the company of Captain
Bobineau a Rocheler, garding the Casemates near the bulwark that flangued
just upon the enemies bridge did mightily annoy them, as being within two
pikes length each of other.

The nine and twentieth of the month, the besieged made a sallie, where in a
Casemat that they forced, and in part discovered, they slew a great number.

The same day the Mayor sent to the Duke of Aniou, the articles which the
Rochelers, with the Gentlemen and soldiers strangers desired to be granted
them, whereof they had answer six days after, besides sundry unprofitable
parleyes. All this was done about the beginning of May, of what time the
Polonians elected the Duke of Aniou to be their king: for the estates accepted
of him the ninth of May, upon which day the Rochelers, who from the 7. assault
had never missed either night or day to give ye enemy some foil, made asallie
through the countermine of the Gospel bulwark where they surprised those that
were next at hand, slew some pioners, and about thirty soldiers, and carried
away four prisoners, without any loss on their side.

The next day at ten of the clock at night, about four hundredth small shot,
and fifty horse, sallied forth at Maubec gate, and near to Cognee gate
surprised a corpse degard, and with the loss of one horseman slew forty or
fifty of the slowest. In the morning they understood that the loosers
pretended to have their revenge: And indeed the next morning an hour before
day, sundry Targetiers gat up by their bridge unto the top of the Gospel
bulwark, where they took away the Ensign of Captain Riuieres Lis, and so
returned without more adoo: albeit they might very well, for the most part of
the corpse degard were a sleep. The next day thinking to have gotten the like
occasion at the breach of the old fountain, finding those that waited for
them, they returned faster then they came.

The same day toward five of the clock at night, the Sarreant Mayor of the
Town made a sallie, and fired part of their wodden bridge, and four and
twenty hours after, returned to burn the corpse degard that was hard by the
sald bridge. About this time at three several courses, certain of the enemies
horsemen sought to keep the poor people of the town after the tide, from
gathering of Muscles, Shrimps, and such like: but some of them lost their
horses and Petronels, and some were taken and carried away prisoners, as unable
soon enough to get forth out of the bogges, where their horses sunck vpto the
shoulders.

The eight assault.
The sixteenth of May, a little before day the enemy gave the eight assault to
the before named bulwark, which was very sharp, yet had the repulse on both
sides. The same day and the two next follwing, the Cannon playing upon the
Town, made no spare of powder or bullet. The twentieth day came in a small
vessel laden with powder and corn, sent by the County Montgommery, under the
conduct of Captain Arnaud, who passed in spire of the enemies fleet and
forces, who discharged many a shot at him, but hurt him not.

A notable sallie.
Three days after, some four or five hundredth men after noone sallied forth
of the town, and surprised and mightily amazed the enemy that lay toward the
Cognee gate, whom they killed without resistance, to the number of two hundredth
both Captains and soldiers, besides a great number of wounded. The whole camp
taking the alarm, many came in, so that the Rochelers lost 20. of their men,
but carried into their town eight Ensigns with many cuiraces, Halbards,
Targets, Harguebuzes and guilt swords. They did greatly bewail Maronniere, a
brave Gentleman, who died of his wounds within two days after, as a little
before they had done the death of Vergerbeanlieu, a Poeteuine Gentleman, highly
esteemed for his valor, whereof be had made proof, especially in the eight
assault, where he took his deadly wound. The five and twentieth day of May,
the battery began very furious, and lasted till nine: the reason was, that
five mines which the enemy had dug, were shut and ready to play.

The next morning by break of day, the battery began again as well again
the bulwark, as against the defenses, and so continued until night. The next
morning about seven of the clock, all the companies of the camp were
mustered. The Switzers being new come, to the number of 16. Ensigns in a great
battaillon, were by the Rochelers welcomed with cannon short, which fell so
just among them, that they made a great lane, and forced the rest to go further
from the Town.

About eleven of the clock, the regiments of the camp being ready to the
assault, discharging their artillery blew up their mines, wherein rested their
whole hope, The ninth assault.
but all this stood them in no stead: for some of their mines did greatly help
to fortify the besieged, and to flancke the breach from the old fountain to
the Gospel-bulwarke: a fatal and unhappy name for the enemy, who were
expected and repulsed by the women, maids, and servants, who that day did
incredible things. The assault was five times renewed, and lasted until six of
the clock at night, always more fierce and greater then any of the former.
And indeed the enemy lost four hundredth men that stayed in the ditches, and
carried away six hundredth wounded. The Rochelers lost thirty or forty
soldiers and women, and three or four Captains: among the rest, one very
valiant, named Blays, who was slain with a piece of a stone.

The County Montgommery did his endeavor to succor the Rochelers by sea, but
in vain, in that he was ouerweake both in shipping and men, to fight with the
fleet royal, Murmurings in Rochell.
which was very strong. Toward the beginning of June, victualles began to
grow short with the besieged: whereupon some considering that the enemies
cannon played continually, also that some soldiers fled the Town, began to
doubt and have some speech of composition, so that some of the most apparent
were imprisoned, for that together with some three hundredth, they had signed a
bill that imported the making of peace upon whatsoever conditions: for their
parts, they were weary of the wars, and the great want of corn would shortly
breed a famine. Others had in open street consulted upon taking of the gates,
whereby to go forth at their pleasures. Of these murmures ensued new parleyes,
which the Duke of Aniou solicited, that so he might depart thence: for the
news was come that he was chosen king of Poland, and that the Ambassadors were
coming to him.

In the mean time, upon Friday the twelfth of June, the enemy gave a sudden
escalado at the little breach near to the old fountain, some hundredth, or
sixscore Gentlemen gat up, and some unto the Caualier, where they stayed long
enough to take a view of the inward trenches and counterscarpe, that was
fortified within the retrenchment, and so began to retire neither escaped
they all the greeting of the small shot, which diminished their number, and slew
some fifteen or twenty in the place. The next day they returned to their
parleyes, and because the Rochelers had counsel to send their Deputies to the
Duke of Aniou, at whose hands (as they were told) they might obtain more then
they demanded, they stayed for a pasport, which they found so badly penned,
that they might well perceive that it stood them upon to beware, and therefore
they caused their Deputies to retire, which so netled the D. that he resolved
before the coming of the Polonian Ambassadors to try all means: and to the
same end, came in person to take a view of the mine by the old fountain, The
Duke of Anious adventures.
where one of the Town soldiers discerning him, shot off a harguebuze charged
with a bullet and some hail shot: but his great Esquier named Deuin,
perceiving the match, stepped before him and was slain: the Duke reserved to
an other end, was slightly touched with some of the hail shot, but not hurt.
After this, notwithstanding their shooting and sallying on both sides, yet was
it nothing in regard of that which was past. But upon the 17. of June, the
Polish Ambassadors being arrived in France, truce was made, and lastly the
articles of peace agreed upon and sent unto the king, which he approved, and
framed them in manner of an Edict, granting to those of the religion, Rochel,
Montauban, Nismes, and other Towns, wherein the free exercise of religion was
permitted: and to others, permission to live without trouble in their houses,
An Edict of pacification, for Rochell and all those of the religion.
therein to solemnize baptism and marriage after their manner, without greater
assembly besides the Parents, then the number of ten: except in the Court at
Parris, and within ten leagues round about it, he restored those of Rochel
to their rights and ancient privileges, disanulling all Edicts made against
them, approouing their defensive war, and consenting that the keeping of their
towns, towers, and fortresses, should remain unto themselves, according to
their ancient privileges, receiving such governors as were not by them to
be suspected.

And by virtue of this Edict, upon the tenth of July, about ten of the clock
in the morning, Monsieur de Biron entered into the Town at Coigne gate, with a
Herald at arms, and four of the kings trumpets: at which time he caused the
peace to be published in the principal places, accompanied by the Lieftenant
of the Town, and of Monsieur de Villiers, and then dined at the Majors house:
which done, presently after he returned conducted out of the Town.

End of the siege of Rochell.
The same day, diverse barks and other vessels laden with bisquet, corn, meal,
fish, and other ammunitions, entered into the Town, as they did before the
siege: which we have briefly discribed in the principal circumstances thereof.
The enemy had both by sea and land, between forty and fifty thousand men,
whereof more then the half of them died before Rochel, as well in skirmishes,
encounters, surprises, and assaults, as of wounds, miseries, and diseases:
sixty pieces of artillery, great, middle, and small, shot into the Town, and
against the defenses, rampires, and walls thereof, at the least two and thirty
thousand times. The bulwark of the Gospel, because of the surname, was least
spared. The enemy lost therewith the Duke d'Aumale, Cosseins, Master of the
field, that entered by force into the Admirals lodging in Parris, and began the
massacre. Ligardes his brother, Goas and Poilac, Masters of the camp, diverse
great Lords and Gentlemen, above 60. Captains and co^manders, as many
Lieftena^ts and Ensigne-bearers: most part of the massacres of Parris and other
places, being come thither to receive their reward, either present death, or
wounds which speedily cut off their days. The coming of ye Polish
Ambassadors, was the means ye defended Rochel, which began to want both
victuals and ammunitio^ of war, and that had lost many hundreths of soldiers in
ye skirmishes and breaches. Another means served: which was the division in the
Duke of Anious camp, and the friends which the Rochelers found therein, from
whom they received many good aduertisements, which greatly relieved them during
the siege: the end whereof, made the king to call to mind many great faults by
him committed, which he had been advised and counseled unto, and to invent
the means to prevent them: but too late, for being embarked and in the middle
of the sea, then when he discovered a desire to see the port of his arrival,
not long after he found himself to be fallen into the deep gulfes of death,
and with most great grief unto his heart, was constrained to behold the fire in
his Realm, which some persuaded him to be quenched, and to have recovered an
everlasting peace upon Saint Bartholomewes day. But in his mischief he sound
this comfort, that many others that thought themselves very nimble, in their
turns, found themselves no less deceived, then they wickedly abused the youth
and boiling passions of this poor Prince. I must not forget to set down the
provision of victuals that God sent unto the besieged in Rochel, which was an
infinite number of small fishes, never before that time seen within that
Haven, and that every day came in, and as it were yielding themselves to the
mercy of the poor people of the Town. And presently after the publishing of
the Edict and liberty granted to Rochel, at the coming of the Polonians
retired again.

Now let us see how sundry others of the religion in other parts of the
Realm, The estate of the churches in Quercy, Langucdoc, and other places.
bare themselves this year 1573. The Barron of Serignac with other Lords and
Gentlemen both of Quercy, Foix, and other Provinces adjoining, being
advertised of the intent of the Romish Catholics, repaired to Montauban,
where they held a common Council, and after sundry conferences resolved, as
well the Inhabitants as strangers refugied, to take arms: which they did in
war like manner, and thereof advertised those towns where the religious were
any thing strong. The Inahbitants of Chastres in Albigeois, slacking and
refusing the succors of Vicountie Paulin and the Barron of Panas, were
surprised, and some slain, and the Town brought into the subjection of the
Romish Catholicques. They of Montauban sent forth their troops into the
field, under the leading of the Lord of Serignac, a man zealous in religion,
discreet and virtuous, and a wel-willer to millitarie discipline. They placed a
Garrison in Terride, whereof Serignac challenged the Barronage, and by escalade
took Buzet upon Tar, within three leagues of Toulouse. They also strengthened
Villemur, surprised diverse other places, fortified such as they held in the
former troubles, placed garrisons at the passages, and appointed a day of
meeting at Realmont in Albigeois, to consider of their common affairs. There
made they a division of their gouernme^ts. Vicountie Gourdon had one part of
Quercy toward Cadenac: Terride or Serignac had the other part toward Montauban
and Gascon. To Vicountie Paulin fell Lauragais, and in Rouergue they
established the Vicountie of Panas, with his brother the Barron. The Count of
Foix, with the hilly country, was allotted to the Vicountie of Canmont.

There they decreed, that if one stood in necessity, the other Generalles
should repair to him with all their forces and be under his obedience, so to
avoid all iealouzie that might otherwise take hold of such as were of like
authority, Sundry warlike exploits.
every man returned into his government. Serignac by compositon took
Villedieu, Chasteau Vasin, and the Tower of Orgueil, places near to Montauban,
encamped with two thousand small shot, and some horse, before Mo^ricou, makes
a breach, gives the assaults and one escalade, but takes the repulse, as also
from before Real-ville and Vioule, at which places many of his men were hurt
and slain.

In his return from an other assembly holden at Realmont, for advise upon the
Rochelers affairs, who craved succor, but could have none in regard of such
difficulties as befell them. Serignac passing by Puylaurence, understood that
Captain Angely with eighty soldiers, was besieged in a village three leagues
of, and therefore with all speed marched thither with one hundredth and sixty
men: and thus he on the one side, and the besieged on the other, so charged
the enemy, that they slew two hundredth of their men, and scattered the rest.
About this time the Inhabitants of Bearne sent to Nismes and Montauban, a
coppie of the letters sent to them from the Court in the name of their Prince,
to recall them to the Romish Church: together with their excuses and aunsweres
to the same, protesting to persevere and abide in the religion. In April, the
County of Villards newly made Admiral of France, Admiral Villards warreth
upon the Protestants with small success^
and General of an army against the protestants in Quercy and the countries
round about, gathered his troops dispearsed in Garrisons, besieged and took
Saint Gemmes in high Quercy. The Lord of the Town, notwithstanding his
composition for life and goods, was carried prisoner to Cahors, and there
executed at the instance of many his enemies whom he had hardly entreated. His
men saved themselves in a rock, where they could not possibly be indammaged,
and after joined with succors that came from Montauban.

A few weeks after, the Admiral besieged Brifenel, a small Town in high
Rouergue, where Montilliere gallantly withstood him, and slew some hundredth of
his men, but at the last departed with life and goods. Albeit in exchange the
Adm. in May lost Soreze, surprised by escalade, and Montesquiou within two
leagues of Thoulouse. Also toward the end of July, the Barro^ of Fougeres took
L^desue a Bishops sea, and a rich Town situate in the mountains of
Languedoc, at the same time that Captain Grave seized upon Mas Saints
Puelles, within one league of Castelnau Darry. The Duke of Aniou had before
solicited those of Montauban, to send him their Deputies with articles for
peace, entreating them in the mean time, to desist from all hostility. This
was one means to disvnite the Provinces, and so to get them one after an
other. At the first this seemed to grow to some course: but it was easily
remedied, and the siege of Rochel together with the election of Poland, made
void many of their devises. Marshall d'Anuille Governor of Languedoc, took
arms also against the protestants, assembled six Cornets of horse, Marshall
d'Anuille besieges Sommieres, where he loses his Army.
five thousand harguebuziers, besides the companies of Lyonnois and
Volunatries: his footmen amounting to ten thousand, that led foureteen
battering pieces, wherewith he pretended to besiege Nismes. But Sommiere a
small Town near to Bezieres and Montpeslier, won from the Barron of Ioyeuse
by Captain Gremian, brake this purpose, and an other enterprise of the
Marshals against Vzes: so that seeing himself frustrate before he came to
Nismes, he besieged Sommieres: both the Town and Castle, made a reasonable
breach and gave an assault, repulsed by the besieged, who slew above one
hundredth of his men, and wounded many more. But in his second assault he had
yet worse success. Hereupon came to him his brother in law the County of
Candale, with his company of one hundredth horse, and twelve companies of
Gascons, who gave the third assault, wherein three hundredth of the hottest left
their lives.

The besieged stood in want of many things, but their neighbors sent one
hundredth and twenty soldiers, who with much ado got in, and brought all that
they could to succor and strengthen them. One of the hundredth and twenty
being lag, was taken and brought before the Marshall, to inform him of all
that he knew. Albeit they racked and tormented him, that he grew as big as a
tun and so died upon the torture, yet could not his tormentors wrest out of
this soldiers mouth, any word prejudicial either to the besieged or to the
protestants. The besieged having holden out four months, suffered five
thousand cannon shot, that had beaten down all their defenses, and laid their
walls in the dust, craved composition: but the Marshall would have them by
force, and to that end gave forth a general assault, committing the leading to
Candale, whom he exhorted to revenge the death of his Captains and soldiers.

This young Lord, who before had seemed desirous that matters should have been
otherwise ordered, marched resolutely to the breach, where he performed the
duty both of a valiant Captain and courageous soldier: but after a little
fight, wherein he saw a number of his soldiers overthrown, himself was
slain in the place.

The besieged having performed all that was to be desired in valiant men, in
April did accept of composition for life and goods, and so the Marshall
sending hostages to Nismes for their safety, they came forth with the drum
sounding, the Ensigns displayed, their matches lighted and in the cock, having
seven days respite to carry away their goods, and to retire where they list.
The Marshall understanding that Mismes in great resolution expected his
coming, and withal, considering that he had lost two thousand five hundredth
of his best men, cashiered the rest of his troops, who scattred every way. The
Admiral warring in Gascon, had other success: for he took Terride, Flaugnac,
and all that the protestants had gotten in Gascon beyond Garonne. Then did he
besiege Caussade, a small town kept with six hundredth small shot, Caussade
subuertech al Admiral Villars purposes.
under the conduct of Puiols, who forced the Admiral after great losses to
forsake the place: after which repulse, he did nothing worthy memory. The
Vicountie Gourdon understanding that part of the Adm. troops after this siege,
marched toward Rochel, watched them at the passage over Dordogue, cut in
pieces one company, and made the rest to run. On the other side, the Barron
of Grandmont, whom the king of Navarre had sent into Bearne to replant the
Mass, was taken, and most of his men defeated by the country people. The
estate of Viuaretz and Dauphine.
In the mean time, the estates of Languedoc met at Anduge, where they formed
an order and rule for the war and administration of justice. In May the
protestants choosing the Lord of Saint Romain for their General, surprised
Villeneufue in Viuaretz. Marshall d'Anuille under color of justice, seizes
and sells all the protestants goods that he may. In Dauphine the protestants
took Orpierre, Serres, and other places in the Bishoppricke of Die: also Meuse
and other villages in the mountains, under the leading of Mombrun, who with
his courses and exploi^s drive his enemies to fear him. The K. hoping by the
peace granted to Rochel, Montauban, and Nismes, to take some rest, having
revoked the edict of 1570. and sent his brother into Poland, found al new to
begin: for those of Quercy, Lanquedoc, and their neighbors, did immediately
protest against this edict, Complaints against the pacification granted before
Rochel.
which they termed captious, and a preamble into new massacres: considering
that their capital enemies and authors of all disorders, remained sole
Councillors and Governors of the K. and his estate: that all the French
Churches were debarred the public exercise of religion, to them so solemnly
granted by the Edict of 1570. that all the contents of this pacification of
Rochel, and whatsoever was otherwise promised, was but a collection of words
without effect: that there was no speech of justice against the massacres, but
an abolition of all that was past, which was the absoluing of ye threatened:
that all Ecclesiastical discipline was taken from the protestants, whom thereby
they meant to plunge in all Atheism: that this treaty was formed with some
particulars without their commission, whose advice could not prejudice the
general cause of all the Churches, to whom they had promised not to do or
grant any thing without the common consent of all. After these protestatio^s,
with the consent of the new king of Poland, (whom his brother and the
Ambassadors hastened into that far country) they assembled at Millaud in
Rouergue, after at Montauban, where they divided Languedoc into two
governments, the one at Montauban, the other at Nismes, to serve for the
bordering countries of Seuenes and Viuarais. For the government of the quarters
of Montauban, they chose Vicount Paulin, and Saint Romain at Nismes, who had
the charge of all mattters of war, yet were accountable to the estates of the
country that furnished the^ with counsel and quoyne. These estates in every
government were composed of the chiefest of the provinces, yet so as in matters
of importance there were particulare states in every Dioces, that meant to confer
by one or more of ye Deputies, with ye estates of ye government, by whose
advise ye governor was to take his directio^s, and at their hands to receive
his pay. For the countenance of this order, they decreed ye the soldiers
contenting themselves with their pay, should not forage nor waste ye plain
countries: and to that end they taxed the adversaries Towns and villages,
forcing the^ to contribute toward the maintenance of the garrisons. Such as
voluntarily paid, were eased as in time of peace, and in many places the
Pesants followed their labors without danger: which caused many towns and
boroughs, otherwise enemies to the protestants, to pay the contributions for
fear of worse. Besides this order, to furnish the maine charge, and at all
times to have a stock ready for all accurrences, The want of discretion in
the kings Council.
they seized upon the Church revenues, establishing their commissaries to that
effect, and all this had they leisure ynogh to do, whilst the kings and their
Courtiers were busy in their bankets, dances, and other vain pastimes for the
K. of Polonds farewell. Thus in Languedoc in a short time they furnished many
places, from whence they might bring to the field under the conduct of their
Governors, very near 20000. persons, still weakening their adversaries with the
collection of the revenues of the benefices and contributions that they
gathered in every quarter. Likewise following their example, sundry of the
Romish Church, otherwise discontented, grew to be more affable to the
protestants, and to take their parts, so to procure some quiet in the state of
France. The protestants in the government of Nismes, twice assembled together,
resolved to crave at the kings hands a more sure peace, and upon better
conditions then the edict of Rochel, which they found very faulty, and not to
be admitted in many the articles. They sent therefore their Deputies to give
him thanks for the good affection that he protested to the restoring of peace,
adding, that the same is the most necessary remedy for the reforming of the
estate already decayed and lost, without speedy provision. The magnanimity
of those of Languedoc.
That in hearty good will they are most affectionate to yield him al obedience:
but that the massacres do evidently declare the danger, where the Prince is
governed by the pernicious advice of his wic^ed Councillors.

They besought the king not to mislike that they having an interest in this
action, had assembled themselves to the end with deliberation to consider of
the surest means to establish a sound and good peace. That through the
policies of wicked Councillors, the king was induced both by word and
public letters pa^rents, to declare himself to be the author of the massacre
at Parris, which some few days before he had disaduowed, wherein his
reputation was greatly impaired with foreign nations. That they could not
think his will to concur with such bloody effects as lately appeared, yet
they feared least his wicked Councillors were still like affected, and
therefore they could do no less but take order for the safety of Languedoc
and themselves, and by the example of their fellows, so hardly entreated,
look to themselves.

They did therefore for the establishment of peace, desire that the protestants
might in their towns have their Garrisons maintained at the Kings charge:
Their petitions.
that besides those Towns, the king in every Province of his Realm, should
deliver two such as by sour Deputies should be chosen, which also should be
kept by the Protestants at the kings cost. That the free and public exercise
of religion should be permitted in all parts of the Realm, and to all that
would require it.

That for the admistration of justice to the Protestants, there might be in
every Province erected a new Court of Parliament, composed of protestant
judges. That the protestants for the maintenance of their Ministers might be
discharged of such tenths as the Priests did demand. That the authors,
Councillors, and executioners of the massacres, might be punished as thieves
and disturbers of the common quiet.

Those of the government of Montauban, sent likewise their Deputies to demand
besides the premises, that the Admiral and all the Protestants murdered the
four and twentieth of August, 1572. as also they that yet lived, might be
deemed to have been and to be, most faithful subjects to the king and his
estate, and innocent and clear of all spotte of rebellion. That all arrests,
edicts, and deeds to the contrary since published, might be revoked and
declared to be of no force, as slanderously granted, defased, and rased out
of the records: the goods, honors, and offices, restored to the heirs of the
murdered: all defamatorie monuments taken away, and all processions instituted
in honor of such cruelties, abolished. They farther also demanded free
exercise of their religion and Ecclesiastical discipline in all points: Burial
without limitation of time or Churchyard: exemption from all contribution to
the ceremonies of the Romish Church: admission of their children unto Colleges
under protestant Regents, and legitimatio^ of Priests marriages to such as
should frame themselves to their religion. Many other articles they propounded
concerning government, and sent their committies toward the end of August, with
whom near unto Lions joined the Deputies of Prouence, Dauphine, and Nismes,
who all by the mouth of one, propounded great declarations unto the king: who
returned them to confer with certain his commissioners, promising after he
had brought his brother the king of Poland out of the Realm, to take advise for
all that should be requisite for the satisfying of his subjects. Upon the
Deputies report in the beginning of November, the protestants renewed their
association throghout the Provinces aforesaid, where they held many places, as
also a very exact course for their conservation.

The Ambasladours of Polonia being entered into France about the end of July
to fetch their king, they bare him company from Rochel to Parris, What passed
since the coming of the Ambassaders of Polonia, until their departure.
where upon the foureteenth of September he made a roy all enterie, nothing
wanted to make him happy, but the prosperity of the Rochelers that had slain
part of his servants.

In the Court there were some that rejoiced at the dishonor he had received
before it: others took his departure impatiently, specially the Queen Mother,
and her most secret Councillors, those of Guise, and the spirituality. All of
them feared the king, that began to change both countenance and speech,
specially having fully understood the truth of the resolution and means of
those of the religion in Languedoc, and the countries thereabout. The
spirituality had made a present of three hundredth thousand crowns to the king
of Polonia, for the good services he had done for them against those of the
religion, and would have done twice as much more, if he had overcome the
Rochelers. The Bishop of Valence and Lansac being in Polonia, to obtain that
which they pretended, granted diverse articles touching those of the religion
in France, unto the Nobility of that country, whereupon the Ambassadors
made instant means and requests unto the king touching the same, which in
effect were almost agreeable to the conclusion of those of Languedoc: they
spoke likewise for diverse particulars: many subtilties were used to divert the
Ambassadors from that pursuit, busying them with bankets and shows of no
small charge and expenses. Their new king was not greatly desirous to make that
long perigrination, and would gladly have staed till the next Summer: and some
of his most trusty friends assayed to cause some hard answer to be given
unto the Ambassadors, to the end that either they should return discontented,
or that the time might by that means pass away. But the kings servants caused
him to make fair promises to those Ambassadors that were remitted unto the
Town of Metz, there to understand what or how much should be done for them.

Among these serious matters, the King could not content himself, but twice or
thrice cast out certain threatening words against those that had abused him,
making him believe that after the four and twentieth day of August, he should
be absolute king. But to the contrary, he perceived his subjects openly to
reproach him, with the unrecoverable wrongs that he had don both to himself and
the^. To accuse him, that in stead of being father of his people, he had bin
both the butcher and the executioner, or at the least had resumed the title, by
the induction of the principal authors of such confusions, but his complaints
and threatenings were but of hard disgestion for himself, and in those troubles
he found not one faithful servant that taught him to be patient and to
content himself, in time to find the means to execute justice upon such as
had committed so many iniustices and furious executions, under the title and
pretense of his name, The kings sickness.
whereby a strong fever seized upon him in Champagne, in such manner, that it
was thought he would have died being at Vitry, whither he traveled to bring
his brother on his way to Polonia, that could not dissemble the grief he had
to depart out of France, to go among such people as would prevent him from
making any massacres, and by the long delays of his affairs, made men to
judge that more then two expected the issue of the kings sickness, whose
servants as then spoke much against the Queen Mother and that new king, as also
of their practices, for the which some absented themselves from the Court and
went into Britain. But the kings sickness having taken other effect then was
expected, having by lively force of his ardent youth, repulsed and driven out
the disease at his head, neck, and face, the report went, that it was the
small Pox, whereat most of the Courtiers smiled, not daring to speak one
word, but shrinking in their shoulders.

And being somewhat amended and recovered of his strength, he ceased not to
procure and hasten his brothers departure, that issued out of France about the
end of October, leaving all the charge unto his mother, who openly showed to
bear him greater affection then to her other two sons. The King being
doubted of by her, because of his threatenings and alterations, and the Duke of
Alencon loved not the house of Guise.

The estate of France after the departure of the king of Polonia.
Presently after the departure of the king of Polonia, new practices were
invented, whereof I will make a brief discourse, because those of Languedoc
daily strengthed themselves more and more: to appease them, an assembly of the
estates general was appointed to be holden at Champagne, and truce was made
for two months with those of Languedoc, with permission to assemble
themselves to consider what could be necessary to be propounded and agreed
upon in the estates, for the good and profit of the Commonwealth and Realm
of France. Mean time, an enterprise is practiced to surprise Rochel, and men
were sent through all the Provinces of the Realm, secretly to discover what
friends and enemies they had, to call the particular estates to frame the
books, and to put their enterprise in practice with as little rumor as
possible might be.

On the other side, the Queene-mother fained to be very careful touching the
election of the Lieftenant general of the Realm. And being at Soissons,
desired the king not to grant that charge to the Duke of Alencon his brother,
alleging that that young Prince that would not approve the massacres, being
followed by diverse discontented persons, might move some troublesome matters,
if he once perceived the forces of the Realm to be at his commandment.
Therevppon news came, that the Deputies of diverse Provinces came from many
places to assemble the estates, with notes and commissions to speak boldly,
namely against the Authors and Councillors of the massacres. For which cause
the estates being assigned to be at Champagne, was reiourned, and yet diverse
Deputies being come to Parris, asked and obtained audience, wherein after many
and diverse earnest complaints and declarations made touching the publicque
confusions of the Realm of France, and particularly in the Provinces, they
besought the king, that in consideration of the mischiefs supported by his
subjects for the space of many years, by the evil government of his
principal Councillors, it would please him to give some comfort to his
subjects, and in the mean time to call an assembly of all the estates of his
realm, to foresee and provide for those disorders, otherwise it was to be
feared the people would rise and breed some mutiny. The Queene-mother and her
adherents hardly pushed at by such complaints, where with the king seemed to
be moved, sought by fair speeches to appease the Deputies: and presently
after changed countenance, using threatenings in such sort, that the Deputies
returned without any relief, but only that the king would shortly take some
order for them, wherewith they were exhorted to maintain the provinces in
peace, permitting those of Languedoc, whom they doubted to make new assemblies,
thereby to frame large articles, which not long after they did in the assembly
holden at Milliand in Rouergne, where they forgot not any any thing requisite
for them and their associates.

The mischief by the which an entry was made for the ruin and overthrow of
those of the religion, was, that diverse Catholics that termed themselves
polliticques and discontented, thrust themselves among them. And coming in
credit, made themselves companions with them: in such manner, that if those of
the religion had kept themselves a part, the king had bin constrained to grant
them peace, and by that means their affairs had fallen out happily, which
they did not by reason of this mixture, whereof invited by the course of years
we will now speak somewhat. Certain polliticque Courtiers to bring the
matter to a better point, esteemed it necessary to have a Lieftenant general,
nominating the D. of Alencon as most fit for that place: they set before him
the little estimation made of him: his small means: the inquisitions made of
his servants: the distrusts that were had touching his fidelity: the refusal
of granting him the Lieftenancie general: the kings sickness, and the means
that offered it self unto him to restore the estate of the Realm, counselling
him to withdraw himself from the Court, and so begin to move the matter.

While this was doing, where the Queene-mother was presently certified, and
could serve her turn, thereby as you shall see the practices to surprise
Rochel, wherein Puigaillard, Landereau, the Barron de la Guard and others, were
dealers, Enterprise upon Rochel.
began to work, but in such sort, that by little and and little the
Rochelers discovered the devise, whereby they intrapped certain principalles
of the enterprise, who about the end of the year they caused to be executed.
Presently after, the king wrote letters unto them, saying: that the execution
pleased him well, and willed them to look unto themselves: which was the
occasion that after many disputations, to cause the^ to enter into consideracie
with those of Languedoc and others, to defend themselves, staying till some
leaders were raised upon unto them, as hope was given them. That which made
them stay, was that they perceived diverse men of good quallitie enemies to the
religion to join with them, to ask reformation of thee-state, which made many
good men to presume, that some piece of cunning was in hand to be wrought, and
that the Queene-mother and her Councillors caused this tragedy to be playde,
to entertain a mutiny during the Kings sickness, that they might cry hola
when it pleased them, and in time to overthrow the one by the other.

Those of the religion understanding the devise against the Rochelers, and the
practices invented to surprise them in Languedoc, and all the while the truce
endured, Beginning of the fifth troubles in France
and the raising of men to run upon them suddenly, determined (truce being
expired) to provide for themselves: and first published an ample discourse, of
the causes and reasons that moved them to defend themselves, wherein they
showed an infinite number of wrongs done unto them within the space of six
months, without any hope of justice: perceiving a manifest appearance of their
total ruin and destruction, if they opposed not themselves against it.
Further, they set forth certain aduises and humble declarations unto the
Princes, Nobility, Parliaments, and third estate, thereby to stir them up.

The Duke of Alencon, that had been solicited by his most faithful
Councillors to look unto himself, was put in mind to seek for the place of
Lieftenant general, and if he obtained it to keep himself aloof: or if
they sought to employ him against those of Languedoc, to think upon the means
to restore the affairs of the Realm to some better estate. His mother was
persuaded that the Marshals de Montmorency and de Cosse were dealers therein, at
the instance of the king of Navarre and the Prince of Conde: whereupon with
her Council she determined to assure her self, and to rid her self of
those that seemed to take other part then hers, which was the entry into
diverse strange alterations, wherein those of Guise help with both their hands:
whereupon it happened, that the Court being at Saint Germain in Lay, the
Duke Alencon made request unto the king, to grant him the estate of Lieftenant
general, to represent the kings person throughout the Realm. Whervppon the
Marshall de Montmorencie entering into speech thereof, with the king and the
Queen Mother, showed them, that if they granted not that request unto the
Duke, they should do him wrong, for that it would be an occasion for every man
to judge of his insufficiency, for that the same estate had been given unto
the Duke of Aniou without his request: alleging other reasons as the desert of
such a place might move him for the quietness of the Realm.

How the Lieftenants place was granted to the Duke of Alencon.
This request was in manner granted, but in stead of letters pattents, certain
private letters were made and sent unto the Gouernrs, besides a declaration
made by the K. by word of mouth unto the Deputies of the Provinces. The Duke of
Alencon not content therewith, pursued his request, which made his adversaries
think, that he understood somewhat of his mothers meaning, which was to put
the estate of Lieftenant into the hands of the Duke of Lorraine, who not long
after came into the Court, whither he had been sent for by express messengers.

They proceeded further, for that at the same time a report being sown
abroad, that the Duke of Alencon secretly held certain men about him, thereby
to effect some bad exployt, the Queen his mother went personally to search
within his chamber: and not long after, putting I know not what fear and
distrusts into the kings mind, counseled him to approach nearer to Parris,
that he might lodge in more safety at Bois de Vincennes, a strong and
pleasant place.

Before he dislodged happened an other matter: the Duke of Guise making a
quarrel in the Court yeard of the Castle of Saint Germain, against one named
Ventabran, (in time past one of his servants) laid hand upon his sword,
Ventabran fled and got to the stairs, running to the chamber of the Marshall
de Montmorencic, which being shut, he ran higher to the chamber of the
Lady, widow to the Constable: and finding Monsicur de Thore, the Marsha^s
brother, stayed there, where he got certain blows, but yet without hurt, the
Duke affirming that Ventabran had conspired to kill him: and that he would
plague him for it.

This deuile thus wrought: the Marshall being a wise Gentleman, fought to find
out the truth, and caused Ventabran to be committed to prison, who within two
days after, was set at liberty, which was the occasion that the Marshall by
license from the king departed from the Court. This was done in the month of
February, at the end whereof, news came to the Court, that on Normandy side,
about a days journey from thence, there lay two or three hundredth horsemen,
that were said to been assembled by the Duke of Alencon, to favor his retire
from the Court, Others bearing him no great affection, spread forth a rumor
that they were in arms prepared to kill the king, the Queen, and his
Council. The first advise took place, nevertheless to make the latter seem
likely (yet untrue) every man (except it were the king, Praclises of the Court,
whereinto sundry not able to penetrate at the first, the gentry of Normandy
found themselves deceined, whereof ensued the destruction of the County of
Montgommery.
persuaded to stay with his train) in great haste dislodging from Saint
Germains, where they stayed till the lodgings of the Castle of Blois Saint
Vincennes were prepared, and rid to Parris, from nine of the clock till
midnight, with most great noise and tumult.

I must tell you that the Duke of Alencon was in mind to have departed from
the Court, and to take the king of Navarre with him, and that this troop
composed of the Gentlemen their servants, came to bring them to the places
appointed by them: but imagining many difficulties in the execution, he took
advise of la Mole a Gentleman of Prouence that governed him, who gave him
counsel with all speed to aduerise the king his brother, and his mother, what
his meaning was: which was the cause that the king removed not: nevertheless
the mother that had some greater matter in her head, made that voyage by night,
and went to the house of the Marshall de Retz, in the subburbs of S. Honor.
The Parisians believing whatsoever was told them touching those horses, in
short time made a great and puissant army, as they said.

The next day the king went unto his mother, and within eight days after, they
went to Blois Saint Vincennes, having holden diverse councels to devise the
means to entrap the Marshal d'Anuille, that gave them work to do in Languedoc.
Mean time, the Duke of Alencon and the king of Mauarre, upon the four and
twentieth of March, published a declaration touching the matter of Saint
Germains, protesting their good wills toward the king, and that they were
resolved to oppose themselves with all their means, against such as would
rebel against him, which was an occasion to bring the Marshall de Montmorencic
unto the Court: who being come was arested, as also the Marshall de Cosse, and
both most shamefully led prisoners to the Bastille. On the other side la Mole
Coconnas, and Tourtay, servants to the Duke of Alencon, were committed within
Parris, and not long after executed, having only confessed to have been of
their Masters counsel to depart out of the Court. Diverse Lords and Gentlemen
entangled in this process, saved themselves as well as they could: the Duke of
Alencon and the king of Navarre were kept more straight, and twice examined
touching that action.

The estate of Dauphine, Languedoc and poictou.
These troubles in the Court, hindered not those of the religion and their
associates to look unto themselves. In Dauphine, Mombrun took Loriol, Linron,
Alet, Grave, and Roinac, and overthrew five companies of footmen that sought to
impeach them. Those of Villeneufue in Viuarais, not long before had put
certain troops to the swood, that came against those of the religion, without
loss of one man, and took Aubenas, a Town of great importance, having cut
the throats of all the Garrison, for the most part composed of the massacres
of Lions. The government of Languedoc and Dauphine having bin committed to the
Prince d'Auphine, and Monsieur d'Acier joined with him, the Marshall d'Anuille
by letters intercepted, discovered what was pretended against him, by which
means he began to draw to those of the religion, consulting with Saint
Roman Governor of Nismes, seized upon Montpeslier, Beaucaire, Lunel, and
Pezenas.

In Poistou the Politicians joined with la Noue, took Saint Maixaut, Melle,
Fontenay, Lusignan, and other places. In Normandy about the beginning of
March, What happened in Normandy to the County de Montgommery taken prisoner,
and after executed.
the County Montgommery accompanied with Lorges and Galardon his children,
departed from the Isle of Gerze, and arrived at Rades, where Colombieres and de
Fey, with fistie Gentlemen came to meet him: from whence he went to Saint Lo,
and then with in three days after, assieged and took Carentan by compositio^.
Within a month after, a strong army of the enemy, commanded by Matignon and
Feruaques, set upon him and enclosed him with a little weak town and ill
furnished, called Danfrone, accompanied with sixty horse, and eight
harguebuziers, conducted by Captain la Touch the younger, resolving upon a
valiant defense, even in the beginning of the siege sent forth sieve and
twenty horse, and some small shot, who giving a sharp onset, slew seven
Gentlemen assaylants, and nine horse, and soretired with the loss of the Lord
of Friaize, who was slain, and two prisoners that they left behind. This was
the eleventh of May.

The next day the besieged cut in pieces one Corpse de guard: but soon after,
some either for fear, or won with fair words, forsook the County and
yielded to the assaylants, who in reward, stripped and put them to their
ransom. The Queen Mother understanding that the County whom she hated to the
death, was in her nets, sent forces day and night to strengthen Matignon, as
also the army that lay before Saint Lo, was commanded with all speed to march
to Danfrone, where they had in the beginning of the siege six thousand small
shot, and fifteen hundredth horse. The king being very sick, upon the 23. of
May the Castle was battered with six pieces of cannon, that in five hours shot
above five hundredth times, and made a breach of five and forty foot broad.

Then did most of the Counties men forsake him, and in liew of entering the
Castle with him, fled out of the Town into the camp, where they received
their deserved entailment as their former companions. About two of the clock at
after noone, the assay lants came fiercely to the breach, where they found the
County on the right side, with the lords of Brossay, Chauuiny, Cornieres,
Tere, young Touch, Mahiliere, Cross, Oulfe and others, to the number of
twenty.

On the left side were the Lords of Sey, Hayes, Vaudore, Sanssaye, Villenenfue
and others, in like number of twenty. All together fell upon their knees to
hear the prayer which one of the three Ministers there present made in the
presence of the assay lants, who when it was done, came to handie blows in the
order following. Out of ten companies of men at arms present at that siege,
Matignon and the other Captains chose one hundredth Gentlemen, even ten out of
every company, well armed: followed with 600. small shot, with murrians, and
100. pikemen with their corselers. These 800. men, with some 200. voluntaries
mixed among the^, were led by the LL. of Fernaques, Villermois, S. Golombe,
Raberprey, Lauerdin and others. The fight lasted sieve hours, neither did the
cannon cease, which indomaged the defer dants with stones, wherewith also the
County was wounded in two places on his sace, but slightly. He was also
struck with a harquebuze upon the right arm near the shoulder, which through
the goodness of his vambras prooded but a bruise. Thus having obstinately
continued the fight on both sides, the assailants were putto retire, with the
loss of Doily, S. Colombe, and sundry other Captains, Gentlemen, and
soldiers, slain in the breach, to the number of 60. and about 100. led away
hurt and maimed. On the Counties side were also slain, Brossay, Tere, Mesnil a
Minister, Vandore, Saussey, Nohe, and 6. soldiers, and 12. wounded: namely the
County, Villeneusue, Riutere, Ousse, Gros a Minister, Maimberte and Courton,
captains, and 5. soldiers. Two days after, seven or 8. of the besieged got
forth and fled to the camp. The 26. of ye month, Vassey thrice spoke to the
County, inducing him to enter into compositio^, as also they had done the day
before. Loath he was to consent, as knowing the hatred of his enemies,
accounting it an honor to die upon the breach with weapon in hand: but seeing
his men thus cast away themselves, leaving him in manner alone, with the wounded
and a few others ye likewise fainted: withal, that al munition of war and water
failed, he was enforced to hearken to composition, rather to save ye remainder,
the^ of any regard to himself: yet making of necessity a virtue, he held off,
and obtained ye himself with his assistants should depart with their lives and
some garments, but no weapons but sword and dagger. That himself should remain
in the hands of Matig. and Vassey, but with good entertainment and safety of
his life. This co^positio^ they swear to keep inuiolably: and Vassey who was
his kinsma^, made great protestatio^s thereof. Some hours after toward
midnight, these 2. Cap. went for the C. who came forth in the company of
Chauuiny. And about 7 of ye clock in ye morning, Mat. returned to bring forth
ye rest. With him entered the soldiers lodged in the town, and the camp by the
breach. The co^mposition was so holde^, yt in the presence of Ma. they slew
part of the besieged, stripped the rest, and offering them great indignities,
forced them to fine and pay ransom. Three or 4. yt fell into the hands of a
Lord, yt made account of ye law of arms, escaped safe. A Mini. named Bute, they
put to death, and hanged Cap. Touch ye younger. The Co. was soon after,
contrary to faith and promise, brought prisoner to Paris, and lastly put to
death, as we will more at latge note in due time and order. The D. of Montp.
very affectionate to the To. church, with anarmie took the field in April, to
war against the protestants in Poictou, Wars in Poictou, against Protestants.
from who^ the L. of Biron had practiced to take To^nay Charante, but could not
archieue it. In May, the D. besieged the castie of Talmo^t, which yielded: but
in the mean time his company was surprised in a village near to S. Hermine,
many slain, 12. or 15. Gentlemen carried away prisoners, and some 60. horse, much
baggage, and the D. cupboord of silver plate, by Cap. S. Stephen, who lay in
garrison in Fontenay, which the D. immediately besieged, and gave two assaults,
where he gained nothing, but lost the most resolute of his troops. Whereupon
hearing of the kings mortal sickness, he retired, attending new supplies and
commissions.

At the same time the Prince of Conde being gotten from the Court, and retired
into Picardie, received advise of diverse practices wroght to seize upon his
person: Retrait of the Prince of Conde into Almaine.
but notwithstanding the the snares that were laid for him, he got into
Almaine, followed by Thore, whom they likewise sought to intrappe, because of
the Marshals of Montgommery and d'Anuille his brethren, and for his counsels
given to the Duke of Alencon. This retrait was diversely spoken of: some
esteeming that the Prince was let go to keep the water in trouble, and to
find other practices: others accounting it a great deliverance of those of the
religion. Time made known what fell out thereby: but whatsoever it was, the
Prince arrived at Strasbourg, and having acknowledged his fault in the French
Church, there assembled touching his conversion after the massacre to the
Popish Church, he detested it, resolving to employ himself to maintain the
estate of France, as his father had done, and there finding the Deputies of
Languedoc practicing a levy of Rutters, wrote unto the churches, exhorting
those of the religion to be courageous, and to make account of his good will
for their comforts.

By the same messenger Thore writ to his brother the Marshall d'Anuille,
persuading him to look about him, and to take the offered occasion. This
Marshall was the same time at great strife in himself, seeking to assure
himself on both sides: on the one side he doubted the king and Queene-mother:
on the other the protestants means to overthrow him, if he should entreat
them hardly.

Heerevppon he resolved sometimes to have an eye to the Court, sometimes to
the contrary, and according to the Proverb, to watch how the market went. On
the one side writing to the chief Captains of the protestants: on the other,
sending the Lord of Rieux to Boisde Vincennes to the king, with ample
instructions dated the eighteenth of May, therein protesting of his affection:
declaring his former services, entreating after account yielded of his
administration to be discharged of his office, and to withdraw to any place
that the king should appoint. The same day he wrote to the Parliament of
Thoulouse, to excuse himself of that he was accuse of a desire to rebel
against the king, and to surprise Narbonne. These proceedings stayed the
Queene-mother and her Councillors, who did well perceive that d'Anuille would
set them work enough, if they should deal otherwise then well, or touch his
brother Montmorencies life, whom in the mean time they caused to be kept, so
to bridle d'Anuille, and to take some course in their affairs, as hereafter
we shall well perceive.

The kings sickness.
The sickness wherewith the king was troubled, not long before the departure of
his brother to go into Poland, had a little rest for the winter time, but the
hidden disease about spring time began again to revive, in such sort, that
having bin sick in the months of February, March, and April, he was
counseled by his Physicians, that he should be purged and let blood, which
were means altogether unprofitable, because it was openly seen, that he
began to fade even in the flower of his age, to the great astonishing of the
ignorant.

Those of least judgment, esteemed that he had eaten or drunk somewhat that
disiested not. Some superstitious persons imagined some witchcrafe or
coniuratio^, and because la Mole had bin found seized with a little image of wax
about him, (which he affirmed to be the picture of a Gentlewoman) pricked in
two places by a witch, they made certain reports to be spredde abroad, that it
was a certain charm used against the life of the king. Although la Mole
sustained the contrary, until the last point of his death, affirmed it to be
made only to continue him in the love of that Gentlewoman whom he meant to
marry.

The king used all the means he could to surmount and overcome his sickness,
and as his years gave him, assayed diverse times to show his courage, but all
in vain. After the departure of the king of Polonia, they perceived him to be
more changed in mind then in body. If he had lived longer, it is without all
doubt, that the Councillors of the massacre had received their reward from
him, his heart was so much moved against them, so that he could not choose but
utter his mind therein to some about him in the Court, whom he knew to be
utter enemies to such injustice: and thereof wrote letters out of the Realm.
So that to conclude, he was determined to have made some stirring among them,
until that finding himself to be seized upon, and that he had not the
means as then to execute any thing, being environed by men that held him as
it were bound both hand and foot, his servants slain, disgraced, or banished
from him: wherein in time he thought to take order, that might procure an
ouerture to his haughty desires, not once thinking until he was so weak,
that he had been so near his death.

His letters to the Governors of Provinces.
In the end of March, he wrote unto the Governors of the Provinces, saying,
that seeing the coffeehouse of his subjects, and the common cause of the
religion, produced so many troubles within his Realm, he desired them to use
peaceable means with those of the religion, declaring that he would not that
any wrong should be done unto them, nor other dealing used toward them in
their affairs, then the other Catholicque subjects of his Realm: he
commanded that those of the religion should be safegarded by those of the
Romish Church, to assure and defend them from the violence that was to be done
against them: where any such should be enterprised, he commanded all his
Officers, to use the speediest and readiest justice that might be, willing
them to look unto it, calling God to witness, that his only intent was, to
see all his subjects live in peace. He likewise desired the same Governors to
provide, that their companies should not in any sort be chargeable to their
subjects, but should pay according to the order therein taken: by the same
letter also showing, that he had been sick of a quarterne ague, he was as
then somewhat recovered, so that the reports spread abroad of his death, were
wholly untruths.

The fourth of May, he advertised the said Governors of the imprisonment of
the two Marshals, that were accused of conspiracy against his person and the
estate, inioyning them to ouerrunne all those that were up in arms, to put
them to the sword, but the poor Prince as then was neither respected of
friends nor enemies. Every day he received packets of new commotions, that
bredde nothing but discommodities, wherein a firm peace, and faithful
maintenance of those of the religion in the exercise thereof, and in that which
they had desired for the conseruations of their persons, goods, dignities,
rights, and privileges, had been the only remedy which his mother and her
Councillors abhorred.

He perceived the beginnings of new troubles, in the captivity of his
brother, and his brother in law, and the two Marshals: as also in the exile of
the Prince of Conde, and of diverse great Lords: his subjects armed one against
the other: and to be short, the fire of division kindled more then ever it was.

Whereupon overcome with the evil that reigned in his body, and with so many
horrible tempests in his brains, he was forced to keep his bed and yield to
his disease. For the space of certain days he strove and struggeled against
nature, not yielding thereunto by extreme force. The nine and twentieth of
May, letters were written in his name to the Governors of Provinces, to whom
he sent word, that during his sickness if he chanced to die, until the
coming of the king of Polonia his brother and successor, they should obey the
Queen his mother, Letters in favor of his mother.
whatsoever she would command: showing that his brethren the Duke of Alencon
and the king of Navarre, had promised him to do the like in her behalf: in the
two last weeks of his sickness he lost much of his blood, that issued out of
many places of his body, and once rowlde himself therein, falling down by
weakness, many times naming diverse Lords, whom he particular hated, and that
till then had kept themselves out of his hands.

The thirtieth of May, which was the day of his death, the Queene-mother
perceiving that the simple letters made the day before, The day of his death,
and what passed as then specially touching the regency.
touching the charge to her committed, sufficed not to strengthen her
authority during the absence of the king of Polonia, whom she feared could
not so soon return again into France, determined for his sure establishment,
to cause her self to be declared Regent in the absence of the king to come,
and to cause letters pattents thereof to be sealed by the Chancellor Birague,
who with the seals was wholly at her commandment: which was as much as to
overthrow and subvert the fundamental laws of the Realm, to abolish the
right of the first Prince of the blood, to lessen the authority of the estates
general, to rule the Parliaments, and to reign in strange manner over France.

Nevertheless, the better to bind the hands of the two first Princes of the
blood, and the two Marshals whom she held prisoners, to beat her enemies, to
extirminate the County de Montgommerie, kept prisoner against faith and
promise made, to sow new divisions in the estate, and so to maintain her
self in those confusions, without foreseeing the great disorders whereof she
should be cause, by that means giving liberty to those that in the end
would be her overthrow, as hereafter you shall hear: her ambition blinded
her eyes, she entered into the kings chamber with Birague, by whom she caused
to be showed unto him, that seeing his sickness hindered him from dealing in
the affairs that required his presence, it should be good to give the regencie
of the Realm unto the Queen his mother, and commanded that letters pattents
to the same end should be given unto her.

The king that was at his last hour, by their advise caused the Secretaries
and Captains of his guards to be called in, to whom he said: Do all that
which the Queen my mother shall command you, and obey her as my self. The
Duke of Alencon and the King of Navarre were likewise called, that they might
know that the Regencie was committed to the Queene-mother, and were expressly
named in the letters that were presently dispatched for the same purpose. One
that published a discourse of his last speechs, says, that not long before he
died, he desired his mother to pursue his enemies to the uttermost, and that
with great vehemency he reiterated his speeches, saying: Madame, I pray you
heartily do it. And in those combats of mind, he died at Blois Saint
Vincennes, upon the 30. of May, 1574. in the presence of his mother, set upon a
chest, accompanied with the Cardinals of Bourbon and Ferrare, the Chancellor
Birague, Lansac, and other Lords that beheld ye end of the tragical life of
this Prince, that was born the 27. of June 1550. and began to reign the 5. of
December. 1560, and had a reign which all posterity will admire and abhor. So
this Prince lived not till he attained to the full age of four and twenty
years, of nature being very active, unconstant in his cogitations, rash in
his enterprises, impatient to attend, diligent to look into other men's
natures, prompt of conceit, of good memory, extreme colloricke, secret, a
great dissembler, and one that easily framed his countenance, Description of
Charles the ninth.
which his Tutors many times put him in mind of, for in the beginning he was
courteous, and easy to be ruled.

They likewise made him become one of the greatest blasphemers in France,
wherein he became so expert, that that evil quallitie in him, converted to be
his ordinary speech. Martigues, Losses and others, taught him that corruption
by his mothers consent: specially after the first troubles. They contented not
themselves with those corruptions, but enticed him likewise to Courtizans, to
whom of himself he was not much adicted: and to conclude, to make him the
capital enemy of the religion, both she and they which ought to have had
more care of conseruing the honor of this Prince, left nothing omitted, whereby
to push him forward to all vice, and to cause him to wallow in the filthiness
that covered him on all sides: he uttered his words in good terms, with a
ready and pleasant speech: loved Music and Poetry: we have seen
reasonable good verses of his composing. But his principal exercise was in
hunting, the pleasure whereof, made him forget all other pleasures, and in the
end he gave himself so much unto it, that the blood of wild beasts, which to
shed he took a singular pleasure, having ripped up their bellies, and pulling
out their intrailes with his own hands, made him in a manner to become
furious, so that many times at his return from hunting, he entered into such
fury, that none of his servants durst once appear in his sight, unless would
receive some blows. In his Anagranome, which was devised by certain persons
after the massacre, was found out these two words: Chasseur, Desloyal, wherein
are as many letters, and the same that are in Charles de Valois.

He had composed a book of all the parts of bunting, which till this time
never was extant: he was sober, drinking no wine, slept little: his visage
long, pale, and swart: a long nose: sharp and quick sight, specially after
the second troubles: of body well proportioned, but beginning to stoop. He
took pleasure to taunt great men, not sparing either mother or brethren,
specially the Duke of Aniou, whom he railed at, and diverse times used him most
unworthily: but above all, he had a great quarrel to the Parliament of
Parris: to the officers whereof, in one of his Orations made touching the
complaints of the neglecting of his commandments, he said: I will that from
henceforth you shall obey my commandment, without any more disputation
touching their merits, for I know what is to be done for the honor and
profit of my realm, better then you do. And I will that from henceforth you
shall not loose any time to write, or frame your declaration unto me, neither
yet to moderate, correct, nor interpret my commandments. For my meaning is,
that all whatsoever I say and do, shall presently be executed. Three days
before he died, his mother having showed him of the taking of the County de
Montgommery, he made her no answer: and when she told him that he ought to
rejoice at the taking of him that had killed his father, I care neither for
that (said he) nor for any thing else in this world.

He likewise rejoiced that he left no small children behind him, because
(said he) that leaving them in their minorities, they should have over much to
suffer: adding, that France as then had need of a man. Now we must speak of
his successor, and see what manner of man he was.

Here ends the History of the last troubles that happened in the reign of
Charles the ninth.
A BRIEF DISCOVRSE OF THE GREAT AND WONDERFVL EFFECTS THAT HAVE ENSVED THE
KINGS CONVERSION: Collected out of a certain Oration made touching the
reduction of the City of Lions under the kings obedience, and sent to
Monsieur de Reuol, Counselor and Secretary to the King.
THere was never any strange or new accident, how acceptable and pleasing
soever it might be, that in all places or with all men was esteemed and holden
in admiration, for that every man therein will give censure according to his
own affection. I speak this in respect of the mournful silence which the
reduction of the City of Lions has inserted into the minds of many men; and
the joy it has infused into the hearts and very entrails of others: for that
therein I never spoke with any man, that would once conceive the true cause and
reason thereof, which forces me at this present to enter into this discourse,
wherein so fit occasion being offered, if it please you to give me audience,
and permit me license to speak, I will in brief most plainly show, that it is
only the miraculous and mighty work of Gods hand which has wrought the
same: although per adventure this kind of argument pleases not such men, as
are only pleased with our displeasures, and in a manner faint and are overcome
with the mere air and sweet savor of the flower de luce.

It is long since agreed and consented unto, that Henry de Bourbon, chief
Prince of the blood royal, and principal Peer of France, by true descent, by
order of succession, by right of blood, and by custom and law of the Realm,
is called to the Crown and government of France: which first quallitie is in
him so true and perfect, that none or few of his famous predecessors ever had
more evident titles thereunto. He is a Frenchman, from his Grandfathers in both
families, and not only a mere Frenchman, but on his fathers side, of the
first branch of the blood royal: the like on his mothers side; by his father,
not only descended from Saint Lewis, or Hugh Capet, but from Charles and
Dagobert, of whom the Capets descended, contrary to the wilful ignorance of
such as would prove his family to be mere strangers: and by his mother,
from the Alberts kings of Navarre, who successively were of the house of
France, and by the marriages of daughters, capable by succession to the
kingdom of Navarre. And for such he was esteemed and accounted, until the
death of the Duke of Alencon the kings brother. When presently the good old
Cardinal of Bourbon was titled in the head, and made believe, that in the age
of sixty years he should live and succeed a king (who beside his young
years and strength of body, lived not in any such disordered manner, whereby
he should once have occasion to think upon his successor) for it was showed
him, that he was the first Prince of the blood, and that the right of
inheritance and succession consisted in his person. But when this devise was
found too weak, and the absurdity too much discovered, thereby seeking to
impugn or deny the king of Navarre to be the chief and eldest branch of his
house, in the right and title of his father, who in a manner lived in him,
(besides the reuocation by his uncle made unto him, of all rights, names,
voices, and actions whatsoever, both present and to come, that might appertain
or belong unto him, as being issued from the house of Bourbon, expressly
acknowledging the said king of Navarre his Nephew, for the true son, heir,
successor, and representation of the chief branch of the said house) they
invented other objections and subtle policies, that under those pretenses
they might bleare the eyes of the common and simple people: affirming the
Crown of France to be vacant, and so belonged to the first Conqueror:
a^leaging for reason, that as in the populer successions of common people, such
as are of the kindred and family of any houses, being in the tenth degree of
consanguinitie, cannot be heirs of their kinsmans lands, so far in descent
from them, and thereby the inheritance falls into the Lords hands, and that so
the house of Bourbon had no title or any right to the Crown of France, as
being in the tenth degree of consanguinitie from it, whereof they caused diverse
discourses and whole volumes to be written.

But that not being able to be beaten into the heads of true Frenchmen, nor
once set footing or enter into the opinions of the commun people, altogether
incapable of such Sophisteries, they began to enter into an other course of
injuries, accusations, and inuections: wherein they contented not themselves,
only to cry out and make war against the said king, and to produce and cause
to be published a perpetual incapacitie in his person, and that without the
Popes consent, but they accused him of treason, they condemned him, they named
him unworthy and incapable to rule in France: they assembled all the estates
of France at Blois, wherein a manner they utterly rejected him: every man
showed to be his enemy, if not in his right and title, yet touching the
religion which he then held, and finally went about to frame his process. But
to the contrary, those that pursued him, were themselves executed, before they
heard their condemnation or judgment.

In this manner the fire began to be kindled in all the four quarters of the
realm, and the blow was of such force, that all neighbor Princes were moved
there at, such as were offended arming themselves to be revenged, and the
people in a manner led by a fury, helping them, and with them turned their
faces against the king: whereof the Town of Parris was the first, and by
example thereof, all the Towns in less then 6. weeks, made that great and
strange co^motion, that continued for the space of five whole years ensuing.
She moved them to this dissension, by the smooth and special reasons by her
alleged against heresy, perjury, and tyranny: coniuring them by duty to
their country, and by the love they ought to bear to the preservation
thereof, to join with her in so just a cause, and to pass one of these two
ways, (having no other means) either to be vanquishers, or die in the
quarrel, rather then to submit themselves to the king. And among the rest, the
City of Lions, (never inferior to any City in the world, touching
fidelity and obedience to their kings, that had no other object then only
zeal of religion, in the defense whereof, it espied many evident and mortal
signs) suffered it self to be borne away among this troop, not once
considering or apprehending the multitude of miseries by her after that endured.

And in this manner the wars began with so strange an alteration and
motion of all estates, yea even of the very pillars of the land: and the revolt
was such, that in fine, the royalty of the king was reduced to a small corner
of the country about Tours and Blois, where without doubt the league had
buried it, if suddenly the king of Navarre had not aided him: who thereupon
took courage again, having on his side the Hercules of France, and scourge of
rebels to their Prince: but when this disordered and great mutiny began
somewhat to decline, and that the presence and authority of the Sovereign
Prince, held the most assured within the bounds of their duties, and that
Parris perceived it self in way and course of extreme desolation, suddenly
the king was slain. And then (O the great and deep judgments of God) he
that about three months before, had passed there river of Loire only with
four hundredth horse, a thousand shot, and certain pikes, was presently made
chief sovereign and commander of a most fair and great army, to whom the
Magistrates and Officers of the Crown, and all the Nobility, yielded their
obedience, thereby seeking to impeach the desolation and overthrow of the whole
estate, and to prefer the duty of natural fidelity, before the vain hope
of strangers, and the last hazard of the rest and surety of their lives and
goods. And so behold him king, that not seven months before had been deprived
of the title of the first Prince of the blood, and of the hope of the name,
Sacrying, and Crown of the Princes his ancestors, that had so many times
been driven from the Court: that in four years had seen ten armies, and
ten Generals to a king, marching (before the heads of the forces of the
greatest Prince, of the most warrelike nation in all the world) against him:
that after the overthrow of a great foreign power, had withdrawn himself
into a corner of the Realm, without land, men, or money: and a Prince
altogether poor, unless it were in hope. He that had been declared unable for
the Crown, that had been made one of the Cardinal of Bourbons retinue: that
was no more acknowledged to be of the race or progeny of S. Lewis, as being
ten degrees in consanguinitie from it: he that the country of Spain esteemed
the subject of all our miseries, who in the life of ^ur kings was the only
argument of all the tragedies that had been acted in the country of France: he
that thought not to have succeeded a king, being in the flower of his lively and
gallant youth: that had bin an occasion to the contrary, if age, and not a
most cruel and poisoned knife, had not borne him to S. Dennis: he I say was
king, in the middle of all his troops, in open field, and by sound of trumpet
proclaimed king of France. And the Catholicque Nobility, who by reason of
their diversity of religion, it was thought would have separated themselves
from him, were so much moved at the detestable murder so disloyally committed
against the sacred person of their most Christian, Catholicque, and religious
king, abhorring that part from whence so miserable a monster had his issue,
that they chose rather to preserve themselves by keeping together, then to
destroy themselves by disunion: that it remained constant and faithful to the
successor of their king, not once disputing of the lawful vocation of his
Majesty, and so much the rather that he embraced the preservation of the
Cal^olicque, Apostolic, and Roman religion, and promised to reciue
instruction, and make profession thereof. No other means resting, whereby to
knit and join that which by disunion had been separated, and nothing but the
new opinion of religion, was the cause to place a barrier between them, and
the means that the poor people did not most willingly cast themselves into
his arms. And to the contrary, the fear of the alteration of religion,
puts the^ out of their bounds, and as the waves that break into a breach,
having gotten through, do run with more noise and force then before. So he
was esteemed for an heretic, his goods confiscate, and his body punished,
that had not half a dozen of maxims or princples ready, thereby with tooth
and nail openly to maintain, that Henry de Bourbon might not be king,
although he were a Catholic: and that the power of the Pope stretched not so
far as once to undertake the hearing of his excuses, much less to absolve
him. In this general licenciousnesse of all things, whereby every man is
permitted both to speak and think evil, which fills France with barbarism
and monsters, which makes the Cities and Towns the gulfes of civil furies,
wherein it is easy to fall, and impossible to get out again: it seemed that a
whole world, neither yet the reigns of four kings, would ever have ended so
great adesolation. For thereby is seen the deluge of all afflictions fallen
upon the people: confusion and disorder rampeth and enters into all places:
councels are weak: justice despised: the foot commanding the head: the
treasurescconsumed: the estate becomes sicker then sickness it self: and
which is more, religion, for the which they take weapon in hand, loses more
in one month, then it gets intenne, having nothing more contrary to the
increasing, restoring, and beautifying thereof, then the insolency, cruelty,
disobedience, and impiety of civil wars. And should we suppose, that during
these monstrous and mad rebellions, the obedience we owe to God can long
continue? What is he that knows not how many injuries religion has
sustained, as well by the defendors, as enemies thereof? both of them esteeming
it a glory, to violate, blaspheme, and in a moment to destroy the forepassed
labors of so many years, and in two hours to saw down the tree that has
grown up and prospered for 1500. years. The people by long draughts swallow
down the sweet breath of liberty, they term disorder reason, they admit
no law, but what they like best, and will by no means hear speaking of
superior. Of the despising of the Prince, proceeds disobedience to God: and
from that impiety springs the disobedience we show unto each other. For that
long sufferancealtereth custom, and forms immitation, and the example of one
that escapes unpunished, moves others to commit the like offense. So that
among so many crimes, disorders, and confusions, it is not strange unto us, to
see our actions have so hard success. For as the horse that has newly cast
his Master to the ground and broken his bridle, cease not to run till he
comes to some place, where with great fury he kills himself: so the
people abandoning all duty and respect of government, overthrow themselves at
the end of their most furious course: and are like a ship in the middle of the
wanes, which being never so well rigged and furnished with warlike ammunition,
having neither sail nor rurther, is ready to sincke, and stirs not but at
the pleasure of a feeble blast of wind, which uses it as it list. To the
contrary, the kings army (that as a rock resists the proud and raging
waters) like agreat river passing her bounds to ouerflow the medows, assiegeth
Towns, wins diverse battles, bears all before it, and triumphs in all
places. And Spain, which ought either to unburden it self, or at the least
be content with the great number of roabes which it daily wears, and with so
many Scepters, that impeach it, and rest it self: rises up to put us in
fear. She that fears least our prosperity would be her ruin: our peace,
her wars: and that our nails should grow so long, therewith to pull that from
her, which she and hers has forcibly taken from us, she bends her cannon
shot against the battered walls of our estate: and she that seeing us
transported with fury and collor, ought to hide the knife, and quench the
fire, puts it into our hands, therewith to move us to destroy our selves.
And adds oil and wood more to increase the fire of our divisions, yet all in
vain, for that against good Frenchmen, she sends Spanish shadows. But
after the loss of a great battle, and the long and extreme enduring of
miseries by the assieged towns, every man begins to detest wars and to
seek peace. And the ordinary meat wherewith the people were usually served,
begins to fail and be disliked: the goodly and beautiful pretense of
religion, that had given so great an appetite to the common people, to disiest
arms, loses credit: and it is evidently seen, that the war has more
respect to the altering of estate, then preservation of religion. And in fine,
when at the assembly of the league in Parris, the D. of Ferrare under pretense
and cover of religion, had propounded the means to shake and utterly overthrow
the salique law, not any good Frenchman but detested the devise, as athing more
cruel then death it self. And the Court of Parliament did most virtuously
resist the lamentable subversion of that law, which has maintained this
monarchy, and continued so many years: and in defense whereof, our forefathers
died the plains of Poctiers and Cressy, with their lively and masculine blood.
And in the mean time, when every man cried out, and openly said: the king was
no king, that they were earnestly busied to find an other, that every man would
be, and yet durst not: his Majesty by revelation of the holy Ghost, and for
his own salvation, turned to the sacred and holy bosom of the Church, leaving
the error and new opinion, that from his cradle he had always holden, feeling
in his soul a strong and firm resolution, to abjure his former impostures. He
did it not at randon, neither as constrained by necessity, by fear of
foreign usurpation, for the only inioying of a temporal peace or Crown of
Charles, but of a holy and most divine inspiration which entered into his
soul, from the day and time that the death of the K. left the Scepter of
France, and yielded it unto him: from that time he made known to our holy
father Pope Sixtus the fifth, by M. de Luxenbourg, to Pope Gregory the 13. by
the Marquess of Pisani, and since that, to him who at this day sits in S.
Peter's Chair, called Clement the eight, by the Cardinal de Gondy, that as he
was lawful successor to the Crown, he desired also that the succession of the
Catholic, Apostolic, and Roman religion, be observed in his realm,
submitting himself to his authority and instruction touching the salvation of
his soul. And perseuering in his so holy resolution, he banished from the
Court, those that had made him believe that the world had continued in
darkness from the death of the Apostle S. Paul, to the time of Calvin, and
that the splendant sun of the truth, had been eclipsed touching the preaching
of the Gospel, and shut up within the territories of Bohemia and Saxony, until
the seditious preachings of John Hus and Martin Luther, caused it to shine with
greater clearenesse: and being instructed in the truth of our religion, by the
most learned Prelates in all the realm of France, he presented himself in the
temple of the chief Apostle of France, even in the middle of the shadows of
his predecessors, and there, and upon their Tombs detested his heresies, the
only causes of his troubles, and original of our mischiefs. There is no
reason what soever to be objected, that can deny this action to be most holy,
most admirable, and most miraculous, whether you consider the happy
disposition and abundance of the year, the victory against the Turks, or
the sudden conversion of our rebels. For first you have seen how God guided
this Prince through the middle of so many laborinths and dangers of fire and
flame, to the throne of royal Majesty: how this Joseph persecuted by his own
kindred and family, triumphs in Aegipt: and how this Moses, exposed and
abandoned to the mercy of civil tempests, becomes not only Coronel of an
army of 600000. men, but king of a great Realm, and of so many millions of
people. And the king, to give a taste and feeling unto his subjects, of the
contentment and quietness that his soul inioyed by his new conversion, and
thereof to give evident testimony to all the world, grants a truce even at
the very instant when his enemies were ready to yield: and sends the Duke
de Neuers to his holiness, submitting himself to his commandments, and
offering his conscience (the subject of a goodly conquest) gives him to
understand, thot he desires but one religion in his Realm: that he knows
well that the Church is one, that faith is not divided, and that as the body
can endure but one head, the heavens but one sun, and religion but one God: so
the Realm of France ought to have but one Church, which cannot be one, where
God is diversely served. So if our miseries are not incensible unto him, if it
pleases him not speedily to embrace the occasions offered, and mittigate the
rigor of forms, not only our religion, but also the estate, will be a pray
to long and cruel divisions, which continually afflist the country of France.
It is said, he is one of the most woorthiest successors of Saint Peter, that
for the space of one hundredth years has sit in his chair, which increases
our hopes, and lightneth our minds, in a manner clean abated: for that one of
the best comforts that man can have in the middle of the waves and surges of
the sea, is, when he is assured that his Pilot is an expert man, and knows
what to do. And so we hope, that to preserve this French vessel from ship
wrack, he will rise up against the tempest which daily threatens the same:
and we know what winds and waves do blow and push it forward: and that he will
embrace the conversion of so importunate a soul: for the preservation whereof,
all Europe ought continually to wade in tears, vows, and prayers. But when
the delays of the Popes Consistory were perceived, together with the
oppositions and trauerses made touching the Embassage of the D. de Neuers, when
it was well wayed and considered, that it were very hard and impossible for
those in Rome to judge of that which is done in France: that their opinions and
wills were forced and constrained, and that it was known, that in the extreme
necessity of taking order for the Commonwealth, in so urgent a cause they
must stay and attend upon process, peace being broken, and the people
longing after the first morsels of the truce, they ceased not till they were
wholly franchised from the tirannie of wars, specially the towns that at the
beginning were the first that took weapon in hand, and from thence proceeded
the reduction of the City of Lions under the kings obedience, being not able
any longer to continue in her unconstant estate, nor to subject her self any
more under her ruins, fenses, and distrusts, as things most doubtful, and
mischiefs most uncertain, so that she opened and uncovered her eyes, to know
what she should do, and under whose protection she might best be preserved.
She knew that the sovereign and last remedy of her calamities, was to be
under one, and no more to slote uncertainly in the waves of diverse protections
which have been causes of these civil wars.

She found that she ought to have a king of France, and in the family of
Saint Lewis, from whence descends Henry de Bourbon, king of France and
Navarre, whom she had sooner acknowledged, if it had pleased him sooner to make
profession of the Catholic, Apostolic, and Roman religion, as at this day
he does. Lions resisted against her king, and ramped against the gate, and will
you have it still remain covered in the brakes, that she should always be at
the point of death, in the middle of the waves of her rebellions? it was at the
point to become a desert, and the fable and common mark to be laughed at by all
her neighbors, and in the end their conquest, already her traffic (which is
her Indes or Perou) her rents, her pensions, and her principal revenues were
cut off and taken away. And no other occupation bare sway, or was in request
with her, but the art of soldiers: her Citizens were slain before the gates,
and her natural forces began to fail, wherein she seeks for redress, and
knowing no better Physician, then he that loves his Patient: she cast her
self into the arms of her king, and drowning the remembrance of her follies
past, in the seas of his great clemency: she desired him, from thence forward
to accept and receive her Citizens, for his true, faithful, and natural
subjects, and not to put any difference between them and others, unless it
were in this point, to have in remembrance that they were the first, who
without constraint acknowledged him for their king, and by their example have
gotten unto him the best part of his flowrishing Scepter. Behold the just
reasons and causes of this so sudden change, if the obedience which the
subject draws from the yoke of strangers, to yield it unto his own
superior, may be called a change. And the more commendable it will be, in so
much as that the service of the king is not contrary to the commandment of
God: that religion remains firm within her franchises, shining in her
glory, and inviolable and vnexpugnable in her forces. As long as the wars were
wholly for religion, they contributed whatsoever they had, but when they once
perceived that the holy conversion of the king made this war, no more war
against religion, but only against the estate, they could not longer delay,
nor withdraw out of their minds, the fear and reverence they owe to the true
image of God, which is the king, believing certainly that those bear arms and
fight against God, that rebel against a most Catholic and Christian Prince.
In this so great disorder, great wisdom and good order has bin seen, for
that the most advised and best experienced, concerning matters of estate,
judged this quotidian fever, could by no means be healed, but by some strong
and violent remedy. But by the providence of God, the disease that in man's
judgment seemed incurable, has been healed without shedding one drop of
blood, by the constant and firm resolution of those that rather desire to die,
then not to see themselves franchised from this government, which is contrary
to the royal estate, and losed from the middle of so many protections, which
how holy or just soever they be, are altogether dangerous, and the best title
they can bear is of no value. To be short, this town which has always made
show of pure religion toward God, and fidelity to her Prince, has well
showed that the flower de luce, which for the space of so many hundredth years
had been graven in her heart, could not be pulled away but by cleaving and
renting in pieces the hearts of all her Citizens: that she could not brook
nor once endure, such Frenchmen as are transubstantiated into Spanish minds,
that gape only to see this Scepter broken, this crown in pieces, that they
might gather the remnants, and pluck off the flowers. Thus much I thought good
to speak, before I enter into the History.

THE FIRST BOOK OF THE HISTORY OF the last troubles of France, under the
reigns of Henry the third, and Henry the fourth now living.
M.D.LXXIIII.
I Am not abashed, if such as at randon discourse and speak of our great
miseries, do so oftentimes run into fond opinions, A History ought to be
without passion.
because that to get out of so great a laborinth, they follow not the right
way of the truth, but rather taking the crosse-path of their own passions,
they leave the highway, and approache the ditches. Their writings are of
black and thick clouds, which never appear without some thunder of evil
reports, injuries, and slanders: Tables representing nothing but infamous
pictures of Monsters, and Arches of imperfections. And when they enter into the
deep consideration of the Authors of our euilles, they throw the fault and
mischiefs of these deuisions, sometimes upon one, and some times upon an
other, their opinions being furred only with the drugges of hated, or of
zeal which transporteth their minds. Such people, that like serpents nourish
themselves by poison, The causes of the troubles of France, imputed to diverse
things.
and that are better pleased with the dark Eclipses, then with the bright
shining beams of the Sun, and do more rejoice to show some execrable action,
then to speak of any memorable and woorthiething, have in this season raised
most strange mutinies, moved the people, armed the greatest cowards with
their seditious writings: trodden the Majesty and reverence of Princes under
foot: bannished modesty: in her place, established insolency, despigh, and
confusion. Therefore to make known Against such as say, that the King of
France and Navarre are the causes of the troubles.
through all the parts of the world, the beauty, excellency, and woonders of
the royal actions of their lives, to draw so many Princes and great and
valiant Captains out of the circle, wherein by these divisions they are
compassed, to show the Majesty of our King to be far distant from the many
unworthy slanders, of those that affirm and accuse him to be the only
motion of our countries troubles, to declare in this discourse, the royal
virtues that shine through the thickness and obscurities of impiety and
rebellion: and to dissuade men's minds from so many false perswations, I have
drawn out of the most stayed and certain opinions, the truth concerning the
beginning, and proceedings of the last troubles, that have vexed this Realm,
by the renewing of seven most cruel and bloody wars: France has endured
seven wars, and has seen 6. Edicts of pacification. God grant that the 7.
peace may be the last, and the end of civil miseries. The peace for foreign
wars was made in Ann. 1559. There is no opinion that is deeper with in the
hearts of men, then the opinion of religion.
by the hazard of so many battles: the ruin of so many people: the taking and
spoiling of so many towns: and the death of so many Princes: that the only
remembrance, takes away my senses, stops my speech, and makes my pen to
stay^ therefore to begin this matter, and to void the spindle, we must first
find the end of the third: and by the end of foreign wars, weaue this
cloth of civil Commotions.

All war is cruel, and ends with more difficulty then it is taken in hand:
but those divisions that happen in any estate touching the point that ought to
knit and unite the spirits of men, are more bloody, their beginnings more
terrible, and their ends more dangerous: and the more the pretenses are large
and fair, the more men enter into the sustaining and defending of them: for
there is nothing that does move them more, then the defense of their religion:
nor any thing that does more animate, nor sooner put them in oblivion of the
consideration of respect, duty, and obedience, then the quarrel concerning
the salvation of their souls: and the manner of the service they ought to
minister unto God: every man esteeming that religion he follows, to be the
true, and purest manner of woorshipping: condemning and rejecting all that
which is not conformable unto it. n="b" The Oracle of Apollo, gave answer to
the Troia^t that their town should never be taken as long as they kept that
image of Pallars.
This is the Paladium of Troy, our rest and welfare consists therein, and her
assurance is our security: he that straineth this cord, breaks the
hermonie of the Commonwealth, and induces the dissimilitude of religions:
which presently opens the gate to murders, enmities, and seditions, and from
thence to persecutions, both public and private: for that neither the old can
be reformed, nor the new established, without contradiction and violence. From
thence it proceeds, that when in one Nation, there are some that remain
constant and firm in the faith and tradition of their forefathers, and that
others do reprove it, and invent certain doctrine which they preach, and
affirm to be the pure, true, and only rule for men to learn: it cannot be
remedied, and of force it must be so, that this diversity of religion,
brings with it a division of minds, and of enmities, which are not appeased,
but by the ruin of the one, or the other part: the triumph of Israel, is the
loss and hinderance of the Egyptians.

The first motion of religion in Bohemia, by John Hus and Hierome of Prague.
France that had seen the strange furies, which this apple of discord by the
Hussites had sown in Bohemia, at Munster by the Anabaptists, and in
Allenmaigne and Suisse, and that ought to beware by other men's harms, and
look that the fire of their partialities, take no hold in her towe, has most
miserably abandoned it self unto this schism: and more overrun, sacked and
trodden underfoot, by the great faction of Catholics and Huguenots, in
thirty yerres, then it endured The death of King Francis, at Rombouillet.
in the space of 6. years, under the long, variable, and cruel wars of the two
houses of Orleans and Burgonge: factions more fatal and miserable in France,
the^ that in Italy of the Guelphes and Gibelins: or in England, of the long
wars between the houses of Lancastre and York. It had the beginning from the
death of King Francis the first, which grain of division (wherewithal the
Provinces of this Realm is sown) was bought in Geneue, of such as brought it
from Saxony, where they had great store, out of Luthers Warehouses. Luther
began to preach
And the most curious, who at the first thought to enter into those vessels of
new sects, The assembly of Lutheria^s dicouered in Parris in S. James street,
before the college du Plessis.
but only to shake them, were carried away by impetuositie of wind, and the
goodly appearance of her opinions, which were said to tend only to the
reformation of the abuses of pride and luxury in the Clergy, thereby to
reduce it into the estate of the Levites, without lands or possessions.

France, that at all times has been the nource of fine wits, both subtle
and curious, was the most fit and apt Province, wherein to make this Novelty
spring: and therein became so fruitful, that in less then two or three
years, there was found more Lutherians within the Capital City of Parris,
then Prelates or Doctors to oppose themselves against them.

The Duke of Saxon, the Count Palatin, the Marquis of Brandebourg, the Duke of
Witenbourg. The marriage of the Dauphine with the Queen of Scots.
But the king that sought to quench this fire by the rigor of laws, at the
first entrance of those Novelties, spared neither authority of Edicts,
severity of punishments, nor executioners to extirpe them. Whereat certain
foreign Princes being moved, besought him to moderate his public
persecutions: and the great Potentates of the Realm rose up, and put
themselves in arms: and among the rest, Monsieur d'Andelot, a man whom the
king loved, both for the honor of his house, and valor of his person, and
many Councillors of the Court of Parliament, found to be inveloped with this
cloud, we cast in prison.

The Cardinal of Lorraine, and the Duke of Guise his brother, that practiced
the marriage of the Queen of Scots their Cousin, with the kings eldest son,
and were the greatest next the king, who for counsel put his whole confidence
in the Cardinal, and his forces into the Duke of Guises hands, making him
Lieftenant general of his Realm, that had all authority over the people,
that esteemed them no less faithful to the Crown, then zealous and religious
toward the Church: that honored them as the most affectioned to the
Commonwealth, and that were his Druses, Marcels, Dions, and Phocions, moved
the king to the extirpation of those Heresies: and without doubt, he had
surely done it, if the splinter of Mongommeries lance had not been, which
although it brake not, yet it stayed the fury of those public executions. The
death of King Henry the second.
This great king that promised his people a long and continual peace, being
dead, his Scepter remained to Francis, but the royal authority with them,
that as then had the possession, and that vaunted themselves to deserve it, in
respect of their services done to the king, their country and religion, in
such manner, The sacring of Francis the second. The Constable withdraws from
the Court.
that before Anthony de Burbon king of Navarre, and first prince of the blood,
arrived at the Court, his place was taken up, and the royalty divided and put
into the hands of a king of fifteen years of age, an Italian woman, a
Cardinal, and a Prince of Lorraine. The kings ancient servants being
separated from the Court, namely the Constable. Like as the sun is in heaven,
the same should the king be on earth, and what effect the sun works with
the Planets, the same should the K. unto the Princes of his blood: the sun
never withdraws his brightness That was ordamed at Tours, Ann. 1484. and at
the same time observed by Charles 8. son to Lewis the 11. that reigned 14.
years. Malecontent: in An. 1560.
from them, no more should the king deny this favor to the Princes of
his-blood, that are about him. Which not being don, it cannot be but there must
be disorder, Eclipses, and obscure confusions. The Princes of the blood,
perceiving themselves debarred from their guard, that the king was in the
custody of strangers, contrary to the ancient privileges of France, which
ordains that the minority of the K. shall be assisted by a council chosen
by all the Estates of the Realm: wherein the Princes of the blood ought to
bear the principal place, and strangers excluded, united themselves
together, in the middle of a thousand deaths, to preserve their degrees and
dignities. This coffeehouse opened the caracters of divisions, that after
caused a deluge of miseries in the realm of France. And the Malcontents,
either because they were excluded from public charges, or being tormented in
the liberty of their consciences, agreed together to unhorse the house of
Guise, that aspired so near the king: minding never to leave arms, before his
Majesty should be delivered out of their hands, and the estate reduced under a
lawful government: promising nevertheless not to attempt any thing against
the person of the king, his authority, nor the Princes of his blood. But God
showed that he loves not disturbers of the estate, nor such as bath their
hands in their own blood: that take courage by the indiscreet opinions of
certain pretenses, The enterprise of Amboise ciscouered in Ann. 1560. and the
enterprisors pursued by the Duke de Nemours. The gate of Hugon in Tours, by the
which they assembled: or of the first accords of the declaration of protestants
made in Latin: which are, Huc nos venimus.
and that use remedies crueller then the disease it self. For that he
overthrew this first enterprise, and the actors thereof being taken upon the
sudden, obtained pain and punishment for reward: and so were hanged in their
boots and spurs at the castle of Amboise. But the sparks that issued out of
this flint, after that set fire to the civil wars of France, and because the
greatest part of those alterers of estates, were of the new religion, that as
then were called Huguenots, of the place where they first assembled themselves
in Tours, the Cardinal of Lorraine began to cry out against Hereticques:
and to make them more odious, he caused it to be reported throughout the
Realm, that their enterprise was against the king: wherein they induced the
Prince of Conde: who to justify his innocence, and to show the integrity of
his heart to the service of the king, in his presence, and others the Princes,
Lords, and Officers of the Crown, spoke openly and said. That his Majesty
excepted, and with reverence to the Princes his brethren, the Queen his
mother, and the Queen then reigning, those that had reported him to be of the
enterprise of Amboise, lied falsely: and if they would seem to justify it,
he offered to fight with them: and that if they were not comparable unto him
for degree, he would imbase himself for that time, and make them either by
sword or lance, confess themselves to be vilaines and traitors. And thereupon
this Prince not enduring to live among so many suspicions and distrusts, as
being the But and mark of his enemies, left the Court, and went unto his
brother the king of Navarre, whither such as professed reformation withdrewe
themselves. This disease increasing more and more, and the corrupted humors
thereof breeding to a dangerous and mortal palsy, the Queen Mother that knew
better the disease, then the cause thereof, The assembly of Fontainbleau, Anno.
1560. the 21 of August, where the King, the Queen and diverse Princes sat,
there the Admiral presented a Petition, and said that he would cause it to be
signed by 50000. men, and the Cardinal of Lorrain said, the King should oppose
100000. against it. They were not permitted to alight (as the manner is) at the
kings Palace. She said that no man ever bandieth against the blood of France,
with out repe^ta^ce. Justification of the Prince of Conde. Agreement made
between the Prince of Conde and the house of Guise, the 14. of August, 1561.
La Popelimere says, that the king of Na. promised the am bassador of the K. of
De^mark to cause the religion to be preached throughout France, within one
year after.
perceiving that by sharp and bitter remedies it was nothing healed, began to
use gentlier and more easy: and to the same end, she caused the most learned
and wisest men in all France, to be assembled at Fontainbleau, there to debate
the causes of religion. Where the Admiral presented the request of those who^
he supported, which was, to have liberty of churches, and freedom of
conscience: whereunto the Cardinal opposed himself. And the Lords of Monluc
and Marillac, were of opinion, that the most assured means to stop those new
sprung sects, was to submit themselves to a general Council: and in fine, the
conclusion of this assembly was, that a Parliament of the general States
should be holden at Meaux, in the month of December after: and a national
Council the tenth of January then next after ensuing.

The Parliament was holden at Orleans, and the king sent for the king of
Navarre to come thither, and to bring the Prince of Conde his brother with him,
that there he might clear himself of the hard report that ran against him:
to the which end, they set forward, and arrived at Orleans, presenting
themselves unto the king, that entertained them not as their qualities and
nearenesse of blood required. For the Prince of Conde was committed prisoner,
whose deliverance was sued by the Lady Renee, duches of Ferrare, nevertheless
his process was framed: whereunto he pleaded not guilty: yet in fine, he
was condemned to have his head stricken off before the kings Palace, and at the
entry of the States: upon the which judgment, he continually expected the
hour of death. But by Gods providence, the death of the king procured both his
life and liberty: for king Charles judged him to be innocent. At the same
time, the Court of Parliament in Parris made an Edict, the Parliament of Estate
continued, and the difference of religion was appeased, by staying for a
general Council. Meanetime, Messieurs de Guise, being in hope that their
greatness would still increase and spread abroad, were much abashed to see it
shortened by the death of the king their Nephewe: and thereby to be constrained
and put in mind, to think that they were no more as they had been. So that
they yielded their place to the King of Navarre, but not the opinion, nor the
hope to recover it once again. By that means their great affairs left off,
but they forsook them not, seeking by all means to be reconciled to the
Prince of Conde, always keeping their own, (like the Master of a ship that
hoyseth and pulls down his sails as time serves) and always stopped the
holes wherein they foresawe the round world enter: ceasing not to speak most
assuredly and openly against heresy, which they so much the more detested, as
that they perceived the Princes of the blood, to lend their helping hand
toward the advancement and establishing thereof: and that the king of Navarre
that made account thereof, began to like it, having more desire to the Realm of
Navarre, that was promised to be restored unto him, and to that of Sardaigne
offered him, if he would separate himself from the Princes reformed, and the
protection of the protestants Churches, then to the consideration of the
quarrel of his house. The greatness of those Princes could not continue
equal, by reason of the vnequallitie of their houses. Yet they sought to go
all in one rank, whereby the kings favor could no sooner give countenance to
the one, but it moved the other. His favor is like a fair Lady, every man
seeks and courteth her, and if she smile more upon one then upon the other,
it breeds but jealousy, despite, and quarrel: and she cannot divide her
heart in two, without a a mortal division. Every man has his turn, and both
Catholicque and Huguenot, under pretense and zeal of religion, seeks to get
the good will of the king, his mother, and his brethren. But the freedom of
the Ministers, being impatient to stay the resolution of a Council, made them
to preach openly, whereby they so much tempted and altered men's consciences,
that suddenly the ceremonies and traditions of the Church, were abated, and
the temples seized upon and destroyed. And the Constable being descended of
the first Barron and first Christian in France, opposed himself against this
diversity of religion in one realm, The Edict of July made at S. Germains in
Lay, 1561. The assembly at Poissy. The murder of Vassy the 1. of Mars. 1562.
The battle of Dreux the 19. of Dece^ber, 1561. The Constable was first taken
then the Prince of Conde. The king of Navarre was slain at the siege of Roue^.
1562. The Duke of Guise slain before Orleans, the 24. of Febru. 1563. 1. Edict
of peace. Anno. 1563. Reconciliatio^ between the D. of Guise and the Admiral
1566. Counsel of the Duke of Alue. The enterprise at Meaux, at the feast of S.
Michael* 1567. The battle of S. Denis, on S. Martins even, 1567. Where the
Constable was slain. The second Edict of peace at Lo^iumeau
which from the time of king Clouis had bin holden and maintained in paritie
and integrity, under the ancient faith of their forefathers. The Cardinal of
Lorraine on the other side, took the matter in hand, and counseled the king
to make an Edict against those of the religion, and the presumption of certain
men was such, that they consented to the disputation at Poissy, where in place
of remedy, we found but an increasing of our miseries. After that, the Edict
of January so much renoumed in all the troubles, and solemnized by the
Huguenots, followed: the breach whereof, by the means of Vassy, caused both
parts to fall to arms upon the plains of Dreux, which gave the name to that
me morable battle: not only for the number of men there assembled, being
1900. foot, and 2000. horse for the kings part, and 4000. horse called
White-coates, and 6000. foot of the contrary: as for diverse other accidents
that therein were marked, besides the taking of two of their chief leaders. For
the Prince of Conde that imputed the first motions of his imprisonment, and of
his separation from the favor and presence of K. Francis the 2. to the
practices of the Duke de Guise, that evening of the battle, was his prisoner,
and accepted the half of his ancient enemies bed, that was offered unto him:
a right description of this variable world, where you see one triumphing, and
the other captive. Among so many prosperities, that environed the Duke of
Guise, (by the death of the king of N. General of the kings army, followed by
all the Catholicque Nobility, and Tutor and co^ductor of the king and
Queen-mothers whole affairs) death being jealous, that the Capital city of
the realm, at his arrival had cried: Viue Guise, Viue Guise: with as great
joy and gladness, as ever they cried, Viue le Roy, dispatched him out of the way
by Poltrots means, that slew him at Orleans, and thereby finished the first
civil war: at which time, the Prince of Conde was delivered out of prison, and
the Constable brought the first Edict of peace. By this peace France had means
to breath, and her subjects to live in some assurance, but the corrupted
humors, that caused the disease of the estate, were not so well disiested, but
that there rested some remnants, whereby it might be feared, it would fall into
a much more dangerous sickness: which happened 3. years after, when the most
troublesome alterers of estate, renewed the fire, which although it were not
utterly quenched, yet it was half consumed. The Queen having performed that
general visitation of all the kings Provinces, and at Moulins taken up the
quarrel between the houses of Guise and Chastillon, and made the^ friends,
caused 6000. Switzers to be sent for, vndera fained sear of the D. of Albes
passage through France, with whom she had conferred at Bayonne: where they
concluded, that to live in peace, it was best for her to fish after great
Samons, and to leave the frogs. The Admiral perceiving it, determined rather to
save himself by his arms, then with his legs, and went so near unto the king,
that he had almost taken him at Meaux, and so caused him to retire to Parris,
being conducted by Pfiffers regiment, And the Prince of Conde took the town of
S. Dennis, assieged Parris, and burned the milles. And in fine, the two armies
met, and fought before S. Dennis, where the Protestants retired, and the K. had
the victory: but it cost him the life of the Constable, being one of the
valiantest Captains in all Europe: who having commanded in 7. battles, died in
the sight of the city of Parris, and of his king, at the head of an army,
victorious by his co^duction, and having cut his enemies in the cheeks, that
had wounded him in the face, he was by a Scot shot into the raines with a
Pistolle, and so died of the seventh wound he had received in that seventh
battle: being of the age of 60. and 7. years. This death procured an other
little peace, commonly called the lined peace, which continued but 6. months,
and made a war that The Prince of Conde slain at Bassac the 21, of March,
1569. The battle of Montcontour the 3. of October, 1569. The 3. Edict of
peace, An. 1570.
endured for the space of 2. whole years, wherein the Prince of Conde died: and
where the Princes of Navarre and Conde, and the Dukes de Guise and Maine were
Captains: the one of the protestants army, under the conduct of the Admiral:
the other for the defense of Poictiers, under Monsieur the kings brother,
General of his Majesty's army, whereby the battle of Moncontour happened,
where all the protestants footmen were slain, and the Rutters spurs were not
sharp enough, to make their horses fly: but Monsieur not pursuing his
victory, suffered his enemies to range and meet together again, who in short
time were found strong enough to constrain him to the wars, or else to make
another Edict of peace, with more advantage then the two first. This peace
being sworned by all those that had any public authorite therein, caused the
Frenchmen to feel the sweetness of tranquillity, to be much different from
the sharpness and bitterness of civil divisions. Therein the king, the
Queen Mother, his brethren, and the Princes, did nothing but breath, and
aspire unto contentment: nothing was spoken of in France, but only assurance,
and of remoouing their wars unto the frontiers, or within the bowelles of
foreign countries, and every place was filled with marriages, bankets, etc. But
this goodly show was put only a presaging of the torment that ensued: and
Sailors judged that those great calmes, would in the end cause some great
tempest. For presently after, ensued the great and terrible day so full of
blood, tears, and sorrow, where without respect, The massacre upon
Bartholomewe day, Ann. 1573.
so many French men had their throats cut, and where the king of N. doubting
himself not to be secured in the chaste imbrasings of his first nights
espousals, was constrained to alter the form of his religion. And because he
had escaped that danger, (and finding himself healed of his continual fears
and distrusts, he said, that in changing of religion, he had done it by
constraint) he was oftentimes accused of Apostacy. At that time, Rochel ye
began to refuse the Garrisons which the K. would have placed therein, was the
refuge of the Huguenots: Rechel besieged, Anno. 1573.
whereupon Monsieur besieged it: and in 6. months brought it to such extremity,
as that if the planting of the flowerdeluce in the furthest parts of
Septentrion, had not diuerted him, he had been Master thereof, at such
composition as had pleased him. The King of Polonia Sigismod, when he died,
left 5000. horses in his stable.
For the Polonians sent Ambassadors unto him, to offer him the Crown of
Polonia, and to inuit him to the possession of a great, rich, and puissant
Realm: great, because it is in compass twice as much as France: rich, by
reason of the abundance of all things necessary for man's life: renowned, for
arms and horses: and puissant, for the honor of the Nobility, being most
valiant and brave warriors: having more Gentlemen therein, then are in France,
England, and Spain. Thither he went, being accompanied by the king himself, as
far as Lorraine, from whence for his better assurance, Coronation of the K. of
Polonia. Letters of regent granted the Queene-mother, till the K. coming out
of Polonia. In Parliament the 3. of June 1574.
he passed through the territories of the Princes of Almaine, (that were much
grieved and offended at the murder committed upon S. Bartholomewes day) and
from thence he arrived at Cracouia, and there upon the first day of Penthecost
he received the Crown, and the next year after upon the same day, he was
crowned king. Mean time, king Charles his brother, that died in the flower of
his age, declared him to be his successor, and his mother regent till his
return: commanding the Duke of Alencon his brother, and the king of Navarre,
not to alter any thing in the state: and to persuade themselves, that kingdoms
are only gotten either by virtue or succession, and not by reuolting or
tyranny. As this great king of two great realms, as earnestly looked for of
the Frenchmen, as lamented of the Polonians, was desired of the Catholciques,
for the effects The return of the king of Polonia into France. His nature. The
wars for the commonwealth, undertaken by Monsieur and the malco^te^ts. An
increase of Monsieurs revenues the 28. of May, 1576. An agreement with
Monsieur, made at Ioinuille. The K. made this peace to separate his brother
from the Princes. The 4. Edict of peace in May. 1576. Aiguemortes. Beaucaire.
Perigueux. Le Mas de Verdun. Nions. Serres. Yssoire. Seine la grand Tour. The
king called this peace his peace. D. Casimire would not dislodge, without
assurance of payment, and the observation of peace. The league of Peronne.
they had perceived to be in him touching the religion, so was he also loved of
the protestants, that knew him of nature to be a true Frenchman, estranged
not only from cruel actions, but also from most severe intents: and hoped
under his reign, to find a more moderate and peaceable season. But God to
punish our sins, had otherwise ordained: for at the kings return, the wars
likewise returned, which began to flame and burst our upon the frontiers,
against the Marshall of Amuille, who perceiving himself altogether frustrate
of any hope of ever being reconciled to the king, practiced with the towns of
Longuedoc: seduced Monsieur, that made himself General of this new confusion,
under pretense of a quarrel for the Commonwealth, and used the forces of both
the religions. The king of Navarre, that could not forget the bloody day that
had consumed so many of his servants, and perceived not himself so much
employed as his inferiors, in matters of estate, abandoned the honorable
captivity of the Court, and those that had followed him, with all the Princes
of his house, joined themselves together for his protection. Whereat Monsieur
was grieved, and perceiving himself to be left alone with his Catholicques, he
had recourse to the kings favor, by the increase of a new degree of honor and
revenue, given him by the king. The king of N. and the Prince of Conde,
procured strangers aid, not as they protested, thereby to shake off the yoke of
the Monarchy, or to divide themselves into as many Co^mon-wealths, as there are
Provinces in France: but to live in obedience under the king, and freedom of
conscience, and thereby to obtain a peace: which was made between the king and
Monsieur his brother, the K. of Navarre, and the Prince of Conde, whereby the
free, public, and general exercise of the religion, was permitted unto the
Protestants, in all the places and Towns, which as then they held, they being
declared capable, to have their places in Parliaments and chambers of justice
severally: all judgments being made against them for any enterprise
whatsoever, declared void: the memory of the heads of their part taken away,
and the cruel day of S. Bartholomew disauowed. And for the better assurance
and performance of the conditions, they had eight Towns delivered unto them,
with the conditions of their governments. This peace which was thought would
have long continued, being made with so great solemnity, not with
dissemblers, but with a king, that as yet had given no occasion of distrust,
was soon weakened and shaken, for that the same conditions that had made it,
were the means to unloose it. For the Prince of Conde perceiving that he reaped
not the fruit of his desert, and that the government of Picardie was denied
him, was the first that found himself offended, and that showed himself
discontent: desiring the Duke Cazimir, not to abandon the frontiers of
Lorraine, until he perceived that peace to be well confirmed and observed. The
Catholicques to the contrary, being grieved at the liberty which the Huguenots
had obtained, thereby to make their religion increase and fructify, and that
the Rutter had not as yet put up his Pistolle into the case, besought his
Majesty to restrain that pernicious license of the Edict of peace: but
perceiving him not to be sufficiently moved to cut off that which as the^ began
but to spring up, nor to take knife in hand, therewith to shed his own blood,
they began to assemble at Peronne, and to move all the rest of the towns, under
pretense of diverse occasions, not little wondered at of the people: peace,
wherein they swore obedience and service to the General that should be
appointed over this fellow ship: engaging their lives and honors, never to
separate themselves for any commandment, pretense, excuse, The original of
the league in An. 1576
or occasion whatsoever. Behold the conception of the league, which will bring
forth most prodigious effects. The Huguenots had won their sure, for till
then, they were often accused of rebellion, as having shaken off the yoke of
Sovereignty, being separated from that fair and vnexpugnable maxim, that
the power of the Prince proceeds from God, and that it is not lawful to
resist against it, for any excuse, cause, pretense, or reason whatsoever.
Pardon me I beseech you, mighty Princes, Prelates, Lords, and Gentlemen, that
are Catholicques, if I tell you, that this fortress which you build, will be
your overthrow: this fire you kindle, will burn you: these knives you forge,
will be tempered in your entralles: and that thereby, you will leave neither
of your selves, nor your league, but a most pitiful and shameful memory.
What think you to do? O you leaguer for God, for the faith, and for the king?
The league is not for God.
You undertake arms for God, who desires nothing but peace: you publish
rebellion, he commands obedience: you trouble the rest and quietness of a
Christian king, he wills us to endure at the hands of a Prince, although he
be a Pagan. You do it for God, whose name you call upon, and deny his power:
you do it for God, that detesteth your actions, and knows your thoughts: and
you do it for that God, who will confound all those that breed confusion among
his people. You undertake wars for religion, and nothing hinders it more
then wars: you fight for holiness, Nor for religion.
and your weapons destroy the Churches: authorize blasphemers, and plant
Atheism, impiety, and despising of devotion in all places. You march under
pretense of the Churches cause, and you ransom and spoil the Clergy by
tithes and impositions. If it be for the spirituality, wherefore do you bring
in the Rutters, that have ouerrunne the Priests, burned the Churches, robbed
the relicques, Nor for the Church.
and polluted the Altars. You said it is for the king, so said the Huguenots at
the enterprises of Ammboise, of Meaux, and of S. German in Lay, and you will
not believe him, for the king had disauouched them. If it be for the king,
where are his commissions? If it be for his service, where is his
commandment? If it be for him, wherefore do dou it without him? If it be for
his obedience, Nor for the King.
wherefore swear you to obey the Head of your league? Can you be bound by one
oath, to two co^trarieties? This new faith and promise which you give, is it
not to obey a new Lord, seeing you cannot serve two Masters? If it be to
maintain his kingdom in the Catholicque religion, cannot he do it without
you? What shame will you procure unto him, to atribute the honor of the glory
of so happy a conquest unto your selves, and not refer the triumph unto him?
What blasphemy and reproach do you induce into his honor and reputation, both
among his own people, and with strangers? Will they not say, The subject
ought not to bind himself by oath of fidelity, to any but to his sovereign.
that a great king, and a wise king, with the advantages of his Majesty, and
his powers, durst not enterprise that which the subjects undertake to do. Know
you not, that all leuying of arms is treason, without the kings authority?
that the subjects cannot make any league, without the Prince? that leagues are
not made betweeene Subjects, or equal persons: and that the Courts of
Parliament, are the foundations of the severity of laws, both humane and
divine? But let us hear what your pattents of the league contain.

The first league made at Peronne without naming the Head. For religion. For
the service of the king.
IN the name of the holy Trinity, Father, Son, and holy Ghost, the only
true God, be honor and glory for ever. The association of Princes, Lords,
and Catholic Gentlemen, ought to be, and shall be made, to reestablish the
law of God in her pristinate estates, to retain and hold the holy service
thereof, according to the form and manner of the holy, Catholicque,
Apostolicque, and Roman Church, abiuring and renouncing all errors to the
contrary. Secondly, to preserve king HENRY, the third of that name, by the
grace of God, and his Predecessors, most Christian kings, in the estates,
glory, authority, duty, service, and obedience, that is due unto him by his
subjects: as it is contained in the Articles which shall be presented unto him
in the Council of estate: which at his sacring and coronation, he promised and
swore to observe: with protestation not to do anything, to the prejudice of
that which shall be ordained by the States of his Realm. Thirdly, to restore
unto the Provinces of this Realm, For the people.
and Estates thereof, the ancient rights, preheminences, franchises, and
liberties, such as they were in the time of King CLOVIS, first Christian King,
and better and more profitable, if they may be any ways invented, under the
protection before said: and if in case there happens any impeachment,
opposition, or rebellion, to the contrary of that which is aforesaid, by any
man, or from what part soever it may be, the said associates shall be bound
and holden therein, to imploye all their goods and means whatsoever: yea, and
their own persons even to the death, to punish, chastise, and ouerrunne, those
that seek to contradict, hinder and resist: that all the things aforesaid,
shall not be really and effectually put in execution. And if in case that any
of the associates, their subjects, friends, and confederates, shall be
molested, oppressed, or pursued, for the cause aforesaid, by whomsoever it may
be, the said associates shall be bound to employ their bodies, goods, and
means, to be revenged on them that shall have done, or caused the said
oppressions and molestations, be it by way of justice, or by arms, without
exception of any man. If it happen, Against such as appose themselves against
the devises of the league. Against such as shall leave or abandon the league.
that any of the associates, after that they have taken their oaths unto the
said associates, would withdraw themselves, or depart out of the same, under
what pretense soever it shall be, (which God forbid) such breakers of their
consents, shall be hurt and offended both in their bodies and goods, by all
means possible, as enemies to God, and rebels and perturbers of public
tranquilities, without revenge to be taken against the said associates, either
publicly or privately. The said associates shall swear all ready and willing
obedience and service, unto the Head and Geuerall that shall be appointed:
follow and give counsel, comfort and aid, as well to the entertaining and
conservation of the said association, as to the ruins and overthrow of the
contradictors thereof, without acception or exception of persons: and the
failers and delayers therein, shall be punished by authority of the General,
and as he shall appoint: whereunto his said associates shall submit themselves.

Practicing with towns.
All Catholicques of Towns and Villages shall be advertised, and secretly
summoned by the particular Governors, to enter into the said association and
duty, to furnish men and munition for the execution thereof, according to the
power and faculty of every man. That such as will not enter into the said
association, shall be reputed as enemy thereof, and be pursued by all means and
sorts of troubles and molestations: Contribution of men and money.
and it shall be forbidden unto the said associates, to enter into debates and
quarrels one with the other, without permission of the General, at whose
arbitrament the contradistors shall be punished, as well touching reparation of
honor, as for all other causes.

If for fortification or greater assurance of the said associates, there is any
appointment made with the Provinces of this Realm, it shall be made in form
aforesaid, and upon the same conditions, whether the said associations be
sought for by the said Towns or Provinces, or that it be offered unto them:
if it be not otherwise ordained by the General. I swear by God the Father,
touching this Ghospel, and upon pain of cursing and eternal damnation, that
I have entered into this holy and Catholicque association, The form of the
leaguers oath.
according to the form and manner of the extract that has been presently read
unto me, faithfully and sincerely, whether it be therein to command, or to
serve and obey, and promise both upon mine honor and life, to continue
therein, as long as one drop of blood last within my body, without resisting or
withdrawing my self from the same, under pretense of any commandment,
excuse, cause, or occasion whatsoever.

The instructions of the Advocate David.
About that time the Advocate David was taken, with certain aduertisements and
notes about him, concerning the means whereby to authorize this league, and to
break the ordinary course of the succession of France, by impossible means,
which ought neither to be known, nor be believed, and wherewith I mean not to
dishonor this discourse.

Packets of the league of Peronne cast about the streets. Nature of the people.
Mean time Posts were sent into all places, to spread the news and first
advise of those pretenses, masked with fair and shining vizardes of holiness,
thereby to bleare the eyes of the people: and libels were cast about the
streets: diverse men of good account traveling about the country, to serve for
bellows to this new forge, made to kindle a great war.

And the people that ran from one extremity to another, which love changes:
a troop that follows such as lead it: a sea that never rises without wind:
and a Monster with many heads, suffered themselves to be borne away with the
first waves of this tempest.

The Parliament at Blois, 1576
Mean time, the king minding to put cold water into the boiling pot, and to cut
off the mean to this new motion, caused the Parliament to be holden, which by
the last peace he had promised, thinking, and certainly persuading himself,
that not any one in his Realm, but loved rather to entertain a sworn and
solemn peace, then to seek the continuance of wars: the overthrow of
Towns, and the desolation of the people: or that the Rutter should once again
return to suck the blood, gnawe the bones, and eat the marrowe of their
children. At the first assembly of the Parliament, An Oration of Henry the
third, at the Parliament in Blois.
and after he had saluted and welcomed all the Estates, with a most heroyicall
and Princely grace, he made an Oration unto them concerning the miseries and
afflictions of his Realm, and the hope he had, that so great an assembly,
being the very quintessence of the finest wits in all France, would provide some
remedy therein: showing that the minority of himself and his brother, at the
beginning of those civil wars, was reason sufficient why they should not be
esteemed, or once thought to be the causes thereof: commending the wisdom of
his mother touching the government of the Realm: protesting, that for his own
part, he had no other care, desire, nor intent, then only to procure the rest
and welfare of his subjects, whose miseries he would be always ready to relieu
with the price of his dearest blood: The Crown of France laid to pawn for
100. millions of gold.
charging all the assembly to aid and assist him therein, and to devise the
means to release his Crown, at that time pawned for above the sum of 100.
millions of gold, to unite themselves together, thereby to puck up the seeds
of partialities, to reform abuses, and to restore justice to herintegritie,
and to reduce it into the pristinate holiness and splendure. That don, Pierre
d'Epinac Archbishop of Lions, rose up, and before them al, declared his reasons
touching the Clargie. The Lord of Senscey, with a military, frank, and true
French tongue, spoke for the Nobility: and Versoris for the common. The two
first, by a multitude of reasons and wonderful speeches, concluded that it was
most fit and convenient, that there should be but one religion in the Realm.
The third, showed that the people wholly desired the reunion thereof, so it
might be done by peaceable and quiet means without wars. But the Clergy
and Nobility, after many difficulties, caused the Parliament to break up, so
that under the ashes of the last wars, which as yet were hot, there might
be found the sparks of a great fire. For after many messages (although in
vain) sent by the king to the Protestant Princes, Protestation of the Prince
of Conde, in Ann. 1577. under which was placed, Deo and victricibus armis.
the war began again. For the Prince of Conde rose up in arms, and
swore not to leave them, until he had brought the realm into her pristinate
splendure and dignity: restored liberty to the Estates: eased the poor
people of insupportable tributes, inverted by the Italians: delivered the
Frenchmen from the servitude and tyrannical infamy whereunto they were
subjected, not only by their own carelessenesse and disunion, but by
artificial practices of such as would raise the foundations of their
greatness, with the blood of the true Princes of France, and of the Nobility,
to the great disadvantage and overthrow of the ancient laws and customs of
the realm. Whereupon the king having enterprised those wars, the rather
because his Estates showed him the reasons, War began about Easter, 1577
necessities and commodities, (although of his own nature he rather desired
not to have broken the peace, but only to abridge it of certain particular
articles, by the Huguenots esteemed most advantage for them) caused two great
armies to be levied: whereof Monsieur was General of the one, that marched
toward la Charity and Issoire, and the Duke Demain, commanding that which
went for Poitou, where he assieged Bar, Taking of la Charity and Issoire,
Anno. 1577.
and took diverse Towns. His Majesty's army encamped at Brouage, and
costrained it to yield. And Lansac Governor thereof, would have gone into the
Isle of Re, but he could not. And to conclude, the wars were so long and
tedious, that the Generalles well perceived themselves to be too old, to live
to see the end thereof. And the king that never had tasted the sweetness of
peace, began to dsire it, having first proved so many troubles and vexations
of war, therevppon he determined to establish a good and holy peace, Reason
to induce peace, and against war, in An. 1577. Great numbers, are not the
cause of victories. God is the God of battelles. A discourse polliticke and
military. The chance of war uncertain.
which should be well observed: to the which end, he heard debated, examined,
and considered, diverse and all the reasons that could be alleged, both for
the establishing and dissoluing thereof. Those that desired no peace, devised
many arguments which they framed for the purpose: as first they said: That the
king ought not to make peace, having means to make war, with more men and
advantage then his enemies. But they were answered, that the multitude of men,
is not the cause of victory: and that a small handful of desperate soldiers,
had overthrown a great army. The kings cause is more just. The Princes shroud
themselves under a just enterprise when God is offended: and that the war is
not made for the defense of his quarrel, but for particular revenge. The
Huguenots have neither money nor credit, for the soldier himself among them,
is constrained to contribute money to pay foreign aid, instead of receiving
his own wages. With a little, they do much: necessity is their virtue: and the
ground of their cause is so dear unto them, that they will rather fight
without money or meat, then live without their liberty, or preaching of the
Gospel. There needs but one battle to overthrow and destroy them. Victory
rests in the hands of God: it is a both doubtful and uncertain, and battles
in these days are prolonged, and never given without advantage of the one
side, or the other. And again, it is impossible with an army of 10000. men, to
root out a 100000. Huguenots. The K. will never hazard battle, but he is
assured to have the victory, and to triumph over his enemies. This is as much
to say, as he reckons without his Host: for it consists in God: there
needs but a small matter to put all your forces in disorder, and make them a
pray to their enemies. For if in times past, 500. Actolians, Justin. lib. 24.
X^nop. hist. lib. 7. Bap. Egnat. The battle of Poictiers. Lois the last Earl
of Flaunders. Froisart li. 2. cap. 95.96.97.98.
better shepherds then soldiers, put 900. Lacedaemonians to flight? If
Epaminondas with 4000. men, overthrew the Spartans army, being six times as
many? If among the Christians, Baudonin brother to Godfrey of Bullon, with 300.
horse and 900. foot, all Frenchmen, caused the Caliphe to yield and leave the
field, being environed with 9000. horse, and 20000. foot? If a little troop of
English soldiers half in despair before Poictiers, triumphed over a great
army of the most puissant and warlike Nation in the world? Is it not a most
foolish temerite, to put confidence in the doubtful chance of a battle? It is
never good to assail those that hope for nothing but despair. The last Earl
of Flaunders having brought the Town of Gaunt to an extremity of victuals,
would have them to present themselves before him bare-headed and footed, with
halters about their necks: and so to ask pardon for their lives, without any
assurance thereof. But 5000. of those miserable people, that had nothing left
but their arms, and in despair, He was constrained to hide himself in the
straw of a poor woman's bed, where he saved himself, and the next day went
out disguised. The peace of the low countries.
issued out upon him, and like hungry wolves fought so desperately, that in
fine, they overthrew his whole army, composed of more then forty thousand
men. There is no peace to be granted to heretics. It is done continually, for
it is not yet a year, since the king of Spain granted peace to the Islands of
Holand and Zeland, not only giving them the liberty of their religion, but
withdrawing the exercise of his own. Peace gives that to the Huguenots, which
war takes from them. And what? the liberty of conscience. Many polliticke
and wise men, have acknowledged and confessed, that force constrains not men's
consciences: that sword and fire, have not power to extirpe the opinions of
religion, that are once entered into the minds of men: that such victory over
men's consciences, belongs only to God, the father of light and truth: and
that force may well make Hippocrites and Atheists, but not religious or
christian people. If the king suffers this liberty of conscience, 1576.
Liberty of conscience.
Catholicque religion will be clean consumed under these novelties: and all
his Realm will be poisoned with sects, Schisms, and errors. The free exercise
of this new religion, will be less advantage to the perticipants thereof, then
it would be if it were but secretly used. Religion increases more being
persecuted and forbidden, then when it is permitted. Read a book touching this
point, imprinted at Antwarpe. An. 1579. Dialogus do Pace.
For the people are light and impatient, with long rest and quietness: and to
the contrary, things least permitted, and uneasy, are most pleasant and
agreeable. And therefore desire nothing but change, and dislike novelties, with
more disdain then ever they had affection or vehme^t desire to see the^
adua^ced. They always fall headlong into that which is forbidden the^. The more
they presented, tormented, and troubled the hereticques at Prague, and in
Ausbourg, and the more they were forbidden to assemble and meet together, so
much the more they in creased and had assemblles, and with fires, whippings,
hanging, and prisons, became innumerable. And when they have the free liberty
of that they desire, when rigor is laid aside, the thing becomes so common
and discovered, that many refuse it, entering again into the great and broad
way which they had left. And therefore diverse men have thought, that there is no
better means to shake, Apollitike maxim. Unity of the sectaries, in matters
of policy.
and in the end to overthrow a new religion, then to permit the free exercise
thereof. For as a man of great judgment in our time, says: As much as man
loves his liberty, and yet abuses it, so much the more he hates servitude
and constraint, wherein notwithstanding he behaueth himself better, then in the
enjoying of his freedom. There ought to be but one religion in one Realm. It
is well said: but when a king finds more, it is very hard for him to root
them out. Would you have one eye thrust out the other? the greatest Princes in
the world are much troubled thereby, and yet constrained to endure it. The
Princes of Almaine have this diversity in one Town: yea, in one Host, and in
one family, without either trouble or division.

The interim of the Emperor Charles the fist, 1530. Confirmed 1555.
The Emperor Charles the fifth, was constrainsd to pass that path, and his
brother Ferdinand, a man most affected to the Catholicque religion, consented
to the same liberty in his kingdoms of Bohemia, Hungaria, and Austria. Piety
is the foundation of all estates, which cannot be in all places where God is
diversely served. It is so, and you find many that complain thereof, but few
that seek the remedy: we know but two, that is, rigor, and peaceablenesse,
either by a general Council, or by arms. For the first it needs not,
because the truth once known and determined, ought not to be brought in
question or disputed of again. The latter is altogether strange, and it was
never heard, that men were put to death, to force them to believe. To kill,
burn, and massacre, are words never used but in seditious enterprises: those
of the new opinion, that live among the Catholicques without preaching or open
exercises, are content to seek no further freedom then the liberty of their
conscience without being troubled. A King cannot refuse his subjects the
liberty of not speaking, for that men's tongues and consciences, are not under
the Sovereignty of his Scepter. Tacere liceat, Nulla libertas minor a rege
Petitur Senec. O ed. Lictance li. 5. cap. 14.
God is the God of men's souls: Kings may constrain men's bodies, and force
them to say that outwardly, which inwardly they deny. For as he (that is called
the Cicero of Christians) says: Who can constrain me not to believe that
which I will believe? or to think that credible, which seems incredible:
there is nothing so voluntary as religion: but if the mind be separated from
it, it is no more religion, but hypocrisy and dissimulation: force will do
that, Purpure cultores efficies non Dei.
which should be done only by love, for by it men respect more the penalties
of the law, then the law it self: they will reverence the Judges scarlet
gown, not for the love of the Judge, but for fear of the executioner, that
attends on him: ^ides suadenda non imperanda. Bernard.
and when they are gone, their courages are found to be strongerthen their
torments, and their constancy greater then their cruelties: peaceablenesse is
more convenient, and has more force. Faith commands not, but is taught: the
strongest or roughest bits, are not fit for good horses. Our consciences are
the like, for force breaks sooner, the^ bends the^. If the Lute be not
well tuned, or if the Mean do not agree with the Base, we must not therefore
break it, About the end of June, 1574. the king called him his father.
but wind it softly up, and you shall make them accord. The Emperor
Maxemilion, that said, that no sin could be greater, then to violate men's
consciences, answered the king of France returning out of Polonia, (proposing
the ruin of the Huguenots, and the restablishing of the only religion of his
forefathers in his realm) that those which seek to rule over men's consciences,
supposing to win heaven, do oftentimes loose their possessions on earth. To
obey God and serve the king.
Two religions cannot command in one Realm. It is true, but that is no
consequent why there should not be two: for the subject is not bound to follow
the religion of his Prince, as long as he permits him the liberty of his
own: he must obey and serve: he gives to God, that which is Gods, and to
Caezar, In the time of Clouis a Pagan, there was Christians in France
that which is Caezars, and confounds not the difference between those two
services and duties. He that has one religion, cannot have two, and hates and
detesteth that which is the contrary. Clouis our first christian King, being a
Pagan, tolerated christians in his Realm: and so did our King being in
Polonia, permit Latin and Greek Churches, with the confession of Ausbourg,
Lutherans, and Caluenists, to live together in Muscouia, and other countries
belonging unto the Emperor: the prince of Greece and a great part of his
subjects, are different from him touching religion. And although the Turk
receives not the Crown, yet he constrains them not to leave their
christianity. The Frenchmen could not endure Jews in France. They bannished
them not because of their religion, but for their Barbarous cruelties,
wherewith they crucified young children in dispight of the son of God: and
for their extreme vsuries, wherewith they consumed the common people. The king
suffering Heretics, does wrong to the Catholicques. The king is Common-father
to them, as well as to the others: Jews banished out of France, and for what
cause.
as there is no reason to prove the ingratitude of the son toward the
father, so all laws detest the inhumanitie and impiety of the father against
the son. Those whom the king so oftentimes proclaims rebels, and his
enemies, are his children, his subjects, and his servants. God never prospers
the enterprises of the subject against his Prince, and very sildome have kings
had great triumphs by wars over their subjects. It belongs to a Vittellius,
and not to a king of France, to walk along the fields, his garments all died
with the blood of his subjects, Vitellius said, that the body of the enemy
slain, sauoureth well, but that of the citizen being dead, is better. Tacit.
lib. 17. Suet in the life of Vitellius. Cap. 10. The people never die. The 5.
Edict of peace, An. 1577. made at Poictiers in the month of September.
Conference at Nerac, the last of February. 1579. The 6. Edict of peace in An.
1581.
and to delight in the savor of their dead bodies lying slain upon the
ground. When the Huguenots shall be overthrown and consumed, the king shall
live in peace. Suppose he puts them to death, and that at one time, he
cutteth off a hundredth thousand heads. The General seed is immortal by the
succession of every particular family, kindred, and several man, which still
increases one after the other, although every particular man of himself is
mortal, the body of the people in general never dies. The K. may well destroy
all the particulars of this new opinion, but they will leave as many children,
whose innocence God and nature will not permit to touch, that will succeed not
only in their goods, but in the humors, quarrels, and passions of their
fathers. In fine, those that persuaded peace by their reason alleged, got the
upper hand of those that desired war: and there upon it was concluded, with
great concontentment on both both parts, that the Prince of Conde the same
night he received it, caused it to be published by torch-light, although with
less advantage on his side then the first. For it restored the exercise of the
Catholicque religion, in the places where it had been prohibited, continuing
and commending it to be used in all places: it suffered men's consciences to
be free, yet without public exercise, but only in the Towns and places,
where as then it was openly preached, and to Gentlemen of quallitie and degree,
in their own houses: yet there was some difficulty in the execution and
observation of this peace, which the conference at Nerac between the
Queene-mother and the King of Navarre, soon avoided: but the wound not well
healed, did still bleed, by means of the furious disorders of those that were
his chief doers: but in the year one thousand five hundredth eighty and one,
it was wholly joined and drawn unto a scarre. Peace being made, what became of
those that desired nothing but war?

Monsieurs voyage into Flaunders.
The King of Navarre and the Prince of Conde, withdrew themselves. And the
Queene-mother caused her title which she pretended to the Crown of Portugal,
as only heir of the house of Boulongne, to be discided. And Monsieur the
kings brother, after the example of the Archduke Matthias, went into
Flaunders, there to make work for the king of Spain, where he made a goodly
entry, but an evil retrait. Mean time, what did the king? he to overthrow
impiety by godliness, and heresy by truth: and to show by all his actions,
that he desired nothing more, then the ending of all divisions in his Realm:
and knowing that the Prince is as it were a spring, from whence there issues
either vice or virtue, that the people follow his steps, and that they do more
by example then by commandment: he showed himself the mirror of devotion
and christian reformation: Institution of the order of the holy ghost 1579.
he ordained many holy Congregations, true Schools and Gardens of piety: he
built Monasteries: he frequented religious persons: he ware the order: and by
the example of Lois the eleventh, to unite great persons in concord and
inviolable amity, both for the benefit of the estate and Country: he
instituted the order of the holy Ghost, as an authentike declaration, that he
neither could love nor do good to hereticques, binding all the knights of the
Order by a solemn oath, unto such conditions as only pleased Catholicque
minds: he esteemed that by spiritual remedies, he might heal the disease
of the spirit, and frenzy of new opinions: that force or man's policy, could
not constrain men's consciences: that we must not kill, to make men believe,
that the conversion of such as are strayed out of the way, is the only work
of the hand of God: and that the wisest Princes had bin constrained to give
over violence and terror of wars, and have recourse to catechisings, for the
reducing of the consciences of their subjects: he bestowed Bishoppricks, and
spiritual promotions, upon such as he knew to be no less learned then
religious: he caused all sorts of books of piety and devotion to be printed:
forbidding and defending the impression of heretics writings. And to
conclude, he lived more like a Capuc in the^ a King: he desired no more war:
his Diana, was the singing of the Foueilantins: his Campe-royal a Cloister: his
armor, Manners and fashions of Henry the third. An Anagramme made of the king.
Henticus ter^ius: inte vere Christus.
a Penitentiaries sack: he lived continually with a Crucifix in his hand: and
if he lived, it was no more he, but Jesus Christ that lived in him. Such
witness of his actions was given by the Capucins of Parris, such was the
commendation he had by Father Bernard Fueillantin, and Father Edmund Anger,
that had well searched, tried, sounded and tasted the conscience of this
Prince, both publicly and privately, assured and persuade every man, that
France in long time before, had not any Prince more religious, nor more humble,
as having no other care, then only to keep and maintain his subjects: first,
in their obedience to God, and next unto himself. Nevertheless, he that in a
little book, entitled Francophile, shows the greatness of his spirit: and as
the common Proverb is, makes the Lion known by his feet, writes clean
contrary of the actions of this king, while he led that sollitarie life. Whose
proper words I will rehearse, and join them to this treatise: either in truth
they are of greater eloquence and copiousnes of matter then mine own, which
areas follows. He was soon weary of wars, and as of nature he was sost and
delicate, his spirit weak, Francophile imprinted at Chartres. Anno. 1591. F^l.
31. and 32.
low, and impatient to endure travel or pain: and all his complexions unequal
differing, and too base for a soldier: he sought a peaceable and quiet life.
And so he soon turned to delight in weddings, dauncings, and all ordinary
pastimes, which procured long peace. But the Queen, and those of the house of
Guise, perceiving him to take that course, thought to use him as a sipher, and
while he busied himself with devising of measures, and concordes of
dauncings, to hold the rule of the Commonwealth, and to dispose the government
thereof: but they found themselves soon frustrate of their intent: for as a
fore eye desires shad dowe, and cannot endure the light; so the spirit of this
Prince already molten, and in a manner mollified in this profound rest and
quietness, could not endure the presence of great persons: whether it were
because in his delights he feared their checkes, or that he more desired the
priuitie of meaner men, in such manner, that finding themselves far out of
their accounts, they had recourse to wicked practices and inventions, wherewith
in time they filled all the country of France.

Mean time, certain years past over, wherein to furnish the superfluities of
the Court, the Commons of France were so straungely oppressed, that they knew
not what course to hold, wherein those of Guise were not idle. And as the
hunter watches in narrow places for the Quails, which the rigor of winter
season drives into more temperate and pleasant countries: so among so many
public disorders, they were always watching in the Court, to take up and
entertain male contents, where no hour in the day passed over their heads,
but they cought a new Pigeon. And this hunting was not only holden in that
place, but in all the Towns of France, where the people were so hardly pressed
and beaten down with the weight of those burdens, that all the hopes and
comforts of better intertainment by the Guises offered, they presently imbrased
without judgment or discretion. And among all these discontents, of the
subjects, oppressed with great taxes, of the Clargies impatie^ce at the
increasing of their enemies, and of the Princes of Lorraine, The faith and
obedience of the people, began to decline 1582.
restrained from the kings favor, it was an easy matter to renew the league
of Peronne, and to animate their hearts, that were disposed to revolt, in
disobedience, to maintain religion, and the easing of the people. Nor better
nor fairer pretense to open the eyes, hearts, and purses of such men to
enterprise war, could not be found. At the same time, the king had sent unto
the Princes for the restitution of the Towns, which they held for the
observation of the last edict of peace, which they were to yield up at the end
of 6. years. But because the king of Navarre sent word unto his Majesty,
Prolongation of the time, of the towns of assurance. 1582.
that the peace having so often been broken by surprises and open wars, the
termed of 6. years was too short a time for the execution of the Edict, and
abollishing of wars: he agreed to the prolongation thereof. Whereupon all the
Princes of the league, took occasion to say, that the king favored
Hereticques, and that he would endure heresy, and considered not that those
Towns were inhabited by Huguenots, strong of situation, and hard to be won by
force. When the king of Navarre perceived those motions, and that some matter
was breeding, he foresawe the tempest would light upon him, what pretense soever
was made: thereupon he besought the king, to call to mind the intelligences
he had given him, in Anno. 1576. sent expressly by a Gentleman, concerning the
treaty and handling of the league in Spain and Italy, and that he should
look to the profit of the mine, seeing it was discovered. And perceiving the
enterprise every day more and more to proceed, he began to take care of
himself, and sent the Lord of Pardillan to the Queen of England, the king of
Denmark, and the Princes and Electors of Almaine, to renew amity with them:
desiring their aids touching the preventing of new troubles, that began to
rise in France against the edict of peace: and to appoint a good sum of money to
be sent unto some Town in Allemaine, to be employed for the leuying of
certain forces against the enemy. In the mean time, for the advantage of the
league, but to the great trouble and mischief of all the Realm of France: The
death of the Duke of Alencon in June, 1584.
Monsieur the kings brother (either by his riotousnesse in the low countries,
for grief of the hard success of his affairs, by hazard, or by Salcedas
means, that was executed) died at Chasteau Thierry. His death awakened the most
drousie heads, it brake all the bands that stayed the proceedings of the
league, and caused it presently to roar, at Chaalons, Rheims, Troy, Dyon, and
Mezieres. It had already found credit enough in all the other Towns,
specially at Parris, wherein they were diswaded from the yoke of the
Huguenots, and the hope of the king of Navarre to rule over them. The first
point of the love to the king, was already foundred in her heart: she spoke not
of him but with all kind of disdain, and every day presented him with the
opinions and censures of Pasquils indiscreet ieasts, and libels without names,
wherein corrupt minds already stuffed with the disorders of the Court,
swallowed up the poison of their mutinies, under what pretense I know not,
speaking of the king as of a Sardanapalus, or one that did nothing: The kings
devise. Manet vltime Coelo. Qui dedit ante Duas vnam abstulit, alcera nutat,
Tertia tonsoris nunc facienda manu.
of a Prince, drowned in his pleasures and delights, whom already they placed
like a Chilperic in a Monastrie: and in stead of the third Crown, which by his
devise was reserved for him in heaven, they promised him one, made with a
raisor in a Cloister. But he that would know the first conception, birth and
infancy of the league within Parris, he must believe that which Manant says
to Maheustre, that speaks like a wise man, and by the propositions and
answers, represents all those that deal therein: and for the first, he
names him that was the secret Minister of the leaguers intent, to make it
known to three Preachers, that took seven or eight Coaintors with them,
thereby to make a small Council: which was oftentimes holtors within the
College of Forteret, where they began to choose six others of the most
faithful, The College of Forteret, was the cradle of the league. The six
first confederates of the league.
to watch at all the six quarters, to report what was done in those places: to
sow this new grain within their heads, to sound the affections of the most
fervent Catholicques, and to dispose them to a resolution against the king, the
world and death. Those six Arch-leaguers, in the beginning made a fair and
great Harvest, and as with the number, courage increased. The principal
leaguers were assured, that those new confederates would engender others,
presently therevppon the two pillars that sustain and uphold the Prince,
(which are the most faithful Archers of his Court of guard, that is, good will
and authority) were thrown down, hatred and despite entering into their
places. Of those two plagues, as of a monsterous blood, was conceived and
brought forth most disloyal rebellion, and the despising of the law and the
authority of the Prince, mixed with the evil mind which the people bare to
their king, his Council, and his favorers: hatched this great Erynnis and
furious mischief in France, that has entered into all the veins of our
body. But alas poor people, what will you do, what example, what
commandment, what just reason, moves or assures you to arm your selves
against your king? What law approoueth the rebellion of the subject against
him whom God has appointed your king? If there be any imperfection or
disorder, are you to correct it? or can the foot ordain a law for the head?
It is no more lawful for you to resist against the faults or imperfections of
your Governors, then to despite God, and ask him the cause of the frosts and
hailes, that beat and spoiled your vines. Stay you little snayles within your
shells, come not forth you torteaux out of the cases, under them you are
assured: for you shall no sooner put forth your heads, nor stretche out a
foot, but presently be assailed, and lie open to your enemies: ready to
receive the first blow that shall be given. As Soon as the league perceived
that diverse towns had made great fires for joy of her birth, it was presented
to the Pope, that he might give it his blessing, avouch it for his, and declare
it to be for the Catholic, Apostolic, and Romish Church. But Gregory the
13. desiring to show himself to be the common father of all Christians, and
Pastor and not dispearser of his flock, Pope Gregory would nener consent to
this raising of men. The answer of the Pope unto the league.
considering that the raising of arms against a most Christian and Catholicque
king, was wholly contrary to the doctrine of the Gospel, the examples of
Christ and his Apostles, and the laws of policy and state: certified the
leaguers Deputies that he could not approve their inventions: and to conclude,
sent them back again without an answer. And not long before he died, said to
the Cardinal of Est, that the league should neither have bull, letter, nor
commission from him, for he knew not what they meant: and that he would not
serve for a firebrand to kindle a war, which he could by no means quench.
The impatience of the league, that would by no means stay the resolution of the
Court of Rome, publicly manifested her intent, making it self so much more
plausible, as the pretenses thereof made it seem admirable and fair, in that
the name of one of the first Princes of the blood, stood written in the
forehead thereof. A Prince in all other respects old and decayed, wholly
without hope ever to marry, to have issue, or to survive a king both young and
lusty. The people on the other side, were all disposed to rebellion, so that
there wanted nothing but the watchword. Mean time, The Cardinal of Burbon.
The Astronomers assured the duke of Guise of the short life of the king.
every man looked into the royalty, they reckoned the kings age, they would
make him a king like to the King of our Stageplaies, who while he is
apparelled, is called most noble king. It was openly said and spoken in every
man's mouth, that the King dying without issue, he had no other successor, then
the Cardinal of Bourbon, and yet in the mean time, the people were covertly
put into the heads, of the vaire usurpation of the Capets, upon the heirs of
Charlemaine, whereof there was diverse books printed: and then the Pasquils ran
about the Court: and I have noted some of the best, which will not be amiss to
be set down herein:

The King. I desire peace, and for swear war.


The Duke of Guise. Peace being made, my hope is clean gone.


The Duke de Maine. By wars we obtain both credit and riches.


The Cardinal of Guise. Time offers it self covertly unto us.


The King of Navarre. He that reckons without me, thinking I will endure it,
let him assure himself to reckon twice.


The Cardinal of Bourbon. Every man may reckon that which he thinks to be
his own.


The Queen Mother. This disputation is of no force as long as my son lives.


The Duke of Lorraine. Let us nevertheless follow the league and her pretenses.


The Duke of Sauoy. Then the king will loose both France and all his subjects.


The King of Spain. If France be lost, I will soon find it.


France. Soft and fair, there needs not so many dogs for one bone, such as
by ambition seem to trouble me, did never prove my force.


AN ARGUMENT BOTH WITH and against the league.
The King he has no children to succeed,
His successor, a Catholicque must be:
The Realm is taxt with imposts every day,
And people moved do seek for vengeance still.
Two, three, or four minions possess the wealth:
The Parliament was holden all in vain,
The holy league will now redress these wrongs,
Thereby for to reduce our hope again.
The King he has no child, but he may have,
Rebellion ought not to redress our right:
The King can ease our case without constraint:
His mignons two or three are not so great,
And Parliament will end all difference,
Which may cut off the way unto the league.
I must, I will, it pleases me to think,
So many reasons cannot be but good:
But such confused minds have no restraint,
For thou preferst degree and honor high.
Its true, they Princes are most fortunate,
Comparisons with them may not be made,
But they set fire in their dwelling house,
Which is an act both pitiful and strange,
They are disdainde, but know thou wherefore?
I dare not speak, I leave that to the King:
If he say naught, God knows what he thinks,
I will not utter word for fear of blame,
Only it greaueth me, so many wise
And learned men in France, do hold their peace.
The victory is for them, each man does say,
Such as have interest will them resist:
All is now free with horror and with death,
And our afflictions mortal are.
Behold the foolish toys of idle brain,
To think our wrongs proceed from wicked men,
And he that says our king is fast a sleep,
If he a subject be, then let him showt:
For me I dare not speak, in these strange time,
Least that our Courtiers ketch me by the back:
I am too weak my country for to help,
But to destroy the subjects of our King,
Orit desire, shows a want of faith:
For he that honors not his lawful Prince
May well be said, he fears not the Lord.
I am not borne a King, my fate most hard
Permits not such glory to my race:
But if I were a King, such dignity
Would cause me make my name for to be fearde:
I would march forth in arms most terrible,
With Majesty most like for to commannd,
And dumpting pride of subjects ^utime,
Immort allize my name for ever more:
God should me guide, faith should be my shield,
The people my support, the law my strength,
To die the earth with blood of traitor vile,
Opposing strength and force, them to resist.
But I am not a King, my heart does fail,
I love to rest, and hate most bloody war.
Perceiving in our time the inconstant state,
Which gives cause still to expect a change:
We may compare France to a Table square,
Whereas four sit, primero for to play:
The King, on whom the loss must wholly fall,
Says pass if I can, and yet he has guard game:
Bourbon he says, this game is tedious,
It werieth me, and throws off his hat.
Not thinking what his l^^ter card might be.
Navarre holds play, and likest for to win:
But Guise in hope to have some little flush,
Ve^^eth at all, Navarre he doubleth it.
The Spaniards standing to behold their play,
And bearing part with Guisert covertly.
Supplies his want with money, that he may
In the end have all the gain unto himself.
To flatter, lie, dissemble, and betraye,
By subtle means the truth for to disguise,
To play the fox, pretending holiness,
To seem denout, and yet an Hipocrite:
To please great ^e^, and follow at their heel,
Of earthly ^^ul^ to feign a deity,
To respect state and now religion:
To forge a God of man's in^^^tion:
To ask for peace, where peace cannot be had:
Ready to run at every little call,
Still to be armed, and save the hereticque.
In stead of Catholicque, Machiauel,
Not to regard the world that is to come,
Are signs of such as live by policy.
To speak of God, and yet a devilish mind,
To make great show of read, and yet no faith,
To play the polliticque, despising law:
To promise rest, and seek to tyrannise:
To seem an innocent, and yet vniusts
To show pity, yet filling all with blood:
To seem subject, yet seek the King to spoil:
Do you call this a servant Catholicque?
If to be holy, we must seek to range,
In every place to massacre and spoil,
And put both lives and goods in stra^ngers hand,
And to our country furious Tigers seem.
If leaguers law has so ordained it,
To drown my self I rather would desire,
Then for to live an Vtheist in my heart,
And outwardly show a christian.
Although this age has much abridged the liberty and freedom of writing,
which appears in our ancient Hystoriographers, Prossart, Monstielet, and
Phillip de Comines, yet will I neither for fear nor flattery, (two Historical
plagues) seem to cover the truth of this discourse. I confess that in such
places, as of themselves are discommendable, I have added of mine own, to make
them more notorious: and in such actions as are worthy praise, wherein
virtue, conscience, and valor consists, Ispare no commendation but in things
indifferent: I am constrained to suspend my judgment: rather then to enter
into many untruths: wherein if I should use partiallitie, I could not choose but
varrie from the matter. My squadron is the truth: Plato and Socrates are my
friends, but I esteem truth before all things.

This History is a plea, neither with not against the league: I will not set
roses among thorns, there is never any universal plague, but some escape it:
and among so many and diverse actions, it is impossible but there must be
several colors.

I will report the problemes debated on both sides: I will show you their
propositions, which are neither so clear nor apparent, but there is always
some contrariety: I will set forth in open show, the occasions of the
league, the kings reasons, and the king of Mauarres defenses, which I will
declare without choice or difference; and you shall consider of them without
partiallitie, hatred, favor, or self will, and esteem them as a meat rather
prepared for your health, then for your taste.

Two things gave a hot alarm to the league: one, the assembly at M^^^auban:
the other, the voyage of the Duke d'Espernon to the king of Navarre: which it
took as brands to kindle her fire, and began to send out commissions in all
places in the kings name, who disauouched them, and prohibited the raising of
soldiers. The first point of their dislike, The kings Edict of the 28. of
march 1585. against the raising of men.
showed the reason which moved the Cardinal of Bourbon, the Princes, Lords,
Towns, and common people, being Catholicques, to oppose themselves against
the Hereticques. Secondly, because they were offended, that the Parliament
which they would have had to be holden concerning wars, to be made against
the Huguenots had been revoked. Thirdly, to break the Edict of pacification.
Fourthly, because they stood in fear, that if the king should die without
children, there would rise great trouble for the succession of the Crowns:
Reuocation of the edict of peace.
whereof the king of Navarre had great hope since the death of Monsieur the
kings brother, by the practice of his friends and favorers about the king.
Fifthly, because of the great preparations for war, made both within and
without the Realm, that should be ready by the fifteen of April then next
ensuing; Nominating of associates to the crown
being in Anno. one thousand five hundredth eighty five, to execute that,
which they said had been concluded in an assembly at Magdebourg, the fifteenth
of December, one thousand five hundredth eighty four, against religion, the
king, and his subjects: by the which it was agreed, that the Queen of England
should furnish fifty thousand Rutters, four thousand Switzers, and twelve
thousand Englishmen. The Count Palatin, Prince Casimir, and the Duke of
Pomeranie, each of them four thousand Rutters. The Langraue of Hesse, two
thousand and five hundredth. The Duke of VVitemberg two thousand. The Lords of
their league, besides the Queen of Engla^ds forces, five thousand Switzers. The
kings Protector and Council of Scotland, two thousand Scots. The king of
Nauare, the Prince of Conde and their associates, five and twenty thousand
Harquebusiers, and four thousand horse, that had sworn never to make peace
with the king of France, but with all their consents, to maintain the Prince
of Orange in the low Countries, against the king of Spain: to help the
Emperor by all the means they could, to get the Demaines of the Empire,
witholde^ by the Pope, and to send their deputies from all places in the month
of March to Basil, and Switzerland, thereto determine the differences
concerning the Lords Supper. Sixthly, because those of the religion would not
yield up the towns by them holden, for ye assurance of yt execution of the
edict of peace. Seventhly, because of (...) universal abuse suffered in placing
of officers, in leuying of moneys, and by invention of excessive oppressio^s
laid upon the common people. And lastly, against such as abusing the K. favor
and authority, had in a manner ceased upon his person, impeached the ordinary
access of honest me^ unto him, by that means, to keep from him the knowledge
of disorders that are in them: disposed governments to their favorers: consumed
the kings treasures: molested the common people: braued the Nobility: cut off
the liberty of Justice: spoiled the Clargie of their tithes and extraordinary
benefits: and persuaded the king, that it was necessary for his service, to
weaken and dimininish the authority of the Catholic Princes and Lords. Upon
those just occasions, they said they were forced to meet in arms, not having
means (by reason of the suddainenesse of the thing, together with the little
credit they had with his Majesty) to stay for his Commission, neither yet to
proceed by any other way, to make him know their greefes: assuring him, that
the end and purpose of their pretense of raising of arms, was only for to
reestablish the Church of God in her true and ancient dignity: under the
exercise of one religion throughout all his realm: to restore the Nobility to
their honor and franchises: Pretense of the League.
to ease the common people of the impositions invented and devised since the
reign of Charles the ninth: and not to employ the treasures that shall be
levied, but for the kings service: to procure that from thencefoorth, the
Parliament should be holden every three years: to desire the king to take
order touching the differences of the succession of the Crown, to the end his
realm should not be divided into as many factions, as their are titles
pretended. For the surety and preservation of their own persons, among so many
public and private calamities: to bannish from the Court, such as abused the
favor and authoriof the King: protesting not to do any thing against the
service of the king, neither yet to leave arms, before their intents were
fully executed: and that his Majesty had procured means to shun the
danger: which to avoid, they had taken arms: with promise likewise, that
their soldiers should be paid.

The king thinking by fair means to retain them in their duties, and to
exhort them to an union, The Kings letters to the king of Navarre.
wrote to the King of Mauarre, that he should not move at those actions, but
content himself with patience: the people might perceive and judge the
pretenses of the league, and know on whom to lay the blame: praying him to
assure himself of his good affection, with promise that he would not forget
his interest, more then his own, and that he would not be unmindful of him,
as being his good brother: withal, discovering unto him the judgment he had
conceived touching those new troubles, which was in these words. That he
knew, that those of the league, what show soever they made, pretended only
against his person and his Crown: minding to rise and become great at his
costs, seeking nothing else but the utter ruin and dssipation of his estate.

While the flame issued out of this furnace, the league made war against the
Huguenots, ceasing upon the best Towns of the Catholicques in all the realm.
Religion was preached in Guyenne, and they went to drive it out of Picardie:
Marceille taken the 9. of April, 1585. by the league but presently again,
reduced to the K. obedience.
the Hugnenots were in Rochel, and the leaguers army marched straight to
Parris: they are at Montpellier, and the league set upon Marseille: which by
means of the second Consul of the Town they took, who afterward was hanged.

The taking of it again out of their hands, liked the king so well, that as
the messenger brought him news thereof, into the Hall whereas then he was,
leaving his company, he went unto them, and commending their resolution,
esteemed them for his faithful and good subjects, in that they had hanged the
leaguerer Daries, saying unto them: My good friends, I am content to grant to
your request, and more if need require, assuring you that my liberallitie shall
never be wanting, to acknowledge your great fidelity.

But in the mean time, he took no order for his affairs: he was on foot, and
the leaguer spoke on horseback: he ware the Penetentiaries sack, and they
armor on their backs: and leaving arms, which nature and necessity
presented unto him, The K. zeal to religion, cause of the peace, in An. 1577.
he had recourse to pen and Ink, and made his declaration, but in such cold
manner, that you would say he durst not name his enemies: and seemed like a
man, that complained he had been beaten, but showed not by whom. he said,
that both before and since his advancement to the Crown, he had sufficiently
showed his zeal and affection toward the Catholicque religion, whereof the
only conservation was dearer unto him, then his own life or royal Crown.
That he had been constrained to make peace, when he perceived that he wanted
means to continue the wars: Fruits of peace to all estates.
specially when he knew and well perceived, that all his Realm was wearied
with their continual calamities. That peace was the ready remedy to bring his
subjects to one religion: to establish justice: to correct abuses: reform
manners: comfort the Clergy and the people: revive the qualities and horrors
of his Nobility, in a manner imbased by those divisions. That the peace being
well holden and observed, it would procure an entire and full contentment to al
estates: And thereby justice would be in force by authority of the laws. The
Clergy reformed, and that in all places there was no other but learned and
godly Prelates. The Nobility reconciled, leaving hatred, distrust, and the
people delivered from the insatiable troubles of wars. That diverse
nevertheless, both impudent and bold, more hypocrites then religious, had
taken pleasure to interpret that peace to a secret favor and love he should
bear unto the Huguenots, thereby to advance them, a thing which never once
entered into his mind. That the fear of troubles ye might arise after his
death, The disputation of the Princes succession, is odious while the Prince
lives.
was not a sufficient cause to torment and trouble him in his life, and as it
were to condemn him, not to be any more the person that God and nature had
ordained him. That he never favored the succession of a king, that should be
to the disadvantage of the Catholicque religion: that it was in a manner to
constrain nature and time, so much to distrust the goodness of God, as to
undertake a quarrel touching the succession of the Crown, during his life,
being healthful and strong of body, his Queen the flower of her age, This is
spoken for Monsieur de Guise, that was Great-maister of France.
and every man in hope that God would send them issue: that the Princes which
complained to be out of his favor, had received as great favor and rather
more, then ever they deserved, having honored them with the greatest and most
honorable offices of his Crown, which in times past were not given but to the
Princes of the blood. And in fine, having promised to restore the Church to her
splendure, the Nobility to their contentment, justice to her authority, and
comfort to the people, he prayed, coniured, exhorted, and commanded, all
Ecclesiastical persons, Gentlemen, Parliaments, and Towns, to separate
themselves from all such means, as might impeach the effect of so holy an
intent: and to leave all leagues and assosiations, uniting themselves under his
obedience, as by nature, duty, and their own welfare they were bound. The
king of Navarre, who to obey the king, had not as yet taken arms, and let
pass all the occasions that might excuse him, thought that of all insensible
creatures, he should be most insensible, The king of Nauarres declaration,
made at Bergerac the 10. of June, 1585. and presented to the king, by Monsieur
de Cleremont.
if he should be so simple as not to perceive the many slanders raised
against him: and that if seeing an arm lifted up ready to strike the king,
he would not stay it, and show the generositie of the house of Bourbon: under
the promise of his Majesty, made a declaration, which he presented and sent to
all christian Princes, and chief companies of France, to make them capable of
his actions.

Wherein he fully discovered his religion and manner of faith, showing that
he had been borne during the Schism and permission of two religions in
France, that he neither could nor would leave that, wherein he had bin brought
up and instructed, if by a lawful Council he were not otherwise converted:
and that still then they could not hold him for an hereticque, much less as
one that had fallen from the church: affirming that he had never bin
hereticque, nor contrary to his first opinion: and that they thought rather to
destroy, then instruct him: and to overthrow, then unite him. That every man
knows when he yielded to hear Mass, after Saint Bartholomewes day. That
both age, force, and fear, made him consent to that, which in mind he never
thought: and that as soon as he was at liberty, he returned to the exercise
of his first religion. That in all the wars which he made, he never had any
other respect, then only to God, and service to the king. And that as soon as
his Majesty by his Edicts, had consented to the liberty of men's consciences,
he presently left arms, and countermanded his troops, together with the
foreign aids of his friends and confederates. That for that cause, he is not
enemy to the Catholicques as the report goes. That he maintains those of
Bearn, in the small liberty they had when the Queen his mother died, and so in
all places of the kingdom of Navarre then resting unto him, where he found
the exercise of Catholicque religion, he never permitted any change. That the
consultation in Magdebourg, which the league so much spoke of, that they caused
it to be preached openly in the Churches, was an imagination and worthy such
reports, for that it would be found, that neither there, nor in any other
place, it was ever holden. And that in the extract of forces, by them therein
set down, they induce the Ambassadors of the Elector Palatin, and of the
Prince of Orange, the one being dead above a year before, and had left a
son within years, under the wardship of the Duke Casimir: the other, about
four months before that, was slain at Delft, by Balthazard Girad. That the
declaration by them made of his incapacitie to the succession of the Crown,
was the thing that touched him most: yet until then, he had least mind of
it, contenting himself with the hope, that God would long time preserve his
Majesty, for the good of his Realm and Commonwealth, and would in time give
him issue, to the great grief of his enemies: not seeking to judge the king or
Queen to be barren in the flower of their ages. That those which in their
declaration and protestation, named him to be desirous of the kings death, a
perturber of the State, and sworn enemy to all Catholicques, had falsely and
wickedly lied, and therevppon besought the king, that the quarrel might be
descided between him and the Duke of Guise, one to one, two to two, or ten
to ten, without troubling himself, or suffer the people to endure any longer
vexation.

The Queen Mother, that held with the Duke of Guise, more to cross and trouble
him, and to make an entry into the disorder and confusion of all affairs,
then to advance him, Princes favorers of the league.
gave the king to understand, what power the league was of, showing him, that
therein he had to do with the Pope, the Emperor, the king of Spain, the Duke
of Sauoy, certain Princes of Germany, the Catholicque Cantons of Switzers,
all the house of Lorraine, and all the chief Towns in France that had entered
therein, al resolved to expose their persons in ye middle of all perils, as the
last anchor to preserve religion from shipwreck. And she gave him so hot an
alarm with those first assaults, The surprising of the Citadel of Lions, the
2. of May, 1585.
and knew so well how to use the occurrence of the taking of the Citadell of
Lions, (whereof the Captain had bin driven out) unto her purpose, that the more
the king thought upon it, the more he perceived himself to be weakened, and
the leaguers advanced. He thought that the ramparts and defenses of his
Estate, were already abated: he believed that already, the Duke of Guise
held him by the collor: it seemed unto him, that his Palace of Louure was
besieged, with great pain they could hardly make him come forth of the
Capucins sell: it was no more he that wan the battelles of Iarnac and
Moncontour, generositie wanted, and his heart began to fail. Herein diverse
Politicians noted a great fault in the Estate, which after produced great
accidents. Many embarked them selves with the league, being made believe it was
for the kings person, but perceiving the contrary, left it.
Caezar only opposed but the authority of his face against his mutinous
legions, but it was with a lively and bold assurance, not doubtful nor
trembling. If the king had showed himself to the league, not covered with a
Penitents garment, or habit of an Hermit: not by fair and plausible means,
but with constancy, courage, and resolution worthy a Majesty royal, he
had well made them know him to be king, the true and only Image of God, that
had thunder ready in his hand to consume and confound such as rose up against
him: the war would be ended. The army of the Duke de Guise, which at his
first rising and in the flower thereof, was but a thousand horse, and four
thousand foot, had been dispearsed in less then a month: and the Cardinal de
Bourbon had confessed to the Queene-mother, that if the king had banded his
authorithie against him, all his attempts had been clean overthrown. Fear is
a plague to valiant minds, but when the heart of the chief commander is
possessed therewith, his authority is abated, it dimisheth, falls, and
undermines it self: for fear in flameth the courage, and causes men so much
more boldly to enterprise their wicked actions, as that they are assured they
shall not be punished. Also the king letting slip this revolt, rather speaking
fair, then commanding: and yielding, rather then opposing: thereby drew all
the mischief of those toubles upon his own head. He desired the Queenmother
to bear some of his blows, This is the opinion of the Author that made the
tiberal and excellent discourse. fol. 22. The last request of the Princes of
the league. The Edict published in Parliament, the king being present, the 18.
of July, 1585. The K. fearful, disarmeth himself, to cause the league to
disarm them selves.
and to procure the Duke of Guise to leave off his arms, and to assure him of
his favor, and that he would give him what part of his Realm soever he would
ask, to let him live in peace. This Prince of great hope, wise, and valerous,
and one of the greatest Captains that France in long time had bred, perceiving
that so hardy an enterprise had already taken so good effect, and made so
great a change, pursued it, and perceiving the king to yield unto him, hoped
more then he either thought or ought to do. And there upon presented the king
with another request, wherein very wisely he motioned his own interest,
together with the common cause, signed by himself and the Cardinal of
Bourbon, tending to this end. To desire him to make and swear an vnreuocable
edict for the extirpation of heresies. To take by force the Towns holden by
those of the new religion. To reuowne the protection of Geneue: to authorize
their wars: to reconcile them unto him: to be of their league: and of a king
to become a participant.

Therevppon with all speed the peace was made, and cast into a mould, the king
suffering himself by that fear to be so much carried away. And by the edict,
he prohibited the exercise of the new religion, revoked all other edicts that
favored it: commanded the Ministers out of the land: and all his subjects
within six months after, to make profession of the Catholicque religion, or to
depart out of the Realm: dispearsed the tripartite chambers of Parliaments:
ordained that the Towns given in hostage to those of the religion, should be
yielded up: and not only commended, but approved the war by the Princes
begun, acknowledging it to be done for his service.

This edict authorized them, Articles drawn at Nemours, the 7. of July, 1581.
but the articles that were secretly drawn at Nemours, were not altogether for
their advantage, and yet there was nothing in them, that displeased them, but
only the condition, that bound them presently to leave the league. And
although they demanded no other sureties then his Majesty's word, yet they
asked the Towns of Chaalon, Thoul, Verdun, Saint Disier, Reims, Soissons, the
Castle of Dyon, the Town and Castle of Beaune, Rue in Picardie, Towns given
in assurance to the League.
Dinan and Conq in Britain, to be delivered unto them. And the king paid
2001006. Crowns, and two thirds, for the strannge forces levied by the^,
discharged the^ of one million, six thousand three hundredth and forty eight
Crowns, three deniers, which they had taken up of the kings receivers, and
100000. Crowns to build a Citadel in Verdun, besides the wages of their guards
of Harquebusiers on horseback, which he gave to all the princes of the league.
Consider now I beseech you, if these great comfortors of the people, these
Timoleons, and these Arates, that caused their defense of the Commonwealth, to
be published in all places, that detested the great increase of tallages and
inventions of imposts, in these affairs did once think upon the people. See
how in three months they made the people so lean, that they left them neither
flesh, blood, nor bone, and oppressed them more in that time, then ever they
were in three whole years before, by ordinary charges, besides the violences,
pillings, burnings, and many other insolences incident to wars. For the poor
Pesant, that knew not what the league meant, that never came at Peronne, nor at
Nancy, where it was first devised, was forced to pay the millions of gold,
which that three months war had prodigiously spent, and to support the seven
and twenty Edicts, that by that means sprung up, to the great disturbance
of polliticque government and justice, and to confirmation of the kings
treasures. And yet in the mean time, all their Orations, and their great and
long discourses made unto the king, tended to no other end, but to renew the
wars. But I would to God, that most christian kings had answered them, with the
same words that Cleomenes used to the Ambassadors of Samos, who by along and
vehement Oration, exhorted him to make war against Policrates.

After they had made him weary to hear them, and their own tongues to
speak, he answered them in few words, which made them much abashed, saying:
I remember not what you said at the beginning of your Oration, much less in
the middle: and as for your conclusion, I will not grant unto it: there
needs not so many words: I can do nothing touching your demand: I will have
peace, and never make war, but against those that refuse peace. Thus should a
king of France have said unto his French subjects, and not suffer himself to
be consumed by them, in such sort as you shall hereafter hear.

Here ends the first Book.
THE SECOND BOOK OF THE last troubles of France, containing that which passed
from the beginning of the wars, after the Edict made in July, 1585. until the
Barricadoes of Parris, and the Kings retrait to Chartres, in the Month of May.
1588.
There are degrees to ascend unto the royalty, and not to descend without
falling.
NO man can mount and descend both at one time. There are some high places where
you cannot descend, without falling. The kings authority never fails without
his ruin and decay. As Soon as the king bended himself and the honor of his
Majesty to the leaguers desires, he perceived his authority, engaged to the
pleasure and will of another, by the edict of Iulie: which of a king as he
was, made him a participant: and in estate like a scipher, which of it self is
nothing, without it be joined to other figures. And to the contrary, caused
the league to be of more account then before: so that the light he gave unto
it, was the loss of his own.

From that time, his respect, power, and fear, vanished, he spoke no more to
the league, but as equal to equal, and received the law of those that ought
to receive it of him.

The league did not any thing without the King.
This peace made a great and vnreparable breach in his honor, by the which, all
the impunities of the league passed with great assurance: and her bold
enterprises, (which of themselves would have bin ouerthrown, became more assured.
For as soon as the favorites thereof, perceived themselves to be feared, that
their first sailie had gotten credit in the hearts of good Towns, put fear
into the kings mind, procured favor with his Council, that the zeal of
religion kindled the most cold minds, and that the thing which deserved
punishment, had obtained recompense. They determined from thence to undertake
their first enterprise: but knowing well, that in a manner having pulled it
forcibly out of the kings hands, it hatched but a rotten egg, who by that
levy of men at arms being much offended, would never cease until he were
revenged, that so great a wound would never be so well healed, It was
impossible that the king should forget the leaguers enterprise.
but there would be a scar: specially because it was in a manner but three or
four days since, that by so many Edicts he had declared them rebels, and
manifest traitors, they determined not to assure themselves, but in and by
their arms. But arms are nothing without money, and money cannot be had but by
leuying it upon the common people, to whom there rested nothing but their
tongues and voices to complain: to constrain them, was the means to bring
upon the league the same furies and imprecations, wherewith the Husband man,
the Merchant, and the Artisicer, detested the enterprise and pretense of the
first troubles, and make their quarrelles most fearful and odious, for no
other reason then only because of the greefes and oppressions which they
received, to send into Spain, the spring was not stopped: but that liked them
not so well, so that there rested no other means, then only to serve their
turns with the kings commissions, and to make him chief author of the wars,
and the means of entertaining thereof.

Therefore presently they caused him to determine wars in all places of the
Realm against the Huguenots: he was not only advised of the importance, but
of the facility thereof, affirming it to be but three days works, and that
the strongest places would parley for a peace, as soon as he sounded up the
drumbe, and the king of Navarre would yield at the only report of their
enterprise.

They brought this poor king a sleep with many chimers, foresaying he should
have foreign aid: which was as true as the sea burns. It was told him,
that all Christian Princes would help him: that the Queen of England should
have so many Chastillian forces against her, Many chimeres.
that she should find enough to do, to defend her self: that the Princes of
Germany would never stir for the king of N. being a Prince poor, both
without money and credit: and that all would in a manner melt at the appearance
of those new sons. An army by sea prepared in Portugal of 30000. men,
against England. An. 1587.
So that the war was sworn to be made in all places of the Realm: and as
then there wanted nothing but money. To the which end, the king in his Palace
of Louiene, caused the principal of the Clergy, the Parliament and the
Citizens of Parris, to be assembled, showing them, that as by their advise
he had broken the peace, so he desired to be helped by their means to the
maintenance of his wars: the charges whereof (he said) amounted to the sum
of four hundredth thousand Crowns a month, The Kings Oration to those of
Parris, the eleueth of August, 1585.
for the entertaining of three armies, one in Guyenne: the second, about his
own person: and the third, to impeach the enterie of strangers.

And speaking to the principal President: he said: that having perceived so
much zeal and affection in him, to have the last edict of peace revoked, he
doubted not but he would be able by sufficient arguments, to persuade his
equalles, that as long as the wars endured, they should not look for any
stipendes.

To the Provost of Merchants in Parris, he said: that seeing the Town He
commanded him presently to call the Town together, to leme upon them, the sum
of 200000. Crowns.
was so much affected to the breach of peace, it ought to be as well disposed
to contribute to the wars. And then turning to the Cardinal of Guise, he
said: that as the heads of the Clargie were those that had most stirred and
provoked him to wars, which could not be made without great expenses, they
ought not to spare their arms to help him, considering it was not reasonable,
that his Majesty should only bear the charge of that which would redownd to
the benefit of the Commonwealth.

But when they made certain difficulties, and that already every one
confessed, that there is no peace how little advantage soever it brings, but
is much better then any war, how triumphant and victorious soever it be: Pax
vel iniusta vuhor ius^^ssimo bello. Cic ad Artic.
that the apprehensions of public calamities, opened the eyes, and moved the
senses of the most insencible: that every man would gladly have war without
feeling the discommodities it brings with it.

With an angry countenance he said unto them: Then I think it had been
better to believe me. I am in doubt, that in seeking to be rid of preaching,
Speeches of K. Henry the third.
we do not greatly hazard the war. But the Clergy, whose hearts more then
their purses, were opened to that war, and considering that all the aids which
the kings of France at other times had from the Spirituality, Read the oration
made by the Cardinal of Lorraine to Charles the 6. at Fontainebleau the 28. of
May. 1573. The Clergy in less then 15. years furnished 60. milions of
Frankes. The Clergies declaration made unto the King the 19. of November, 1585.
in their greatest and most urgent affairs, was out of the tithes of their
revenues, that since it had engaged in the Towne-house of Parris, the one
hundredth thousand Frankes of yearly rent, and thereby consented to the
alienation of the free farm thereof. That at the kings return from Pologne,
it had already co^tributed 60000000. Frankes, that since that, it was bound
for the space of six years, to pay yearly the sum of one million and three
hundredth thousand Frankes, for his service, with condition not to be charged
with other tithes.

That now the king having declared that this war, moved by the solicitation
of the Clergy, ought to be followed and supplied at the charges of the
Church, the ruin thereof was most evident: they thought good to show the king
their impossibility to satiffie the same: the just complaint of the great
charges it had borne in the last leuying of arms, besides the loosing of their
rights and franchises.

To the which end, the Bishop of Brien spoke for all them unto the king,
showing that until that time, the Clergy had not spared the riches of the
Alter, to maintain the honor of the sacrifice: but now that their means were
so drawn out, their rents engaged, and their free farms alienated, that they
could do no more: That it would be a most erreligious thing, that religion
should be defended by people without religion: and that the Church nourishes
and entertaineth such as committed so many rapines, sacriledges, blasphemies,
pollutions, and vnreuerent dealings toward it.

They besought his Majesty, by the memory of his father, by the honorable
name of most christian king, the goodness of his nature, and the lively
comiseration of his spirit, to be protector of her privileges, and for a time
permit her to breath. Mean time, he animateth him to the execration of the
Edict of July, which could not be done without war: the war not without
money: and the money could not be levied but by suppression of the Church, or of
the common people.

But that served not, the league would have wars, and of force the four
elements, whereof the Monarchy consists: that is, the king and the 3.
Estates, must be reduced into the ancient confusion of a Chaos, and that they
whose fathers used to have wars in Africa, Asia, and in the furthest parts
of all the world, must entertain and hatch it among themselves. Mean time,
the King of Navarre being advertised that preparation was made, Letters of the
King of Navarre to the King.
to war against those of the religion, complains unto the king, touching the
peace he had made with the league: showing him, that upon commandment
received from his Majesty, to be patient, and not to stir against those
that had risen against him: he to show duty, had so much bridled his nature,
that in a manner it stained his reputation: and according to his Majesty's
pleasure, rejected the occasions, which from day to day presented themselves
unto him, whereby he might revenge the leaguers attempts: and that
notwithstanding his Majesty forgetting the consideration of the particular
interest which he had in his last raising of arms, had made peace with his
enemies, and armed them with his forces and authority, against the Estate, his
blood, and his own person.

And having repeated his offer in all his declarations, for the ceasing of
troubles (touching the difference of religion, if there were no other passion
that touched his enemies at the heart) he added, that if the king would not
accept his fidelity, he can do no more, but content himself with his own
innocence and affection toward his Majesty and the State.

Declaration and protestation of the King of Navarre, and the Prince of Conde.
In his declaration, having disciphered the cause of leaguers taking arms, the
vanity of their pretenses, and the fruits that all the Estates of France may
reap by the conclusion of the treaty of Nemours, by breaking the peace, and
beginning war. He protests, and with him the Prince of Conde his Cousin,
the Duke de Mommorency, the Lords, Gentlemen, Provinces, Towns, and common
people, as well of the one, as of the other religion, to oppose themselves
against the Authors of those troubles, in a lawful and necessary defense,
thereby to conserve the laws, which are the foundations of all families, and to
maintain the estate and liberty of the King, and of the Queen his mother.

Sixtus 5. excommunicateth the king of Navarre and the prince of Conde, in
September, 1585.
This Prince had need to be a strong Bulwark, thereby to defend himself
against so many assaults, on all sides made upon him. For having both the king
and the league, as enemies on the one side: on the other side comes the Pope,
with his thunderboults of excommunication, declaring him incapable to the
succession of the Crown of France: abandoning his person and his countries for
a pray, to such as could obtain it.

Touching this Bull, many whole books both with it and against it, were
written and set forth: to the which I refer the curiosity of such as desire
to know whether the Pope has any authority over the estate of France: for
which consideration, The King of Nauarres letters to the States.
the Court of Parliament would not allow it. Therevppon the king of Navarre
complained to all the Estates of France, in that they had caused the succession
of a king being yet alive, to be decided in the Court of Rome: made the title
of a Prince of the blood, to be judged by the Pope: and suffered the
Consistory to give that which belonged not unto them. And having particularly
represented unto them the mischiefs which thereby might arise, together with
the shame and perpetual reproach unto this Nation, in having To the Clergy.
produced monsters into the world, and rebels among a most obedient people:
he ends his letters, with rejecting the mischiefs of those miseries, upon
those that are the authors. In his letter to the Clergy, he said: If war be
so acceptable unto you, if a battle likes you better then a disputation, a
bloody conspiracy, more then a Council: I will wash my hands, and the blood
that thereby shall be spilt, be upon your own heads. I am assured that the
maledictions of such as shall thereby endure great misery, will not fall upon
me, so that my patience, my reasons, and obedience, are sufficiently known.
Mean time, I hope God will bless my just quarrel, to whom I commend you.

To the Nobility.
To the Nobility he writes, and says: The Princes of France are the keys of
the Nobility: I love you all: I feel my self perished and become weak in
your blood. The stranger has no interest in this loss: I have good cause to
complain of some, but I rather bewail them: I am ready to embrace them all.
That which most displeases me, is, that those which I most esteem of, whom I
know have been circumuented: I cannot distinguish them being in arms: but God
knows my thought: their blood be upon the authors of these miseries, to whom
we pray, etc. To the Commons, after he had deplored their wounds, and
scarres, and assured them of his readiness to shed his blood, if his enemies
would by a combat of two and two, end the war, To the Commons.
which would be the death of so many thousands of men. He says: I am a
Frenchman borne, I will be partner of your miseries: I have assayed all means
to exempt you from civil discordes: and will never spare my life, that they
may be abridged: I will not impute the fault upon you: you are Frenchmen, but
rather esteem of your good wills: I demand nothing else of all you (that
according to your vocations are most subject to endure mischief, then to do
it) but only your vows, prayers and good-wils. But because he feared the
sword of Saint Paul, more then the keys of Saint Peter: and that the Gold of
Spain is more dangerous, then the Lead of Rome, he sent his Ambassadors to
the protestant Princes of Germany, to crave their aids. Which the king
perceiving, sent the Cardinal of Lenoncourt, and the President Brulart, unto
him, to assure him of his Majesty's good will, of the great desire he had to
see him united to the Catholic Church, not only for the safety of his
conscience, but also for the easier establishing of his succession to the
Crown, to declare the causes that had moved him to break the peace, and to
desire him to yield up the Towns which he held for his security. The king of
N. having yielded most humble thanks unto them, for his Majesty's good will in
his behalf, answered, that without instruction he could not change his
religion, for the which so much time and blood had been shed. And that those of
his side, were so far from yielding up the Towns, given to them for their
security, that following the example of the leaguers, they had cause rather to
ask for more. The Ambassadors perceiving that neither the one, nor the other
point of their Embassage took effect, ended their commission by desiring the
king of Navarre to enter into a treaty, wherein the Queene-mother would labor
to his contentment, Conference agreed upon.
and travel as far as to Champigny, if in the mean time it pleased him to
stay the foreign army. He willingly accepted of the conference: but to the
other point he said, that he neither could nor ought in any sort, to stay or
withdraw the good wills of those who in so much important an occasion, yea and
in so extreme necessity had entered into the field, that by restoring the
authority of the king, trodden underfoot by the breach of his edicts, they
might defend him from the foreign inuation of the league.

The Electors, Palatin, the Duke of Saxe, the M. of Brandenburg, the D. of
Brunswick the Lantgraue of Hessen, sent Ambassadors to the king in Parris. The
Kings answer to the Protestant Ambassadors.
The Princes of Germainie, that sought to aid such as were of their religion,
perceiving France to be a body in a manner wounded to death, thought good to
procure the remedy thereof, rather then to help to give the mortal blow,
and to prove if by entreaty and fair means, they might cease the causes of
their division, and procure the tranquillity of the commonwealth, by the
observation of the edict of peace. To the which, end they sent their
Ambassadors to the king, to desire him to open his eyes to the tears, and his
ears to the complaints of his poor subjects, and to vouchsafe the hearing of
the humble requests of his neighbors, for his own good, and the quietness and
honor of his faith, his Crown, and reputation. But the king thinking it
strange that foreign Princes should deal with his affairs, answered them,
that he knew what was necessary for his subjects, and that according to the
cause, for their good and tranquillity, he had made and changed his
ordinances, as all sovereign Princes in Christendom use to do, to whom he
referred the care and charge to govern their subjects, as they think good:
and that for his part, having the fear of God, and the love of his subjects
lively engraven in his heart, he would do nothing against the honor of his
conscience, nor the fatherly care he had unto his people. With which answer,
the Ambassadors returned not well pleased: and the king that had given six
months respite to those of the new religion, either to leave it or depart out
of the realm, perceiving that by delays they had means to arm and put
themselves in defense, thereby at the end of the said term, to rise up against
him, under the assurance of foreign aid, sent to the Governors of his
Provinces, and the Ministers of justice to execute the edict. The king of N.
for his part, declares the^ enemies, in whose towns the said Edict was
published, causing the goods, rents, revenues, and debts, to be ceased upon
and sold. He lost no time, all his friends were ready, and the Sieur de S.
Mesmes with stands the Marshall de Matignon. The Sieur de Laual had the
charge of Xaintonge, and raised the siege of Taillebourg, where the Ladies de
la Trimouille, both mother and daughter were assieged. The Viscount of
Thurenes, with three or four thousand Harquebusiers marched in Limosin, and
there had taken the Bishop of Tulles.

The D. of Guise being advertised of the dislike the Ambassadors of the princes
of Germany had, touching their answer, counseled the king to set upon the
Huguenots, before the Rutters entered into France. So that in less then
eighteen months, the king of Navarre saw himself assailed by five camps
royal, under five several Generals: The Duke de Mercure in Poictou.
where the Duke de Mercure thinking that the conquest of the Huguenots in
Poitou, would be as easily executed as enterprised, left Britain, not
considering the common maxim: that he that will break, must be stronger
then the thing which he minds to break,

He thought with two thousand men to do a great act. But the Prince of
Conde meeting with him, caused him to remove, not only from Fontenay, but
clean out of Poitou. And from thence, the Prince besieged Brouage, and having
reduced it to such necessity, that he weakened the most hardy, he received
news of the taking of the Castle of Angers, The taking of the Castle of Angers.
upon the Sieur de Brissac, by three Captains: one named du Halot, Parrisan to
the king: the second, Fresne, enemy to the Count de Brissac: and Rochemorte,
affectioned to the king of Navarre, that agreed together to take the Castle of
Angers, one of the strongest places in France. Brissac therein had a Lieftenant
called Captain Grec, with twelve soldiers, whither Fresne went to visit him,
and being invited by him to dinner, in company of Rochemort and others, went
thither, who wrought so bravely, that as they entered, they slew all the
soldiers that were not of their faction: at which noise Grec coming forth,
was met by Fresne, that stabbed him with a Poinyard. Du Halot beginning to
enter into the Castle, and perceiving the execution, stepped back into the
Town, and protested that he had caused the place to be taken for the king,
notwithstanding he was kept prisoner.

Rochemort presently advertised the Sieur de Clermont, who by post sent word to
the Prince of Conde, to certify him thereof. Those of the Town besieged the
Castle, and all the country ran thither: in the evening they desired to
speak with Fresne, who minding to issue, and being upon the Drawe-bridge among
diverse harquebusiers, one began to discharge his piece, and seeking to
reenter, Rochemort and his fellows perceiving the danger, drew up the
bridge, and Fresne being shut out, hung upon the chains, where the Townsmen
cut of his hands: in such manner, that he fell into the ditches: where a Heart
that was bredde up in the Town, with his horns made an end of his life, by
tearing his body in pieces. Du Halot was presently executed in the Town: and
Rochemort being demanded for whom he held, answered that he held for the king
of Navarre: at which answer there was no need to bid them make trenches, and
to keep watch, attending the coming of the Duke de Ioyeuse, that not long
after arrived in the Town. Certain days passing in that order, one day after
dinner, Rochemort leaning in a window of the Castle, and falling a sleep, was
shot with a harquebuze, wherein there was two bullets, the one cut his
throat, and the other his tongue, and so was slain. Whereupon 16. soldiers
that were therein, being divided, because there were but seven Huguenots, began
to parley, which endured certain weeks. The Prince that lay before Brouage,
having about the beginning of October, Anno. 1585. received news of the
surprising of the Castle, and of Rochemorts answer, not knowing what had
happened since that time, determined with all speed to draw thither, because
that service would be a stay to the leaguers forces: and a great means of
advantage for them against the league. And having considered how it might be
possible for him to make that voyage, being in those earnest affairs, which as
then held him, in the end he ventured with 700. or 800. foot, and 1000. or
1200. harquebusiers on horseback, wherewith (not without great discommodities)
he passed by boats over the river of Loire to Rosiers, between Saumur and
Angers, being as bold an enterprise as ever was in our time. For the voyage in
truth, was enterprised with too much courage, and little consideration, to pass
over a great river between two armies, and to run into a straight, not
knowing on which side to issue, without any boats that stayed for him, for
that those wherewith he passed, lay ready by chance: nevertheless, he
entered into the Subburbes of Angers, and within the Barricadoes, where he
spent a whole day in skirmishing, and having proved if he could have any
news from the Castle, he understood it was no place for him, for they made him
no signs, although his trumpets sounded for the purpose: for the composition
was agreed, whereupon there was no need to bid him stir, and as then it
was a great victory to save himself, and a great pray to bring the rest of
his troop to Rochell, and not to Parris.

The overthrow of his army, and the doubt of the safety of the Prince of
Conde, bredde great fear to the Huguenots, and elevated the leaguers
buildings, at the least two or three brases higher. For presently thereupon,
the king caused his second edict to be published, full of confiscations of
goods, banishments, and corporal punishments of such as abiured not their
errors, declared them traitors: and the term of six months, which the first
edict granted unto them, to withdraw themselves out of the Realm, already
reduced to three months, was limited to fifteen days, after the publication
of the second edict. A great cause of extreme desolation unto diverse families,
and of strange murmuring and mutiny in the Towns, wherein those poor people
remained in covert after so many broils.

The edict of the seventh of October, 1585.
The Prince having past the river of Loire at Lude, not without great
difficulty, three days after, he understood that the Duke de Maine had past
toward Orleans, with fifteen hundredth horse, both Frenchmen and Rutters, to
stop his way, if he repassed by the river of Loire. The Duke d'Espernon, and
the Marshall Biron, with diverse Cornets of horse, and certain Regiments of
foot, were about Bonneual in Beausse, to meet him: and the Sieur de la Chastre,
had the charge to let him of having bridge, mill, boat, or passage over Loire.

The Duke Ioyeuse was at his back, and all the Pesants held watch, ready to
rise at the first call: and the Princes troops were so wearied, as they could
not possible be more. The means whereby he thought to pass the Loire, in two
or three places between Blois and Amborse being cut off, his fear increased,
and his troops being but small began to diminish. And yet there happened two
difficulties more in his camp: the one, that such as had friends in Beausse,
Perch, Vendosme, and Maine, stale away from him, in such manner, that in some
of his Cornets he had not twenty strong: the other was, that the Sieur de
Rohan, and diverse Lords of his troops, being of advise not to pass any
further forward, and that if they did, it would be a means to run head long
into evident danger, took leave of him, and turned toward Brittaigne, where
they escaped many dangers: nevertheless, in time they passed courageously over
Loire, and entered safely into Rochel. This separation was the cause that the
Prince had no more but his own Cornet, the company of the Sieurs de la
Trimouille, and d'Auantigny, certain light horse, and harquebusiers on
horseback, belonging to the Sieurs de Clermont, and five and twenty or
thirty Gentlemen of Poicton, that marched before, with the Sieur de S. Gelais.

About the end of October, 1585. the Prince being advertised that he should
presently have so many several forces of his enemies upon him, that he could
not escape if speedily he provided not for himself, being always of a good
courage, at his departure he provided for the retraict of his companies, as
also for his servants and household, leaving the principal charge to Monsieurs
de Clermont, and de S. Gelais, and so about eleven of the clock at night he
departed, accompanied of the Steurs de Trimouille, d'Auantigny, certain
Gentlemen, and some of his principal officers, but very few, and passed many
and strange ways, which he was constrained to make, to recover the I sle of
Greneze: and from thence he was got into England, where the Queen received
him with great honor, and with certain Noble men: and vessels well
furnished for the wars, conuayed him to Rochel. The Sieurs de Saint Gelais,
de Bois Duly, d'Aubigny, de Tifardiere, and other Gentlemen, saved the rest of
the troops, hardby the Forest of Marchenoir, where they received diverse
several aduises of the dangers like to ensue. For they were of advise to
separate themselves into small troops, of twelve or fifteen in a company,
the easilier to save themselves, for it was not possible for them being all
together, to endure above an hour, perceiving their enemies to make toward
them so fast: therefore having left their carriage, discharged their booties,
and for the most part became better Christians, then they were at their
departure from the siege of Bronage, they saved themselves, and although the
Towns of Orleans, Blois, Ambuse, and Tours, were straightly guarded:
nevertheless, diverse of them being armed, passed the bridges of the same
Towns, each man saving himself as well as he could.

Saint Gelais being so escaped, made toward Orleans, and traversing by
Ianuille, by the great way to Parris, he passed through many companies
dispearsed in Beausse, and then entered into the Foreest of Orleans, where
having trauersed the Forest, in the end with great pain he got to Loire hard
by Gien: and having stayed some time in Berry, repassing Creuse, Vienne, and le
Clain, he got to Rochel, where he found the Prince and all the heads and
principal Captains of the army.

As touching the siege of Brouages, the Sieur de Saint Mesmes, having stayed
there about a month after the Princes departure, was constrained to retire, and
to separate his troops.

The Prince of Conde began the war so fresh again, by the Sieurs de La^al
and Saint Gelais, that the new conquestes made them forget the grief of their
last misfortunes, he took the Castle of Dompierrie, hard by Saint John's,
belonging to the Marshall de Rez, where the soldiers refreshed and paid
themselves for their former losses: therein finding a most rich booty. Plassac
Governor of Ponts for the king of Navarre, in the nightime by scaling
lathers, upon the three and twentieth of February, 1586. took Royan, a very
strong place hard by Brouage: and the sixteenth day of March following, the
Prince of Conde being in Taillebourg, married the sister of the Sieur de
Trimouille, by whom he had a son: but he lived not long after his second
marriage, as hereafter you shall read.

Mean time, the Sieur de Laual took Soubize, and drove out the leaguers: and
after that, Mornax, and Alleuart. S. Gelais for the Princes part, took
Mondeuis, and Chizay, upon Boutonne. Ranques drove the Albanois out of the
Castle of Sasay, which afterward was taken again, by composition made with the
Sieur de: Malicorne Governor of Nirot.

About the beginning of April, the Sieur de Saint Luc, Governor of Brouage,
having a certain enterprise to make upon the Isle of Oleron, sent for aid:
and among the rest, Tiercelin with his Regiment, composed of four hundredth
Harquebusiers, fifty Musketeers, and about two hundredth pikes, all resolute
soldiers, having but one colors, which was the Colonels Ensign. Which the
Prince understanding, determined to visit them, but finding them not where he
thought they had been, he withdrew himself to Taillebourg, with the Sieurs de
Laual, Boulaye and others: who presently after, having received intelligence
that Tiercelin was come from Oleron, to go to Marennes, and so to return to
Saints, he went to watch him on the way, very near to the plain, where
certain horsemen would have issued out of Saints, but they were set upon
and dispearsed by Cargrois, that led the Argolitiers of Monsieur de Laual.
After this skirmish, the Prince returned to Taillebourg.

As for Tiercelin, although he knew that his enemies watched his return, he
made no account thereof, trusting in the strength of his Regiment, and so
resolved to fight with them wheresoever they should assail him: and upon the
seventeenth of April, he marched toward Saints in very good order. Which
the Prince understanding, mounted on horse bocke, with his brother in law the
Sieur de Trimouille, la Boulaye, Auantigny and others, to the number of thirty
persons, with as many Harquebusiers, and so made toward Tiercelin, whom he
found about a thousand paces from the subburbs of Saints, where he set upon
his reareward, and slew about thirty or forty of them: the rest of the
Regiment, ranged themselves in order of battle under the hedges, and in the
highway. In that first charge, the Sieur de Trimouille had his horse flain
between his legs, and without speedy succor had, been in great danger.

La Batarderaye, Ensigne-bearer to Boulaye, was there slain: Chanterelles and
Captiane Navarre wounded to death: Auantigny hurt both in the hand and the
knee: and notwithstanding the Prince perceiving the Sieur de Lanal to be gone
to fetch his company not far from thence, and that in great haste came
golloping with about five and thirty horse, commanded him to set upon the
enemy, where that young Lord readier to execute the charge, then the Prince to
command, leaping over hedges and ditches, made right upon the Colnelles
Ensign, being as then guarded with a battle of pikes, which he braste,
fighting with him that bare the Ensign, and put him with all the pikes to
flight: whereof there were flaine to the number of sixty men, and took the
Ensign with him.

Tiercelin being hurt in the arm, saved himself, with a great number of hurt
men. There the Sieur de Laual lost Sailli called Tanlay, (because the other
died not long before at Saint John's) and Rieux his two brethren grievously
wounded, one in the head, the other in his groyne, whereof they dyed within two
days after. Cargrois was shot into the knee, and the Prince himself gave two
brave charges to the horsemen of Saints, that thought to aid Tiercelin, and
put them twice in disorder, bearing with him their arms, and other furnitures,
together with the Colonels Ensign, but it grieved him much for the mortal
wounds of those two young Lords, that were followed by the Sieur de Lanal their
brother, that died within eight days after.

The army of the Duke de Maine in Poitou.
The Duke de Maine minding to make his profit at other men's costs, and thought
by the overthrow of the Prince of Condes army, to spoil the rest of the
forces that were in Guyen, departed from Poictiers with a fair and goodly
company of men.

This Prince valiant and wise, that has always holden his reputation, by
keeping promises both with his enemies and friends, never knew what is meant by
joining a piece of a Fox skin, to the skin of a Lion, not being large
enough.

But as there are many, who not withstanding they have contrary winds, yet do
arrive in safety at their desired port: so diverse men receive so many crosses
in their enterprises, that fortune never favors neither their valor, nor
their virtues. In times past, he had done many valiant acts in Dauphine, and
now he employed time, money, and great labor, to do no great matter in Guyen.

His army was of five hundredth French horsemen, eight hundredth Rutters, four
hundredth Lanciers Albanois, and about five thousand foot, with diverse pieces
of artillery. He made his account, to force Towns not so much by fight, as by
famine, whereunto the season of it self was sufficiently disposed, which
should sooner be overthrown, then fought withal, and sooner fought withal,
then assailed.

At his arrival, Xaintonge and Poitou trembled, being as then afflicted with
three points of Gods horrible punishments, plague, famine, and war: where the
soldiers found no other booties, but famished rattes. He employed them first
in the taking of Montignac, Beaulieu, and Gaignac, small Towns, and the^ to the
impeaching of the passage of the river of Garonne, where he thought to surprise
the king of Navarre, and already had written unto him, that he could not
shun his nets.

Saint Bazeille lying upon the same ruier, was taken by force and spoiled: and
Mont-segur taken by composition. The Duke de Maines ficknesse at that time
bredde great disorder in his camp, and want of money weakened the courages of
the resolute: nevertheless he took Chastillon, a place fortified, by the
valor of the Barron de Sauignac Governor thereof, and after that, Normand in
Perigueux.

But their want was so great in the army, and the extremity so much, that it
fluttered but with one whing.

And the chief General, that looked for nothing but a revolt, and perceiving
that where he thought to win in Guyen, he had lost Aussonne in Bourgongne,
gave the king to understand, that it was more then a year since his soldiers
were forced to march on foot, always fighting in the enemies country, with
men and with the air, the difficulty of the passages, the ouerflowings of
rivers, the coldness of the weather, and the long raines, without being once
succored, neither with new forces, money, nor ammunition for the wars: and
said that of seventeen hundredth and three score thousand crowns, whereunto
the wages of the army amounted unto, Read the declaration of the Duke de
Maine, touching his exployts in Guyenne.
he had received but three hundredth and four thousand Crowns. From that
voyage he brought with him the daughter of Madame de Chaumont, being of the
age of twelve years, to marry her to one of his children.

Behold the triumphs of the league in Guyenne: in an other place I have said
something touching the king of N. voyage out of Gascongne into Poitou: which
requires a larger discourse: which is, that in the month of Febr. 1000. five
hundredth eighty six, the Marshall de Matignon having besieged Chastelles, the
king of Mauarre accompanied with two or three hundredth Gentlemen, and about
eighteen hundredth Harquebusiers raised the siege, What the K. of Navarre did
to impeach 4. armies of the league.
and determined to diue within the Castle. Then he made a voyage into Bearn,
there to take order for his affairs: which done, he returned toward Nerac,
and passing at Lanse, a Town belonging to himself, he had intelligence that
the Duke de Maine marched forward to impeach his passage over Garonne.
Notwithstanding he went to Nerac to fortify the place: and issuing out, he
marched to Barbaste, and held on his way toward Chastel-Ialoux, and being
about two miles near the middle of the lands, he showed his company what he
purposed to do, and with twenty Gentlemen well mounted, and ten soldiers
for his guard, he rode toward Chaumont, leaving the conduction of the rest of
his troops, being about four hundredth Argo litiers badly mounted and
disarmed, and about fifteen Harquebusiers of his guard to the Suur de la Raque,
to pass at S. Bazeille, which he did without resistance, although the army
of Matignon lay not above three miles from thence.

The king of Navarre being at Chaumont, dined there at his ease, and yet the
Duke de Maine was not above two miles from the place where he pasted: and after
dinner he went over, without impeachment or loss of any of his men.

Arrived at Poictou, under marshall Biron.
The next day going to Saint Foy, with all his company, where he continued for
the space of three weeks, hunting at his pleasure: and from thence he retired
into Poitou, where the Marshall Biron with a thousand or twelve hundredth horse,
and three or four thousand foot, besieged Marans: but the agreement made
between the king of Navarre and him, made him raise his siege, and Marans
continued quiet, using both the one and the other religion: the Duke Ioyeuse
brother in law to the king, brought a new army, and with it besieged Mexeut,
which he constrained to compound. And from thence went to Niort, Exployts of
the Duke Ioyeuse in Poictou.
battered Tonnay-Charente, and set upon the Rocheliers heels, but as then his
army was so afflicted with the plague, that having made a little troop, under
the conduction of Lauerdin, he retired in great post unto Parris, Coutras, as
hereafter I will show you.

The Marshall Ioyeuse took Montesquiou in Lauragois, and lost thirty two
Captains, and five hundredth Harquebusiers at the siege of Mas Saint Puelles.
The Marshall de Mommorancy caused the league to fly in many incounters in
Languedoc: as at Lodeue, and Saint Pons: the Sieur de la Valette advanced the
kings affairs in Province.

The Duke de Espernon General of the army, by the king sent thither, arrived
at Lions, with about eight hundredth horse, to cause his foot to pass through
the Town: but the Lord of Mandelot, who from the first moouings of the league,
had always bin upon his guard, to show himself rather newter then
participant, fearing least with these troops, the D. of Pernon should take
occasion to remember the throwing down of the Citadel: was counseled by the
Bishop of Lions to look unto himself, having both security and advantage.
The Town of Lions being surprised in the first troubles, by the Earl of Saux
then Governor, and yielded up again by the Edict of peace. The last of
April. 1562 Peace, in an. 1593. K. Charles the 9. at Lyo^s 1564. A Citadell in
Lions.
After that, the Duke de Nemours had used all the means he could, both by
practice and arms to get it again.

The king went thither, and by his Enguiniers, drew out a goodly and strong
Citadell, by that bridle to restrain the over prompt and ready affections of
the City, to those new alterations, and would not depart from thence, before
he had seen a great part thereof finished. It being accomplished with all
convenient things belonging to such a Fortress, both for form, greatness,
Bulwarks, trenches, munitions, and commodities.

He made it the terror of the Huguenots, while those that commanded it,
affected the defense and protection of the Catholicques: but after that, in the
said kings time, the favor of the Duke d'Espernon withdrew la Mante, The
taking of the Cuadell in Lions.
therein to place le Passage. Mandelot not being able to dissemble the
disliking he had to the great advancement he had of that Duke, devised the
means to cease upon it, and so thrust out the Gascons, by him placed therein.

The news of this surprising in so dangerous and suspicious a time, abashed
the king, thinking it to be one of the first effects of the league, but being
assured of the inviolable affections and fidelity of the Citizens of Lions,
that would never yield as long as his Majesty lived, Fortress, generally, are
more hurtful then necessary.
he agreed to the throwing down of the Citadell, for the sum of fifty
thousand Crowns to him offered for the same.

But his Council found that throwing down of the Fort to be very dangerous,
saying: that a Town composed of so many humors and several motions,
inhabited by people of both religions, stirring and desirous of change, the
keye and rampart of the Realm, ought not to be without a Citadell.

Whereunto the wisest Politician answered, that such fortifications served
only, either for the defense of the subjects, or offending of enemies, and
that in the one they were dangerous, and in the other not necessary.

Mean time, the king desired his mother to be a means and instrument, of a
good and continual peace in his Realm: and she being grieved that she
could not warm her self but with embers, and sorry that the misery thereof,
surmounted the means that she could use therein, undertook a voyage into
Poitou, there to parley with the king of Navarre, who of his own nature, and
by the advice of his friends, was more disposed to a good peace, then to a
simpletruce.

Meeting of the K. of Navarre, with the Queene-mother, the 13. of December, at
S. Bris.
And after they had both freely passed all the doubtful scruples that could be
alleged unto them, thereby to reuerse their good intents, the place of
meeting was appointed at Saint Bris, and truce agreed for fifteen days,
whereat the Switzers and Almaines were much offended.

The first and second enterviewes, were passed over only in complaints,
excuses and goodly reasons. The Queene-mother bathing them with her tears,
reproached the disobedience of the subject to his Prince, detested the
stubburnnesse of new opinions, represented the necessity that constrained the
king to make peace, and undertake wars, sweetly excusing the burning
affection of the house of Guise, that had raised the same, thereby to prevent
the mischief, which the succession of an heretic Prince would bring into the
estate: besought and charged the king, to yield to the Catholicque Church and
faith of his Majesty, to leave his errors, and not be condemned.

Cause of the troubles.
Whereunto he answered, that in his soul he felt a most great torment of
impatience, in that the league made him the only argument of those tragedies:
that his Majesty esteemed him the subject of his divisions: that all the
mischief, by the Realm of France endured, and which in the end would
overthrow it, proceeded only from the breach of the Edicts of peace, wherein
depended all the welfare and felicity of this estate. He complained of the
wrong, that he himself in particular, his house and al France in general,
received by that bastard peace made at Nemours, with the heads of the league,
and of the good entertainment they received, after they had been proclaimed
rebels and traitors to his Majesty. He said, that to strengthen the league,
the king had commanded him not to stir, nor prepare himself to war, that
the people might evidently see who were the first perturbers of the peace. That
the permission by him given to them, to in croch so much upon his authority,
was the only continual fever of this estate. That he saw no more but by the
leaguers eyes, nor understood any thing, but only by the ears of his enemies.

Exhortation to the king of N. to become Catholicque.
And as the Queen sought to assure him of the kings and her favor, and that
both of them had more desire to see him converted, and protected under so fair
and assured hope, of the chief Crown of all Christian Princes, rather then
any longer to shroud himself under protections of wars, despised of the
greatest part of France, and to be the principal occasion of his friends,
grief. He said again, that by the kings commandment, not to arm himself
against those ye soght to fight with him, he had hazarded his life to keep his
promise, to satiffie those that soght to reduce himto extremities, and
neglected the care of his own preservation, saying: Madame, you cannot accuse
me but of too much fidelity, I complain not of your faith, but of your age,
that (doing wrong to your memory) has made you forget what you promised me.
The sharpness of words, was somewhat assuaged at the third meeting, wherein
the Queene-mother strained the cord, that brake both the accord and harmony
of their conference: for she told him, that the last and only resolution of
the king, was, never to make peace, nor take truce with him, if he became not
a Catholicque. Whereunto he answered, that he would never have thought, that a
Princess of so good judgment, would have taken so much pain, to come unto him
only to propound that, wherewith his ears were continually filled, being
means of more honorable troubles, if it were not ended in manner by him
required, which was by a general Council, to whose judgment he submitted
himself: promising also to cause all the rest of his friends to do the like.

As they continued in this proposition, every man giving his censure, there
passed many words, whereby to persuade him happily to return to the Church of
God. The Queene-mother showed him how much that change would make his estate
more free, more assured, and more convenient for his It is said that the Duke
de Nemours said unto him, that there he could not raise any impost, It is true
said he, and so there are no Italians among us.
degree, that his conversion would draw him into his Majesty's savor, without
longer seeking to court the Majors of Rochel, where he could not do as he
would. Whereunto he answered, that the consideration of his particular
contentment, yea and the winning of thirty Crowns, should never cause him
shamefully to leave the religion, which for the space of thirty years he had
professed: and that he did what pleased him in Rochel, because that therein he
did nothing but what he ought to do.

In the end, their discourse changed to the propounding of a truce, that stayed
unresolved for diverse difficulties therein found, as also because of the advice
the Queen had received, that her presence was necessary in Parris, to quench
the fires, which the Archleaguers (whereof we spoke in the first book) began
to kindle, grounding the alarm upon conference had with the king of Navarre.
Both of them agreed to a peace, confessing that both the Catholicques, and
Huguenots, were wette with the ship wrack they had endured: that it was not
convenient to draw them into it again: that their wounds were not as yet
healed: that they ought not to be set together by the ears: and that it was
requisite to have a peace.

The Queen Mother would have a truce, the King of N. a peace.
The Queene-mother would have no truce that should promise a peace, unless the
king of Navarre would assure them of his conversion. The king of Navarre would
have no truce, that produced not the effects of a peace, and the ruling of his
conscience by a national Council. She would no truce, if the king of Navarre
did not countermaund his foreign army. He would not agree to the second
point of a truce, if he were not assured of a good peace. In respect whereof,
he offered that great assembly and raising of Rutters and Switzers unto the
king, to help him to recover the obedience and authority due unto him.

In this manner their interview ended, without any resolution: and the
Queene-mother in all haste took her way to Parris, upon the advice given
unto her concerning the last point of despair, that was to be executed
therein. For the Duke de Maine, being advertised that she went to the king of
Navarre to make peace, made haste to Parris, to shewethe king that her travel
to that end was against his edict: that such peace could not be good:
ingendring in religion the effects that are contrary to the tranquillity of
Catholicque consciences. He found the Parrisians more moved then ever they
were, to rise up in arms: he saw the secret articles of the six
Archleaguers, to fight against heresy, These secret articles were sworn in
the house of Reims near the Augustins.
to reform the Court and the insolency of the kings minions. They enterprise,
they sap, they mine, they beat down, but all in words: their counsels are
evil grounded: their dangerous attempts are more difficult to execute, then
to resolve.

The Rattes found it expedient, that to preserve themselves from the Cat, they
must hang a bell at her ear, but none of them durst undertake to do it: they
must cease upon the king, but who would be so bold? Read the Dialogue of
Manant and Maheutre. Fol. 104.
They sent unto the Towns some of their consort, who under certain secret
pretenses, went from Town to Town, to see the leaders of the league, and to
discipher the secret meanings of his intents.

Manant says, that at that time among them, they spoke not of that enterprise,
but only tending to their defense, if in case they were assailed: and that the
invention of Barricadoes was resolved upon, above a year before they The
first resolution of Barticadoes, about Easter. 1587.
took effect. But he that wrote the treaty of the causes of the troubles of
the month of January, 1589. says, that the league perceiving, that if the
Huguenots were driven out of France, and the only Catholicque religion
maintained therein, it should have no more cloaks to cover her shame: they
thought it good to let the Huguenots remain on the one side, and on the other,
to torment the king. For (said they) if our ground be the royalty, we must
have the place voyded, and such as would place themselves therein before us,
must be removed.

If wars be continued against the Huguenots, the end cannot be but to our
ruin, it will in the end produce a peace, which will send us naked without
arms unto our governments: living between fear and despair, that the
oppressed oppose not themselves against the oppressors, that the offense
return not upon the authors, and that the king call not to mind the treaties
of Peronne, Nancy, and Chalon. If they be vanquishers, their victory is our
loss: their life, our death: their greatness, our imbasing: and their rest,
our torment.

The strongest support of their enterprise is upon a pillar of Castille, old
and rotten: that is, not sustained but by hope of our ruin: that fears no
other shaking, but the ceasing of our civil wars, which will not be ended
but by strangers, from whence they are derived.

This Prince knows well, that as long as the diversity of religions parts
our minds, there will never be peace among us, although the zeal of religion
does much trouble him, that he is the son of the great scourge of the
Almaine Protestants: and that he has drowned heresy in his own blood, yet he
desires to invade us, either by one means or other. The Ram desires to eat
the Bat, whether it be because it is a bird, or because it is a mouse. If the
Edict of July be put in execution, if heresy be pursued in so many places, it
will be very hard for it to resist: the king will always be Master, he
will always stand upright, he will resume the authority and power that he
seems to have left, to retain us: and perceiving himself (like Lewis the
eleventh) vntangled from so many leagues and parties, he would live like a
commander, destroying both Huguenots and Leaguers, take the raisor in hand to
both their beardes, and drive all partakings out of the Realm, only his own.

The fires made for joy of his victories, would be the obsecquies and funerals
of our partakers. The king of Navarre shall die, or else he must convert, or
be clean spoiled and overthrown. His death will strengthen the first article
of our league, and the fear of altering of religion shall vanish away. His
conversion, will pull the weapons out of our hands, and the words of faction
and disorder, (Huguenots and Nauarrois) will no more be heard among us. His
overthrow shall not be so much advantage unto us, as to the king, he will have
the flowers and the fruits of this victory, and we nothing but the leaves.

A great army ^^dermineth it self, and there is too gr^^^ ^^^ger to fight.
But to overthrow him will be no small labor, arms are not continual. We
think to constrain them to fight, and they will not but defend themselves:
they will shut themselves within their Towns, that brave all our forces, and
make us mad, as if we stood barking at the moon, and fighting with the
clouds. Many times men hazard all they have in the strength of a battle, and
when it is lost, to get a thing of no moment, there is no means to raise it
again. To look for it out of Spain, is to reckon men's charges of another man's
purse. Promises are feminine, and effects are masculine, this nation is used
not to say what it will do, nor to do, that it says it will do.

And further, we have to do with a Prince, that is always first at giving
blows, and last in retiring: it is not a heart that leads Lions. He says
not go thither, but he goes himself, like unto Caezar: he hears as soon
of our discipation, as of our coming: he has learned to be a Captain at
our costs: he holds thirty Towns in France, which to overcome, we had
need to have the forces of thirty leagues such as ours is: and when he should
have nothing left but his sword, it is very much with the lawful right he has
to the succession of this Realm.

Aut Caesar aut nihil.
Therefore seeing the die is cast, that we have embarked our selves in this
rough sea, that the end of our league is either to make us a king, or else
nothing, let us take the shortest course. There is no appearance to attain to
the royal seat, before so many Princes of the house of Bourbon, we should
never have done: he that would rule over them all, must first pull the king out
of his chair: when it is empty, there will be means to sit down: if he
reign longer, our winter is come, the servants of our hopes will withdraw
themselves, being deceived. The king is lusty and gallant of body, if he
have any children, our suit is ended, and not having any, we are likelier to
die before him: we must play open play, let us deal with him, as his father
dealt with our Grandfathers: and let us do the like to the Capets, as they did
to the heirs of Charle-Maine. Of this ensued the conspiracy made at Parris
about Easter, in Anno. 1587. which was not executed by the uncertain
resolution of the heads, that left the Parrissians in the middle of so
dangerous an enterprise, whereof the K. was advertised, and from that time
determined to punish them. But his authority was already so much weakened,
and his Majesty so much despised, that but for fear to be reproved, the
hooker had taken and drawn him through the mire of his infamous slanders and
mockeries. The Preachers tongues served for rules to these seditions, they
detested the life, pleasure, and dissolution of the Court, and spoke not of the
King but in dirision, publicly condemning his actions, he caused them to be
counseled and diuerted from those passions, and of a chair of truth, not to
make a place of babbling: but the more he sought to turn that chollor into
fleame, the more it increased and rose up: in the end he was constrained to
threaten them with imprisonment. Whereof grew the meeting of Saint Seuerin,
where certain excommunications were pronounced in S. Benets Church, against
the Commissaries and Sergeants, that would have laid hands upon certain
Preachers. Wedensday the second of September. 1587.
The books that were published at the beginning of these disorders, were the
wood, straw, and brimstone, that long time maintained the embers of those
rebellions: there was not any mean Fiddlers boy, but that like a crow upon a
steeple, pronounced the tempests and calamities of those furious mutenies.
Infamous libels.
There was nothing seen in the Hall of the Palace, but only discourses,
aunsweres, aduertisements, and Apologies.

He failed to surprise Mets the 26 of May.
And in the mean time, that war was made with pen and ink within the Towns,
the Duke of Guise made it with Iron and steel in open field, he held his army
in the frontiers of Lorraine, and made war upon those of Iamets, which he
had begun against the Duke de Bouillon, from the first day of the birth of the
league. And perceiving himself to be Master of Douzy and Rocroy, and by that
means of the passage of the river of Meuze, he caused his troops to enter
upon the lands of the sovereignty of Sedan, vexing the poor countrymen that
dwelt in the villages, with all kinds of warlike cruelties. Mean time, that
famine plagued them within the towns, the D. de Bouillon, to divert him from
thence, sent the Lord de Schelandre Governor of Iamets, to make an attempt
against Verdun, which is the first town lying in the frontiers of Champaigne,
and most tumulteously entered into the coniulation of the leaguers pretenses.

The Duke of Guise followed him, with the most part of his forces, which his
departure gave time and leisure to the Duke de Bouillon to victual Sedan: and
the Queene-mother in the mean time, disposed the two Dukes to make a truce,
first for fifteen days: in the which time, the Duke of Guise practiced
certain soldiers, (more for gain then for conscience) to surprise the Castle
of Iamets, but the enterprise failed, and the instruments thereof were punished:
and from that time, they began again to renew their courses and spoylings,
more then they did before.

The Queen laid an other plaster upon this sore, by a second truce of a
month, which the Duke de Bouillon employed in Alsace, with four hundredth
horse, and eight hundredth Harquebusiers, thereby to advance the army of
Germains, that were to meet in the plains of Strausbourg, there to be
mustred. And the Duke of Guise had leisure to go unto the King, to receive his
instructions and commandments, upon so great and urgent an occasion. He
found him at Meaux, where he showed him, that since the Edict of July, and the
resolution taken by his Majesty, to make war against the Huguenots, it had
been so coldly begun, and pursued with so many wants, that it was not to be
found strange, if the issue had been as unfortunate, as the cause just and
worthy to be done by a king of France: that contrary to the edict, they had
let their hereticques continue in their houses, enjoy as in a public peace
their lands and goods, that ought to be employed for their destruction, and to
the taking away of the means that continued their crimes toward god, and their
rebellion against the estate. That in stead of selling and confiscating
thereof, Borne in France, and spaniolized in Rome.
the revenues of the Cardinal of Pelleue were ceased upon, because in open
consistory he had most virtuously sustained the just occasion of the leuying
of arms, by the Catholic Princes against Hereticques. That in those wars
the Clergy had endured most, and received least profit or advantage, having
continued more for the advancement of Mignons, then for the ruin of
Hereticques, and that so great sums of money cut off from the possessions of
the Clergy, from the nourishing of the poor, from the relief of Pilgrims,
from the ransom of captives, and other necessities of the Church, had served
to no other end, then only for the entertaining of the enemies of the Clergy.

He complained of the contradictions of the edict, and among other things, in
that the kings Council, the Court of Parliament in Parris, the Justices, nor
the Provost in Parris, had not sworn to the edict.

Of the hard measure showed to the Towns that had desired the exterpation of
heresies, and the reuocation of the last edict of peace. Of the overthrowing of
the citadel of Mascon, of surprising ye of Vale^ce, of ye disgrace of the
Sieurs de Brissac, Crusilles, Gessan, and Antragues, and of the countermaunding
of the assignations given unto him, for the restoring of the charges by him
made in that last raising of soldiers.

The king to the contrary, had well considered how the insolent passion of the
league, could not find a firmer footing within all the articles contained in
the treaty of Nemours, and that it aspired to some greater matter. He knew
well it had demanded Towns for assurance against the Huguenots, in the
Provinces where they had no cause to fear them, neither in soul nor body.
That ye surprise made by the D. d'Aumalle of the towns of Dourlan and
Pontdormy, and the intelligence discovered at Bollogne, were some of the
operations of the medicine which they had taken to avoid this monarchy of
vigor and strength. That for to fortify themselves with numbers of Towns and
participants, it had caused a Citadell to be erected at Vitry le Francois,
therein to place an Italian, in whose country a Frenchman cannot so much as
obtain the base office of a Sergeant. That the Duke of Guise would not receive
the government of Raucroy, until his Majesty had promised him they should
hold it in his own name. That it had prodigally spent the 100000. crowns,
raised for the building of the Citadell in Verdun, not desiring other fortress
thererein but the hearts of the people, abused with pretenses and goodly
apparances of the intents of this conspiracy.

The contrarieties of the edict being well wayed and debated on both parts,
the Duke of Guise turned his pursuites upon the means to assail the
Huguenots, in the same places where they had received the foil, in Poitou,
Dauphine, and in the countries of the Duke de Bouillon, desired the king to
cast his eyes upon decaying religion, if the army of strangers should bear
the triumph into Allemaigne, both of France and of the Catholic Church, and
to embrace the conservation thereof, without esteeming any thing to be
difficult or dangerous for so memorable a victory, calling to mind, that he
was a king of a people, that never feared any thing but the falling of heaven,
and assured themselves to overcome all whatsoever that durst assail or set
upon them here on earth.

The King, whose intent was only to live and reign, could not consent to
war, The Kings oath the 10. of January. 1587.
notwithstanding the oath he made when he instituted the order of the holy
Ghost, nor the last resolution sent to the king of Navarre, by Monsieur de
Rambouillet, that he would not permit or suffer other religion in his Realm,
then the ancient Catholieque faith, and abolish that which they called
reformed: yet he desired most earnestly to have had a good peace, thereby to
divert the miseries which the army of strangers would bring with it, but when
he perceived himself not strong enough, The kings resolution.
to make the King of Nanarre and the Duke of Guise to consent, by reason of
their differences, and that he could not sustain the one, without oppressing
the other, that he had not the courage to be indifferent between both,
without leaning to the one or to the other, and to be short, that he durst
not use the authority of a King, he was constrained to suffer all the heads
of the league to counterfeit with him.

If he consented to the liberty of reformed religion, and restored them the
Edict of peace, he thought he heard all the mutenous leaguers continually
about his ears, if he made war against the King of Mauarre, he had fifty
thousand strangers upon his back, that would constrain him to overthrow the
league.

Whereupon he desired the Duke of Guise to yield to a peace, not to abandon
the Estate of the Realm for a pray unto strangers, to procure the ease and
contentment of his king, the comfort of the people, the freedom of the
Clergy, and the dignity of the Nobility, by other means then by such as
would overthrow the honor of his sovereignty, bring his subjects in despair,
rob Churches, and suck the blood of those few Gentlemen, which foreign
wars had left within the Realm, to desend it from civil wars. To the
which peace, he moved him by honorable promises and advantages both to his
house and partakers, but he found his heart altogether resolved unto wars,
rather desiring a battle, then a disputation, and neither minded to endure
misery, nor yet to procure the remedies thereof. So that to conclude, the Duke
of Guise would have wars, and answered the king resolutely, that he was not
in the mind to have any peace: adding further, The Duke of Guise would have
war.
that if he were constrained thereunto, it should always be done with
exception of the religion, and the assurance of him and his. Whereby peace for
that time was utterly bannished, yet Priam for all that, issued not out of
Ilion, before he saw the Grecians under his walls, and then he began to
stir himself, and to resume the generous courage which he had lost among
the pleasures of Vincennes, The state of the Court in An. 1586. and 1587.
at the marriage of Monsieur de Ioyeuse: since which time, the Courtier had not
stricken one blow with his sword, but only in quarrel of Arioste, and had
rather spend one hundredth Crowns in dauncings and in Maskes, then one one
hundredth solz in powder and in flaskes.

The long rest, had made the most valiant like unto a horse, whose warlike
courage abateth by lying long upon the litter, but necessity founded them an
alarm, and made them perceive the black cloud that began to fall upon the
state.

For the King, that should have been very incensible, if he had not had some
feeling, marched in proper person, and divided his war into three parts: that
is, to Chaumont in Bassigny, to Saint Florentins hard by Troy, and to Guyen.

Four hundredth launciers, and two hundredth foot, all Italians.
The first army being composed of five and twenty companies of men at arms,
twelve Ensigns of footmen of the Regiment of Escluzeaux, six of Ioannes, and
six of Gie, with diverse blankes for commissions at the Duke of Guises
pleasure: troops of strangers sent unto him by the Duke of Parma. The second
was led by the Duke de Montpensier: and in the third that went for Guyen, the
king himself was in person, which three armies in all, might comprehend the
number of sixty eight companies of men at arms, ten thousand foot, twelve
thousand Switzers, and four thousand Rutters. The Duke de Ioyeuse led an
other army into Guyenne, against the King of Navarre: and the Duke of Lorraine
had brave and goodly forces upon the frontiers. The Duke de Bouillon was
Lieftenant for the King of Navarre, in the army of Rutters and Almaines, Duke
Cazemire excuses himself.
that were conducted by the Barron of Othna, and composed of nine and twenty
Cornets of Rutters, three and twenty Ensigns of Switzers, and five thousand
Lansquenets, armed with corslet and pike: besides eleven Cornets of French
lanciers, and ten companies of Harquebusiers on horseback, so that the army
might be in all, about thirty thousand men, not accounting the fifteen
hundredth harquebusiers, and four hundredth horse brought by the Lord of
Chastillon. Behold poor and miserable France, covered with the hair of
afflictions, and charged with a heavy burden, Miseries of France.
under the which it must either languishor die. Behold it ready to be a pray
to a people different both in manners and speech: all the furies of hell
raunged in her fields. and horror, confusion, and impunitie, thundered and
battered in all places, which every man judged to be a scourge, for the great
and horrible crimes committed therein. He that sees France troubled and vexed
in that sort, may well say, that the just judgment of God, has brought it to
so great desolation, through the abundance of sins that fill up the measure
of her iniquities, for which causes the scourge of God has discipated and
seduced into ashes, many more flourishing estates then ever it was. Lust and
desolatenesse overthrew the first Monarchy of the world: prodigallitie took
away the life and force of the second: ambition and discord dismembered the
third: The ruin of the 4. Monarchs, Assiria, Asia, Persia, and Rome.
impiety and injustice unfeathered the fourth: and impiety, injustice, and
desolation, will reduce France into a fatal and certain destruction. The
Ministers of piety are no more chosen as they ought to be, and it is no
marvel why there are no more Athanasians and Hillarians therein, seeing that
the spiritual livings, which are the Schools and fountains from whence
godliness should spring, and examples of the true service of God, are holden
by men of arms or Courtiers, and which is worse, by women and children. This
impiety which has slidden into religion, has formed many Atheists, that
speak disdainfully of godly providence, that flatly deny it, that by believing
overmuch, believe nothing at all, whereby the souleresteth in their bodies
without any apprehension, either of the second life, or of the latter death.
Others serve God but for a fashion, and by manner of acquittance, and curiously
forge diverse sorts of errors, and under I know not what kind of hypocrisy
and dissimulation, suffer themselves to be borne away by superstitions, which
traungely abuse and offend the most holy Majesty of God: it is the monster
with six horns, that has gotten so much credit among the common people, and
that thrusts it self into the Palaces of Kings: it is the means to
trafficque and deal with the devil, to give us the detestable fruit of the
Cupidits: which torment those miserable Sorcerers, who most easily deface the
divine caracke out of their souls, and prostrate the same at ye pleasure of
the stinking gate of hell. This vermin that remains free without looking
into, in the time of Charles the 9. had attained to ye number of 30000. as
their chief leader co^sessed, but since that time it has had so great ascope,
that such as deal with it in great houses, are called Philosophers and
Astrologiers: and now Almanackes serve as rules and cannons for men's actions.
To this impiety we must add the most execrable blasphemies, which proceed
from the mouths of great men, yea and from the poorest Pesants in France, that
have every day new words to spit out against the heavens, and to despite the
justice and providence of God. The Pagan swears very sildome, the Sarazin
knows not what it means, the Turk abstaineth from it, and the Huguenot
detesteth it: but our Catholicques are Masters of the Art, and make account to
ride upon divinity. The second branch of our mischiefs is injustice. The
first foundation of an estate and authority of a Realm: yea, that which gives
it form and being, is justice.

Virtue which makes kings, and without it they would change their royalties,
Injustice is the root of miseries in France.
into tyrannies. It is the fear of the wicked, and the encouragement of the
good, and because it is the principal office of aching, when the Hebrieux
desired Samuel to give them a king, among other points of their request, they
added these words, to Iudgevs, and to do justice as among other people. All
the world complayneth of the perverting thereof: estates are no more given by
Geometrical proportion: France makes laws of wax, to be tempered with men's
hands, and subject to melt at the warm favors of great persons. There are
laws enough to gouernall Europe, yea and all the plurality of epicures, but
they have their virtue only in paper, and some sees them both published and
violated. Now there is no conscience made to sell that which is bought of the
king, and most commonly justice is divided to such as have no money, but this
injustice is much more to be deplored, for the heavy and insupportable
burdens it lays upon the poor people, and makes them not only a medowe
which is cut thrice a year, but a body that is fleane, or rather an anaotomie.

Theking which has ten millions of gold for his revenue, lives by
impositions and new dances, wherewith he deuoureth his people, he blows
their noses so often that he makes them bleed, pulls up both herb and
root, cuttes the feathers so near, that they can grow no more, puts his
subjects out of breath, and constrains them to hate and detest the Authors of
these miseries.

Injustice is yet more seen in the disorder and cruelty of soldiers, that
are without discipline, rule, fear of God, respect of the good, compassion to
the miserable, and that afflict and torment the friend as much as the enemy:
persecute both mass and religion, kill Priests as soon as Ministers, rob
Churches, burn Temples, spoil Merchants, torment old men, violate virgins,
cause women with child to bring forth untimely fruit, ransom Pesants by
cruelties, which in times past were never known but of Scithians, Lestrigons,
and Turks, but none unworthily practiced among us, to the great dishonor of
the courtesy and favor that has so much beautified our nation. But the
desolation which enters into all the members of France, makes it another
Babylon, a puddle of filthiness, and a sink of all sorts of corruptions,
whereof the wounds are so old, that they are in a manner become natural,
desperate, and incurable. The Court of our kings, which in times past were wont
to be the seed of the virtues of French Nobility, did never abound in more
disorders, lusts, and excess, then under the reign of Henry the third,
specially in the years 1586. and 1587. So that it may be said of some Towns,
as it is reported by strangers, that all things are printed therein, only not
to be virtuous. The kings Court is like a Theator, which the people stand to
behold, it is a fire which transformeth such as approach it into her nature:
the most modest come forth insolent: the most chaste Lucresse, becomes
Faustina. From the disorder of great persons, proceeds the misbehauiour of
the meaner sort, and there has bin carters, that have been so superfluous in
their vanities, that there wanted nothing in their houses but a chapel of
music, and to serve them by quarters, to counterfeit little kings. I must
confess the truth, and not make you believe that a man with a crook shoulder
is of goodly proportion. The K. gave a great furtherance to these desolations,
his example was a direction to all his subjects: as the influctio^ of ye head
runs into al ye members. Men do not only imitate, but approve ye actions of
great me^, and according to their humors, voluptuousness, disorder,
superstition, molestation and cruelty, enter into credit. The people suffer
their minds to be cut and cautherised at Princes pleasures, as the greater
the authority is, the more affectionate is their immutation: every man takes
that color, men perfume themselves with those drugues, and the example of the
Prince is so contagious to the subjects, that they receive it, enters sooner
into their eyes then their ears.

Alexander cast his head a side, and all the Court held their necks awry:
Denis was purblind, and his Courtiers stumbled at every step, and iusteled
each other, as if they had been evil sighted. Plutarke tells, that
Courtiers put away their wives, following the kings example that loved not his
wife. Lewis the eleventh, would have Charles his son to learn but one word
of Latin, and all the Court despised learning. King Francis established
learning, and all the Nobility caused their children to be instructed. Henry
she third loved ryots and pleasures, and all the Court abounded in desolation.
He considered not, that the vices which ranged in his Realm, are the same that
caused the whole world to be drowned, overthrew five Towns, caused the tribe
of Benjamin to be slain, destroyed Sparta, Carthage, and Athens, spoiled
Troy, and procured the Cicilian evening prayer. He considered not, that this
voluptuousnes which makes him swallow poison in his milk and Ippocras, makes
him fitter to be a woman then a man, that to maintain it, all France is rent
in pieces.

The treasures that Caligula found after the death of Tibera, being 1800. horse
load, nor the nineteen millions of Crowns that the Vitellius spent in one
year in making of banquets, will not suffice, that from thence spring the new
impositions, wherereof the moneys proceeding, are died and tempered in the
blood and tears of the poor people, that ask vengeance of God, and that in
the end, deal to ease their oppressions, and overthrow the oppressors.

Prodigious sights seen in the reign of Henry the third.
If the complaints of the people, cannot pearse the ears of the king, yet let
him look unto the effects of Gods judgment: as strange signs, monsters,
comers, and earthquakes, which are the messengers thereof, let him consider,
that these leagues and partiallities, are the winds that rise before a
tempest, and the shipwreck of this estate. And that with a little push this
edifice which has been built so many hundredth years, will in a moment be
overthrown.

But not to prolong our History with many tedious words, let us return to the
army of Protestants which were left in Lorraine. And there we shall see great
wants, which soon produce many infalliable faults, without remedy and
reparations that are presently made, to the ruin and confusion of such as
commit them. It was destitute of a General, capable of so dangerous a journey.
The Duke de Bouillon was therein but a learner, and those that assisted him,
were more fit to go of an Embassage, then to give a charge upon the enemy. The
Barron of Othna had less experience then courage, all his sufficiency
consisted only in the report and commendation, given of him by the D. Casimir.
For about the beginning of the month of August, Neither the Rutters nor
Switzers would fight with so fair an occasion.
consusion and necessity (two dangerous plagues to a great multitude) entered
among them. There was division in their intents, some of them would spoil the
country of Lorraine, others would stay their vengeance and fury, until they
were in the heart of France.

The Duke de Bouillon by means of that army would refresh his Towns, that as
then were unfurnished: the General of the Almaines would not do any thing
before he had a Prince of the blood to direct him. The Frenchmen said, they
must go straight forward to pass the river of Loire: the Almaines would march
along by the river of Seine, and from thence into Picardie. But the passage of
the river of Loire was resolved upon, after they had let slip a goodly
encounter at Pont Saint Vincent, where all the troops of the league made show
to set upon them, but the necessity of victualles procured by the Duke of
Lorraine, by throwing down milles, and ouens, made them leave that bone, and
pass further forward in this manner. The Duke de Bouillon, Liestenant
General, the Count de la March his brother, led the Vant-guard: Cleruant the
Switzers: the Barron of Othna the Rutters: Guitry Marshall of the camp, and
Mouy led the French footmen. And as they passed le Barrois and leinuillois,
news came of the arrival of Monsieur de Chastillon, at Gresille, near to la
Mottes in Lorraine, both the armies made thither: that of the Duke of Guise to
intrappe him: and that of the Duke de Bouillon to defend him: in which effort,
they traveled so much, that both the one and the other, wearied and weakened
themselves.

The Earl of March fell sick and died, leaving his charge to Nonsieur de
Chastillon, whom he had engaged. That done, long raines, want of victualles
and sicknesses, began to torment the army: which notwithstanding all
discommodities, made right to Chaumont in Bassigny: passed the river of Marne:
placed their artilllerie, (but to no purpose) against the Abbey of Clernaux:
burnt the corn upon the ground about the country: crossed l'Aube a^
Montigny, and Seine above Chastillon, where Monsieur de la Chastre lay, passed
hard by the Duke de Maine, and the troops of Bourgongne lodged at Leignes, and
Ansile Franc, passed Cure above Vermenton, and Yonne hard by Creuant, and so
made a halt toward the river of Loire.

The cause of the overthrow of the Switzers.
There began the complaints of the Switzers, and the mutinies of the Rutters,
because the King of Navarre came not to them, and that the King was at the side
of the river of Loire, either to fight with them, or to stay their passage. A
stratageme worthy of a King and Council, no less commendable then
admirable, being the true and only cause of the victory. For he considered
that the only means to break this army, was to impeach their joining with
the king of Navarre, and so to let them consume of themselves, as not having
victualles to suffice their wants, nor retrait for their advantage. That the
necessity of their belly would cause the head to rebel. That famine would
cause disseases among them, and lessen their troops. From this Council
proceeded two great effects, but different in execution: he commanded the
Duke Ioyeuse, The battle of Coutras.
to keep the King of Navarre in Poitou, and rather to hazard battle, then
suffer him to pass the river of Loire, as he determined to do at the head
thereof: assuring him, that the ruin of the foreign army depended there
upon: to the which end, the Duke de Ioyeuse that had anarmie fortified both
with men, munition, artillery, and means, marched toward Coutras, to pass
la Drongne at Gue: and upon Tuesday the twentieth of October, stayed with all
his forces, between la Roche, Chalais, and Coutras, the king of Navarre made
toward him, fully resolved to fight. And his troops, not mercinarie but
chosen soldiers, not constrained but free, that desired rather to sweat in a
skirmish, then heat themselves in a Tennis-court: rather to pursue a flying
enemy, then stay to drink sweet and pleasant maluesie at a bankette, that
feared nothing but the loss of their reputation, stayed only but till they
had the word to give the onset. And after they had bin long encouraged to
fight, and grieved with outrages and threatenings, they sell to blows. And
about eight of the clock in the morning, the king of Nauarres artillery began
to play, and that of the Duke de Ioyeuse to answer them, but not very
luckely, for that either the ignorance or the malice of the Cannonier had
placed it so low, that the mouth of the cannon shot right upon a little hill of
earth, wherein the bullet stayed without pearcing further.

The battle was so soon descided, that in ten hours this great army of
the king (that had the advantage, both for place and number, began to retire)
was sooner broken then fought withal. The king of Navarre, the Prince of
Conde, and the Earl of Sotssons, behaved themselves most valiantly, executing
the offices both of Captains and soldiers, and gave thanks to God in open
field, all died with blood, and hilled and covered with dead bodies: and among
the rest, with the bodies of Duke de Ioyeuse, Monsieur de Saint Sauueur his
brother, and five and twentieth other Gentlemen of name. All their Cornets were
taken, with the artillery and baggage, and fourteen Gentlemen of account
taken and put to ransom. That done, the king of Navarre being eased of so
many nets that were set up to catch him, marched forward to join with the
foreign army, and to pass the river of Loire: but the king lay encamped at a
little Village called Lere, between Cosne and Neusuy, impeached him by the advice of Monsieur de Neuers, causing the guets between Pouilly and Dony to
be broken down, filling them with thousands of trees, stones, and chains, to
entangle the feet of the Rutters horses that should pass. And intrueth, the
letting of that passage, next to the help of God, was the second cause of the
advantage the king had of the victory. For the Duke of Guise that followed the
army, durst not set upon it, nor hinder it from spoiling villages, therewith
to refresh it self. But as soon as it perceived it self to be in that
enclosure, and that they must of force recule, to take the left hand, and enter
into a country wherein the Rutter had never hunted the Heart, and considring
the situation, it began to be abashed and fall into a mutenie, and loose
courage: and having failed of their enterprise at la Charity, it entered into
the way of Beauce, drawing toward Montargis, and so stayed at Vimori, or
thereabouts. Where the Duke of Guise that followed, determined to dislodge
them, and took them so suddenly, about seven of the clock in the evening,
that they sooner heard the cries of the dying and hurt men, then the Qui va la
of the Sentinels. The 27. of Octobr.
The Rutters were readier to place themselves in order of battle, then to save
their baggages, or impeach the spoil made by the soldiers. There the Barron
of Othna shot two Pistolle bullets into the Castle of the Duke de Maine: and
for exchange, he got a great blow with a courtlasse in the forehead. The
Rutters in that skirmish lost 50. good soldiers, 100. Pages, 300. horses for
wagons, 2. Chaumeaux, and the two Attabales, which are drumbes of leather for
the Generalles Cornet, being a Turkish invention: and the Duke of Guise, 40.
Gentlemen and 200. Soldiers. I call not that a victory which costeth the
blood of so many brave Gentlemen, but rather an unrecoverable loss. And the
Duke of Guise might say as the K. says* of those whom at this day we call
Albanists, (after he dispersed the army of the Romans) were utterly spoiled
if we obtain such another victories against the Romans.

From thence the Duke de Bouillon marched to Chasteau-landon, which he
battereth and takes by force, and by the Rutters pilled and spoiled, being
moved with impatience, to have neither money, nor the sight of the King of
Navarre, which mutiny had been much more greater, if the assurance of the
arrival of the Prince of Conde had not ceased it, that met them about
Chartres, where the Duke de Bouillon yielded him his charge, together with the
white Ancient.

The king being at Bonneual, had intelligence of the division and mutenie,
that hatched and began to breed in the strangers army, and therevppon used
all the means he could, by wise and polliticque practices, to sound the hearts
of the Switzers, to see if he could procure their separation from the army,
and so to persuade them (by the remembrance of the fidelity and alliance of
their nation unto the Crown of France) to leave their arms and retire.

Those that confessed themselves not to be borne but with the mark of a
flower deluce, and not to be entered into France, but to restore it to the
pristinate splendure, obeyed the king, and upon agreement of four hundredth
thousand Crowns, paid them in ready money, he sent them back again into
their country.

Surprising of the Rittersat Auneau.
The Duke de Guise perceiving the army of Rutters to be as a body dispearsed,
having nothing left but the legs and the arms, executed upon them, that
which he had determined from the first day of their entry, which was upon 'the
Generalles lodging, and so by striking the Shepherd, divided the flock: as
Caezar did at the battle of Pharsale. He showed therein, that there is nothing
more necessary for a great Captain, Fortioribus Superatis aliis concidit
^nimus.
then speedily to take occasion when it is offered: I say speedily, for that
in seleritie and vigilent care, the art of war consists. And having espied
the enemies camp at Auneau, he entered into it with all his forces, and chose
his field near to the Town, to sustain such as issued forth, or those that
should come to aid them within: his footmen entered the streets about the
time that the Carts and baggage were ready in the morning to issue out. And
so surprised the Rutters at their breakefast, when the trumpetres began to
sound a chiual, and set so bravely upon them, that having not the means to
issue forth, they were constrained to retire into their lodgings at the
pleasure of the assaylants. The booty was great, being eight hundredth
Chariots, Jewels, and Chains of Gold, and two thousand horse, both for the
field and wagons, so that in one night, all the footmen of the Duke of Guises
army were on horseback, and rich of spoils and prisoners. For the Gates
being ceased upon, and the streets chained, there was no means to save
themselves, but by the walls: which the General leaped over, passing by night
through a marrish ground. Those that know the manner of the Rutters form and
order used in the wars, may well suppose how easily the Duke of Guise
obtained his purpose, for horsemen are of no force, being in a street that is
chained: but of force they must light off their horses to come to hand-blowes,
This is contrary to the opinion of Monsieur de la Noue.
but in that case the Rutter has put a Pistol against the hayles of the
bullet, of musket and caliuer shot, and whenever they should meet in open
field, one Cornet of French horsemen would be strong enough for two Cornets of
Rutters.

The Frenchman is very expert in his lance, and the Almaine in his Pistolle:
the force of the lance is furious and strikes far off: the pistolle hurts
not but being near, and yet there is no assurance to hit right, when men
drawn suddenly and without foresight, it is composed of many pieces, and
often times either the stone, powder, wheel, or bullet, makes them loose
their shot.

The sword is the best weapon of a soldier.
The force and strength of the great horse, makes a marvelous encounter, but
the weakness of the Almaines horse is nothing like. The Frenchman sets
furiously upon the head of his enemies squadrons, and when his lance is
broken, he takes his sword, which is the most assured weapon a soldier can
bear. The Rutter never fights with his face forward, not knowing whether his
blow took effect or not. And when he shot, and that one rank thrusts
forward upon the other, he goes no further, but turns to the right or the
left hand, as the place serves, until he has charged again, and so comes
to shoot. The launcier passes forward, follows on his course, breaks and
scatters al whatsoever he meets, with certain petrinelles, that are mixed
among the lances, the fear and scattering abroad assures not the Rutters
hand to charge readily again, and while he does it, half dead and trembling,
there needs no great labor to break and enter the ranks that are
disordered. Whereby it happens, that the Rutters did never obtain any great
victories against the Frenchmen, although they brag and say they will soon
vnsaddle a launcier, that comes to assail them, and take his horse.

Such as are expert in the effects of nature, affirm, that there is not any
passion which sooner makes the liuelenesse of our senses to fail, then fear
and disorder, which so much troubled the army of Rutters, that it nailed their
feet form passing forward, and gave them whings in their heels, to make the
more speed. Nevertheless it was in such estate, that by reason of some small
assurance they had of the King of N. arrival, that it was likely to have
ouerunne the Duke of Guises forces: and as it was at the point to retire back
again, the Prince of Conde, the Duke de Bouillon, and the Lords of Chastillon,
and Cleruant, promised to pay them all their wages, so they would pass forward.

The hope of their pay, made them to march in a time not much convenient,
toward the forest of Orleans. The King perceived that the longer their army
kept the field, the greater would be the ruin of his country, and that being
joined to the King of Navarre, it would do much hurt, caused the Sieurs of the
Isle of Cormont, to certify the Coronels, that if they would yield up their
colors, and swear to bear no arms in France, without the express
commandment of his Majesty, he would give them assurance to retire in
safety: they perceiving themselves far from the king of Navarre, hardly
handled by the Frenchmen, beaten by the league, pursued by the king, Capitul
ati^ the 20. of December. 1587*
and forsaken of the Switzers, assembled themselves together at Marsigni, and
accepted his Maisties offers, sent by Monsieur d'Espernon, that feasted them,
and made them drink new muscat their bellies full.

Monsieur de Chastillon laying hold upon the occasion of a safe retrait, and
for his purpose, protested not to yield up his colors but to the King of
Navarre, and so took his way toward Roane, to retire with a hundredth good
horse, and certain Harquebusiers.

The Governor of Lions, entered into the field to impeach his passage, but the
little children of Coindrieu, easily judged of his fortune, and the effect of
that expedition, which they called not the journey of spurs, but the battle
showing the back, and bring news thereof before it was fully done. For there
they fought like the Scithians, and they that had their heels best armed, were
most valiant. The Scitheans fight flying.
The consideration of this encounter, and the inequallitie of the forces and
leaders, makes me believe, that which many have persuaded themselves to be
true: which is, that wisdom in war is of little force. For fools commonly
beat wise men. Behold an old Captain armed with so many examples, Old
Captains commit young faults. Paradoxe.
and glorious exploytes of war, that had sharpened his judgment by so many
practices, finds himself contrained to yield the place to a small handful of
men, half wearied.

It is said, that good wines are best in the latter part of the year, when
time has purged them of their fire and made them mylder, but regard must be
had that they become not sour. Age causes strange Metamorphoses in us, it
breeds evil favored wrinckles in our hearts, and always there is somewhat
that tastes sharp and mustie, and begins to be faint or rank. Old men
should sit in Council, and young march in the field: old men fear blows.
The boiling and courageous heat of youth (mother of brave exploytes) is
extinguished in them, there it is too hot for them. They never sleep without
curtins and fire: I make more account of a young Captain, whose virtue and
valor grows up with his age, and such (as without dissimulation) France has
found in Monsieur de Chastillon, who in less then 4* months, compassed a
great part of France, trauersed a hundredth dangers, passed many places, where
he found any thing either before, behind, or on his sides, but that opposed
it self against him. And like a brave Gentleman, having separated himself
from the mutiny of the Rutters and the leaguers forces, although the Count de
Tournon, and the Lord of Mandelot, bereaved him of all means to pass away, but
only by arms, yet he passed through them, like thunder that teareth and
scatters all whatsoever lies before it, and made them know, that the valor
of a courageous heart, is not subject to long and tedious resolutions, which
are not executed but in words. This place has somewhat separarated me from the
banquet made by Monsieur d'Espernon to the Rutters, and of the treaty that
followed, which gave them liberty and assurance to retire. They went unto
Geneua, where diverse of the heads (whether it were for grief, with
languishing, or by blows of musket) yielded up the ghost. There the Duke de
Bouillon being in the five and twenty year of his age, died upon the
eleventh of January, having made his heir the Lady Charlotte de la Mark his
sister, charging her to alter nothing in the state, nor the religion of the
soueranties of Sedan and Iamets: nor to marry without the aduises of the king
of N. the Prince of Conde, and Monsieur de Monpensier, whom he appointed his
heir with his son, the heir dying without children: with the same charge
not to alter any thing in his lands, in the which case he substituted the king
of Navarre, and after him the Prince of Conde. As Soon as the Duke of Lorraine
understood of this Princes death, he sent his armies into his countries, in
defense whereof, la Noue his executor entered into arms, with protestation,
that the promise he had made (for his delivery) unto the king of Spain, not to
bear arms against him, bound him not to refuse his aid in defense of a young
child, against the usurpation of the Lorraines.

The Marquess du Pont, eldest son to the Duke of Lorraine, and the Duke of
Guise, against their faith given, they followed not the army, but the
miserable troop of Rutters, to the Mountain of Saint Claude, where they gave
thanks for the good success of their company: and from thence to please their
hungry troops, they trauersed the Count of Bourgongne, entering into the
Countes of Mombeliard, and Hericourt, where his men used diverse great
cruelties, and spared not the lands of the Bishop of Basle, the example and
ornament of the good Prelates of Germany.

After the bloody ceasing of so lamentable vengeance, upon a poor innocent
people, which as yet do feel the losses and destructions of two hundredth
Villages, the violence used to a number of women and maids, the massacre of so
many old men, the furious and beastly inhumanities of the league, they bare
the signs of their spoils into Lorraine, where they erected the great
confusion that dispearsed it self, through all the veins of the estate,
nevertheless it was the glory of the league, and the last point that ambition
has learned.

Time and humors are meruellously disposed thereunto. All France showed it
self much bound unto it, that had delivered them from the furies of
strangers, and assured all Catholicque minds. The victory of Auneau, Marvel
that a king should be tealous of his vassal.
is an ordinary song among the people, the rejoicing of the Clergy, the
bravery of the Gentlemen. Of the league, the jealousy of the king, that knew
well that this Laurel was not given to the league, but to disgrace his
Majesty, although it was common in the mouth of honest men, that his Majesty
had constrained his enemies to yield.

There was no Preacher but spoke openly in the pulpet, and said: that Saul had
killed two thousand, but David six thousand: the friends of Marcus Crassus
could not endure that Caezar should be beloved of the people: this jealousy
sought to eternise the Dictators office, with his reputation in the opinions of
the commons, made it to be proclaimed in all places, that the Rutter had been
raised, paid, and sent away by the King, and that without the prowess and
constancy of the Duke of Guise, the Arc had fallen into the hands of the
Philistines, that heresy had triumphed over Catholicque religion.

The Pope, the King of Spain, and the Duke of Sauoye, made fires of joy, and
pronounced the praises of the Duke of Guise: It is said that the Pope sent the
Duke of Guise a sword, engraven with burning flames. All estates shook and
wauered.
the Prince of Parma had sent him his arms, saying: that among all the Princes
of Europe, it belonged only to Henry of Lorraine, to bear arms, and to be a
commander in the wars. The league by this means being in so great appparance
and likelihood of advancement, pushed forward rather by insolency of good
fortune, then of judgment, sailed in the maine sea of her pertences, and
embraced the occasion for the which long since it had always had the
nostrelles open, the eyes watchful, the ears harkening, and the foot
stirring. And to conclude, it became very fair. The Clergy with full sail
pusht forward the intent of the Duke of Guise, to band against the Huguenots,
diverse Gentlemen wondering at his fortune, under vain hopes that he would once
be king, ranged themselves to his will, believing that most dangerous
attempts and easiest to be achiued, is under a Prince full of valor and
courage. The people that are not nourished but with the praises of the house of
Guise, and the disorders of the king: held on that side which they esteemed
most sure and strong.

The Town of Parris, that perceived the king to have forgotten the Edict of
July, that he had returned to his first humors of penance, that he is judged
by Ioubert and Miron, never to be a father: that his favor, his liberty, her
heart, and his soul, depended but upon two of his creatures, and that the
charges and impositions renewed and redoubled, began to dislike of things
present, and to embrace all whatsoever offered it self unto them, how little
appearance soever it had, not to change or decay.

Some of the busiest, which after that time were named the sixteen, began to
utter their devises, and secretly to vent their false moneys, filling the
hearts and ears of the common people with fears, by consideration of the
unrecoverable fall of the Church: of secret favors and intelligences with the
King of Navarre: of despising the Catholicque Princes: of advancement of
Migrons: Murmurati on against disorders.
of desolation of lusts and pleasures: of hypocrisy in the Court: and of the
resolution of the Parrissians, to revenge the conspiracy of the year past.

This moved the most assured, dimmed the eyes of the most clear sighted, and
heated the courages of the most lukewarm. These consciences trembling more for
fear to loose the bell, then the steeple, suffered themselves to be led
away without conduction or thread into his laberinth, and most foolishly ran
one after the other, into the preace of this fury. The Duke of Guise, that
thought not of any tempest, the ship being yet in the haven, and feared not
when he perceived it to be in the middle of the raging seas, embarked
himself therein, in hope of those populer winds, and built upon the
quicksands of Parris. And if you would know what parts were in him, to
undertake so hautie an enterprise, hearken what a great personage of our time
writes thereof. He only is all the league, the rest of his house are not
like him, and all of them together cannot furnish the least part of that which
by him is taken in hand: The Duke of Guises nature in the liberal discourse.
a great dissembler well advised: very wise, and wiser then all his faction,
which all the world well perceives by his actions. I have seen by writings
under his own hand, in an enterprise of great importance, where the greatest
person of his house, next after him, without his advise went about to commit a
great and notorious fault. He is endued with much virtue, certain effects take
good success, and with the name and memory of his father: by civil war, he
presently became the chief commanmaunder of the Catholicque faction, specially
seeking to get the favor of those towns, that feared a Prince of the
religion, whom he flattered by many private means, chief and cettaine signs
of a mind aspiring unto tyranny. He is diverse, and corrupted without
measure, secret, close, crafty, patient, (even to the point of being blasoned)
dissembling, proceeding in his intents, with long detraction. Seeing far off,
and not enterprising any thing, but he is well assured to effect it. His
father and his Grandfather withstood the King of Spain in Italy, and he
will do it in France. He says it is the zeal of religion that provoked him.

And God knows, there are yet so many Turks and Sarrasins in the world, that
withhold his inheritance of the kingdom of Jerusalem, why does he not rather
turn his pretenses upon them, then against France? When he perceive the
greatness of the sovereign Majesty decreased and imbaced: that his enemies
were retired unto Rochel: that England had a proud Spaniard upon her back,
(meaning the great Spanish army by sea) he assured himself to take the king
without danger: he leaned his ear to the advice of the sixteenth Archleaguer
of Parris: he advertised the Cardinal of Bourbon, (that went not but as he
was led) not to refuse so good an occasion, and pass so fair a time without
some exercise, gathered an assembly of his principal friends at Nancy, there
to advise the means to pass forward: constrain the king to make his will:
bannish his Mignions, and to be content to be ruled by his house. And so that
assembly concluded, that he should be summoned to join his forces unto the
enterprises of the league: his authority, to her pretenses: his favor, to
their will: leave and refuse the counsel and amity, of such as should be
named unto him: drive and bereave them of their offices: establish the
Inquisition in every Town, to publish the Council of Trent, The effect of the
articles made in the assembly of of Nancy, in Febr. 1588.
touching the ordering of things that derogated the privileges of the French
Church. To consent to the restitution of the rents and goods, that it had been
alienated and sold for the charges of his wars. To give them Towns wherein
they might place men of war, and to make such fortifications, as the necessity
of time and affairs would permit. Ordain the sale and confiscation of
Huguenots goods, also the disabling of their persons, and entertain an army
upon the frontiers of Lorraine, against the return of the Germans, that
would come to have some recompense, for the cruelties by the league committed
in the Count of Mombeliard. These articles were sent unto the king, mean time,
This war continued till May 158^.
the forces of Lorraine continued wars against the Princes of Sedan, a war
that raised a thousand curses against the league, the thing not being so well
justified, as the consideration of an innocents case, made it seem execrable,
and detested such as enterprised the same, for entering upon other men's bounds.
The king stayed for a time, to resolve himself upon the intentions of the
Princes of the league, and made show to consent unto them. And to say the
truth, he was not in estate to oppose himself against them, for that in the
beginning of the league, having permitted them to strike their hatchet into the
flourishing tree of Saint Lois, the blow entered, and made so great an ouerture,
that all fell in pieces. He acknowledged the perilous consequence of his first
fault. And that he agreed to the treaty of Nemours, and to the breach of
peace, so to approve the league. Prognostications of de Mesnil Aubri, 1560.
He verified that which the Cassandrian Huguenots had so often sung: he saw
that the great credit which the Duke of Guise had gotten among his subjects, to
the great diminishing of his own, did more increase, that since he had left
disobedience unpunished, rebellion was avouched, and that from it would proceed
some strange change, to shake the estate. As many sillables as he pronounced
in reading those articles, so many times his heart beat, and moved in his body
with an extraordinary fear, saying in himself: Considerations by the King
had, touching the articles of Nancy.
The league will have me to bannish my servants, that are most affected unto
me. So the wolves desired the sheep to drive away the dogs, that they might
work their wills.

That I should bind my self to their devises: and why? to serve them for a
bridge to enter upon the royalty: that I should hatch the vipers within my
bosom, that should knawe my enteralles, and under the flower deluce, I should
cover the crosses of Lorraine: that of a king, I become General of an army:
that the people may know, that seeing I have not the courage to be a Master,
it is reason I should be a servant: that if I have not the stomach to punish
such as enterprise upon me, they neither have shame nor fear to proceed
therein: it will have me overthrow and destroy those great persons that I
love, and that belong unto me: which being done, what advancement would it
be either to me or to the Commonwealth? what is a forest when the fairest
trees be cut down, but only a place full of fushes? what is a Realm when
the greatest houses are overthrown and impouerished? only a desert.

That I should agree and consent with them to make war against such as are
not of their league. Who ever heard that any estate could long endure when it
is divided in two parts, that have weapon in hand? and what will become of
mine, enduring three or four? and that these two words of leaguers and
Pollititians, shall be as contagious therein, as those of Guelphe and Gibelin,
that first sprang out a little Town between two brethren, and spredde all
over Italy, among all the Princes? Who shall defend me under his
partialities, from the same slanders that our neighbors of England and
Germany have received? I will have no other part but mine own, and find
there is no better nor fairer, then to be a king, I mean a king of France.
That I should cause the Council of Trent to be published, I am content: but
this publication must not be made by sound of trumpet, or noise of
Cannon-shotte. Hitherto my sovereign Courts of Parliament never counseled me
unto it, for the prejudice I might induce into, the liberties of my Crown, and
franchises of the Clergy of this Realm: and fortaine Princes have not
received it, but as far as it was conformable to their wills, and have taken
out of it the thorns that pricked them. That I should establish the
Inquisition at the least in all my Towns: this word breeds a fear in every
man. The Inquisition was not invented but against Infidelles, for that after my
ancestors had reduced Spain to the Christian faith, and that Pelages King of
Castille, perceived himself not strong enough to constrain Infidelles in
their consciences, he permitted them the liberty thereof, for certain
yearly tribute. Long after, Ferdinand of Arragon, perceiving that by the
patching of so many superstitions, both of the Sinagogue, and the Alcaron of
Christian religion began to be corrupted, he determined to constrain the^ to
be Baptized, or to leave the country, such as to stay and that made more
account of their livings then their consciences, purged not themselves so well
of their errors, but that there rested some dregs of their first opinions,
which they held by succession from their ancestors, and desired rather like
the Duke of Friezland, to go to hell with their sects, then to Paradise without
them. For men do hardly forgo the religion by them learned from their cradles,
and the more they are afflicted to make them leave it, so much the more they
harden their minds against torments: the more the exercise is forbidden them,
the more they seek it: and the more they are moved, the more they stir:
they began to inform against them, whereof the Iacobins as then newly produced
into the Church by Saint Domenicke (full of doctrine and religion) had the
charge, who employed prayers and exhortations, and would not use violent
purgations, thereby not to stir up an abundance of humors, that might
stop the heart or the liver, this peaceablenesse and toleration being
dangerous in the Church, they began to use rigor against those miserable
Marians, under the name of Inquisition: and since that, it has been exercised
against such as are not sound in Catholicque religion.

The forms since that time added thereunto are very strange, as the length of
proceeding to aunsweres, the voluntary confessions of those that are accused:
the slanders and boldness of their officers called Flies: the prison under
ground, soul, obscure, and fearful: the punishment with trochelles and
wheels, the sinews, the water, and the fron, the yealow Casocke without
sleeves painted full of devils, which they call Saubenite, the myter, gagge,
and the cord, and that which is the last part of this pitiful tragedy, the
fire have made this inquisition (which I think necessary in Spain) so strange
unto the Flemmings, and so detestable to the Frenchmen, that the Frenchmen will
rather a thousand times endure that which the Flemmings have suffered, then
subject themselves unto it, to establish this inquisition, among the light
toys of the Frenchmen, the liberties we possess within these thirty years,
and the curiosities that are naturally in us, there would not be wood enough to
burn my subjects.

I will not do it, I had rather have a sick then a dead body, I will not
make religion a Butcherie, or the alter of a sacrifice which is not bloody, a
pillorie or place of execution: no, the king of France will no more cause his
subjects to be slain, to make them believe he will never undertake to
constrain men's souls, as long as their bodies are obedient unto him. It
belongs unto God to accord these false notes, that are heard in the harmony
of his Church.

They would likewise that I should consent unto the Clergy, that they may
purchase in fee farm such goods as heretofore have been aliened from their
Churches, and constrain the possessors thereof to sell them again: that is as
much to say, that I should fight for the Church, and the Clergy shall keep
their temporal goods, while the people play the Alkamists with their teeth.
They will give the alarm, and never come to battle. All the rest of their
articles touching the sale of Huguenots goods, and of their disabling, are
already ordained, men are employed therein, all my parliaments are troubled
therewith. What do they demand of me, which I have not agreed unto not being
able to refuse it? and how many things have I graun-vnto the^, which I could
refuse, because I ought not so to do it? There is no sinewe in his polliticke
body, but it is wrested, nor any member which does not languish. They have
constrained me to play and hazard my estate by chance of wars: I have
already lost the half, let them suffer me to withdraw my self into the
other half and live in peace.

Such were the objections of this Prince, at the motions of the leaguers
articles, but because of nature he was fearful, feeble, and light, he never
had firm resolution within his mind. Princes most commonly do fail by not
believing counsel, but he deceived himself by too much crediting.

The first point of this mischief was, that truth was kept from him, and that
men followed his humors.

He was persuaded the strongest part to be that of the Duke of Guise, that
all the Towns and Provinces had their minds set on him, that if he entered
not into it, he would be left alone, at the mercy both of the League and the
Huguenot.

Yet he firmly resolved to be Master, and to range both the one and the other
under his obedience: but it was by a weak means, embracing the Duke of Guises
part, and made himself principal of the one side, with all severity to make
war against the Herereticque, speaking of nothing but of a voyage into
Poitou, to besiege Rochel, and to take the Isle of Rhie. And that which most
favored this enterprise, was, that the Huguenots had lost the Prince of Conde,
under whose valor and generositie, they conceived great hopes, and without
doubt, as being endowed with all the quallities convenient for a valiant
Captain, and otherwise an unrecoverable enemy of their enemies. His disease
was violent, procured by a nosegaye given him by some of his household
servants, for that upon Thursday being the third day of March, half an hour
after he had supt, a great pain in the stomach, shortness of breath,
hardness of the belly, and continual vometing, with extreme pain and
thirst, took him.

And the Saturday after, when his Physicians and Surgeons had employed all Art,
experience, and fidelity to heal him, growing sicker, a general sufforation
of all the powers of his body ceased upon him, whereof within an hour after
he died. His body was opened, wherein they found all the nether part of his
belly black, and burnt, the guts full of reddish water, the stomach above
the orifice, The death of the Prince of Conde, saturday the 5. of March.
pierced clean through and round about, and the vital powers (that of
themselves were very helpeful and well composed) by reason of the great
quantity of poison were all vlcered.

The king of Navarre at his return out of Gascongne, commanded expressly, that
all those that were suspected to be necessary to the poisoning of the Prince,
should be punished, for the which some were executed. Mean time, the King
that had the enterprise of the League rather then that of the Huguenots, more
imprinted in his mind, knowing that all their demands tended only to this
end, to make a perpetual war, prepared himself to prevent it, and caused
certain forces to be assembled under the conduct of the Duke d'Espernon,
against whom all the league discharged their chollor, making him the only
argument of the confusion and disorder of all his affairs, their jealousy
more increasing by the succession of the place of the Admiral, and of the
government of Normandy, which he had newly received after the death of the
Duke de Ioyeuse. This point deserves to pass two steps out of my matter, the
Admiral in France is the name of one of the chief Magistrates in the Realm,
General and Prince of the seas belonging to the country: as Eghinard called
Ruthland, that was Admiral in the time of Charles the great. The like
authority the Marshall of France bears in an army by land: the same does
the Admiral in a Navy of ships on the sea: but these offices are
distinguished, for that the subject is different and diverse. There is pain and
diligence to be used to place an army by land in order of battle. The like
must be used to conduct a Navy of ships upon the sea. At al times the most
warlike country of France, (both by sea and land) has had her Admiralles, and
the Frenchmen of Britain, Narbonne, and Prouence, are much commended for
their practices and great dexterities in wars Voyages to the holy land,
under Lewis the 7. and Philip Augustus, and Philip le Bell.
upon the sea: never thelesse this office was never in so great glory and
estimation, as it has been since the third line of our kings, being that
which brought policy and government into this Monarchy (as the first had
established, and the second increased it, by victorious conquests) then it was,
that the names of Constable, Great-maister, Marshall, Admiral, and other such
like dignities were ordained, but that of the Admiral remained unprofitable,
while our kings traveled into the Leuant seas, to fight against the
Infidelles, for in those expeditions they supplied their wants with vessels
which they found nearest to the country of Judea, and many times with their
Admiralles, which they had from Genes, Pise, Venice, and Luques. But the
Frenchman that never continues long under the yoke of any stranger, would no
more be governed by strange Admiralles, if they bare not the name of Admiral
of France, although for the most part they were no Frenchmen. As in the time of
Francis the first, Andrew, and Philip Dorie Geneuois, were made Admirals of the
Leuant seas, and after left him to serve the Emperor Charles the fifth. There
has bin diverse brave and expert Admiralles issued out of France, as Enguerrand
de Coucy, and Hugues Quieret, Lewis of Spain, under Philip le Bell, A^ory
Vicount de Narbonne, and John de Vienne under King John: and Charles the sixth,
in whose time the Admiral of France furnished the great army of twelve
hundredth sail of ships against the Englishmen, Cliret of Brabant, Lewis de
Coulant under Charles the seventh, and Lewis Bastard of Bourbon, John of Vienne
Admiral, and since Constable. 1586. Anne de Ioyeuse, Admiral, 1582. The Duke
d'Espernon, made Admiral of France, by Parliament, the 11. of January, 1588.
The Duke d'Espernon Governor of Normandy, entered Roan^ the fourth of May.
Earl of Rossillon, under Lewis the eleventh, and under king Frances the Lord
of Brion, d'Anebaut and la Trimouille, for whom the Admiralles of Britain and
Guyenne, were joined and made one.

Gaspart de Coligny was Admiral under the same king, and confirmed by Henry
the second and his children. Honorat de Sauoye, Marquess de Villars succeeded
him, and caused it to be given to Charles de Lorraine Duke of Mayenne, that
resigned it to Anne de Ioyeuse, and after his death, the king gave it to the
Duke d'Espernon.

And to establish him therein, presented him in the Court of Parliament, and
putting off his sword, bare-headed, and kneeling on his knee, he took his
oath before the chief President, where the eloquence of Monsicur d'Espesses
the kings Attorney much commended and set forth the praises of the Duke. He
succeeded likewise in the government of Normandy, and made his entry into
Roane, nine days before the Barricadoes at Parrs. Not long before that, he
had sent the Regiment of Picardie to lie about Bullen, and caused certain
small English boats to descend before the Town, so to impeach the enterprise
of the Duke d'Aumale, and to prevent that which the said Duke intended against
the Town.

When the Duke of Guise understood of those troubles in Picardie, he thought
the time as then to be fit for him, to constrain the king either to bow or
break, to confirm the articles drawn and devised at Nancy and Dyon, and to
help the weakness of the Parrissians, that without him would have lost
courage.

And for the same cause he arrived at Soissons, where his Majesty by Monsieur
de Bellieure gave him to understand, that he should do him apleasure if he would
abstain from coming to Parris, in so troublesome a time, wherein so many
factio^s reigned, and that if he came thither against his will, he would lay ye
cause The arrival of the Duke of Guise, at Soissons: The king prays him not
to come to Parris until the distrusts were laid.
of the troubles (that might arise by his presence) upon him.

Monsieur de Bellieure, who by reason of greatness and soundness of his
judgment, concerning matters of estate, and the execution of wise and notable
charges to him committed, held one of the chief places of Councellor about the
king, used many and great reasons to restrain the impetuositie of that prince:
and to conclude, departed from him, assuring himself that he had fully
dissuaded him.

But his heart attainted with a burning Fever, could find neither appetite nor
pleasure, but in that which liked his stomach: believed that nothing could
hinder him: that the heavens oght to give him place: that striking with his
foot upon the ground, he would make a 100. legions of men to rise: and that
without fear of Jupiters thunderbolts, he could rule ye chariot of the sun.

The Parissians had sent for him.
Left no means between the two extremities of his firm resolution, but
whatsoever fell out, he would see the Louure, or die in the way. And
therevppon mounted on horseback, with eight Gentlemen, about nine of the
clock at night, leaving his brother, the Cardinal of Guise, and the Prince de
Iuinuille his son at Soissons, desiring the Archbishop of Lions to follow him
in the morning. And so within three hours after the arrival of Monsieur de
Bellieure, and about Monday at noone, being the 9. of May, he entered into
Parris, Sunday the 8. of May 1588.
and lighted at the Queen-mothers lodging, the Filles Repenties, where in great
fear half trembling she received him, and led him to the Louure. If the
streets of Parris had bin as broad, as the way of Appie^. they would hardly have
contained half the quantity of the people that followed this Prince: every
man thought himself happy, that might put off his hat, and kneel on his knee
for to salute him, The Duke of Guise arrived the Kings not knowing onit.
all being full of joyful cries, clapping of hands, pleasures, and wishes, to
welcome him. He for his part, holding his hat in hand, answering by his
countenance to those populer reioycings, marked the most prompt affections to
his desire, they striving among themselves, who should begin to cry: Viue
Guise, Viue le Pillier del'Eglise. Which being heard into the street called S.
Honnore, where a Gentlewoman sat in a shop, she pulled down her mask, and
spoke aloude unto him, vtterring these words: Good Prince, now you are here we
are al safe. That done, he entered into the kings chamber, where he did his
duty to the king, but with less assurance then ordinary, knowing the King
would not like well of his coming: and in truth, he showed him no great
countenance, answering him (unto the reasons he made touching his journey to
Parris) that by M. de Bellieure he had desired him not to come. But dinner time
approaching, they left off, and the D. of Guise departed to his lodging. After
dinner he went to visit the Q. in her garden: where the king finding him, as
well as he could dissembled the exterier appearance of y^ suspicion he had
conceived in his heart: and the D. of Guise justified his actions with a brave
and bold courage, He went to visit the Queen Mother.
by so much the more as he perceived thesecret fear of the Kings trembling
mind, his servant and followers, one after the other still entered into Parris:
for the Archbishop of Lions being the principal Agent of his Council, arrived
upon Tuesday about dinner time, and came not out of the house of Guise, until
the next day, that he went to see the Queen Mother being at Mass, and from
thence went with her to her garden, where the K. found them: he stepped forward
to kiss the Kings hand, who received him with pleasant and cheerful
countenance, having always discovered a certain inclination that he had to
love him, as knowing him to be one of the woorthiest Prelates of his order, of
a prompt and ready wit, and wonderful eloquent, and withal, remembering
that at all times when the storms of words and reasons were used in any matter
of estate, he surprised all his Council. Whereupon he willingly desired,
he had been as much affected to his service, as to the league wherein he had
entered, as alalso in an assured enmity toward the Duke de Espernon. While
the king, the Queene-mother, and the Duke of Guise, were speaking together, the
people spoke among themselves, every man gave him his judgment, what would
grow thereof, whispering each other secretly in the care. But secrets, love,
and wine, are nothing worth when they are opened and perceived.

The king caused four thousand Switzers to enter at four of the clock in the
morning, the eleueuth of May, 1588.
The Duke of Guise feared to be prevented, and the Kings ears were filled with
nothing but with the pretenses of the Parrissians against him, he knew the
practices that would trouble the brains of the ambitious head of the Duke of
Guise, the manner of his arrival, and the favor of the people increased his
distrust, so that he resolved to prevent the time of his enterprise, and
commanded the Marshall Biran, to cause the Switzers and Frenchmen to enter
into the Town, and to lodge them in diverse quarters thereof, thereby to
restrain the people, that prepared themselves to the execution of that whereof
a year before they had failed.

The fear of the Persian.
Captain Gast with his company, ceased upon the little bridge hard by Nostre
Dame: Captain Grillon lodged at Pont Saint Michael: the Marshall d'Aumont
placed a rank of Harquebusiers on each side of Pont Nostre Dame.

Whereat the people being abashed, shut up their shoppes, which they had
begun to open, expecting a fury, wherein Monsieur de Villequier used all the
means he could to diswade them, praying them not to stir, or fear any
thing.

But all in vain, they had no ears, they would not hear, the artificer left
his tools, the Merchant his traficque, the university their books, the
Counselors their pleas, and the Presidents themselves take halberts in hand,
whereby nothing was heard but fearful cries, strange complaints, mournings,
and dispight.

The fearful day of Barricadoes in Parris.
And God knows if in that publicque rising, such as would take upon them to
exhort and set the rest together by the ears, might not easily do what they
list. Among the which, one of those audacious, mutinous fellows, spoke unto
them and said: How now companions, shall not we this day shroud our selves
from the shoures of rain, and pull our heads from under the axe, which the
kings arm lifts up against us, thereby to preserve us from thunderclaps and
furies of evil counsel, that seeks the means to make pray of us, our wives
and children? Perceive you not that the King sees only outwardly,
understands but with his outward ears, and stirs not but by the means of
such as support heresies, Seditious words to move the people.
and that fill their chests with the treasures that are exacted from the
Clergy, and the common people? Shall we stay till they come to bind our
hands and feet, and draw us to the Grieve, there to serve for tapistrie to the
gibbets, that are prepared in the Townhouse?

What further advise needs to be had, to put our selves in a just and
natural defense? Have we not already heard Curtisans in the street making
partitions of our goods?

Did they not say, that from henceforth the K. shall no more be a Page, yt he
should command like a Master, and that he would be revenged for the attempts
made against him by the league.

Shall we abuse our selves? shall we not think upon neighbors, our wives,
our children, and our selves? These words were presently carried and approved
with common consent. And although the Duke of Guise, knew by the report of the
Archbishop of Lions, (whom he had sent unto the king) that the placing of men
of war in the quarters of the Town of Parris, was not against him, yet he
would not trust in any thing but his sword. And with that, the Barricadoes (a
fatal and seditious invention of the league; and the only instrument to
overthrow her tyranny, in such Towns where the people are of courage) were
made distant each from other thirty foot, and reached almost to the Sentinels
of the Louure.

The Switzers were set upon, and they yielded, crying: Viue Guise, and
Monsieur de Brissac caused them to be disarmed, and lodged in the Butcherie or
new market. The Sieur de Saint Paul, caused the kings guard to retire, holding
down their arms, with their hats in hand. The Queene-mother got into her
Coach in great fear, and went to seek the Duke of Guise: and after her,
Monsieur de Bellieure, thereby to appease the commotion. But this burning Fever
being but in his prime, and like to be much more violent, the Duke of Guise
said he could not hold those Bulls that had burst forth. Meantime, the King
was advertised that the enterprise would proceed further. That the Duke of
Guise had not pretended so hautie an enterprise, to faint in the middle
thereof. That to make his victory full and accomplished, he must of
necessity cease upon the person of him, that might either impeach it, or make
it infamous to the victors.

Advise given to the King, concerning the Duke of Guises intent.
Upon these considerations, there arrived a Gentleman, a familiar and
domestical attendant upon the Duke of Guise, that assured him of the
resolution that was taken to enter into the Louure, and to cease upon his
Majesty, which was confirmed by three other, and very true. For that seeing
the Duke of Guise had proceeded so far, the time served not as then to
dissemble, as likewise his Council found no better, more assured, nor
expedienter means. And to conclude, he bragged seeing he had him there, to
hold him fast: where upon a certain Author has written, and says: How now!
what say thou stranger? In the liberal discourse.
to slaye a King of France, it is more then all Europe can do: it is an
enterprise (and yet very dangerous) for an Emperor, if thy Grandfather had
thought, thou would ever have uttered such proud speeches, he would surely
have strangeled thy father, thereby to impeach thy entrance into the world. In
a peaceable estate, in a quiet Realm, this only would have cost thee thy
head, but because it is in such estate, therefore thou troublest it.

The King, that could hardly believe it would proceed to that point, assured
himself, and made no account of that advise, thinking the people would always
range themselves under the clemency of their king. But those of his Council
that desired to be far from Parris, and that knew the mutinies of the
people, showed his Majesty, that there was nothing more unconstant then that
multitude, which in times past had constrained Philip le Bell, in great haste to
save himself in the house of the Templiers, and the Duke of Normandy, son
to King John, prisoner in England, to wear a hood half read, half russet,
thereby to defend himself from their insolency. And desired him to remember
the revolt of the Maillotins, Caboches, and of those of Saint Andrews cross,
of the disposition of Salcede, the letters of the King of Navarre, the
conspiracies made the last year about Easter, and the many aduises and
prognostications he had received, by the singes he had seen. The
Queene-mother was not of that mind, The 13. of May. 1588.
and promised to persuade the Duke of Guise, and for the same cause went to
find him out, desiring him to quench so many fires already kindled, and to
come and speak with the King, of whom he should have contentment at his
pleasure: and thereby let him see, that in so urgent an occasion, he had
greater desire to serve, then to overthrow his Crown: to repair, rather then
throw down the edifice of the estate, which that commotion had most
mischieuously shaken.

The Duke of Guise between hope and fear, that never esteemed man to be
greater then himself, as long as he held his sword in hand, making show of
innocence, and laying the fault upon the people: said, that he suffered
himself to be borne in that sort by them, rather by force and necessity,
then that he had any desire so to do. That touching the Louure, it was but
athing falsely devised against him, that it should be a great folly for him to
go thither, things being in such hateful estate, and so to cast himself weak
and in his dublet, into the mercy of his enemies.

The Queenmother advertised the King by Secretary Pin^rt.
The Queen marking the stubburnnesse and resolution of the Duke of Guise,
concerning her requests, caused the King to be advertised, who desiring not to
stay any longer in that trance, issued out of Parris by the new gate, and that
night lodged at Trappes. It is said, that being at Mon-martre, he turned
toward the Town, and cursing it for the infidelity, ingratitude, and
disloyalty thereof, in respect of all the benefits it had received at his
hands, he swear he would never enter into it again but by a breach: his
servants, the companies of his guard, and men of war, with the Switzers,
followed him, and left their lodgings to those new Kings of Parris. The Duke of
Guise that had written to the Governor of Orleans, The Duke of Guises letters
to the Governor of Orlea^s.
that he held the Louure so close shut up, that he would give good account
of that which was within it, knew well the victory was not performed, and that
his reputation would be stained, if the news of the Kings retrait were carried
out of the Realm, by other means then by him self, he considered that
whatsoever is attempted against the Kings person, touches and concerns all
his equalles, that as the Prelates, the Officers, the Senators, and Knights,
and all Kings are brethren: that one blood royal calls the other: that all
sovereign Rulers, do blason rebels and disturbers of estate, although they
help themselves by the same means.

He thought it good, to send Monsieur de Brissac, to the Ambassador of
England, to show him the cause of the erecting the Barricadoes. I make no
difficulty to write whole leaves of a discourse, when it is not out of
purpose, neither any disgrace to the matter propounded: therefore I have set
down the same words, that passed between the Ambassador of England, and the
Count de Brissac, which were faithfully reported unto me.

The Count de Brissac accompanied with certain Gentlemen, went to visit the
Ambassador of England at his lodging (in those commotions and populer
insolences) to offer him a safeguard or protection, and to desire him not to
be abashed, nor to stir, as being assured of the protection of Mensieur de
Guise.

The Ambassador made him answer, that if he had been in Parris, as a
particular person, he would fall down at the feet of Monsieur de Guise, and
give him humble thanks for his great and courteous offers, but being there
hard by the King, and for the Queen his Mistress (that had peace and amity
with the King) he neither would nor could receive any protection but from the
king himself. Monsieur de Brissac showed him, that the Duke of Guise was not
come to Parris, to enterprise any thing against the king or his service, but
that he had only put himself in defense, that there was a great conspiracy
made against him, and the City of Parris, that the Townhouse, and other
places, were full of gibbets, whereon the king had determined to hang diverse of
the Town and others: and that the Duke of Guise desired him, to advertise the
Queen his Mistress thereof, to the end it might be known. The Ambassador
answered, that he believed the Duke had willed him to say so, that the highest
and hardiest enterprises often times lie hidden and secret in the minds of
those that undertake them, and that (when they think good) they make them
known with such color and show, as they think best for their purpose, that
he could not choose but tell him plainly, that that which passed in Parris,
would be found very strange, and evil thought of by all christian Princes
having interest therein.

That no cloak or cover, how fair soever it might be, could cause it to be
liked of, it being the duty of a subject to continue in the just obedience of
his Prince. That if there were so many gibbets prepared, it would be the
easilier believed, if the Duke of Guise would cause them openly to be showed.
And again, if it were so, it is a most odious and intolerable thing, that a
subject by force should seek to impeach the justice that his Sovereign would
execute against offenders. That he would promise him, that most willingly and
with all speed, he would advertise the Queen his Mistress of that had
passed, but to be his Interpteter unto her, of Monsieur de Guises intents, and
those of his confederacy, it was no part of his charge, the Queen his
Mistress being wiser then himself, both to believe and judge what she
thought good.

Here ends the second Book.
THE THIRD BOOK OF THE LAST troubles of France, containing that which passed
after the Barricadoes in Parris, and there trait of the king to Chartres,
until the Edict of pacification, and assembly of the general estates at
Blois, in the month of September.
Barricadoes the 12. of May. 1588.
O Accursed and fatal day, that haste defaced the beauty and pleasure of the
twelfth day of May, which every year used to put us in mind of the solemn
and triumphant enterie of Charles the eight, into the Realm of Naples, what
coal can be black enough, to note thee in our Ephemerides, and so leave to
our posterity the rememberance of the shame and reproach of the rebellion
which thou breedest up, by driving the king out of Parris, and making known
the hideous spectacles of the tyranny of the League.

There is no memory that forgets the remembrance of thy ingratitude: no
abolition, that defaceth thy felony: nor any defense to be sought, that might
hide thy shame: and there is not sufficient water in the river of Seine, to
wash away the filthiness of thy vilany: nor wood enough to burn the Registers
and memories of this sedition.

But can we speak of the Barricadoes, without remembering this incomprehensible
motions of Gods providence, which does equally shine and appear as well in ye
establishing, as pulling down of Empires, and dealetha swel with their fall, as
with their continuance? And who will not say, Read a notable discourse upon
this matter, in the 2. Book, entitled the constancy and consolation of
publicque calamities. Henry the third, a most religious Prince. He led rather
the life of a Monk, then of a K. He hated the Huguenots.
that this great motion (the spring of all the miseries ensuing) was not a
blow of the hand of the inscrutable wisdom of God, to punish the king and
his Realm?

He that would debate this proposition by the circumstances of the kings
person, needs not to seek the causes thereof, neither in the East nor in the
West, but only to ground them upon the eternal wheel of Gods judgments.

What appearance was there, for subjects to arm themselves and revolt against a
king? what pretense could be so close, but in the end it would open and be
discovered? The cause of religion, which is one of the most violent passions of
the people, and the most assured means to alter an estate, was so clear and
pure in him, that many judged his life to be religious, blamed his actions,
which was fitter for an Hermit then a Prince. He kept more in a Monastery
then with his Council, he spoke oftener with Jesuits, Capucins, and
Fueillantins, then to his Secretaries.

He detested nothing more then Huguenots, and there was not any Huguenot in
France, that had received any commandment at his hands, he was more spoken
and disliked of among them, then any of the house of Lorraine: they beheld him
not, but as the commet of their miseries, and never remembered him, but when
they spoke of S. Bartholomewes day: that which they had endured at the hands of
the duke of Guise, was but roses, in respect of that they had suffered at
Iarnac, And the Huguenots declared his life.
Moncontour, Rochel, and Parris, in such manner, that it were an extreme
absurdity, to believe that he favored Hereticques, and that he would
overthrow that religion, whereof he made so open profession.

He was assisted by the Princes of his house.
Therefore he had no cause to fear any thing to be done against him by the
Catholicques: and yet those are they that in the Capital Town of his Realms,
Barricadoed themselves against him. He had all the Princes of the blood for the
defense of his Crown: for when the King of Navarre, for the liberty of his
conscience had taken arms, it was no longer but while they would constrain
him, and break the decrees of peace, that permitted him to be free of
conscience, not to oppose himself against the Monarchy, nor to an Anarchicall
confusion of this estate.

The rest of the Princes, that knew well that the reasons of the league, were
not so much to reform the Realm, as to overthrow it, and therewith to bring
them within the compass of those ruins, held themselves near unto his
Majesty, all the Nobility of France, at the least nine of ten parts, more
particularly bound unto his service, for their honors, dignities, offices, and
benefi^s, as also the justices of the Realm, not being of the mind to
accomodate themselves to the humors of the Princes of the league, and esteemed
the essential form thereof to be opposite, and an overthrowing to the estate.
The Gentlemen of France foreseeing that the royalty cannot be ouerthrown, but
that the Nobility must likewise bear the same burden: and that the subject
that refuse the obedience and faieltie of his Prince, will not be long before
he seeks to free himself of the rents and revenues he owes unto the Lord
of the soil.

The greatest persons of the Clergy, consented not to those new mutinies,
acknowledging that their profession is more honored and beautified under a
King, The chief of the Clergy.
then by the confusions of a democration estate. The king likewise had named
and chosen them at his pleasure, so that the obligation of his favor, retained
them in his service.

Learned men published his praises, and in his reign there were more books
printed and dedicated to his Majesty, Learned me^.
then in the reign of the great King Francis and his successors, although most
justly he was named the father and restorer of learning.

Some Preacher only flattered sedition, thereby to win estimation among the
common people desirous of a change. In all the towns and throughout every
Province there were officers, who besides their natural subjection, were more
bound to him by oath that he had taken of them, giving them charge of his
treasures, the power of his laws, and administration of his justice, with the
order of policy, and they desired nothing more then the greatness of their
King, his rest and quietness being their only preferment, for that without
liberty and peaceablenesse, with his long life and prosperity, their offices
were of little force, as having exposed their fortunes to the hazard of the
term of his life.

I And yet he was not well assured in Parris.
n such manner, that his Majesty had not any thing more at his commandment,
then men of that quallitie, that only feared the peril of his holy and sacred
person, and the changing of this Monarchy. Who would then believe, that a
king, yea and a king of France, in the middle of so many assurances, in the
brauest time of his reign, in the Capital City of his Kingdom, among so
many Princes, Knights of the Order, in the face of a Parliament, (the thunder
against sedition) and colonie of justice and royalty, having in his power the
Bastille and the Arsenal: at his devotion, the Provost of Merchants, the
Sheriffs, and the Colonnelles, and six thousand men of war, placed in the
streets and quarters of the Town, where he desired should be besieged in
his Palace of Louure, by a people whom he had so much cherished and enriched
with the spoils of his other subjects, and by himself stirred up, under the
false alarm of a Garrison, sacking and spoiling, constrained to save himself
by flight from the fury of his mutinous subjects.

Incluctabilis fatorum vis cuius fortuna^ mutare constituit, consilia
corrumpit. Velleius lib. 2. de Caesar es varo.
And can we that have seen and beheld it, remember it, without considering
that the eternal power of him that rules all the world, made the Spirits,
judgments, counselles, and conductions of those that might divert the
mischiefs, proper and fit to advance them, and suffered them to take effect,
to show his wrath, striking the head, to make members languish. O fatal, and
once again accursed day of Barricadoes, the birth day of our miseries, and
funeralles of our ioys, that unloosed the winds to those storms of blood,
that have drowned our companions, that made liberty captive, truth criminal,
rapin, just: and tyranny and invasion lawful: See here the first beginning
of the troubles of France, 47. slain by Brisson, the President.
that pulled the Crown from the head of the King, and the laws from the heart
of the Realm: that put the weapon in the hand of a President, to raise the
people in his quarter: that kindled the courage of the most coward, to fall
upon the kings guard: that lifted up the chin of most vile persons, and
caused the League to triumph in the strees of Parris, as an Image accomplished
with all wickedness: that put pen in hand of the sixteenth, therewith to
publish this wicked commotion, and to qualify that with a just defense against
the kings aduertising all the Towns of their conspiracy: that God had
preserved that holy and religious City from a great massacre and fearful
spoil: that the Duke of Guise had turned the counsel of Polliticians,
specially the Duke d'Espernon, that had won so much favor in the kings
heart, that it caused him to determine the ruin and overthrow of the principal
and most Catholicque Sedition called the image of all evil.
families in Parris, to restrain their liberty, and dispoyle them of their
religion, esteeming no better nor readier means to make his people to obey
him, then to weaken, beat down, and spoil them of that corpulent fatness,
which made them insolent, mutinous, and rebels, and that they should not
believe the History of their tragedy, from any but their own lying mouths.
As Soon as the Kings servants knew that his Majesty was gone, The Court
dislodgeth from Parris. The Duke of Guise is sorry for the kings retrait.
the Huguenots never dislodged with more haste out of the subburbs of Saint
German de Prez, at the dolourous day of S. Bartholomewe, then they did to
save themselves, some on foot, some on horseback, out of Parris, flying in
great haste: many had no leisure to put on their boots, the fury of the
people being such, and so straight, moved against them, that it was a great
escape made, to return from the house of Guise to the Louure, and no man might
pass if he held not for the Duke of Guise.

Illia cos intra muros peccatut and extra. Horatius.
His Lacqueys served for Pilots and conductors of the Kings chief Councillors,
to bring them safe to their lodgings. That this accident procured not most
strange corosiues to the kings heart, it is not to be doubted. His Majesty
having assembled his men at Saint Glaude, he went to Chartres, where the
league had already sounded so many men's hearts, that there they spoke not of
the king but in disdain, that his Majesty was grieved at the heart, to see
himself in a manner bannished in the middle of his estate, and spoiled of his
authority. The Duke of Guise was much more grieved, when he knew the king was
gone, that suddane blow so much abashed him, that he would willingly have
taken post to follow after him, imputing it a great imperfection of nature:
The Duke of Guise repents his hardiness,
but faults are never known until they be done, and then we may look into
the cause, and attribute it either to our own opinion that opposes us against
the rules of reason, or to our weakness, which abateth both our courage and
resolution. Both of them (although too late) giving us wisdom and means to
repent.

It is very hard in these commotions that are sooner seen then conceived, and
where we must take counsel and arms both at one time, to retain
consideration, respect, and necessary wisdom, or that a man's mind can
continue firm in one resolution.

This commotion of Parris was followed with great imperfections, both within
and without, as well on the kings, as on the Duke of Guises part: he failed by
letting the king escape, for that holding him, the tragedy of Chilperic had
bin acted, and the instructions of the Advocate David accomplished: he failed
likewise herein, that having passed the bounds of duty and fidelity, and used
his Master in that sort, he believed that playing the part of a diligent
servant, he should win favor again: that his boldness would be forgotten: that
a Lion roused in that sort, and so cruelly, would become tame or meek at the
first morsel of respect, service, and obedience, that should be offered unto
him: that he should have his will of the king sooner by flattery and service,
then by pursuing and forcing him: for that not knowing how to use his
advantage, nor in what sort to behave himself in the highest step of the
lather of his enterprises, whereunto he had mounted with so long and secret
pretenses, he fell down all the steps at one time.

When he saw all France disliked the kings departure in that forcecible manner
out of Parris, he began to protest his innocence, and the duty he had
showed to restrain the fury of the people, traveling in the kings behalf to
save his honor, so straungely blemished.

Fault in the King.
The king for his part failed, and his fault was so much the greater, then that
of the Duke of Guise, as there was inequality between them. The form, order,
and means he found to rebate the credit of his enemy, and the reputation he
had gotten among his subjects, was as unadvisedly pursued as begun. He sought
to purge the body, before he had well disposed the humors: some of his
Council said, it was best for him to let the Duke of Guise rest, as being
already mounted so high, that he could not be brought down, but that it
would be good to break down the steps whereby he mounted, and withdraw those
that served him for footestooles. Counsel to abate the greatness of the Duke
of Guise. The magnanimious resolution which the King should hold.
Wholesome Council to reduce the people strayed, into the right path of
obedience, love, and fear, which they owe unto their king, and win so many
hearts again by the same means, that the League had used to seduce them: that
is, by peaceablenesse, by a universal reformation, and by relief of miseries.
The king should have said: I will do as the League desires, I will perform
that which it promises you, I will perform deeds and not words: wherewith
she abuses you: she takes the disorders of times, for the subject of her
mutinies: I will establish order in policy, in my treasures, and in my Court,
the shortest way had been so to prevent him, by little and littled iminishing
the universal favor of the Parrissians toward him, but to do it upon the
sudden, at one blow, and in one hour to repair the destruction and ruins,
so long bred and invented, it was a great folly, and seeing by so many signs
and distrusts, he feared the coming of the Duke of Guise to Parris, and that
he had discovered his pretense. Why did he not cause him to go out again
assoo^^ as he came? he ought to have spoken unto him like a king. Francis the
second his brother, Francis the second cast the Prince of Conde into prison.
being younger then he, used the like speech to the Princes of his blood: if
he had commanded him to depart, without doubt he had gone, because as the^ he
would not have begun his tragedy, and thereby have borne the report of so
manifest disobedience.

And in truth as soon as the king spoke unto him and said: Cousin, wherefore do
you come? his answer was given in faintness and trembling, his visage pale,
and the Majesty that God imprinteth in his Samoris, his Lieftenants, and his
lively Images, ceased and changed, as if from that time he had feared that the
king would dislike the breach that he had made of his commandment, and say:
And it likes your grace, I am here present, to answer to the slanders that
are raised against me, thereby to bring me in hatred to your Majesty. But
(said the king) I sent you express word, not to come hither in this time so
full of troubles and distrusts, and that you should stay for a time. My Lord
(said the Duke) I was not so advertised, The Indians call their kings Samories:
that is to say, god on earth. Speeches between the King and the Duke of Guise
at Louure.
that thereby I did in any sort believe, that my coming hither would be
offensive to your Grace. Whereupon the king turning to Monsieur de Bellieure,
asked him and said: Did not I command you to tell him, that he should not come
hither at this time? But as Monsieur de Bellieure began to certify the king of
his message, the Duke of Guise entered between them, wherewith the
Queene-mother drew the king aside, and so mittigated that first quarrel. They
ought not to have moved this contention, and leave dispight and disdain in
Monsieur de Guises mind: nor leave the knife in the vain which he had
opened, he ought to have given fear and punishment both at one time, or to
have done neither the one nor the other, but it is a most strange thing, that
men do always fail in doing their authorities, and in the principal point
which is the cause thereof.

It was vainly done of the king, to cause himself to be esteemed a good
penitent, a good Hermit, a good versefier, a good discourser, and a good
Orator, if he remembered not himself to be as he was, and to be known for
king, and speak like a king: I say like a king, for this word of King,
contains all whatsoever belongs to his charge.

Senec. Epist. 77. Id in quoque optimum est cui cascitur cui con setur.
Maximoimperio maxima cura in est. Sallu.
He ought to have spoken to the Duke of Guise like a king, and have made him
depart out of Parris, with his adherents, and he ought to have stayed therein
like a king, for if his actions be not performed like a king, they are of no
account. Every thing (says Seneca) is commended for that which is proper unto
it, and for the principal part that gives it the form and being. A Vine is
praised for ye fertility: the wine for the liquor, and the Heart for his
swiftness. In a dog we commend a good nose, to smell, find out, and follow
the beast, his lighnesse for running, both to approach and assail, and his
heart and courage. And to conclude, the special utility and proper use of
every thing belongs to it self.

The Kings of the Sabans publicly durst not come abroad because of an oracle
that forbad them.
The ship is called good, not because she is painted with diverse fair and
costly colors, his stearne all gilt, her boords inlaide with Iuorie, or that
it is laden with treasures and Princely riches: but because the seames of the
plankes are well closed and calked, that it leaketh not, that it is strong and
firm against the force of the waves, easy to stir, and swift of sail.
Likewise you will not say, that a sword is good, because the hilts and handle
are gilt, and the sheath of velvet, set with precious stones: but you say it is
good if it has a good edge, and the point sharp to enter well. So the king
should not make himself known by the Crown and Scepter which he bears,
but by the actions that depend upon his royalty, and that make him to be
esteemed for a king, always remembering, that great offices require great
wisdom. Among the carters and waggoners he is esteemed most unfit for the
charge, that knows not how to behave himself therein.

If your grace will take away the pendants that trouble your ears, you are a
king, and not king of Denmark, or of Arragon, to be both Master and servant
all at one time: nor king of Saba, not daring to be seen publickely, but king
of France and of Frenchmen, a people gentle, tractable, and obedient, that did
not disobey nor retire from you, but when they knew you would not be King: and
that there was one of your subjects that prescribed you a law: in this case,
the sun rising, is always fairer then descending. And as a wise politician
once said unto you, when a king makes it known, that he fears some one man
within his Realm, that there is one that may be greater then he, there is no
more Majesty, he is no more that he was, but all the world runs to the
other.

The nature of Henry the third.
If we cannot be free, yet will we have but one Master: if that Master have
an other Master above him, we presently leave the first to run to the last:
it is the nature of man.

There is this fault in you, that if you find no resistance, if you be in
peace, you command absolutely, and you speak like a king, but if you find
never so small difficulty, you always prefer a gentle and fearful, before
a bold and severe remedy: God grant that in the end you seek earnestly and
effectually to be that which you are, that is, Master and the greatest Lord in
your Realm, which cannot be, if you be not king.

Behold the opinion that the wisest Pollititians had of the king, see how they
lamented the fall of his authority, the spawn of his forces, and the dazeling
or rather astonishing of his senses: I shall never be no more a king to
counsel nor dissuade him, my ambition clymeth not to that degree, yet I will
never counsel them unto mildness, and to simplicity without wisdom, that
pardons and suffers all.

There is nothing so royal as Clemency, and nothing that more wins the
hearts of men, or that makes a Prince more reverenced and beloved, then
affable and courteous nature. Antonius, surnamed the courteous
It is that (said the Emperor Antonius to Faustina his wife) that placed
Julius Caezar among the number of the Gods, that consecrated Augustus, and that
gave the title of Pius to thy father. But when this Clemency is superfluous,
that it changes into a soft and peaceable nature: that this softness is not
mixed with vigor, nor this peaceablenesse with austeritie: I esteem it a point
of mere carelessenesse, which althouh it be not to be blamed, yet it is not
found to be good in a Prince.

For it provoke men to enterprise against a Prince, that is so ready to
pardon, and the suffering of one fault that is miserable, draws on another,
(says the Consul Fronto) to live under a Prince that will remit no part of the
tigor of his laws.

But it is much more miserable to live under a Prince, where all things are
lawful, and that by a kind of faintness or carelessenesse, without
discretion, pardons all whatsoever is done, both against law and reason.
Clemency is commendable to an enemy that is overcome and submits himself,
but while he shakes and fears in our presence, this weakness, this
disquietnesse, and this fear, is a sign of doubting, and he will revenge
himself. But some will say, this severity is odious in a king, intolerable
to the people, and cause of rebellions: and in truth it is to be used with
moderation, and then when we see that mildness and mercifulness is not
prejudicial unto us. If it be called fury or rage, what need we care, so
that fury makes fools and rebels to become wise. We must do as Sabaque
king of Egypt, and Antigonus king of Macedonia did, the first caused the gown
and not the shoulders of the criminal to be beaten and punished: the hatte for
the head: the other hearing the soldiers speak hardly of him, hard by his
tent, he contented himself with saying unto them: What? can you go no further
but under my nose to speak evil of me?

The kings letters at Chartres 17. of May, 1588.
The king saw the prankes the leaguers had played with him, he heard them rent
both his name and his authority: he saw that the Louure was not safe enough
for him against their violences: in steed of saying to these ungrateful
wretches: get you from hence, or to strike such as served them for gowns or
couertures: he excused the authors of the mischief, desires their
reconsiliation, and dares not say, that he had bin constrained to go out of
Parris, remitteth the pacification of his troubles to the Queen his mother,
because he knew his own weakness, and distrusted the affection and
fidelity of his subjects.

He advertised the Lieftenants and Governors of his Provinces, of the
occasions that had moved him to depart out of Parris, and writes unto the
Capital Towns, not to form their hearts in the moulds of those of Parris,
and to believe that he desired no other Garrison, nor fortress among them,
but publicque good will and confidence from them.

He caused his letters to be made and framed not like a Prince or Captain,
but like a man that fled and trembled, that defended himself more with his
holds then his arms, that durst no more command, but entreated his subjects,
and a Prince that had forgotten himself to be a Prince, that he was Gods
Lieftenant, arbitrator of the life and death of his subjects, just distributer
of the greatness of estates, that of some can make vessels of no valor nor
substance: and of others, vessels to honor, and serve in a rich and goodly
Palace: that he is not only the sinewe that gives moving to the
commonwealth, but the heart and the head, that makes it live, and the vital
spirit, that quickneth so many spirits. I must confess a truth, the King
committed a great fault: but because mine eyes have too many lets to mark it,
and that it belongs not to mean persons to mount upon the Theators whereon
great persons play their tragical actions, I will set down the Kings letter
to the judgment of the Reader, yet will I add something of mine own upon
the backside, and in the margent, leaving place nevertheless for such as will
write after me, and believe that such men of judgment as will undertake this
most sharp and bitter Theme to write upon, shall yet find something therein,
whereof they may make honey.

By the King.
Trusty and well beloved, being in our Town of Parris, where we thought an
intent was, to cease al kinds of iealousies
and impeachments, as well in Picardie as else where, which made us reiourne
our travel into our country of Poiton, there to pursue the wars begun
against the Huguenots, according to our determination. Our Cousin the Duke of
Guise arrived unlooked for, upon the ninth of this month, whose coming in that
sort, did in such manner increase the said distrusts, that we found our person
in great perplexity, Guises coming to Parris deceived the King, and with so
small a company it made the Kings mind to be diversely. His sudden arrival
caused him to remember the effects of the aduises given him, and the small
number of his company withdrewe him from it, and made him judge well of that
Princes meaning and intent. But he deceived him, for that ought to have made
his coming more suspicious, for if it had been simple without deceit, the
participants would not have stirred so soon, Publica expectatio magni secreti
impatients.
because not long before, we had been advertised from diverse places, that he
would arrive in that sort, and that certain of the Inhabitants of the said
town, such as were suspected to be the causes of the said distrusts, stayed
and daily attended his coming, and for the same cause having him to be
certified Lewis the eleventh: for counsel to Sigismo^d: for a law to Frederic
the Emperor: for a virtue to the virtues of Tiberius. Also it is no danger to
dissemble, so far forth (as Plato says) that this subtlety do redownd to
the profit of the subjects.
that we would not have him to come thither, before we had taken order for the
affairs in Picardie, and revoked all occasions of distrusts: nevertheless
knowing him to be come only with 14. or 16. horse, we refused not to admit
him to our presence, to prove if with him we could end and cease those causes
of distrusts and troubles in Picardie. Wherein perceiving that we could not
prevail, and that our said Town every day more and more increased and was
filled with strangers, that followed and attended on Periculum est si coetus
and consilia and secretas consultationes esse sinas. Tit. Liuius.
the said Duke, that the searches we had commanded to be made through our
said Town by the Magistrates and Officers of the same, were in a manner but
half done, for the fear they were in, as also that the hearts and minds of
some of them, were more altered and hardened, Guise not to come, and yet he
comes: he is offended at his coming, and yet he lets him stay: and the
Duke of Guise perceiving that the king commands him no more like a king,
obeys him no more like a subject: he enterpriseth his pretenses, because
sufferance gives courage unto his enterprises. Quis eum metuat, qui per
segnitiem patitur hebescere aciem suae authoritatis.
and the ordinary aduertisements day lie brought us, that there would be some
great matter effected in that Town. We determined to cause the said searches
France had his heart free of jealousy and distrust in his Capital town,
against a Duke of Guise, he ought to have dissembled or discovered the
mischief. This search discovered the fire covered under the ashes of desire of
peace, and when those wounded hearts knew the mine to be discovered, that the
kings distrust suspected their pretenses, they judged that he which first
began the mutiny should be master, and therefore it had bin better for the
king to have dissembled and withholde^ his severity. Res enim monebat cauere
magis qua^ quod in illos statueret consultare. Salustius.
to be more exactly done in all the quarters of the same, the^ before they had
bin, to the end we might be truly certified of the true estate thereof, and
cause the said strangers to avoid, that were not avouched as they ought to
be: which to effect, we were determined to make certain Courts of guard of
the Citizens and Inhabitants thereof, which we appointed to be erected in
four or five places of the Town, with certain companies of Switzers, and
those of the Regiment of our guard, that were lodged in the subburbes of the
City.

And also to command certain Lords of our Council, and knights of the order
of the holy ghost, Guises arrival at Parris, that diverse soldiers and men of
factions came thither to be ready at the sound of the basen, that the name of
that Prince was the Lodestone that drew the Iron hearts of the league unto
it, caused his guards to be strengthened, and searches to be made. But as if
he had not bin assured without the advice of the Duke of Guise, he advertised
him thereof, who fearing to be prevented, took that search as a prick to
hasten his pretense, he spoke but the word, and presently Parris bended it
self against the Louure, as if it had been against the fort of an enemy, and
they went with their heads bended against the kings forces, as in times they
did against the Englishmen and Bourguinions. Quo quo scelesti ruitis?
Furorne caecus, an rapit, vis acrior? An culpa?
Horat.
to go into each quarter, with the Quarter-maisters and other Officers of the
said Town, by whom the common custom is, to make such searches, the better
to aid, authorize, and assist them therein, as it has been done diverse times
heretofore, whereof we advertised the said Duke, and all the Inhabitants of
the City, to the end they should not sound alarm, and so doubt of our
meaning therein: which in the beginning the Inhabitants and Townes-men made show
not to dislike. Nevertheless not long after, things fell out in such sort, by
the provocation of certain persons Parris and those that perceived their
boldness as then used to be without censure, and their crime without
punishment, began to kindle the fire that hatched under the ashes of their
rebellion, and first cried in the streets, Lay hold on the Tyrant, the
Huguenot and the Pollititian, words sufficient to move the most modest, and
stir the slowest unto fury in such attempts: where the respect of the Prince
or the uncertainty of the event, retain the general, there must always be
some seditious fellow, that cries and begins the play: for the people are
like a sea, that never stirs without wind, and therefore in their
commotions there must be men purposely appoined, Qui imperitos animos
impella^t, libertate^ ac speciosa nomina praetexantur. Tacitus.
that sowed and put into the hearts and minds of the said Inhabitants, that we
had caused the said forces to enter into the Town, there to establish a
Garrison of strangers, and to do them further wrong, in such manner, that in
short space they had so animated and moved them against our said Soldiers,
that if we had not expressly commanded their Leaders, not to attempt any thing
against the said Inhabitants, and rather to endure and suffer all the
extremities of the world, the^ to commit any trespass in that behalf: we are
certainly persuaded, that it had been impossible to have shunned a general
spoil of the said Town, with a most great effusion of blood. Maubert one of
the most important places in the Town, able to command the rest, and that
ought to have been first entered into, stood void, and served the Townsmen
as a camp, therein to raise the most beastly troops of their mutiny, both to
defend and assail, in such manner, that as soon as certain of the rebels
had entered into it, they were presently followed by those that respected
nothing but the present time, not considering the miserable end of their
sedition, so that Vnde plures erant omnes suere. Tacitus.
Which we perceiving, determined not to proceed any further with those common
searches, and presently to with draw our said forces, which we had caused to
enter only for that purpose, it being very likely, that if we had had any
other intent, we had attempted, and it may be fully executed the same at our
pleasures, before the raising of the said Inhabitants, and that they had drawn
chains or set upon their Barricadoes in the streets, which they began
presently after noone: at the which time, there being in all the streets of
the said towns certain Gentelemen, Captains or other strangers, sent by the
said Duke of Guise, and appointed for the purpose, that in short time had
dispearsed themselves in every quarter, Ferocior ad rebellandum quam ad
bellandum. Tit. Liu.
and forcing the said companies of Switzers and French me^ to retire: to our
great greef there was certain caliuers shot, and some blows given by the said
Inhabitants, that hurt some of the said Switzers, whom we caused to retire,
and yt evening to be lodged about our Palace of Louure, to attend the end of
the commotion made by the said Inhabitants, doing all we might to pacithe same;
the next day causing them to issue out of the Town, reserving those that
before their coming we had placed for a guard about our castle m of Louure, it
being showed us, that it would be the means to pacify the said Inhabitants.

We caused likewise to be stayed certain foot companies of the Regiment of
Picardie, that were at the least seven or eight miles from thence, as also
certain Lords and Gentlemen our servants that came unto us, perceiving their
coming to be put into the peoples heads, and made a shadow of the said
Inhabitants, rising nevertheless, Solomon had thirty thousand soldiers for
his guard: Romulus three hundredth Celeres: the kings of Persia 365. Ge^tleme^
of one liuerie: the Princes of Greece were served by the Scytes and Danes:
Julius Caezar had Spaniards: Caracalle, Almains: the kings of France, in the
beginning had their subjects, that watched at the gates of their Palace, and
the Captains were called Magistri Ostiariorum: after that, Scots and Switzers,
and since, they have added one hundredth Gentlemen, and to them the forty five.
But all they could not assure the king in his town, his Palace of Louure, nor
in his house, but he was constrained to double his forces, against the mutiny
of his subjects. Three things make a Prince pass through the middle of al
mutinies and conspiracies. Virtues and the constant resolution of friends: The
government of subjects: And the providence and foresight of the Prince.
in steed of seeing it take effect as need required, for their good and our
contentment, they ceased not to make more Barricadoes, and to strengthen their
watches both day and night, approaching them nearer our said Castle of Louure,
so far forth as that they seemed to set upon our ordinary Sentinelles, and
likewise to cease upon the keys of the Town house, and of France, the prudence
and long experience of Monsieur de Bellieure, the fair speeches of M. de
Villequier, nor all the kings Council could do nothing therein. The mad man
rejects his medecines, and drives his Physicians from him, Superfluum
suadere quid fieri oporteat cum audientium assensus in deteriora rapitur.
Egesippus.
Saint Anthonies, and other Gates of the City, in such manner, Princeps,
pauidus socors. Tacitus.
that upon the thirteenth of this month proceeded so far, that it seemed not
in the power of man, to impeach their great and violent commotion, which
began to proceed even to the walls of our Castle, which we perceiving, Ex
ferocibus vniuersis singuli metu suo obedie^tes fuissent. It was necessary in
that great tempest to unlade the ships to keep the^ from sinking, and prefer a
general before a particular, for that all is of greater moment then a part,
and the City more then the Citizens.
desiring not to imploye our said forces against the said Inhabitants, the
conservation of the said Town and good Citizens thereof, having always bin
as dear unto us, as our own lives, as they in many sorts have well tried, we
determined the same day to depart, and rather to absent our person from the
thing we so much have and as yet do effect, then see it run into greater
hazard, and thereby receive further displeasure, having desired the Queen our
dear Lady and mother to stay there, to see if by her wisdom and authority
in our absence, she could pacify the same tumult, which we being present
she^ could not do, what means soever she used. The king should not have gone
out of Parris: a great light dimmeth the less, those little facts had never
shined in the darkness of Parris, if the sun of the royal Majesty had not
bin eclipsed. He ought to have showed himself among those mad people, like
ablazing star, like thundering Mars, like him that obtained the victories at
16. years of age, before Iarnac, Moncontour, and at Rochel, at the only word
of king: those strayed souls had yielded themselves to the point of
obedience, the apprehension of the pain that follows those mutenies, the
consideration of the Majesty of the king, the confidence of his mildness, and
the proof of his piety, had dispearsed those disorders. And the good
Frenchmen that were in no small number, that in their minds lamented the
injury done unto the king, the Realm of France, and their posterity, would
have risen up to maintain his authority. Those great blows are not given
without hazard, and where necessity presses a great courage, death is more
acceptable then a shameful flight.
And we arrived in this town of Chartres, from whence we thought it meet
presently to certify you by these our letters, to desire you to consider of
this action, and to judge how much it preiudiseth and disaduantageth the
Commonwealth, specially our holy Catholicque, Apostolicque, and Roman
religion, if it should pass further, seeing that those which rose to fight for
the advancement thereof by this accident, if it be not repaired, will be
separated to use their arms, one against the other, wherein we desire you to
be persuaded, that for our part, we will use all means we can, not to fall
into that inconvenience, so much power has the zeal we bear (to our
religion) over us, which until this time we have always showed, Parris,
which the Englishmen, Spaniards, nor Almaines, never did unto thy ancestors:
and by thy letters pattents thou show to thy people, that in steed of being
revenged, thou seem to think the time long until they pardon thee: thou
commaundest that they should pray unto God for that reconciliation: the^ there
is no danger to lift up the hand against the Prince. Believe therefore, that
seeing it is so, he which has this day made thee fly, will to morrow
boldly undertake to make thee die. And is not this great king, a hazarding of
thy self, to show unto thy subjects, that it is easy to attempt against thy
person, when in steed of revenging thy self, thou prayest that thy subjects
would appease those, whom thou ought to punish? Who persuaded thee that the
remedy of thy mischief is civil wars, that by that means thou shall
recover thy authority over thy subjects? Alas, how thou art deceived? There
is nothing worse for a house, then fire: for a man's body, then a continual
fever: nor for an estate, then civil wars. If thou will remedy these
mischiefs, quench the fire that burns thy house: drive away the continual
fever from the body of thy estate, and give it peace: for it is is the only
means to preserve thy Realm.
praying and exhorting you, as much as possible we may, to pray in your
Churches for this union, and that the obedience due unto us, may be observed
as it ought to be: and suffer not that the Inhabitants of our town, etc. to
stray out of the right way of the same, but admonish and confirm the^ to
remain constant and firm in their loyalties toward their king, and in union
and concord to maintain and preserve themselves under our obedience, and not
to fall into the inco^ueniences prepared for them, if they hold on their
course. And further, if you do any other thing, therein showing your wisdoms,
fidelities and duties, for examples to all our subjects, we will not be
unthankful for it, but have it in remembrance. Given at Chartres, the day of
May, 1587.

The phrase of the letters the Duke of of Guise wrote unto the King, is much
brauer, haughtier, and bolder, showing the affection of a man, that has not
faintly thrust his body into a prease to save his life: but that will stand in
the view and face of all the world: he likewise sent his declaratio^s throughout
all the Realm of France, to justify himself concerning the commotion in
Parris, which I will orderly set down, and in the end show you the common
advise, leaving the Readers judgment to himself.

The Coppie of a Letter written unto the King, by the Duke of Guise, the
seventeenth of May, 1588.
SIr, I am very unfortunate, that those who of long time, by many devises have
sought to separate me from your presence and great favor, have had sufficient
means wholly to frustrate all my good endeavors, used to win your liking, and
by my services make my self agreeable to your Majesty: which not long since, I
have well proved, to my no little grief.

For that being weary of so many false reports used, thereby to make your
Majesty continually to distrust me, I determined with the hazard, wherewith I
was threatened, to justify my life, having resolved to come unto you with so
small a troop, and with free trust and confidence, as I hoped by that means
to let all the world see, that I was far from that, whereof my evil willers
sought by so many devises to yield me culpable. But the enemies of public
quietness, not being able to endure my admission to your presence, esteeming
that in short time it would soon discover the impostures used to make me
odious, and by little and little give me place in your good favor, rather
wished by their pernicious counsels, to bring al things into confusion, and
your estate and town of Parris in hazard, the^ to endure me near unto your
person. Their evil wills is manifestly known in the resolution, (that without
the Queen your mothers knowledge, and against the advice of your wisest
Counselors) they causedyour Majesty to take by an unaccustomed means, and in
a time full of suspicion and partiallities, to place forces in your Town of
Parris, to keep the publicque places thereof, and the common speech given
forth, that they hoped being Masters thereof, they should bring you to many
other things, whollycontrary to your good nature, and such as at this time I
had rather keep silent, then once to utter. The fear thereof, constrained your
good and loyal subjects to arm themselves, by reason of the just fear they
had that by such means the thing was intended to be executed, wherewith long
before they had bin threatened. God by his grace has holde^ things in better
stay then we could wish, and has as it were miraculously preserved your
Town from a most perilous hazard. And the beginning, pursuit, and effect of
those affairs has in such manner justified my intents, that I esteem your
Majesty and all the world, does thereby clearly perceive how far my actions
are separated from slanders, the pretenses whereof my slanderous enemies would
accuse me.

The manet how is thus: First, I came voluntary unto your Majesty, and put my
self into your power, I showed the confidence and trust I had in your good
nature, and the sincerity of my service. The estate wherein I was found when I
received the first news of that enterprise, which diverse of your servants can
witness, shows that I doubted not any injury, nor have any desire of
enterprise, being with less company, more disarmed, and in my house, then one
of my quallitie either may or ought to be.

The respect then that I have used, containing my self within the simple
bounds of a just defense, are witnesses sufficient unto you, that no occasion
can make me fall from the duty of a most humble subject. The pain I take to
restrain the people, and hinder them that they might not proceed to the
effects, which oftentimes such accidents do breed, discharges me from the
slanders heretofore imposed upon me, that I would trouble your town of
Parris: the care I should have taken to preserve them, whom I knew by the
crafty means of my enemies, had given me bad report unto your Majesty,
makes it evident unto all men, that I never intended to attempt any thing
against your servants and officers, as I am falsely accused. The manner of my
behauior to your Switzers, and the Captains and soldiers of your guard, are
sufficient assurance that I feared nothing more, then to displease you: if your
Majesty knew all the particularities, as I think the greatest part of your
good seruitors loving public peace, that are witnesses, have not hidden them
from you: I am persuaded it remains cleared by that means. That I never had
the least of the mischeeuous intents, for the which my enemies by false reports
would make me odious.

I hope the end will yet give more assured testimony, having received one of
the greatest displeasures that could happen unto me, when I understood your
Majesty had determined to depart, because your sudden departure bereaved me
of the means, as I pretended, to pacify and effect all things to your liking,
and saw them well disposed thereunto, at such time as the Queen your mother,
vouchsafed me the honor to come unto me: whereof I gave her so good liking,
that I think she might be assured thereof. And although I could not as then
show it, I will not cease to continue the same good will, and doubt not but to
behave my self in such sort, that your Majesty shall think me a most
faithful subject and servant, and one that desires nothing so much, then that
in doing service, and purchasing the benefit of your Realm, I may obtain the
good fortune of your favor, which I will never cease to purchase, until it
pleases God to grant meethe means: whom I beseech to give your Majesty,
etc. from Parris this 17. of May, 1588.


An extract of other letters written by the said Duke of Guise.
WE have sufficient labor to withstand the devises that are day lie invented
against us, to find means to let us from going into Guyenne against the
Huguenots: we sought to please the King touching his Garrisons in Picardie, and
although that Regiment had not marched, but only to renew old quarrels, and
seek new contradictions, yet we constrained our friends for the space of a
month, to endure Espernons forces against them. As touching new matter of
impeachment, the said Espernon sought to make some controuerfie in Normandy,
which he had found hard enough, if for the desire we had, to see wars begun
against the hereticques, we had not dealt in his affairs, and procured our
friends to content themselves, and not once to trouble or molest him, but the
more to entangle us, both by those superfluous Garrisons, and lost voyage,
wholly to break the course of war, and to turn it against us, they devised
a means to impeach our honor, causing certain leuies to be raised, thereby to
cause us to be more feared then the hereticques, which are, that we desire a
massacre in Parris, that we would take the king, and sack the town, thereby
to procure money, wherewith to make wars against whom we think good: with
other such like things put into his Majesty's head, with the greatest shows of
sincerity in his behalf that may be devised, thereby to procure them more
credit, which has been the devise that has most put us in despair, thereby
perceiving the king more bent to provide for his own defense, then to continue
wars against the hereticques: and that we are so unfortunate, as to be so
hardly esteemed of by some, and so far, that his holiness himself has by
his letter seemed to persuade us unto fidelity to the king our Sovereign.
This despair lastly procured (I say) did cease so much the more upon me, when
as I understood that the king would strengthen his guard with source companies
of French men, and three of Switzers, in such manner, that not desiring to stay
longer in suspicion of so vile actions, within 12. hours after, I arrived in
Parris, accompanied with 8. Gentlemen, and in the middle of all the guards
aforesaid, I went to kiss the kings hands, having no other safe conduct but my
services, and the confidence that a good subject ought to put in his king. This
free access, sincerity, and open heart, me thinks ought to be a clear
justification of me touching al false reports. And in truth, there was no
horest man but rejoiced in his heart, as every man well perceived. The next
day, being always assured in my conscience, I stayed all day with the king,
sometimes in one place, sometimes in an other, devising of the voyage into
Guyenne, and touching that war which I so much affect. Mean time, (as I
presume) the king made inquiry in all places, if I were not followed by
greater troops, then that where with I entered. And having known (as true it
was) that I came with so few, and not one soldier near me by 40. miles, the
next day being the 12. of May, very early in the morning, there entered into
the Town at S. Honores gate, 12. companies of Switzers, and 8. companies of
Frenchmen, besides the companies of the guard, the king and all his Court being
on horseback to receive them. The Master of the field, and regiment of the
guard, and the colonels of the Switzers, having commandment to cease upon
all the places of the City, but the Inhabitants of one part of the Town
fearing some matter, were appointed to keep their quarters, minding to
withstand them, for the care they had of their wives and children in such an
accident: while that was done, I being a sleep in my chamber with so small a
company, for that my household was not as then come from Scissons, as God would,
when the said forces were dividing in that manner about the city, I was
advertised by certain Gentlemen my friends, that as then werein Parris about
their affairs: and which is more, God most miraculously stirred up the
people, with one consent to enter into arms, and without any conference,
being assured of my presence, and of certain order that I presently took
among them, of themselves they began to make Barricadoes in all places within
ten paces of those fortaine forces, and that with such dexterity and
vehemency, that in less then 2. hours they certified the said troops, that
they would presently have them depart out of the City and subburbes, at the
which time, some one of the Switzers hurt an Inhabitant of the town, whereupon
they charged the Switzers, and slew 12. or 15, hurt 20. or 25, and disarmed
therest. On the other side, certain companies of the kings guard were likewise
disarmed and sent into houses, where with their Captains they were forced to
save themselves: which caused me to enter into the streets of the City, and
presentlv delivered 900. Switzers, that were holden prisoners, and many of the
guard, which I sent safely into the Louure, this day shining with yt infallible
protection of god, being ended, I went through all the streets, until 2. of the
clock after midnight, praying, desiring, and threatening the people in such
sort, that by the grace of God, theresollowed not any murder, massacre,
spoil, nor loss of any penny or drop of blood, more then I spoke of before,
although the people were most extremely animated, because (as they said) they
understood that there were 20. gibbets, with certain scaffolds prepared, and
the executioners ready to execute and put to death 100. persons nominated by
them, whose names I had rather let guess then set them down. You will not
believe, what great contentment this gracious goodness of God procured in my
mind: first, in that I saw mine honor so clearly discharged of the suspicions
of spoil and massacre, that had been put into the heads of many honest men
against me, for that having seen all the proceedings, and so happily impeached
the same, I made all mine enemies mute. Secondly, having given proof of my
zeal to the service and honor of my king, so far, as to restore the arms
that had been borne against me, with the drumbs and fyfes conducting the
prisoners sending them their colors, delivering the besieged, and not omitting
any respect, which the most constant would have done.

But they did so much, that they persuaded the king to depart out of Parris,
24. houers after, that I would he should have stayed: But Cod defend that ever
I should think it. Since his departure, his Majesty has had some other
sharper counsel, I have received the Arsenal, the Bastille, and other strong
places, into my custody, I have caused the coffers of his treasures to be
sealed, to deliver them safely and peaceably into his Majesty's hands, as we
hope likewise to procure him unto peace, by prayers to God, intercession to his
holiness, and all other Christian Princes, for the special and not common
proof of fidelity, he has always had of me, but if the mischief continue, I
hope by the same means to preserve religion and the Catholicques, and defend
them from persecution: which the confederates, with hereticques about the king,
had prepared for them.


Another letter of the said Duke of Guise, to the Lord of Bassompierre.
I Writ a lettervnto his highness, which I pray you look upon, although the
Baily of S. Michaels (an eye witness) will justify all my actions, whose
presence, until this time, has hindered me from oftener sending, being
assured he will not forget any thing: the terms whereon we stand, are, that
this morning we present our request: which is directly against Espernon,
wherein all his perfections are well set down, not omitting any thing.
Yesterday I was in the Towne-house, to admit la Chapelle, that has bin chosen
Provost of Merchants, and the General Rolland, Compan, and other persons and
good Catholicques for Sherisfes, the Provost of Merchants, Perreuze being in
the Bastille, and the traitorous Sheriffs fled, there was never seen so
great an obedience of the people in such a commotion: for it cannot be said
that there happened any disorder or wrong, even to the swords, morions, pikes,
caliuers, of 1200. Switzers or Frenchmen taken away, which I caused to
berestored. You never saw stranger accident, we were most wrongfully assailed,
and that by pernicious counsel covertly devised by hereticques. God of his
grace has preserved us, by the resolution, obedience, and courage of those of
Parris, which they continue more then ever they did, with most brave
resolution, to show all duty and obedience to the King: but above all, to
preserve their zeal to religion, and the surety of their Town. The king
raises forces, and we also, he his at Chartres, and we at Parris, thus stand
our affairs: the Governor of Haure C'est bravely withstood Espernon, and
would not allow him: the Governor of Caen would not receive him, specially
into his Castle. This is that which he has done in Normandy, from whence he
is come without establishment of himself, or any of his, being yesterstay
come to the king, although he had sent four Posts to will him to stay, as
being abhorred of all the Princes and officers. Those of Orleans, Amiens,
Abbeuille, Bourges, and manygreat towns, have driven the Pollititans out, and
taken diverse prisoners. All the little Towns send hither to crave the aid of
us and the Town. Justice is peaceable, and no man can speak hardly of all
these things. You must make a voyage hitherto see your friends, who^ God be
thanked you shall not find unprovided of means nor resolution: we must be
well advertised out of Almaine, least we be prevented: we want neither force,
courage, friends, nor means, nor less honor, respect, and fidelity to the
king, wherein we will inuiolably continue, showing the duties of men of honor,
and good Catholicques. These are the terms wherein your friends remain, that
commend themselves unto you, this 12. of May.

L'Amy de Coeur.
Monsieur the Count, shall find his most affectionate commendations. His
Highnesseshall see this word. L'Amy de Coeur.

Come with speed.




If truth be always found in fair words, we need not seek it in any other
place then in these three letters, but if we take a sponge to wipe them
clean, that we may see the bottom, we shall find that the exposition
follows not the text: he begins the letter to the king with an
unfortunate clause, saying: (Sir, I am very unfortunate) and truly if the
felicity of this life consists in contentment, contentment in quietness,
and quietness in a good conscience, how can we call a Prince fortunate or
happy, that is not content with his estate, The misery of great men.
that finds no peace but in troubles? assailed with the violence of passions,
like a tree blown with two contrary winds, tormented by so many strange
accidents, that abounoeth in the excess of greatness of courage, that has no
other life, the^ the miserable death of his quietness, that nourishes the
brimstone, which will consume him in his veins, that penetrateth his bones,
and sucketh out the moist humor that gives him life.

Unfortunate, and thrice unfortunate, to live in this sort between fear and
distrust, and then to have an account to make to that great God, that reuengeth
the injury of Kings, and of the people, and that throws down such attempts
as pass beyond reason. Misfortune always hayleth upon such proud heads, as
desire to clime up to the Moon, and with their feet to touch the very
intralles and bottom of the earth: that seek to administer laws to heaven,
earth, and hell. It is most infallible truth, that such as seek their own
glory and profit, by the hurt and damage of their country, and the
subversion of public peace, The miserable end of disturbers of an estate. This
does show, that it was printed without the Authors name, in the year, 1562.
will be mischieued by the mischiefs that they themselves procure, and
overthrow themselves in the storm of their outrageous passions. All our
Histories are full of the violent deaths of those that sought to thrust their
nails into the wounds of the Commonwealth, to make themselves great, for
that God, which imbraceth the quarrelles of an innocent people, that detesteth
rebellio^s, that has particular care of kings and their estates, dispearseth
the scourges, and casts away the rods wherewith he whipped the shoulders of
those that shake off the yoke of his commandments. It is holden, that the
trouble of Vassy kindled the fires of the first civil wars. And therefore
Ronsard in his Demonstration directed to the people of France, desires that
the authors of those new troubles, may perish with the spring time of the year
next ensuing after he wrote: and in truth the Duke of Guise died not long
after, in the same season: his verses are these.

O God most high, that dwell in the clouds,
And know well the authors of our wars,
God that all scest, behold and understand,
Grant I thee pray, that with the next sweet spring,
Which shall bring forth the pleasant blooming flower,
The author of our troubles manifold,
May die in combat, and his life yield up,
By force of pike, or bullet fatally.
Also there is no sin, which God does less dissemble with, nor wherein his
wisdom does use shorter tolleration, or his fury greater and sharper to punish
it, then the sin of great men, which dispearse, overthrow, and trouble the
laws of a Realm: he adds, that to quench the false reports that ran of
him, that with the peril wherewith he was threatened, he would justify his
life, coming unto his Majesty with so small a company, A great person o^^ht
to purge himself.
it is a point of generositie to put innocence out of hazard. A great man is
blamed for dissembling the slanders made against him, and the haughtier the
heart is, the greater is the feeling. Nicyas was despised, as being so
timorous, that he gave money to such as accused him falsely, to leave off their
accusations. Lucius Posthumous fled by reason of an Embassage, and for that he
would not be at an assignation made by Marcus Cantius Tribun unto him, to
appear before the people. To the contrary, they are commended, He disposes of
their offices.
that offered to purge themselves before their enemies, as Caius Menenius
Dictator, and Marcus Follius his Constable. The Duke of Guise perceiving
himself so near the King, and being advertised of the accusations made
against him, touching his pretenses, had reason to go to Parris in that manner,
and with so small a company, The life of an honest man, ought to be seen of
all men.
for that the subject ought not to approach the presence of his Prince with any
forces, nor in that sort to present himself unto his Majesty, for the
interest he had to be once justified, for that a man of honor, and careful of
his credit, that respects not the common brute, but the integrity of his
conscience, that makes his house (like y^ of Julius Drusus) in such sort, that
his neighbors on al fides may see into it, never suffers himself to be so
wholly born away, for the conseruatio^ of his proper life, that he neglects
his reputation. And so he assures the king, that nothing but that, made him
come to Parris: desiring rather to disobey, then languish in such distrust. His
goodly reasons are not without reply: gardiners are of opinion, that they make
roses and violets of a sweeter savor, if they sow or plant them hard by onyons
or garlic. Let us see, if whether that, whereof the Duke of Guise is
reproached, or his allegations be most sauerie. I will herein set down a piece
of the Apostrophe of the most excellent and liberal discourse, and the intent
of the author was, that such as would write the Histories of our time, should
serve themselves therewith. Gold is good in all places, this gilding will
beautify our workmanshippe: Thou complainest says he, that evil reports
were made against thee, and thy honor, which God be thanked thou have defaced
by this last act: thou art a marvelous Rethorician, certainly it is true: thou
art well purged: thou art accused to have caused the people of certain towns in
this Realm, to have risen against the Governors that the K. would have placed
therein: and thou have defaced that blot, by causing Parris to rise against the
K. himself: thou art accused, that at Chaalons, Reims, Soissons, and other
places where thou came, thou did cease upon the kings treasures: and thou
have purged thy self by taking those he had spared and kept in his capital
city: thou were suspected to enterprise against the estate, and to aspire
unto the crown, and yt for the same purpose, thou had already ceased upon
certain good towns holde^ by thee and thy partners, wherein the K. is not
obeyed: thou have made this false report to vanish, coming in person to make
thy self Master of Parris, and in driving the K. out, after thou had
forced, slain, and disarmed his guard, and made the common people of the town to
rise up against him, in which sort thou do most wisely cover a theft with a
sacrilidge: a murder, with an homedice: and a sin with a crime: thy
simplicity is too gross: thou triumphest that thou wast so hardy to enter
into Parris, with no more the^ 8. Gentlemen, a sign of thy simple innoce^cie.
A great matter surely, but go thou into Rochel with all thy new Courtiers, thy
followers and thy guard: the king of N. will enter therein but with 4. men only:
and if at thy going out, thou runnest not away-he will make thee be shrew thy
self.

It is easy to be said in base Britain, but those that know that all the
kings Council are on thy side: that his mother favors thee: that all the
mutiners and crocheters of Parris, and all the common inhabitants thereof, are
at thy devotion. We say that thy simplicity was very subtle, and thy
innocence much to be suspected. How will thou have us believe, that thou
did-dest put so much trust and confidence in the king, seeing that after the
league, and the capitulation of Saint Maur, thou would never come thither,
unless thon were as strong as he: yet during his being in his army against
the Rutters, thou never set foot within it, only once by surprising it,
and that for the space of a quarter of an hour: No, believe me, it is thy
exercise to play these feats, and not to excuse them, thou art better
acquainted with the one, then the other. He says that the distrust which
ceased upon the people of Parris, when the kings forces entered into the
publicque places of the Town, constrained his good and faithful subjects to
arm themselves, and without conference, together, assured of his presence, and
of certain order by him suddenly taken among them, they Barricadoed
themselves on all sides.

Barricadoes, the invention of the Duke of Guise.
Then the Barricadoes are the invention of the Duke of Guise, and without his
presence the people had not stirred, taken arms, not banded against the
thunder that descended from heaven. This is confirmed by the declaration made
by the Parrisians, the words whereof are these: Advice was given, that the
Regiment of Picardie was sent for in great haste, as also the Sieurs de Mer^
and de Thore, bringing more then three hundredth horse, which could not be
prepared, unless that matter had been purposed long before.

The occasions of the Barricadoes.
The news of those troops made the Parrissians to suspect, and the insolences
of those already established, made us as then to inquire of the preparation
made by the Duke de Guise, and understanding that neither he nor his were
armed, every man thought to aid himself, so that as it were by one general
consent, every one in less then an hour, united and placed them in the
streets for their defense, which is a thing natural to al living creatures: so
the Parrissians moved not, but for fear of a Garrison, this foundation is not
well laid, for that all sedition and rebellion is evil and pernicious in
kingdoms, although the cause be good and commendable.

As the Prince should cut off the means to the first motions of those
troubles, and quench the fires, that being hatched in a particular house,
would enter into the Churches, Palaces, and public houses: so the people
ought to suffer and endure al extremities, rather then to rise against their
sovereign, although he were a Tyrant, cruel, inhumaine: for like as all that
pleases a Prince, is not permitted to be done by him, so al ye is permitted
unto ye people, is not profitable: and oftentimes it happens, that the
remedy is more cruel then the disease it self, and that seeking to shun one
calamity, we entangle our selves in an infinite of miseries. Experience
sets before our eyes, the enterprises and success of coniurations: Defense
is not permitted to subjects against their King.
the beginnings have been impiteous, and the ends miserable.

The tyranny of one man is evil, that of many is worse, but the worst of all
is an unbridled power, and an absolute liberty that has cast off the yoke of
laws. When a people arm themselves against a Tyrant, it must take heed, that
of one, it makes not fifteen, or that in seeking to shun tyranny, The words
of K. Francis.
it indureth not confusion and disorder, which from the royalty proceeds to
the populer estate. You my Masters of Parris, allege, that the arms you
bear, are not to offend any man, but only to defend themselves that is good
against a strange Prince, but against the king and your Sovereign, it is most
execrable: God detesteth and forbids it, and whatsoever he does, be it
right or wrong, it is no more lawful for you to stir against him, then for a
child to move against his Parents.

Causes of sedition.
The life of man is the union of the body and the soul: the life of a Realm,
is commandment and obedience, if the one be separated from the other, that
the soul tyrannizeth the body, and that the body will not receive the law
of the soul, that is of reason, it is a death. When the Prince commands
unjustly, and when the subjects will not obey, the Realm falls to ruin, her
temperature alters and resolves into the first matter, loosing her form.

It was to that end, that wise King Francis the first said, that every estate
of Commonwealth, or Monarchy, consists but in two points, in the just
commandment of a Prince, and the loyal obedience of the subjects. Let us now
see why so many euilles and disobediences have issued from this pandore: all
commotions such as that of Paris, do commonly grow upon one of these points.

When the people are charged with supportable exactions, by the avarice of the
Princes that raises them upon the people by inhumaine and infamous ways and
impositions: as Calig^le raised impositions upon common Stews, Heliogabalus
upon men's vrin, and Alexander Seuerus upon Hot-houses, there is always
mutenie. And therefore the Parrissians under Charles the sixth, took occasion
to mutin, because the Gabelliers asked a halfe-penny of a poor woman that
sold Cresson.

When the King gives estates and dignities to vicious, rather then virtuous,
and unworthy, rather then worthy men. For as in a consort of music, the
different voices are ruled by one tune, from the which they cannot once so
little varrie, but they make a discord in the ears of the Musicians: Likewise
the Commonwealth composed of men of high, mean, and base quallities, that are
united by Harmonicall proportion, according to the which proportion, in the
distinction of persons, and their merits, publicque charges ought to be
supplied. And when honors (which is the most dainty morsel of virtue) is
conferred to cold and raw stomachs, it becomes contemptible. The estate of
Barron was renowned in France, but it was afterward imbased, when Charles the
sixth, at the siege of Bourdeaux, created 500. at on time.

The order of S. Michael. instituted by King Lewis the 11.
The order of Saint Michael continued in his glory, until such time as our
Kings gave it indifferently to all degrees, without exception of persons, or
quallities, and that they bestowed it upon such as were rather Knights then
Noblemen. The Queene-mother showed her self therein to be a woman, when she
called all sorts of people to that degree, without discretion, making one
collor for every man's head, receiving into that order (of the greatest
Monarchs in the world) such as mean Princes, would not have bestowed better
places in their houses, then to make them Grooms of their stables, what order
soever they wear about their necks.

The first article of the institution, contains, that the number of knights
shall be of six and thirty Gentlemen, both of name and arms, without
reproach, whereof the King shall be one, that should be called brethren and
companions of the Order. In the 48. article it is ordained, that at the disease
of any of the brethren of the said Order, there shall be an election made of
another knight, of the same conditions as aforesaid, and that by the greatest
numbers of the voices, of the Sovereign and brethren of the Order, and that
the Sovereigns voice should be counted for two. When Princes are too much
addicted to such as they favor, that they thrust their means over liberally
into their own pleasures, those that perceive themselves elevated into such
authorities not to descend, but therein to maintain themselves, do willingly
conspire against the Prince himself, raising the subjects, and seeking to get
all that, Ambition and Jealousy, two plagues among great men.
whereof already they have obtained great part, thinking they can have no
better nor sufficienter lodging, then the place of those by who^ they were
preferred. The aduanceme^t of the Majors of the Palace, caused great mutations
in the estate of France, about the end of the first geneologie of our Kings.
Seian perceiving himself so strong, enterprised against Tiberius, Perennius
against Commodus, Eutropus against Theodosius, Belissairius against Iustinien,
and Artaban against Xerxes: desire to command is an over dainty morsel,
which to taste, we tread underfoot and suppress, both respect, duty,
honor, and conscience, such disorders arm men's hearts to resolution, their
weapons to mutinies, and their arms with Iron. Lastly, when a king without
reason, puts great Princes and Noblemen of his Realm to death, bannisheth
the honest and wise men of his Council, nourishes partiallities and divisions,
favors wars, to impouerish his people, loves none but strangers, and
distrusteth his subjects, suffers the peruersion of his laws, the corruption
of justice, the invention of new subsidies against the ancient form and
equallitie, without doubt he gives the first shaking and overthrow to his
estate, and provoke his subjects to conspire, rise, and mutin, but whatsoever
may be said, the principal motive to sedition, is injustice, which is a great
crime. When kings or their Lieftenants convert their Sovereigns authorities
into injuries, insolences, and iniustices, and reward the good wills of their
subjects with outrage and violences. The Switzers rose up and slew Grisler, and
Landberg their Governors, The sure guard of Princes.
in the house of Austria, for their violent behavior, wherein they were
esteemed the first scourges of Tyrants. When the K. despises great personages,
to favor men of base condition, or when he oppresses and altogether
overthrows the meaner sort, to eleuate the greater, it is a fault both in the
one and the other, the remedy is equallitie, the mother of peace and nurse of
concord, not that which makes a platonical communion of al things, but that
which justly considers and ballanceth the merits and qualities of every man.
The K. should cause himself to be beloved of al, without despising or hatred of
any man, if it be possible. Such as perceive kings to be like figtrees, that
grow upon the top of an inaccessable hill, and that the fruits thereof serve
only for food unto crows, kites, and other fowls of the air, and that they
are put from public charges, by such as are not capable thereof, do willingly
rise, and such as have great authorities to command, despise the meaner sort,
in such manner, that the despite of the first, and the insolency of the last,
stirs up seditions. But tell me, if it pleases you, my Masters of Parris,
upon which of these causes do you begin your rebellion, or whether it be of
pride, that you raised your revolt?

Tarquin. Neron. Demetrius. Ptolomee. Lucullus. Muleasses. Phocas. Heliogabal.
Vitellius. Gallus. Gallien. Roboan. Cofroas. Iul. Apostat. Chilperic. Thomas.
Lewis. 11. Poptelking of Polonia. Maximin. Caracalla. Perseus. Lewis de
Bauiere. Pertinax. Isaac. Frotho. Ferdinand King of Naples. Berot a Span yard,
Mayor of the Palace. Iean. Constance. Ladislaus. Lewis. Plaints of the
Parrisians. Disorder in justice and promises.
Has the king ravished your wives, like Tarquinus? has he burnt your houses,
like Nero? have you seen in his apparel, the supersluities of Demetrius king
of Macedonia: in his recreations, the pleasures of Ptolomee: at his table, the
disorders of Lucullus: and in his pastimes the luxuriousness of Muleasses king
of Tons? have you marked in him the miserableness of Maurice and Phocas, the
confusion and monstrous prodigallitie of Heliogabalus and Vitellius, or the
toys of your Emperors, Gallus and Gallien.

Has he ransomed his subjects, like Roboam? despised the service of God, like
Cofroas? renounced Christianity, like Iulien the Apostate? pilled Churches,
like Chilperic? abolished holy ceremonies of diuince service, like Thomas
Emperor of Constantinople?

Has he driven away and displaced his fathers servants, like Lewis the
eleventh? has he tormented his subjects and the Suffregans, like Popiel, that
was eaten with rats?

Has he put any of his subjects to death without iusticie, like Maximin? has
he falsified his faith, like Bassianus Caracala? has he broken the treaties
of peace, like Perseus?

Has he despised learning, like Lewis de Bauiere? or men of war, like
Pertinax?

Has he raised Subsidies and impositions upon the fruits of gardens, like
Isaac Emperor of Constantinople? upon beasts and members of men, like Frotho
King of Denmark? or upon vrines, like Ferdinand, King of Naples?

Has he given great offices unto strangers, like Ochozias King of Judah, who
to please Athalie his mother, being a Samaritane, filled his Court with
Samaritans? or like Lewis le Debonnaire, that made a Spaniard Mayor of his
Palace?

And among so many examples of a just distrust, to move your commotions, has
he built a Tower for his dwelling place, environed with profound ditches, full
of water, not to enter therein but by a Drawbridge, like Denis the Tyrant of
Sicile?

Has he done nothing worthy memory, no more then the two last kings of
Constantinople and Hungary?

And if he has done nothing proportionable to so strange defections, tell me
you Parrissians, wherein has he so much displeased and moved you?

I understand you well, he has made intolerable leuies of moneys, and
strange subsidies: he has placed men of ignorance and anarice in the seat of
Justice: he has oppressed his subjects by a thousand means, to enrich his
mignions: he has subverted the order of his treasures, and invented the
practice of present receipt, thereby freelier to exercise his prodigallities:
he has given the honorable offices of the Realm unto the mignions, and has
desired nothing more, then to throw down and loppe the foundation of the holy
League.

Is there no other thing? tell all: show forth your publication: let reason
rather then words be wanting with you: for that in populer commotions, fained
things set out with fair words, are holden for truth. Now I will plainly let
you see, that your complaints are without reason, and your Civil wars breeds
necessity and redoubleth it. More fools then states men. A small grief.
reasons without sense: and yet to please you, say that your dreams were true,
that the king in his new leuying of moneys, his new Edicts, and his new
creations of officers, does oppress his people. Necessity constrains him,
but from whence proceeds that necessity? from civil wars: who makes this
war? the League.

The cause then of these disorders, proceeds from the graft of our miseries,
and from such as upon the firm land, expect the shipwreck of our French
vessels. I aduouch the great leuyings, the excess of impositions, the Edicts,
the offices, the spendings of treasures, and the rapine of receivers, and am
assured, that there comes not one crown out of the pesants hands, that is
worth a Teston, when it is paid into the kings cofers, it is so much shortened
by passing through so many hands.

The people have been strangely oppressed by new inventions, there was somewhat
to say to the Edict of Courtiers, the ten Sellers of fish, the 12. sellers of
beasts within Parris, the receivers appointed for spices, the commissions sent
to all Courts royal, to collect great treasures in every place of the Realm,
the making of so many Gentlemen, the allienation of demands, with many other
corruptions to get money, the numbering whereof would be more odious, then the
charge has bin excessive: but upon whom may the fault be laid, whether upon
the king that granted, or those that first invented them, thereby to find
means to fill their purses, whose avarice resembles the dog, that swalloweth a
morsel of meat cast into his mouth without chawing, hoping presently to have
another: for that all whatsoever proceeds of a new imposition, was devoured,
the sooner to swallow another. But if a great part thereof has passed into the
great and gaping throat of the insaciable avarice of the league it self: if
many, to have a part therein, have given their consents: if the relieuing of
the poor people has not been so much considered, as religiously it ought to
be: if the importunity of those that say, there is always more fools then
estates, have had it, wherefore do they charge the king, that only receives
the grief at his heart, the ruin upon his shoulders, and hair upon his
raines, that since these disorders, never has had good day, sweet slumber, nor
joyful repast? The displeasure he received at the continuance of such new
charges, caused him to desire Monsieur de Birague his Chancellor, to deliver
up his seals, which he bestowed over liberally upon the approbation of his
Edicts, and caused a roll of the most pernicious to be showed him, which he
toare, detested the authors, and lamented the oppression that his people
endured: and as yet we may see the edict that was made for the suppression of
the wicked devises of new Edicts.

The same incrochers put into his head, the invention of Petite Espargne, of
commanding his treasures under an acquittance of his hand, to deliver as much
money as they would have, without knowledge to the Secretaries or Receivers,
what he gave, to the end, that being ignorant of the disorder, and the
instruments of that devise, no man should be blasoned but the king: and that
their impudencies in asking such excessive sums of money, should not be
discovered. Whatsoever it be, content your selves you Parrissians, that all
the profit of their exactions and subsides, has entered into your coffers,
that your own is enriched, that it was neuerricher, then under the reign
Alienation of admonition. Means to maintain the greatness of the Prince.
Tributes. Traffiques. Foreign treatises. Sale of offices. Duke d'Alua. King
Lewis the 12.
of him whom you have driven out, that all the great ponds of royal favors are
fallen into your milles, his liberalities are returned into your purses, and
the mignions have been but the conducts, whereby those great provisions were
transported into your fountains, as touching the doubling of the charges, much
more then ever they were heretofore, in the reigns of Lewis the eleventh,
Charles the eight, and Lewis the 12. and the multitude of offices: it is well
known that the demaines which only maintained the honor and royal estate of
his Realm, is nothing like as it was in their times.

The continuance of wars has engaged it into many hands, the increase of our
divisions has scattered, alienated, and dispearsed it in such sort, that there
must be had at the least fifteen or sixteen millions of Frankes, to redeem
that which is worth above fifty millions. The kings of Europe have six ways
and means to maintain the greatness of their estates. The king of France
has nothing thereof: he has no more demaines, the sacred Patrimony of his
ancestors is gone, he makes no more conquests nor spoils upon strangers,
all the booty he has is of his own, and all the loss of his subjects
falls upon him: he has none that pays him tribute, as the Prince of Asia
does to the King of Persia, the Indies to the King of Calicut, and he of
Calicut Malach, Cambarre and Canor, to the King of Portugal. There is no
trafficque, negotiation, under the name of his Majesty by factors, as
Alphonsus K. of Naples, the King of Portugal, all the Commonwealth, and most
part of the Italian Princes: as the Duke of Florence for silks: and the Duke
of Sa^oy for books, ordinarily use. The two last which are the refuges and
foreign passages and the aids of his subjects, have of long time bin
converted by his ancestors, into charges, impositions, and ordinary tallages.
These six means failing, and not being proportioned to the charges of the
crown, the King has been constrained to find a seventh extraordinary in
deed, of great consequence, and most dangerous, but covered with necessity:
which is the creation of new offices, and the practice to draw money, a means
fit and to the purpose, to supply the kings wants, to fill the pipes of the
springs of treasures almost dried, to ease the people oppressed with wars, and
with the sterilitie of times and seasons, for that such as had to deal with
receipts of the moneys proceeding thereof, make account that in twenty years,
the king has received 139. millions, a certain means whereby money from all
places is brought into the kings Coffers, without constraint, violence, and as
it were by degrees, a hundredth times more tolerable the^ impositions and other
inventions, to charge the poor Pesants, and wherein there is much more
conscience, then in that which Phillip le Long demanded of all his subjects, of
what estate soever, being the fifth part of their revenue, and more reason then
that tyrannical extortion of the tenth part of all the expenses of seventeen
great Provinces, whereof the Author boasted to have found a fountain, that
would yield gold in pieces as big as a man's arm.

This sale of offices is not so new, but that it has been used long since, in
those estates that are thought to be most polliticque, the Venetians having so
great and enemy as the king of France, made a great breach in their treasures
to resist him, his entrance into Italy, cost him above fifte millions of
ducats, which to recover again, they invented the means of selling the
offices of their Commonwealth, whereby they pursed one hundredth millions.

Offices for the employment of the youth of France.
And the French king perceiving it to be a continual spring into their coffers,
brought it into his Realm, to support the necessity of the most oppressed,
and the same necessity has constrained his successors to continue the means
to resist the same, and to honor the best families among his subjects: who
without this splendure would be hidden among the rest, and youth without
employment, would fall into those vices that are incident to that age: but let
us now return again to your complaints.

When you are forced to confess, that other causes made you to enter into the
course and savor of these rebellions, you say, that the king did never approve
nor advance your league. He has loved it too much. If he had choked this
Monster of division, if he had not by his authority strengthened the furious
temeritie of the Leaguers pretenses, he would live like a king, command like a
king, and be in the Louure like a king, and had not gone out of Parris like a
Governor of a country, that issues out at one gate, when his enemies enters
at the other. Did you never hear, that a king that had two factions in his
Realm, bending more to the one then to the other, has in the end been a pray
to one of them? What overthrew Carthage? two factions, Barchinienne, Ruin of
estates by civil wars.
and Hannonienne. What nourished wars in France of sixty years long, and made
it a pray to the Englishmen? the quarrel of the house of Bourgongne and
Orleans. What troubled England with so many mischiefs of seven great
battelles, wherein above sixty or eighty Princes of the blood royal of
England were slain? the factions of the house of Lancaster and York. What
impeached the Empire of Constantinople, but the great faction of Prusins and
Venitiens, which at one blow spoiled forty thousand men? What overthrew the
policy and tranquillity of Florence, but the faction of white and black? To
the contrary, what maintains the Empire of the Turks? their concord enemy
of civil descention: they make their profit of our losses, they advance
themselves under the couerture of our wars, grounded for the most part upon
the foot of a fly, and there is nothing that has so much increased, nor as
yet does more increase their alcaron, then our division, which every day gives
them sufficient christians heads to triumph upon, in stead of stones or other
spoils: as Thuracan did with the heads of the Albanois.

League a continual fever to an estate.
To be short, that hurt which a continual fever is to a man's body, the same
are Leaguers unto a Realm: the Prince that nourishes and entertaineth them, is
no less odious then the Physician, that hatcheth and covers a disease.

The Commonwealth is a ship, the Leagues and factions are the holes and
leakes, by the which, while those that are in the ship are at strife, the water
enters in such abundance, that it causes the ship to finke, and all that
are within her. A wise Pilot should calke and stop those leakes and divisions,
reserving the rurther for himself, without trusting to any other, never being
factious, nor head of any parties, but all king, and always Master of the
ship: and doubt not but these drone Bees, that eat up the honey of all the
rest, and these composers of the league, which make so great a ruin for two or
three months of springtime, had overthrown themselves, if the king had not
nourished them, Machiauille chap. 20. of the Princes.
with the fairest flowers of his authority.

And who ever counseled a Prince, common father of his subjects (unless
Machiauel chap. 20. of the Prince.
it were Machiauel) to entertain partiallities among them? You are sorry that
the king does not as willingly embrace the pretenses of your League, as you do,
and that he has not suffered you to make a table of his back, whereon to
play at dice for his Crown. You have somewhat to say to those whom the king
has advanced: so the heels murmured because they had not the place of the
head: the Ass would clime upon a cushen of velvet, to faune upon his Master
like a Spaniell: puppits would play upon kings cabbins. Know you not, that
they are like counters in the kings hand, whereof he makes one to be a
hundredth, some a thousand, and others ten thousand? Do you not show more
favor and credit in your banks town of your servants, then to an other? and
use you not to say, that you may do with your own as pleases you? is the
king countable to your humors? If he holds the Crown of God and the
ancient laws of this Realm, wherefore seek you to be his Tutors, and to
hinder him from distributing the honors and recompenses thereof, at his
pleasure? It is no reason to prescribe or limit him, whom or what he shall
cherish, love, and advance: if you confer things present, with those that are
past, you shall find no Prince but has had some whom he specially favored,
and that the jealousy nor envy of others farther from his favor, has not
been strong enough to erect Barricadoes against them, as you have done.

The League has no just cause to take arms.
But seeing all your complaints are ridiculous, your reasons without foundation,
and your discourses without assurance: what enchantment has made you to
rebel? Say that this great disorder known to be in the Court of your king,
has put that wild fire into your heads, which has moved and told you,
therefore to remedy it, you must drive him our, you must assail the Louure,
or torment his servant to revenge your selves against the Duke of Espernon,
being at Roane. I will not so much excuse the king, or think that he has not
committed some faults, nor say as the Parasite Anaxarchus, that Alexander had
reason to kill Clytus, or that the two Goddesses Dice and Themis, are always
at their sides, to keep them from committing injustice: certainly there were
many fair and shining virtues in this Prince, Optimum est pati quod emendare
non possis.
and many human imbisilities, yet tolerable. And seeing we must endure that
mischief which is not to beeremedied, the people ought never to have recourse
to arms, but to petitions and humble requests: as during the excessive
exactions in the time of Paillip de Valois, they sued to the estates. If duty,
reason, and love, move not your brazen hearts, the apprehension of the pains
and punishments which god prepares to discharge against your rebellions,
Punishments of rebellion. Bodin. lib. 3. of his Commonwealth.
ought to restrain you. God will never leave those injuries unpunished, that
are done to his anointed: your fathers have repented it in the other world:
and you, before you die, shall pay the vseries, besides the principal of your
commotions. Turn over your old registers, and you shall know what profit
rebellion will procure you: enquire of those of Milan, Gand, Bourdeaux, 4. Of
kings, chap. 25. Qu. Curt. lib. 9. Poli. lib. 10. Liu. dec. li. 3.
Poictiers, and Rochell, if they remember it. And to the end you shall not
think that the pains are new, Sedechia because he seduced the people to
revolt against Nabuchodonosor, had his eyes put out, and cast into perpetual
prison: after that, for his last spectacle, he had seen his children slain
and murdered at his feet, and so lost the use of their light.

Look upon the great multitude of the Jews, that were made slaves by that
means. Behold what rigor Alexander used against the Musicans, a people of
India. And the Romans against those of Rheggio, and of Capoue: how the Authors
of those mutinies were tied to a Cross: how the Senators were publicly
whipped, the Gentlemen sold like flaues. Our Kings, that let your first
rebellion to pass by sufferance, have presently after, seen a second. And yet
would not use those vengeances that appertain only to Barbarians.

Zonar. in the third tomb of his Annals.
Basil Emperor of Constantinople, caused the eyes of fifteen thousand
Bulgariens to be put out, and left one eye to each of their Captains, that
they might lead them. Amurat taking the Town of Dymothicon, that had rebelled
against him by force, caused the Inhabitants to be bound two and two together,
and so threw them over the wall into the river that ran at the foot
thereof, commanding the fathers, or for default of them, the nearest kinsmen
of those that had rebelled against him, to massacre them in his presence. Our
Princes contented themselves with milder punishments, by drowning the pains of
a multitude, in the blood of the Authors of the evil.

Sometimes they have appointed the defacing of Towns that have rebelled, taken
away their belles, and revoked their privileges: but always the punishment
has been much less then the mischife: those great crimes, have always found
great clemency. So likewise in that day of your Barricadoes, there was nothing
that preserved you from the pain due to so terrible rebellion, but the bounty
and mercy of your king: and when I remember your strange dealing, you put me
in doubt whether you be the sons of those, that so bravely and valiantly
exposed themselves for the service of their kings, and that delivered Lewis the
eight, father to Saint Lewis, out of the danger wherein the disloyalty of his
enemies had brought him, between Parris and Monmartre.

But let us seek for the end of our spindle, when those great Physicians that
sought to remedy the sicknesses of this estate, perceived that they had not
used such medicines as were convenient for the diseases, that their plasters
were too little for the greatness of that wound, that to bring those humors
down, they had rather have applied Iron and fire, then any ointments, that to
save the members they had beaten the head, they were much abashed to see that
body without a head: that royal authority was turned into the distaffe: the
royalty into an estate democrature: that none but the Qneen mother was present
in their assemblies, and that the Duke of Guise held the sovereignty of all
affairs. The king for remedy of the disorder, employed the Queen his mother,
a spirit loving trouble and seeking disquietnesse, unreconcilable, as touching
the hatred she bare to the Princes of the blood, and carried away with the love
she had to the children of her daughter, Duches of Lorraine: It suffiseth, the
king sent a woman with tears and complaints against the arms and brauadoes of
a Prince of courage, resolute, courageous in his resolutions. And it was not
likely she would undo that which she had don, nor having counseled the K. to
endure the boldness of ye league, and end those differences by peaceable
means, that she would more defire the advantage and quietness of her son, then
the increasing of the hopes of the Nulla diu faemina pontus hab^t. Proper.
Marquess du Pont.

I perceive to what end it will come, they will make such an other treaty as
was made at Nemours, the Elixir of the Queen Mother: women should never meddle
with any thing, but only to know their husbands shirt from his dubblet.
Francis Duke of Britain used to say, following (the advice of an Emperor)
that it is dangerous to refer the deciding of great affairs unto the
judgment of a woman, and that how great experience soever they have, they
never attain to the soundness of a firm wit.

That fantastical appetite, which makes them have more pleasure in coals and
sand, then in Grayhounds and Partriges, that sick and unbridled taste which
they have at such time as they are great with child, remains continually in
their minds: their breasts are stuffed with subtilties and craft, but strength
and courage wants: they have neither constancy nor steadfastnesse, and their
counsel is always worse.

Plerumque muliebre consilium deterius Tacit.
The next day after the kings departure, the first Senate of this new
commonwealth, was holden by the Queen, wherein she that with her eyes could
do what she list, lamented the mischief of the day of the Barricadoes,
coniured the most busied heads to show their duties, promising all the
effects of a more peaceable and assured life in the fruits of the religion,
distribution of offices, moderation of taxes and tallages, suppression of
offices, and to the contentment of those that dealth therein, a universal
reformation. She exhorted them to leave their animositie, and not mingle their
particular reuenges with public offenses: for it is a vain thing to be angry
with the sea and the waves, after a man has past the storms and shipwrackes
thereof: she besought them to preserve that fair and laudable reputation, The
Queen mother trauelleth to appease the Parrisians.
which their long and constant fidelity had gotten them, to reconcile
themselves to the king, that could not be without some boiling motion or
feeling, to have seen so sudden a rising in the Town that he most loved,
and where he thought to have most assurance, and that his most affectioned
subjects, (the rule and example to others) are proceeded within two fingers
near to an infamous and worthy rebellion.

The Duke of Guise protesting his innocence, and imputing all those mischiefs
not to the will of the king, but to the force and violence of his evil
Council, says that he was extremely sorry, that the king by his departure
out of Parris, had made him loose so good and happy an occasion, The Duke of
Guise his protestation.
thereby to let him see, what his zeal and will was for the service of his
Majesty, that he was ready to make proof thereof in his absence, resolved
with his life to redeem the authority which his Council had taken from him,
with the quietness and comfort of the Town, for the surety whereof, he
besought the Queene-mother to be a mean.

The election of the provost, for the merchants.
That done, they proceeded to the election of a Provost of Merchants, and
Sheriffs, in places of those that are less affected to the intents of the
League, then to the advancement of the kings affairs: and their oaths were
taken by the Queene-mother, against whose will they discharged diverse
Collonelles, Captains and Quarter-maisters, the little troop of zealous
Catholicques, called the sixteen, busied themselves much in those public
actions, either to show the excess of their over boiling love, or violent
hatred.

They took order for the assistance of the places adjoining to Parris, and
among others, Meux and Melun, they advertised foreign Princes, and the good
Towns of all that had passed, still justifying themselves: they made searches
in Parris against all those that were not of their conspiracy, the
Pollititians and good Frenchmen, such as foresawe the inconveniences that
threatened this Monarchy, by the impetuositie of her mutenies, were sifted and
cast into the ashes of their hatred. This monster with sixteen heads, that
should tear the authority of laws, began to cause it self to be feared,
nevertheless, the least advised, that knew that Parris without the king, is a
body without strength, lamented his departure.

The Capueins find the King in their processions.
They sent the Capucins in procession to Chartres, thereby to defend the blows
of the kings chollor, to put water into the fire that others had kindled, and
to reclaim the tempests of his just indignation. And therewith they sent some of
the most account of all the Orders in the City, to desire him with all
humility, not to remit the innocence of the Citizens of Parris, to the
judgment of their enemies: to consider the just causes that had constrained
the people to defend themselves: to bannish from his ears all contrary reports
and aduises: not to defer his return to Parris, wherein he should be
received with as many applaudings and reioycings, as his subjects had greefes
when they understood of his departure, and where he should find better
servants, then those that had counseled him to destroy them and so to depart.
The Queen Mother present deputies to the King.
The Queene-mother was the head of this message, and when the Deputies arrived
at Chartres, she presented them to the king, that heard their Oration, wherein
they acknowledged their fault.

And falling down at his Majesty's feet, spoke as follows.
An Oration of the Deputies of Parris made to the King at Chartres.
SIr, the duty, honor, respect, fear, and obedience, that we owe unto your
Majesty, makes us desire not to come before your presence, but only in all
humility and submission, to crave the happy continuance of your Graces good
favor, without being so bold as once to open our mouths to utter any
complaint, or daring (although in a just cause) to hazard the using of free
speeches, that might never so little be offensive unto your Majesty: and for
this cause, those that sent us, had determined, that we intercession for us,
and for more dignity and reverence, to interpose her self between us and your
Grace.

But it has pleased you, to will her to send us unto you, promising to give us
peaceable audience: which has caused us not only to continue the submissions
due unto your Majesty, but to satisfy your commandment, to appear before
your presence.

Then one speaking for all, said: Sir, I will not rehearse the protestations
by the Princes made unto you, as well of the honor, which they do bear you,
as of their grief for your Graces absence: neither will I prevent those which
the Deputies of Parris here present will show you, but only certify your
Majesty, that we are the bearers of the memorial which it has pleased you
to send for, chosen to that end, not that we esteem of our own sufficiencies
(specially my self) or for other considerations, but only as being men
notoriously exempted from any suspicions of particular passions, in that which
concerns the principal points of this request. Where, if in the general and
common grief, your Majesty finds any proposition somewhat freer and bolder
then ordinary, we beseech you most humbly to remember your commandment, the
proper interest of your service, and the sorrows of your poor subjects: your
clemency permits us to show our grief, and that which most oppresses us,
is the damage and prejudice that these last accidents (among others) have
procured to the service of your Majesty: in such sort, that if we speak
otherwise then becomes us, we shall resemble him that having been dumb all
his life, begins not to speak, but when he sees the sword drawn to his
father, and his king.

For then nature breaks the obstacles, and cries out, saying: Hurt not the
king. The passion and desire we have to your service, as our father, our King,
our Master, and our Lord, causes us for that purpose to break our long
silence, and to use the like cry, saying: Hurt not the king: separate him not
from his good subjects, his Nobility, the Officers of his Crown, his Princes,
his Courts sovereign, his treasures, not his greatness.

Take not from him the honor of his zeal, his piety, his justice, his
Clemency, his mildness, his goodness, and his humanity, so much renowned,
experimented, and commmeded.

For if at any time heretofore it has been done, surely by this last accident
of Parris, it was in more danger then ever it was, which causes us to speak
with much such affection, in that it threatened us with the like danger: And in
such manner, that if your Majesty had known the sequel thereof, you might
have seen sufficient, whereby to discern what cause we have to mourn: but
for that you know it not, we are in greater hope your Majesty will the better
accept the humble petitions of your poor innocent subjects, which appeal and
inuoke your aid, in this world, only next after God, against those who
abusing your authority, would so shamefully destroy and massacre us. The thing
I have in charge to present unto your Maistie, in the behalf of the Princes,
is so true, that they offer to justify the same, when it pleases you to
command.

In this concurrence of so many just complaints, we most humbly beseech your
Majesty, to accept our declarations in good part, and believe, so that we may
live assuredly under your protection, in the religion whereof you give us so
good examples, that there is nothing heretofore happened, that can take away
the devotion which is in us, for the executing of all your pleasures, and the
entire obedience of your Graces commandments: and that there is not any kind
of humility, submission, or satisfaction, that we are not ready to yield
unto you, not only in word, but indeed, protesting in truth, both before God
and man, that in that which is past, we have not sought to offend your
Majesty, or any of your subjects, and that our only desire is, to seek all
the means we can, to live in your gracious favor, and to please you.

A request presented to the king at Chartres.
Wherein when you shall have satisfied the expectation of all the world, yet we
shall not satisfy our selves, by reason of the insatiable desire that burns
in our hearts, to continue still more and more agreeable unto you. The Oration
ended, they presented their petition to the king, containing five specipall
points: that is, the extirpation of heresy, by leuying of arms both by the
king and the League, giving it the name of the holy union, the bannishment and
proscription of the Duke d'Espernon, and Monsieur de la Valette, the
performance of the kings voyage to Guyenne, and a voyage to be made by the Duke
de Maine into Dauphine: the forgetting of the commotions of Parris: the
confirmation of officers chosen for the ma^naging of the affairs of the said
Town since the Barricadoes: the reestablishing of the good and ancient
ordinances of the Realm, leaving the verification of the new edicts, and the
declarations made upon the same to the Court of Parliament, abolishing the
pernicious use of parties, defending the acquitting of gifts, but only in the
end of the year, wholly abolishing and that upon grievous punishment, the
suppositio^ of names, that had bin practiced the easlier to ratify gifts, made
contrary to the ancient laws of the Realm, altogether forbidding the practice
of Receivers, and all the abuses endured by means of the Duke d'Espernon, and
Monsieur de la Valette. The longest articles of their request, tending only to
that end.

Now let us see how the allegations made by the League against them, are
confuted by their aunsweres: and first you shall hear what it says to the
King against them, and what they answer against it. Sir, (faith the League)
the Duke of Espernon, and Monsieur de Vallette his brother, whom your Majesty
has elevated and invested with the greatest offices and dignities of this
Realm, are known not only throughout France, but in all Christendom, to be
the principal favorers and supporters of hereticques in this Realm.

The answer of the Duke de Espernon. Your Majesty may now well perceive,
Apology of the Duke d'Espernon to his enemies.
that at this present the league (pretending their quarrel against us) does
begin their process against you, and having failed in their last enterprise
at Paris, to bereave your grace both of your authority and liberty, (which God
grant may never be effected) they would now spoil your most faithful and
bounden servants, and make them the excuse and whole pretense of their so late
commotion, but the thing is so evident, that this their devise deserves not
any answer, seeing your Majesty and all the world have manifestly seen it.

What parance should they have to begin an enterprise in Parris, to take the
Duke d'Espernon, who as then was resident in Normandy? And what cause moved
them to erect Barricadoes, even to the Gates of the Lounre, to arm and raise
the people in a mutiny, and to cease upon all the keys of the City,
thereby to drive Monsieur de Valette out of Valence and Dauphine, where as then
he continued?

These are the effects of the confession of Salcede, which only are pretended
against your Majesty, and not against the Duke d'Espernon, nor Monsieur de la
Valette his brother, who since it pleased your Majesty to give them any charge
within this Realm, Confession of Salcede.
have most faithfully and worthily acquitted themselves, therein immitating the
steps of their deceased father, The house of the Nogarets has well deserved in
the Realm.
Monsieur de la Valette, one of the greatest Captains in our time, whose
services done for the advantage of this crown and dignity, are yet so fresh,
and imprinted in the hearts of all Frenchmen, that their enemies cannot choose
but confess, that he has deserved a recompense therein toward his children,
whom it has pleased your Majesty to choose (as children worthy of such a
father) and in them to acknowledge the deserts of his service and victories
against the heriticques of this Realm.

An example whereof, the Duke of Espernon in less then six months, An explort
done by the Duke d'Espernon in Prouence.
has cleansed all Prouence (which it pleased your Majesty to commit unto their
charge) of all whatsoever the Hereticques for the space of twenty years has
holden therein, and from whence they had not been driven, by all their
predecessors Governors of the same: and having bannished the Ministers and
principal Leaders from Seine, they have so well pacified and governed that
Prouence, that ever since it has remained in the entire obedience to your
Majesty.

The taking of Sorgues. The Duke d'Espernons voyage to Guyenne. His fanour to
the enemies of the league. His enterprise upon Cambray. His deeds in Dauphine.
The reason for which the league does band themselves against the Duke
d'Espernon.
The taking of Sorgues in Dauphine in winter reason, by those two brethren,
witnesses what minds they bear. And since the overthrow of Huguenot
Switzers, spoiled by Monsieur de la Valette, shows the intelligence and
conference they are likely to have with hereticques. The League specifieth the
places where they showed those favors, as the Duke of Espernons voyage into
Guyenne, the treaties there by him made, the counsels that he gave, the favor
he showed to such as he knew to bear them affection, the hatred he showed
toward all good Catholicques, (specially such as he esteemed to hold with the
League) the intelligence he had with the affairs that Cleruant followed for
the Huguenots in Metz. The enterprises he made upon Cambray, a town belonging
to the Queen. The suspicion he has given to all honest men. The aid he
gave to the Rutters (being overthrown) concerning their return serving them
for a guard. The counsel by him given touching the last troubles happened in
Parris. The secret conferences he has had with Chastillon, the actions of his
brother, as the taking of Valence, Tallard, Guillestre, and other places which
he has taken from the Catholicques of Dauphine, the means he has used
therein, to advance the power of the hereticques, by the destruction of that
Prouence, and the subtilties he used, to impeach the reducing of Ausonne, do
sufficiently discover their pretenses.

And when it pleases your Majesty to have further declaration hereof, with
the general consent of all your subjects, we will bring diverse sufficient
proofs, which at this present would be over long to set down, and which for
diverse good causes we will now omit.

This common opinion of the intelligence that the said Duke de Espernon and
Mousieur de la Valette, have with the Hugunots, and the high estate whereunto it
has pleased your Majesty to advance them, makes your good subjects to fear
(specially the Catholicques) that if your favor should once be withdrawn from
them, (as it is impossible that their insolent behauiors can long time be
endured by so great and wise a King) not finding any entertainment among the
Catholicques, they will take part with Hereticques, and thereby deliver all the
Prouences and strong places that are in their possessions, into their hands,
whith whom already they have so great intelligence, in such manner, that
France (that may shortly be delivered of heresy) should become more subject to
their tyrannical dominion then ever it was.

The Dukes answer Upon the taking of Dauphine.
The Duke de Espernon replyeth by his Council, and says, that he took
Valence and other places in Dauphine, and put out those of the league, (that
had no authority therein) to place his Majesty's soldiers: if that deserve
not an excuse, I refer it to the judgment of all honest men. I would to God
he had also taken Chaalons, Dyon, Montreuil, and all that acknowledges not
your Majesty, within the heart of the Realm: and yet he has not done it
without cause and lawful excuse, which has been often debated before your
Majesty and your Council.

The favor which he bare to hereticques.
As touching the other points of their accusation, touching the favor which the
League says the Duke d'Espernon bears unto Hereticques, your Majesty
knows, and can disprooue their untruths: if they be so in this, that as
touching the overthrow of the Rutiters, there was not any man that traveled so
much therein, as the said Duke d'Espernon, who only by your Majesty's good
pleasure and authority, having effected the disunion of the Switzers, The King
of Nauarres complaint against the Duke de Espernon.
caused their confusion, and by that means gave the Duke of Guise occasion to
set upon them at Auneau, for the which he is so much commended, to the
disgracing of your Majesty, and the honor of that victory that is due unto
you. By this your Majesty may judge the truth of all their accusations, that
knows the particularities of the voyage to Guyenne, what was done by the Duke
d'Espernon, and what followed, all contrary to their declarations. Whereby I
dare say, the King of N. was so much displeased at the said D. of Espernon,
that there is not any man in France, with whom he is more offended. The League
adds, that the D. of Espernon and his brother, are the authors of the
disorders in all the good governments and policy of France: that they have
gotten into their Coffers, all the treasures of the Realm: that they have
aspired to the principal offices of the Crown, separated from it, diverse of
those that would serve it both well and wisely: and besought the King, seeing
he knew them to be the cause and original of the mischief, that it would
please him to bannish them both of his Court and favor, and discharge them of
all the governments and offices that they hold within this Realm, without any
desert. The Duke d'Espernon says, that all whatsoever they say, are but
chimeres and inventions, maliciously devised: for the justification whereof,
The Dukes offer, to testify the truth of his innocencis.
he will gage his head to be laid at the kings seere, if it be found that
he once so much as dreamed thereof. And to the contrary, he reputeth all the
causes of miseries upon the heads of the house of Guise. Who has brought
disorder (says he) in the treasures (whereof you make so great a matter) but
your predecessors, and you that follow their steps? Who constrained the king to
exact upon his people, but only the wars, which the unmeasurable ambition
has renewed, and put them upon the Kings charges? let the chamber of accounts
be examined, and there it shall be seen: who without contradiction has handled
and governed the treasures of the late kings, Henry and Francis the second: let
the most ancient Histories be perused, to see what house in France has risen
from a most mean beginning, to a high and great estate.

I will name no man, every man knows sufficiently what house it is, that
would thrust his head into the clouds, Gifts of the king, without importunity,
and with his foot spurn off the kings Crown: we most humbly call his
Majesty to witness, as our king, the author of our being, our Protector, and
our good Master, if we ever were importunate with him, for any benefit we
have received at his Graces hands, and whether all whatsoever we have both
riches and honor, have not proceeded from him of his free and voluntary
liberty.

We praise God, that we cannot be accused to be Pensionaries to the king of
Spain, or to have received money from him, to make war against our king, and
impeached him from taking into his protection, the government of the low
Countries, nor by force to have taken the moneys of his general receipts,
robbed the wagon of Bourges, and in time of open peace, constrained the money
of Normandy, to be conducted by a hundredth men of arms, even to the Gates of
Parris.

It shall not be long of us, that this reformation should not be performed in
France, we will absent our selves from the Court, and from the presence of the
king. Now my Masters the reformers, let us see some goodly beginning of your
policy: Is your ambition, devises, practices, or inventions, The Duke
d'Espernon is forbidden the Court.
to attain to the highest dignity, thereby any thing ceased? Have you left
Paris, and restored it into the hands of her natural king and Princes? No: but
to the contrary, you have made Melun and Corbeil, to revolt in the very sight
of his Majesty, and all the best towns in this Realm, which by false
persuasions you have led out of the right way.

And to conclude, we will refuse no condition, that may restore and establish
this Realm to peace and tranquillity, and as we do most willingly crave your
Majesty's presence (in a time wherein we ought not to do it) thereby to give
no cause of dissiking to our enemies: so will we be always ready to yield
unto your Majesty's hands, both lives: and goods, The Kings answer to the
request of the league.
with all estates, charges, governments, places, and Castles, that it has
pleased you to commit unto us, upon condition that our accusers will do the
like. And if any man find this proposition and reciprocal submission between
persons, which they may term unequal to be strange, let them remember, and
receive this for satisfaction, that all whatsoever the one and the other has,
is by your Grace, and which they cannot justly hold, longer then it pleases
you.

The king that sat as vmpeir in this contention, by their answers and replies
still received some blows, yet he knew that their declarations were not so
smooth, but that the accusations in his behalf, would easily be aunsered:
and being pressed by the League to yield to their request, he gives the
Cardinal of Bourbon, and all the rest of the Princes (in whose name it was
presented) to understand, that both in peace and war, he had sufficiently
showed the proof of his good will, to the preservation of the only
Catholicque religion in his Realm, and to the extirpation of contrary sects,
without sparing his own person, even at the last overthrow of the Protestant
Rutters entered into this Realm, The victory of the Rutters.
which had not happened without the presence and good conduction of his said
Majesty, that stayed them upon the side of the river of Louure, which they
had gotten with little loss and weaking, as every man knows.

That iealousies and distrust had hindered him from reaping the profit of the
advantage which he had against the Hereticques, having sought all means he
could, to impeach the motions of those divisions, as namely to forget that
which had happened at Parris, as long as the Citizens behaved themselves like
good and faithful subjects, trusting in the bounty and clemency of their
Prince, whereof they have so many times had sufficient proof, that they need
not doubt thereof.

That he lamented the disorders that have crept into the affairs of this
estate, as also the contentions that brake the last peace: that he desired
nothing so much, as speedily to see a present reformation, and that to the same
effect, he would assemble the third estates of France, as the most assured
remedy, which his predecessors in such occasions have always used. That he
was resolved presently to revoke diverse edicts and impositions wherewith his
people were charged. That in the assembly of the estates, his Majesty would
take order for the doubt the Catholieques have to fall into the government of
hereticques: and that touching the particular complaint made by the said
Princes against the Duke d'Espernon and his brother, he would make it known,
that both in that, and all other things, he is a Prince both equal and just,
having special regard not to do injury or wrong to any man. And withal,
that he preferred the public utility of his Realm, before all other things.
The Court of Parliament, who by their wisdom that knew that the absence of
the sun which gives it light, would from thence forward make it become
obscure and without light, by reason of the thick clouds of divisions, would
not withdraw their helps from that trouble and disquietnesse of the estate,
nor turn their back to the king, neither bring upon themselves the infamous
marks or rebellion, or permit that his Councillors should be termed
ouerthrowers of their Princes: The Court of Parliament sent the Deputies to the
King.
but sent their Deputies to his Majesty, to show him of the grief they had
conceived at that accident, and at the mischief that had constrained him to go
out of Parris, to reclaim his bounty and clemency, to divert his just
vengeance from the heads of his subjects, excuse his officers, if in so great
a commotion, imbisilitie and fear, had made them bend their necks, to desire
him to come thither again, to restore quietness and contentment to his
Majesty, order in his affairs, credit to their purple robes, authority to
their estate, and by his presence to dispearse mutenies, which by division had
been raised.

The Kings answer to the Court of Parliament.
The king answered thereunto, that he never doubted but that they would continue
in the sidelitie and affection, which they had always showed to his
ancestors, that if it had been in their powers, to have taken order touching
the disorders in Parris, he was fully persuaded they would have done it: that
he had conceived a most extreme grief thereat, although he said he had not
been the first that had fallen into such misfortunes: that notwithstanding all
that, he would always be a good father, to such as showed themselves good
children: that in the quallitie of a father, he would use the Parrisians as
his sons, that had failed in their duties: and not as servants, that
conspired against their Master: he commanded them to continue in their
charges, according to their duties, and from the mouth of the Queene-mother, to
receive the commandments and executions of his will and pleasure.

The King sends for the Deputies of the Court.
Wherewith the Deputies of the Parliament withdrew themselves, and when after
dinner they were ready to depart, the king sent for them, and said unto them:
I have once again sent for you, that before you go, I might let you
understand, (besides that I said unto you in the morning) that I have been
advertised of the allegation used in my behalf, that I would place a Garrison
in my town of Parris: I am much abashed how that entered into their heads. I
know what Garrisons mean, they are either placed to destroy a Town, or else
because of some distrust that is had in the Inhabitants: they ought not to
think that I would overthrow or destroy a Town, to the which, I have showed
so many signs of great good will, and which I have enriched by my long
continuance therein, as having stayed there more then ten others of my
predecessors ever did, which has procured, yea even to the meanest Artificers
therein, that great trafficque which at this day they have: and so much, that
it might have benefited ten or twelve other Towns, which would have been
glad thereof: and where my officers have had cause to use my help, as likewise
Merchants and others: I have not denied it unto them, so that they may justly
say, I have always showed my self a good king in their behalfes: less cause
should I likewise have, to enter into distrust of those whom I loved, and of
whom I might have assured my self, as I verily thought. So that the amity I
bare unto them, ought to have bereaved them of this fond opinion, that I would
place a Garrison among them: and it is well known, that not one soldier set
foot or entered into any house, to look either bread or provision whatsoever:
but to the contrary, I sent them money and other necessaries, and they had not
stayed there above four and twenty hours at the furthest, which had been
till the next day, but they should have lodge else where. I determined to have
made an exact search, for diverse strangers that as then were in my Town of
Parris, and not desiring to offend any man. I sent to the Lords of my Court,
namely to the D. of Guise, to the end they should give me a roll of their
domestical servant, and to send the rest away, whom I understood to be in
great numbers, at the least fifteen thousand, which I did for the preservation
of my good Town of Parris, with sureties of my subjects. And therefore I will
have them to acknowledge their faults with grief and true contrition: I know
well that they are put in mind, and made believe, that having offended me in
that sort, my indignation is unreconcilable: but I would have you to let them
know, that I am not so disposed to loose them, and as God (whose Image although
unworthy I bear here upon earth) will not the death of a sinner: so I
desire not their overthrow. I will try the gentillest means, and when they
shall confess their fault, and show by effect what sorrow they have, I will
receive and embrace them as my subjects, showing my self like a father to his
children: yea a friend to his friend: I will have them to acknowledge me for
their good King and Master, which if they do not, but rather feed me with
delays, withdrawing my hands, as I can well do, I will make them know their
offenses, whereof the memory shall remain to all posterities: for it being
the chief and principal Town, honored with the Supreme Court of my Realm,
and other Courts, Privileges, honors, and Universities, I can as you know,
revoke my Court of Parliament, Chambers of accounts, aids and other Courts and
universities, which would turn to their great decay.

For that ceasing, their trafficques and other commodities would decrease: yea,
and wholly decay, as it happened in the year 1579. during the great plague, by
reason of my absence, and the discontinuance of the Parliament, a great number
of my Councillors being retired, so that the same year, many of the ships
stood shut up, and the people lived idle, spending their time in playing and
walking in the streets.

I know there are many honest men within my Town of Parris, and that of
four, three parts are of that number, which are grieved for the mischief that
is happened: then let them with speed procure my just contentment, that I be
not constrained to use rigor, which to my great grief I would be loath to do.
You know, that patience once moved, turns into fury, and what a king that is
displeased may do. For surely I will imploye all my power, not leaving any
means unsought, to revenge my self on them, although my mind be not
reuengetiue, but I would that they would know, that both my heart and courage,
is as great as any of my predecessors ever was: I have not as yet, since my
advancement to the Crown, after my brothers death, nor my return out of
Polonia, used rigor to any man, which you both know, and can well witness:
neither I will that any man should abuse my clemency and long suffering.

I am no usurper, I am lawful king by succession, as you all can testify, and
of a race that has always commanded with benignity. It is in vain to speak
of religion: I must take another course, there is no Prince living in the
world, more Catholicque and desirous of the extirpation of heresies, then I am,
which both mine actions and life has showed unto my people. I would it had
cost me an arm, that the picture of the last Hereticque, were painted here
upon my chamber wall. Now you may return to execute your charges, and always
be of good courage, for you need to fear nothing, if I stand by you, and I
command you to let them understand what I have said. Not long after, the K.
determined to go to Roane, where the Inhabitants received him with great joy,
showing so many signs of their great desires to live in his obedience, that
their fidelity and love, mittigated the grief of the revolt and murenie of
others: The king goes to Roane
and not long before, the Town of Lions had expressly sent unto the king, to
desire his Majesty to come thither, and to acknowledge that their long and
continual fidelity, should appear so much the firmer, as by how much the
more it was continually sought to be detected.

When the Duke of Guise perceived that Parris in great haste returned under the
kings obedience, from the which it had so suddenly revolted, that the shame
to be without him, made the boldest of them hold down their heads, that the
violence of rebellion began to lessen, by means of natural reason, that the
son of the kings authority began to wax hot, and that there was not any
desperate leaguer, but acknowledged that the absence of the Court would be a
hinderance to his purse, his shop, and his affairs: he determined to win
the kings favor, The Nobles of the league finds the day of the Barricadoes
very grievous.
thereby not to loose the aid of those that found the action within Parris to
be over hardy. All his servants (himself beginning) returned to the wearing
of their old cloaks of the K. authority, which by their Barricadoes they had
wholly trodden under foot: the third word that issued out of their fained and
dissembling mouths, was, the service of the king, the obedience of his
Majesty, the preservation of the The Nobles of the league finds the day of the
Barricadoes very grievous.
estate, there formations of disorders, and the relief of the people, believing
that this second enterprise would succeed with as much contentment and
impunitie as the first, and in steed of maintaining himself in the degree
whereunto by so many pains, dangers, and troubles he had as then attained, he
descended of a sudden, and went to find the Queen Mother, and with her to
make some evil shapen coat, the king reapeth more profit by his enemies then
he looked for. Plutarche says, there was one, that giving a thrust with his
sword into his enemies body, by chance pierced an impostume therein, which
without doubt had killed him shortly after, if that new Surgeon had not broken
it. And so if the great mutiny of Parris had not suppressed the great
abundance of cold and heavy humors, that long rest and pleasure had
bredde, and constrained the king to rise and bestirre himself, he had
returned to his solitary life, and so most certanly had lost his Crown,
before he could perceive it. The boldness of this enterprise filled his
courage, and from that time forward, he determined either to live like a
victorious king, The profit which he has of his enemies.
ordie vanquished. But he perceived himself to be reduced into two
extremities, both very dangerous, in the middle whereof, there stood a deep
and profound pit, the anchor of his safety is peace, he could not make it both
with the league and Huguenots together: if he turned to the one side, he was
assailed by the other: if he stayed in the middle, he was charged by them
both, that of force he was constrained to take part with the one, The king
resolves to be revenged of the Duke of Guise.
because he had been so imprudent to suffer them both: and that of a King he
must become the General of a faction. And in this manner, being driven here
and there, by the incertitude of his conceptions, feeble, unresolved, and
environed with so many distrusts, by the apprehension of the mischief, he
suffered his mind to be led away from the bounds of his nature: And
began to be very chollericke against the Huguenots, to have the League on his
side, so to aid himself with their forces against them. But those in whom he
ought to put most credit, that lamented the diminishing of his authority, and
the weakening of his forces, and that perceived him bent to procure his own
destruction, counseled him to make peace with the king of Navarre, Councels of
peace. An edict of peace, 1576.
and not to break the edict of pacification, which he had (worn, not in the
field by force or imbecilitie of infancy (as king Charles his bother did) but
after so many victories, in the flower of his years, in the strenth of his wit,
and in presence of all the Realm of France, putting his faith into the hands
of God, who is a just revenger of such as break it, although it be given unto
their enemies. They propounded the same reasons wherewith in the year 1577.
they defended the liberty of consciences, enforcing them with diverse examples
and most certain arguments. Others, that for ye most part are creatures of ye
league, condemned ye counsel, at every word they spoke, crying: Set upon the
Huguenot: religion, the church, and the truth, will always remain: The league
will have war.
they braued in their discourses, they persuaded the K. to continue wars, and
to acknowledge that God had sent him those Machabes of Lorraine, to resist
Infidels: those Herculeses, against monsters: that race of Monfort, against the
relicques of Albigios. Sir, (said they) you shall loose the name of most
christian king, if you yield unto these heresies, that draw the sap out of
religion. You shall be the only king among 60. of your predecessors, that has
so faintly permitted and suffered so pernicious and detestable a mixstur of
truth and lies: and it will be said, that under your reign, Temples were
without Altars: Altars without sacrifices: Churches without Ministers, and God
without service.

The gainsaying of those of the league. Godliness desires not wars.
The others knowing well, that those fair and goodly couertures, hide and keep
close most infamours rebellions: and to put both fire and sword into the deep
wounds of the League, said: That as then it was no more requisite to decide
religion by arms: piety is not joined to weapous, men speak not of God but
in blasphemy and cursing, they worshipped him not but in vanities, entered not
into Churches but to profane them, lay hand as soon upon the Priest and
religious persons, as upon the Minister or Deacon, and the fury and blindness
of the soldier, does not distinguish that in his eye, which in heart he well
discerns. And to be short, war undermines religion, as woormes consume
trees, rust eats Iron, and a fever weakeneth man's body, it ingendreth
Atheists, Libertines, and Epicurians, it makes Citizens of one Town, such as
drink of one fountain, and that live under one air, to become so wild and
discourteous each to other, that of men they become wolves and Tigers, such as
desired that the leaguers sword should drive away the Huguenots, as the
Englishmen were driven out of France: Zozomen lib. 3. Hist. tripart. chap. 11.
say to the contrary, that there is no war more just, holy, nor necessary,
then that which is undertaken only to procure the service of God by one
religion, saying: that Constantine with weapon in hand overthrew the Paganism
of his Empire, extirped the assemblies of hereticques, Nouaciens, Valentiens,
Marchionists, and Paulianists, not leaving them any means whereby they might
offend the liberty of the religion that he held.

Theodozius the elder, made war against the Arrians: Theodozius his son,
against the Nestorians, Marcians, and Manicheens. And that our kings had not
attained the name of christrian Princes, but by most virtuously sacrifising
their lives for the defense of religion. You take not the History (said the
defendants) as it is to be understood: War was not made against heretics,
til after they were condemned of heresy.
you read not, that wars were made against the Arrians, Nouatians, Manicheens,
and other hereticques, until the Councels of Nice, Ephese, and Calcedonia, had
confuted their errors, and condemned their opinions. We have not to do with
such people, they are called members of one church like us: they confess one
redemption with us, hoping for their salvation therein, as we do: there is
neither Infidelity, nor Idolatry in their manner of serving God: they
blaspheme his name less then we do: punishing such as offend his laws, more
then we: and there is nothing in their doctrine, that shakes the foundations
of our faith. You call them heretics, it is long since they affirm this word
not to be agreeable to their doctrine: there is no sentence nor judgment
pronounced against the^: such as er, are not therefore to be accounted
heriticques: heresy is the folly of an opinious mind, so that false opinion
and obstinacy, are the two points that make an hereticque: the one depends
of the understanding carried away with errors and falsehoods: the other of the
obstinate mind, perseuering in those errors. If the Huguenots knew they erred,
or if they were wilful in their ignorance, why would they have suffered
themselves to be slain and massacred in that hot caniculer month of August,
in the year 1572. If they were obstinate, would they so often ask Councels,
either general, or national, to instruct them? as for us that have this
blessing of God, to be christians, instructed in the Catholicque Church, which
we believe to be Roman, we know that Huguenots have more need of piety,
the^ pain: of doctrine, then destruction: and of Catechizing, then
imprisonment.

We take compassion upon such as we perceive to be out of their wits, and
that run headlong into mischief: and why should not we have the like
feeling toward those that are mortally wounded with those errors, that in a
whole and lively body, bear a weak and paste soul, lanquishing and spoiled
by the poison that has so long consumed it. The Catholicque calls the
Huguenot an hereticque, because he believes not enough: the Huguenot calls
the Catholicque hereticque, because he believes too much. The Hoguenot
believes not evil, in that wherein he agrees with us, but he believes not
enough, and wants in that which he believes not: he has nothing but it
comes from us, but there is a fault committed in the alteration, and not in
the essence: and I say following our instructors, that heresy is rather a want
of good, then possession of evil.

The difference in religion, should mildly be agreed upon.
He is not evil instructed in the principals of faith, but he is not
sufficiently informed touching the Ceremonies: he believes constantly in the
only word of God, contained in the book called cannonicall: the Catholicque
takes the interpretations of the word of God made by the Church, for an
infallible rule of his salvation, and not like the Huguenot, by the particular
sense, but by the universal consent of the Church assembled together, under a
legitimate head, which is the Pope: accord these two tunes, and make them
believe in the traditions that since the time of the Apostles have been
brought into the Church, our Ceremonies in the administration of our Sacrament,
and in the election of Ministers, and they are pleased, and we shall have no
more need of wars. If they say they will have no other Judges to determine
their differences but the holy Scriptures, which of it self is easy enough
without interpretations or Commentaries, and that if it be dark in one place,
it is opened in another, tell them, that it is not so easy, plain, nor open,
but that diverse men do stumble in the understanding thereof: that it is not so
clear, as that without interpretation it can discide all the controversies of
our faith: that as God in the old laws would have a Moses to judge the law,
so he would have Ministers his successors, yt they shall determine difficulties
of the doctrine of the Gospel. Make them to agree with us therein, your
difference will soon be ended: and you shall bannish wars and schisms in
France. To those reasons the league opposed theirs, and said: Your arguments
are of no consequent: you say, that the Huguenot is not to be pursued by
arms, because he is not declared hereticque by cannonicall proceedings: that
he is no hereticque because he is not stubborn: that he is not stubborn,
because he desires instruction: turn over the lease, and you shall find
that the Huguenot ought to be pursued by arms, in that he has been
condemned for an heretic by all the Counsels, specially of that of Trent:
that all novelties are odious to the Church: that he is an heretic, for that
knowing, and as it were with his finger touching his error, he stands
stubbornly in defense. Obstinacy and sense reproved, is the punishment of his
infidelity: it is then to no end that he should ask instruction, when there
is no hope of amendment: it is a tree without fruit, and good for nothing but
to be cast into the fire. To this point, those that loved peace, The wars
for religion, cons^steth of a great number of Catholics.
how dear soever it were, cried out and said: Will you then have a new
recourse to fires, punishments, and remedies, which we have already tried to
be more proper to kindle and spread abroad, then to quench and stop the evil?

Do you not as yet perceive, that God detesteth the terrible persecutions used
against them in all the Courts of Parris, that the Princes, Governors of
Towns, Magistrates, and officers of justice, have with their own bloods paid
usury for the unmeasurable shedding of Christians blood, that since the
Magistrate left punishing, and that the Prince has pursued them by arms,
there has died at the least a thousand Catholicques, to kill a hundredth
Huguenots.

The king is become a Captain at his own costs in the battles of Iarnac and
Moncontour, he has continued for the space of ten or twelve years
together, to make wars against them, and in the end, after he had used all
means, and attempted all extremities, he perceived it was in vain for him to
kill, to make men believe, that the Gospel is not planted with other tools,
then the word and peaceablenesse, that it increases by suffering, and not by
persecution.

Jesus Christ planted his Church by miracles. Mahomet by force and violence.
Religion is not the cause but the pretext of the war.
The Talmud with her toys, and the Alcaron with her impostures, detest the
Christians fury, that kill each other: the first says, that Jesus Christ
increased the Church by virtue of miracles: and Machomet, by force of arms.
We know well, and if we confess it not, we are traitors to our country,
and of all others, the most incencible: that religion is not to be preached by
drumb and fyfe: and that of a hundredth that bear arms, there is not ten but
have an other intent then only religion. We know that this war is a mere
war against the estate, that nothing was said touching the king of Nauarres
conscience, until it was evidently seen, that by the death of Monsieur the
kings brother, he was the next in succession to the Crown: and that it is
most certain, that the League builds the assurance of things present, by
those that are to come: that upon the imaginatiue fear and of the succession
of a Prince of an other religion, (the king being in the flower and strength
of his age) they dispute of the right possession, and establish their
usurpation. The Monarchy passes to an other branch of the blood royal, The
Cardinal of Bourbon.
because the king has no children, and because we should have some, they
present us an old Prince, an old tree without fruit, a hollow oak, which
serves but for a support to the juice of the League, and to the hopes of the
Duke of Guise, that climeth unto the royalty by his means. Duke of Guise, who
under color to power water upon those flames, to place order in disorder, and
reformation inabuse, suffers men to burn in flame, and overthrow all things.
Wherefore from henceforth, the king must look unto that which as yet rests
whole and entire within his Realm: that he should make peace with the
Huguenots: that he should help himself with their forces which are Frenchmen,
against those Hispaniolized minds, that will either usurp the Sovereignty of
this estate, or else convert it into cantons like the Switzers. To give peace
to the Huguenots, to aid himself with their forces, to overthrow the
Catholics, to stir up the Pope, the king of Spain, and all Italy, and in a
word, to constrain France to revolt. The king ought not to do it, and it is
too much peril for himself, Objections against the League.
too much misery for his people, and too much injury to the Church, whereof
he is the eldest son: he should call wolves to help, which in the end
would devour the sheep: he should serve himself with foxes, that in fine,
would kill thee geese: the king should be Lent, and the king of Navarre the
entrance into Lent: or as we say, Caresme prenant: and then Huguenots would be
led in triumphs through the Realm. If the king should do it, it would be
openly said, that he supporteth and aduanceth hereticques, that seeking to do
for himself, he does for them: he will put Catholicques in despair, and his
crown in hazard. Venceslaus King of Bohemia and Emperor, was exposed only
because he suffered the Hussites to have the free exercise of their religion.
Defense for the Edicts of peace.
The league was devised only to break the Edict of pacification: which don, it
left arms: when it saw it should have bin subdued, it rose up again, and made
that commotion in Parris. The Kings Edicts of pacification concerning the
liberty of conscience, are not made but with prouiso, this age is so full of
all corruptions, that whosoever seeks to purge them, the healing would be
more dangerous by the remedies that should be ministered, Medici plus interdu
quiet, quam moriendo atque agendo prosiciunt. Tit. Liu.
then the pains and langures of the disease it self. God will raise some
great Monarch, that will use remedies altogether different from those, which
passion, vengeance, and chollor, puts into our hands. We must let this
fistula remain for a time within the body, if you stop it, the vicious humors
that abound therein, will sufferate and choke it up. The disease must have her
course, and in the end it will cease: this heresy will vannish away as all the
rest have done, whereof by the grace of God, there rests nothing but the
memory: the question is, to think upon those that seek to suck the sap of
this estate, and under the ruins thereof, to overthrow the piety and the
Monarchy. The leagues answer.
In the affairs of the K. and of religion, all delay is dangerous. To fear
the mischiefs and chances that may fall out on both sides, or to stand with
arms crossed, attending till God lends aid from heaven, is temerite,
foolishness, and crime. In rebus fide periculosa cunctatio.
Catholicque religion is sick, it is in great extremity, and the Physician
stays to consult of her disease, and to apply the remedies, while she is
ready to die: it is great foolishness not to cut off inconveniences at the
beginning, but much more folly to neglect the mischief, under pretense of
having taken too deep root: it is better late then never: it is a kind of
desperation not to know the disease, and a franzie, knowing it, not to seek a
remedy.

You have been so oftentimes told, that two religions cannot be suffered in
one Realm, that this diversity causes quarrels in particulars, and then
seditions, mutinies, and civil wars, which never end but with the subversion
of the estate. This diversity never suffers the estate to live in peace, and
always furnishes sufficient courage, to the most busy and troublesome, under
that large pretense to move their ambitions.

Religio and timor dei solus est, qui custodit hominum inter se socie, tatem,
Lactant.
Alcibiade served his turn there within Grecia, Sertorius in Rome, Ennus in
Siria, and Selurus in Italy. The tranquillity of the Commonwealth,
consists in the union and accord of the Citizens, take away this concord,
and it is but a piracie, and a retraict of robbers and thieves: the strongest
band that unites men's minds, is religion: it is an adament that draws a
ring, and that ring draws an other, until at last your chain is fully
accomplished: it is the wood that entertaineth the fire of our amities: it is
the ciment that joins the pieces of the building of our estate: it is the
heart of the Commonwealth: take the brandes out of the fire, and it will be
quenched: the mortar and stones from a house, and it will fall: unloose the
boordes of a ship, and it will sink into the water: take the heart out of this
body, and it dies. And God who is truth it self, says: that kingdoms
divided, shall be desolate, dispearsed and overthrown. This civil life will
sooner leave the most necessary elements, fire and air: and live rather
without life, then void of religion. Thr first foundation of the estate and
civil societis, has been religion inuiolably observed.


We find people that never had kings, and can well live without them: there
are some that have lived without laws, without wars, and without learning,
but there is not any people that can maintain or continue their estate,
without a certain rule of the service of the God whom they adore: the first
foundations of Towns were placad upon this rock of religion, and the Pagans
with it had not had one foot of land therein to establish their laws, if
religion had not first been harbored among them. In vain Deucalion had
planted his ordinances among the Grecians, Licurgus among the Lacedaemonians,
Yon and Solon among the Athenians, and Romulus and Numa, among the Romans, if
they had not made the people believe, that they came from heaven, and that the
Gods had written them: and Moses had never retained the people in their
duties, among so many trauerses and changes, if he had not spoken of Ego
Dominus: and therefore Princes that desire to live in peace, and cause their
estates to flourish, never feared any thing so much, as that their people
should leave their opinion once conceived of the service of God. He that
remooueth this stone, shakes all the building.

An answer to the reasons of the league.
This is good before the people have entered into a doubt of the religion which
they followed, but after they have taken more liking in the new then in the
old, what will you do? There are certain things that never go without shame
and disorder, that is naturally in them: there are others, which nevertheless
are tolerable and reputed for just, because of the miserable vtiliue they
breed to the Commo^wealth, adulteries, periuries, thefts, and oppressions, are
things that are always evil. These evils causes common bordels to be
permitted within Towns, to obey tyrants, to contribute to the enemy, to
receive such law as pleases them, to suffer injuries, and consent to robbings
and ransomings, and yet either not to falcifie our oaths and promises, under
the which those things are permitted, or to shun and avoid greater dangers and
inconveniences, men allow, commend, and authorize them. It is well known why
the Curtizans under the Popes nose, are so great profit to the City of Rome,
sin or the nature and fragilitie of our senses, does push us forward, and
that it is not so execrable as their brutish horror that filled the hospital
of Saint Jacques with incurable people, at such time as the Pope Pius Quintus
sought to put down the bordell in Rome.

To shun the renewing of massacres, whererin pesle-mesle, the fury kills and
destroys both Priest and Minister, and to restore quietness to France, which
after two or three drops of cold sweat, which she is ready to yield with
her last effects for a peace for a Commonwealth: a Prince may permit the
diversity of religion, which without these considerations, would not be
tolerable.

Justin drove the Arians out of Constantinople, and all the East parts, but
Theodoric king of Italy, sent Ambassadors unto him, to show him, that if he
restored them not unto their liberty, he would destroy and overthrow all the
Catholicque Churches in Italy. The fear of this mischief caused him to
tolerate an evil, otherwise intolerable and pernicious: necessity to have
peace, is the most straight band of humane commodities, thereby to shun
wars, that makes fathers without childen: children Orphans; women widows,
Churches without exercise of religion or godliness, and the world without God,
without law, or without faith: to bannish wars, that change a most christian
Realm into a Commo^wealth of Atheists: Frenchmen that are peaceable and
tractable, into Scithians and Canibals, living only by blood: this bloody
civil war, that makes the earth a hell, and men the diuelles: it is most
just and reasonable to appease the differences of religion by peace, seeing
war cannot effect it. That ancient world of the church, which in respect of
ours being of Iron and brass, might justly be called golden, permits this
liberty. Peace accorded such false concords, and made good music: diverse
Princes and Estates which at this day flourish in great honor, suffer every
man to live according to his conscience and manner of religion, without any
alteration of their estates by such discipline.

Detestation of massacres.
They consider that the schism is begun, that the greatest part of Europe is
divided, that diverse good Towns in France, make profession of this religion,
there is no more remedy, that we must leave this conversion to the providence
of God.

They content themselves, that their subjects obey them, and that they use
their religion according to their minds: they do not therefore make a
barbarous galemawfre of the members of their subjects, they massacre them not,
they kill them not, and believe that whatsoever we have done heretofore, is
not less horrible to the mind, then cruel to the will: the League replyeth
and said.

Trouble not your self so much with tying these examples together, they serve
for nothing, there is no proportion of one Realm with the other in this point:
that which is good for the Frenchmen, is not good for others. We must not so
much stand upon the consideration of things that are already done, as of those
we should do. France never had two religions, she could never endure them:
Arians could not dwell therein: the Alligers were not tolerated with them: and
the Lutherians and Caluinists would not long continue among them, if the League
be in force. Let your Grace remember what a Chrysostom of France said unto
you at the last Parliament holden in Blois, and now give the like authority to
his arguments that they then had, when they made you take arms, to purge the
heart of Europe of the poison of heresy.

France (said he) has been such, that after it had publicquely received the
Christian faith under Clouis, it has always maintained it in one course
immutable and iuuiolable: France never endured the perverse opinions of faith
within her breast: France while all Christendom was moved by the pernicious
divisions of so diverse opinions, and with so many and different sorts of
heresies, that until this time have reigned, has always continued constant
and upright, not once bending it self to any false doctrine: France has been
the succor and defense of christian faith, and the terror of the enemies
thereof. And to conclude, France has been like a rock, or vnexprignable sort
of christianity. And how much should it now be fallen from his ancient
honor, how much reputation should it loose? how much should it want of her
first fidelity toward God, if changing her firmitie and constancy touching
faith, it should live long in such division, and endure before her eyes, (in
times past) so jealous of the union of christian beleese and liberty, but
rather an intolerable liberty, to live under diverse religions.

Your Majesty looking into the memory of things past, may sufficiently
perceive, that as long as France has been united under one christian religion,
she has made her glory and renown spread through all countries: she has
caused her valor in arms to be proved and felt in all places of the world:
she has always been victorious over all the enemies of Catholicque
religion, and has done so many honorable actions, and achieued so great and
happy conquests against Insidels, that it wanne such glory among the Asians,
Africans, Indians, Persians, Tartarians, Moors, Sarrazins, and others, that
all the christians in Europe, are by them called Frenchmen: for that because
those strange nations have only felt the arms of Frenchmen, they have also
comprehended all the Latin churches, under the name of France and Frenchmen.
But since France has been divided and rent with two religions, let us see how
much it has loft of her ancient renown: she that commanded a great part of
Europe, that conquered countries far distant from her: that at her only
name, made diverse warrelike nations to tremble, is found since this unhappy and
unfortunate division, to be reduced into such extremity, that in the middle
of her breast, she has received foreign powers: she has in a manner received
the law of her neighbors, and of her enemies, and that cruel, turning her
sword against her own intrailes: and although she was invincible in respect
of all other nations, she is now her self so imbased, vanquished, and
overthrown: which is the fruit that this venomous plant of new opinion has
induced, which seems to be at the point ready to give more dangerous
thrusts, if according to the expectation which your obedient people have
conceived of your wisdom and piety, it pleases not your Majesty speedily to
take order therein.

Remember that your Grace bears the Scepter of the great king Clouis, that
first ruled this Monarchy under the public profession of this religion, which
at this present is put in question within this Realm. Remember that you are
successor to that great Childeberg, that being able to endure such persons
about him, that had any wrong opinion of christian religion, made wars upon
the Visigots, that were infected with the heresy of the Arrians, and in the
end, constrained them to join and unite themselves to the holy and Catholicque
Church. Remember that you bear upon your head, the crown of that Charles, who
for the greatness and valor of his actions, deserved the name of great, and by
the virtue of his arms advanced christian religion, and defended the
authority of the Apostolicque sea, against such as persecuted the same.
Remember that you hold the place of that most woorthieking Philip Auguste, who
with so much zeal and affection, employed his arms against Albigeois
hereticques, that had sequestered themselves from the Catholicque union.
Remember that you sit in the seat of that renowned Prince Saint Lewis, that
spared not his treasures, his forces, nor his own person, for his desence and
advancement of the faith of Christ, and by his christian actions, deserved the
crown and surname of Saint, and without prolonging time, to rehearse them all.
Remember that you are Nephew to that great king Francis, the light of the
piety of France, son of that victorious Henry, whose memory shall live for
for ever: and brother to those two Catholicque Princes, Francis the second, and
Charles the ninth, whom God has taken to his mercy. (But But yet again, that
which touches you nearest, remember that you are that renowned Henry, that
being but Duke of Aniou, and brother to the king, did so valiant an act in the
defense of the Church: won so many great battles, and so many times daunted
the enemies of the Catholicque faith, that you have filled al Christendom with
the wonders of your victorious name. And we think (if that like your Grace)
that your M. has not so soon forggotten, that great and solemn oath, that
you made at your coronation, not only to maintain christian and Catholicque
religion, but to advance it as much as possible you might, without tollerating
any other. And if ever any oath lid bind a Prince to maintain and keep his
faith, this has so straightly bound you, to the defense of this religion, that
you cannot permit any other, without breach of conscience: and paraduenture
make a doubt of the right you have unto the Crown. For you know well, that you
have agreed and contracted with Jesus Christ, that you accepted the Scepter
upon this condition, to be defendor of his Catholicque religion, and in that
solemn oath as a gage and earnest-penny, you received his holy body, and
drank his precious blood. And now failing in this religious oath, think you
he has not good cause to be offended against you? know you not, that all the
evils we have suffered, proceeded only from his just wrath? and see you not,
that having given you this Scepter upon such conditions, he threatens to
take it from you, if you keep not the holy promise you made so solemnly unto
him? And even as God summoneth you to the observation of the faith that you
have given him, your subjects by the same means, solicit and inuit you to
observe the conditions whereupon you were made king, and which you cannot
infringe, (breaking your oath) but if you must also loose the title of most
christian King: and we doubt not, that setting these things before your eyes,
that reviving the memory of your predecessors, and continuing the first
prudence and virtue, but you shall have that great good fortune in your time,
to see your people reduced to the sheepfold of the holy and Catholicque Church,
whereof you are as a father and protector.

By this means, those great Kings of Jerusalem, David, Solomon, Abis,
losaphat, Ezechias, and Josias, obtained the blessings of God, and a happy
success in all their affairs: having with so great care and diligence,
restored the purity of religion, and reeftablished divine service that was
neglected. And we also hope, that following their steps, you will reduce all
France to the Catholicque religion: and for the recompense of your holy intent,
you shall have that blessing of God in your time, to behold your Realm as
flourishing as ever it was. And as it shall be most acceptable unto God, so
will it be most honorable to you and to your Crown: and you shall
sufficiently perceive, that at this day there is no King, Prince, Potentate, or
Commonwealth, I except certain Barbarians and the Turk, (whose detestable
manners and customs ought to be so odious, that the only name should be a
horror unto us) that suffers their subjects to live in any other religion,
then that which the Magistrate by the disunion of the Church, holds for only
good and holy. And surely such are not worthy to be heard, that will so much
restrain the power of the Prince or Magistrate, to say that he cannot
constrain his subjects to the faith, but that he ought to suffer them to live
in liberty of conscience (as they say) for this opinion has always generally
been condemned and reproved by all Christians, but only by the Manickiens and
Donatists, that were of opinion that we must not constrain any man for his
religion, but suffer every man to live in liberty, and after his own
santasie: and those which at this day, in a manner by force, pull from you this
liberty of their religion, permit it not to others. For in the places of
Christendom, where God permits that they should be Masters, and having
the authority in their hands, they are so far from permitting Catholicques,
freely to live in the liberty of their consciences, that to the contrary, the
diverse sects that are among them (for that already they are banded and divided
among themselves, an evident sign of their ruin at hand) cannot endure each
other. And there where the Caluenist is Master, the Lutheriau dares not live
freely: yea, and when they change Magistrates of diverse opinions, religion
changes according to his pleasure: as we have seen sufficient of such changes
in England, and in many places in Germany. And what? should not this be a
shame and too great a slander to a good christian and faithful Catholicque,
to be found less affected in his religion, that is approved by so long and
continual succession, then these new christians in their opinions, that are as
it were but one night old? It is then a general and certain maxim, and
approved by the Church, and by all Commonwealths, that the Magistrate ought
and may continue his people under one faith, as it is sufficiently seen by so
many godly laws and constitutions of Christian and Catholicque Empires: and by
the kings your predecessors: whose examples ought to be holy and inuiolate,
unto your Majesty. Such were the reasons of the League, by the vehemency
whereof, the king disposed himself to war, reserving always a continual
thought, to rid himself thereof. But the Queen, that saw so many accidents
to hang like lead over his head, that thought the great and proud Spanish
army would land in Britain, and that all the territories of Italy would
fall upon him, to defend the Catholicqueleague, did so much, that the king
dissembled the wound in his heart, and said: that he had no more remembrance
of the hard dealings that had past: that he had no other intent but that of the
League, which was to extirpe heresy.

Upon this assurance, the Duke of Guise caused his merchandises to be liked,
and to be more esteemed then they were worth, or then he hoped. Whereupon
he entered into a treaty with the Queen Mother, and with her resolved upon
certain articles, upon the fifteenth of July, which the king approved,
received, and signed, within three days after, which were as follows.

THe Articles agreed upon and signed at Nemours, the seventeenth of July,
1585: the kings edicts made touching them, and the declarations his Majesty
has since made upon the edict, shall inuiolably be kept and observed
according to their form and tenor.

And to cease, and for ever to take away the distrusts, partiallities, and
deuisions, between the Catholicques and the Realm, there shall be a
perpetual and vnreuocable Edict made, whereby the king shall ordain an entire
and general reunion of the same with his Majesty, where he shall be and
remain the head, for the defense and conservation of the Catholicque,
Apostolicque, and Roman religion, by his said Majesty's authority.

To the which end, by the said Edict it shall be promised and sworn, as well
by his said Majesty, as by his said united subjects, to employ their treasures
and persons: yea, and their proper lives, wholly to extirpe the heresies of
this Realm, and of the countries under the obedience of his said Majesty.

Not to receive nor show obedience after his Majesty's descease without
children, to any Prince whatsoever, that is an hereticque or favorer of
heresies, what right or pretense soever he may have.

To defend and conserve the person of his Majesty, his estate, crown, and
authority, and of the children which it shall please God to send him, with and
against all men, none excepted.

To protect, defend, and conserve, all those that shall enter into the said
union, and namely the Princes, Lords, and other Catholicques, heretofore
associated from all violence and oppression, which the hereticques with their
fateurs and adherents would use against them.

To leave all other unions, practices, and intelligences, leagues, and
associations, as well within as without the Realm, contrary and preindiciall
to this present union, and to the person and authority of his Majesty, his
estate and crown, and the children that it shall please God to send him.

His Majesty shall promise and swear the observations of the said Edict, and
cause it to be sworn and observed by the Princes, Cardinals, Prelates, and
others of the Clergy, Peers of France, Officers of the Crown, Knights of
the holy Ghost, Councillors of his Majesty, Governors, Lieftenants, General
of Provinces, Presidents, Councillors of Sovereign Courts, Bailiffes,
Stewards, and other his Officers, Majors, Sheriffs, and bodies and
communalties of Towns, of whom oaths, acts, and verbal processes, shall be
taken, made, and registered by the Clerks of the said Courts, Baliages, and
bodies of Towns, that when need requires, they may be seen.

And to execute the said Edict, and proceed to the extirpation of the said
heresies, his Majesty with all convenient speed, shall raise two great and
strong armies, to send against the said hereticques, one into Poitou and
Xainctonge, that shall be led and commanded by whom soever it shall please
his said Majesty: the other into Dauphine, which he shall commit to the
charge of Monsieur de Maine.

The Council of Trent shall be published with all speed, without prejudice
nevertheless, to rights and authority of the king, and the liberties of the
French Churches, which within three months shall be more amply specified and
laid open, by certain Prelates and Officers of his Court of Parliament, and
others whom his Majesty shall appoint thereunto. It shall be agreed (for the
surety of these present articles) that the keeping of the Towns granted by
the Edict of Nemours, unto the said League, shall yet continue for the space of
four years longer, and more then the two years that rest to be expired of
the time agreed upon before, and likewise of the Town of Dourlans.

The said Lords, Princes, and others, that shall have the custody of the said
Towns, shall promise upon their faiths, honors, and loss of all their goods
altogether, and every one in particular, to deliver into the hands of his said
Majesty, or to whom he shall appoint, within six years, without delay or
excuse, staying ordifficultie whatsoever, for what cause or pretense soever it
may be, the said towns and places that are given in keeping for the surety
aforesaid.

Further his said Majesty (for the said security of these present articles,
and the said time of six years) that if the Captains and Governors of the
Towns of Orleans, Bourges, and Monstreuil, die during the said time, his
Majesty during the said time of six years, shall commit the government of
the said towns, to those that the said Princes shall appoint.

But the said time being expired, the said towns shall no more remain
engaged for the said security, but shall be left off and maintained in the
same sort and manner as they were before.

The Town and Citadell of Valence, shall be delivered into the hands of the
Sieurs de Gessans, therein to command for the service of his Majesty, as it
did before.

The Sieur de Belloy shall also berestored to his charge and Captains place of
Crottoy, to enjoy it as he did at other times.

His Majesty shall cause le Bernet to issue out of Bullen, and give the charge
to a Gentlemen of Picardie, such as he thinks good: which being done, the
said Princes will cause their forces to withdraw themselves from about the
Town, and wholly dispearse their soldiers that are there: and as touching the
Towns that are declared, and shall declare themselves before this present
conclusion, to be united with the said Princes, they shall continue in the
protection and sauegard of the king, as other towns, and left in that estate
wherein they are, without any innovation nor putting of Garrisons or
surcharges, in considerations of things forepassed.

The Captains and Governors of the places that have been dispossessed of
their places since the twelfth of May, shall be reftored to the same on all
parts, and the Towns shall be discharged of men of war, that have bin
placed in Garrison therein since the said day.

Process shall be made and executed touching the sale of hereticques goods,
and of those that bear arms with them against his Majesty, by the best,
readiest, and certain means that may be devised: to the end, that his
Majesty's meaning and intent, may in that point be executed, according to the
edicts and declarations aforesaid: and that he may be better aided with the
moneys that shall proceed thereof, to make war against the hereticques, then
it has been heretofore.

The Regiment of footmen of Saint Paul, and of Sacremore late deceased being
in arms, shall be paid like others that shall serve, and when they are in
Garrison within the Provinces, assignation shall be given to the Treasurer of
the wars, from the beginning of the year, to pay them for four months at
the least, which may not be denied.

The Garrisons of Thoul, Verdun, and Marsal, when they are employed for the
kings service, shall be used as well for musters, as for leadings, in the same
sort, and like to those of Metz.

When the king shall employ his companies of horsemen, he shall employ those
whom the said Princes have required, to be used and paid as others are.

Those who at this present execute the charges of Provost of Merchants and
Sheriffs of the Town of Parris, shall presently remit their said charges into
the hands of the king: who having regard to the declaration made unto him,
touching the necessity the said Town has of their continuance in the service
of the same, shall ordain, that they shall be reestablished and placed
therein, not only till our Lady day in Harvest next ensuing, but for the space
of two years after.

And as touching Brigard, that has been chosen to the office of the kings
Attorney, they shall likewise put it into the kings hands, who shall ordain,
that he shall use it till the middle of August next, being in Anno. 1590.
Mean time, Perrot shall receive the ordinary stipend given by the Town, and
the pensions it has pleased the king to grant unto the said office. And then
there shall be paid unto him, by him that shall be chosen to execute the
said office, after the said middle of August, 1590. the sum of 4000. crowns:
if it be the kings pleasure to continue the said office and pension, unto the
said new elected officer, and if his Majesty will continuie the said
pensions, the said Perrot shall have but three thousand crowns.

The Castle of the Bastille shall be remissed in to his Majesty's hands, to
dispose thereof as pleases him.

His Majesty shall make election of some man whom it shall please him, within
the said Town, to have the office of knight of the watch.

The Magistrates, Councillors, Captains, and other officers of the bodies of
towns, that have charges in the Towns within this Realm, that have followed
the part of the said Princes, shall likewise put them into the kings hands,
which shall presently be restored to them again, for the good and
tranquillity of the same.

All prisoners that have been taken since the twelfth of May, by reason of the
present troubles, shall be set at liberty on both sides, without paying
ransom.

The artillery taken in the Arcenac, shall be restored into the same place
again, and remain as it was: if after the conclusion of this present
agreement any man of what estate or condition soever he be, do enterprise any
thing against the Towns and places of his said Majesty, they shall be holden
for infringers of the peace, and for such taken and punished, without favor or
assistance by the said Princes, or any other under any pretense whatsoever.

Likewise, if any of the towns or places, that are given for security, shall
be taken by any man, those that shall have taken them, shall be punished as
aforesaid: and the said towns being recovered again, shall be redeliuered
into the said Princes hands, for the time granted unto them.

The taking of Marrans.
Upon these articles the kings Edict was published, not so much against the king
of Nauarres religion, as against his interest, and to debar him from all
that, which none but God could take from him: who while they were agreeing
upon these articles, and that in less then four days, the declaration and
execution were both proclaimed, touching him, he made himself Master of the
Isles of Charron and Marrans.

The Edict was ratified in the Parliament at Parris, upon the 21. of July, the
substance thereof being, that his Majesty would renew the oath made at his
sacrying and annoynting, The second edict in July for the league.
to live and die in the Catholicque religion: to employ his life and forces for
the conservation thereof: to extirpe heresy: never to make peace nor truce with
the hereticque, nor to favor or advance the succession of any Prince that is
an hereticque or fauorer of them: to embrace and receive all those that are
joined in league against them: not to place in any office of justice or estate,
any other then men that are of the Catolicque, Apostlicque, and Roman
religion: that his subjects so united, should swear to leave all sorts of
association and intelligences, as well without as within the Realm, and to
defend each other against the oppression and violence of hereticques: freely to
expose both their bodies and goods, The subjects oath to their King.
for the conservation of his authority, and of the children which it should
please God to send him: he abolished, and as it were wholly buried in silence,
the fury and ingratitude of his subects, declaring them guilty of treason,
that should refuse to sign to that union, or that having signed, should leave
it: in respect and favor whereof, he remitted the disorders of the league
since the Barricadoes, which he declared in the end of the edict in these
words: The kings declaration against the disorders of the league since the 12.
of May.
We declare that no inquiry or search shall be made, of any the intelligences,
associations, and other things, which our said Catholicque subjects may have
done together, as well without as within our realm, for that they have informed
us, that whatsoever they have done, was only but by reason of the zeal that
they have borne to the conservation and maintenance of Catholicque religion.
All which things shall remain extinguished and quenched, and by these prese^ts
we declare them, and all whatsoever is happened and past since the 12. and 13.
of May last: and since that time by reason thereof, until the publication of
these presents, in our Court of Parliament of Parris, extinguished and void,
as well in our said Town of Parris, as in other Towns and places of our
Realm, as also all acts of hostility, that may have been committed, as
taking of our treasures, in our receites general, particulars, or elsewhere,
victuals, ammunition, and artilleries, bearing of arms, or mustering of men,
and generally all other things done and executed during the said time, and that
since the said time have ensued by the occasion, and for the affecting of the
troubles, without pursuit, inquiry, or search, directly, or indirectly, in
any sort whatsoever, against our said subjects. All the which, we do once
again cease and delay, as things that never happened, without any exception:
as soon as the edict was published, and the kings lightness therein once
perceived, those that looked into it, presently judged, that such peace covered
a dangerous war. The leaguers to the contrary, took that as a miraculous
effect of their Barricadoes, yet they feared much the last act of the tragedy,
and although the advancement of their enterprise tra^sported their senses, yet
the most courageous among the^, tre^bled with fear, when they remembered the
violent breach of their fidelity unto the K.

The only remembrance of the twelfth day of May, caused their fairest days to
become cloudie, they put in oblivion the forgetfulness of their duties, and
esteemed not the Prince so insensible, but that in the end he would be revenged.

Two things abashed them, the one the fatal desteny and overthrow of the great
army of Spaniards, consisting of one hundredth and fifty ships, that were
destroyed in a manner without fighting upon the coast of Ireland, which should
have led all English slaves into the mountains of Granado, and the mines of
Peru: the other the kings resolution not to return to Parris, The overthrow of
the Spaniards army.
although he had been desired and importunately sought unto for the same:
excusing himself by the preparations of his army for Poitou, and the
assembling of the 3. estates. In the first, they saw that their great hopes on
the West side, were well weakened: in the second, they knew that there rested
some sparks of chollor in the Kings heart touching the Barricadoes, but they
armed themselves with courage and resolution against all things whatsoever:
esteeming it not time as then, to keep the oath which they had taken, The king
will not go to Parris.
to leave all foreign leagues and intelligences, and that they must not so
soon pull down the scaffold, but rather let it stay till the building were
fully finished. And therevppon they held new councelles in Parris, from the
which was drawn the resolutions which the author of the treaty made (touching
the causes of taking arms by the league) rehearses: which are, to preserve
and hold their authority and credit, gotten by so many trauerses, The
discourse of the troubles of France, to the year 1589.
and to further the decreasing of the kings and of the ancient order of
France: to hold the king in such sort besieged, and to make his will so even
and united with theirs, that he should not see any more but by the leaguers
eyes, nor speak, nor stir, but by the tongue and sinews of their intents.

To take order that those that should be sent unto the estates, should be some
of the paste which they had molded, and their instruments furnished with the
instructions of their Agents, or rather extracted out of the fine flower of the
Articles of Nancy and Peronne, to move things unto the king, that neither time
nor necessity of affairs did once permit, as wars against the Huquenots, and
the ease of their people, by vnburthening them of tallages, to the end they
might make his Majesty odious if he refused that first fruit promised to the
creatures of their league, and he could not consent to wars, and release the
means to maintain the same. To be the stronger party duting the assembly of
the estates at Bloys, and to the same end, they should send into all places,
for the Gentlemen of their faction, to meet them there in arms. Not to leave
their good intelligence with the duke of Parma, to confirm the treaty of
Ginuille, and to advertise the king of Spain, that the agreement made with the
king, stretched only to the means of the execution of secret purposes. To
send to the Colonel Phiffer into Suisse, and to Monsieur de Balagny in Cambray,
to retain them in the particular assemblies among them.

To hinder Monsieur de Neuers from going into Picardie, to pacify the mutinies
of the League, not to seek after more confident minds then they have. To
cause the Citizens of Parris to become bound, yearly to pay thirty thousand
Crowns to Monsieur de Villars, Governor of Haure, thereby to hold him in
confederacy with the League.

The king was well informed of those enterprises, and had made that last The
King wept when he sealed the Edict in July
Edict as much against his heart, as he did the first, for he was seen to weep
when he signed them, lamenting his misfortune, that to assure his own person,
it constrained him to hazard his estate, he knew that the Edict would not be
observed but by himself, and yet his mildness so much impeached him, and the
apprehension of a good war, so much retained him, that he would not take order
therein, rejecting the advice of those that counseled him to make peace with
the Huguenots, and let them stir against the mutiny of the League. He said
there was less danger to dwell with those that continue in the unity of his
religion, then with them that had separated themselves, and become heads of new
opinions, although he well knew the causes and pretenses of the raising of the
League. The Duke of Guise, made Lieftenant general of the kings armies.
After that, either in good faith, or purposely, he bestowed his liberalities
and favors upon all the principal heads of the League. To Monsieur de Guise
he gave the office of Lieftenant general, over all the forces throughout the
Realm of France: if not of the execution thereof, yet he had the name and title
of Constable: he gave him a beam of his brightness, an arm of his power, and
a lively image of his Majesty: his letters pattents being sealed at Chartres
upon the fourth of August: The Cardinal of Guise, Legate of Auignon. The Duke
de Maine in Dauphine. The Duke de Nemours Governor of Lions.
he promised the Cardinal of Guise his brother, to procure the Pope to give
him the office of Legate of Auignon: he sent Monsieur de Maine with a fair and
great army into Dauphine, wherewith he passed at Lions, and there his voyage
ended: he gave the Duke of Nemours the government of Lions, which his father
had inioyed: his letters pattents were read, published, and registered in the
Court of Parliament, upon Thursday the 22. of December, in the same year, upon
charge that he should not meddle with any sort, which the execution of
Justice, ordinary, nor for matters proceeding in trial of law, but only to
aid and assist it: he forgot not the Archbishop of Lions, whom he desired to
withdraw from the League, and to keep him for his Council, for some special
cause that moved him to be adicted unto him: he was jealous that the League
should have a primate of France in it, of so good credit, reputation, and
desert in the Church. I except Peter of Sauoy, which revolted against Lewis
Hutin.
And surely his jealousy was not without reason, for never before that time,
any Archbishop of Lions, did ever conspire with those that in times past
troubled the quiet estate of France: they continued constant to the Colonel of
the royalty, united themselves to the Scepter of France, to maintain the
franchises of the French Church: they have been arbitrators of great
controversies, in: he affairs that maintain the order of the Monachie, which
is called the estate: they never leaned but on the kings side. It is true, that
Paul Emille reports, that Agabardus Archbishop of Lions, was President in the
Council that was holden for the deposing of Lewis Debonnaire, and the raising
of his children, and whether the descent is inserted in the person, or that
there is some other heavy destiny insident to the seat, the Bishoppricke of
Lions has at al times had Pretates, that were most worthy instruments both
for estate and religion, most affected and faithful servants to the King, and
chief Presidents of their Council: Eucherius under Clodion le Cheuelu:
Patient under Clouis: Sacerdos under King Childebert, Nisier and Priseus:
Gontran under Etherius: and Anemond under Clotaire: Asterius under Lewis and
Carloman. And in the 2. and 3. family of our kings, there were Archbishops of
Lions chosen out of the greatest houses and purest blood in France: or of the
neighbor Princes, as Philippe and Pierce de Sauoye, Countes of Sauoy, and
Innocent the fifth. James Archbishop of Lions.
of Bourgongne, Reinold Earl of Forest. Peter of Tarentaise, that after was
Pope of Rome: Henry and Lewis, Eales of Villars and Montluel, Charles
d'Alencon, Ame, John and Hugh de Talaru: two Charles de Bourbon Cardinals:
Andre Cardinal of Espinac: Francis de Rouen, son of a Marshall of France:
Anthony of the ancient house of the Earls of Albon, that were Dauphins de
Viennois, and Earls of Auuergne.

Pieces of money quoyned by the Archbishop of Lions, with this devise on the
one side, Prima seeds, And on the other, Galiarum.
And in truth it is the principal sea of France, the most famous and most
ancient, and in times past, the Archbishop had a privilege to quoyne money:
there are yet certain pieces of money to be seen with their stamp, and in
the time that the kings of Bourgongne had that authority over the sea, which
the kings of France now have, the Archbishoppes were the first, and most
worthy instruments of their kings Council. Frideric Barbarousse in the time
of Lewis le Ieune, amplified their privileges, by his letters writing to the
Exarches or Lieftenants, or chief Councillors of his Palace of Bourgongne,
because that part of the Realm of Bourgongne, that lies on this side the Mont
Iura, was as then Emperor of Rome.

The king seeking to withdraw the Archbishop of Lions out of the league,
promised him the custody of the seal of France, made him one of his privy
Council, before being only of the Council of estate, recommended him unto
Pope Sixtus the fifth, and made him believe that the Lord of Gondy was sent
expressly to fetch him the Cardinals Hat.

The Kings favors showed to the chief of the League.
He continued his favors, he renewed and amplified them to all those that had
any credit in the League, thinking that by the signs of his good favor, those
Salmonees that would counterfeit Jupiters thunderboults, would acknowledge and
withdraw themselves out of the confusion of their pretenses. He did nothing
without them, he disclosed his secrets unto them, thrust his soul into the
deepest part of their passions: yea, and seemed to be as much moved as they,
to the advancement of treaties, most liberally thrusting all his favors and
authorities upon them and their participants, so that there was none of them,
how far soever in degree among them, The Cardinal of Bourbon declared to be
chief Prince of the blood. See the treatise of January. 1589.
but felt some part of his benignity: He proclaimed the Cardinal of Bourbon
to be the first Prince of the blood royal: that is, he ratified the first
Article of Ginuille, made in Anno. 1585. which was wholly to exclude the king
of Navarre from the Crown: and avoided that great disputation and argument of
the Uncle and the Nephew, so much written and disputed of both with tooth and
nail, thereby to trouble the ancient order of the succession, and make the
good Cardinal of Bourbon to serve the League on both sides. This point
deserves some small view of their process. Those that sustain the right and
title of the Cardinal, alleged all these reasons, first, that the law of
the Realm, or the Salicque law, that refers the succession to the heirs
Masles, refers also the prerogative to rain and to enjoy the Crown, to the
next of the blood to the king, that dies without children. Francis de Valois
Duke of Alencon, died with this prerogative of first Prince of the blood, and
first of the succession, and at his decease, had no nearer kinsman the^ the
Cardinal of Bourbon, that was in the tenth degree of consanguinitie from him,
and by consequent, succeeded in the prerogative of the Duke of Aniou: and as
one cannot be heir to a man, if he be not his heir by law, so he ought to
have that quallitie at his death, at the which time, the hope of succession was
joined thereunto. And as the succession and inheritance of the Realm,
permits but one only heir, so this prerogative permits but one lawful
heir.

Quoniam sororem, c. De iure de lib.
This right of prerogative never rested but in the person of one of the Princes
of Valois, by the privilege of first begotten: and those of the house of
Bourbon never had it, because they could not represent the chief branch of a
house, from whence it did not issue, the colaterall ingendring, not the
colaterall. In such manner, that Anthony de Bourbon, although he had all the
right of the house of Bourbon, having not, nor by any means would have the
right of elder: the auncienter house being Valios yet living, could not
obtain the prerogative of the first Prince, or any hope to attain unto it,
nor yet to transfer it to Henry his son.

To say it comes to the house of Bourban, there being no other family of
the Masses but that house living, and by consequent, to him that has all the
pre-eminence of the right therein by virtue of succession, and so to Henry
son of Anthony, as being the head of that house, and representing his
father, eldest and first Prince of all that family: it is most certain, that
this prerogative did not fall from the person of Francis Duke of Aniou, Jus
suitatis. Eghinar din ^ita caroli.
to the family of Bourbon, for if it were so, it would follow, that all the
Princes of that house, should succeed in the same prerogative, and that he
which dies, should cease the whole revenue of that family, and not the
nearest. So you cannot say, that Anthony king of Navarre, being descended of
the eldest house, the right falls to him, seeing it is a thing clear and
without difficulty, that the family of the eldest is preferred before the
family of the youngest, for in colaterall successors, they consider the
nearness of the Parents, to the last that died ceased, and the nearest in
degree always excludes him that is further distant in Consanguinitie: so
Charlemaine comforming himself to the law of the Realm, after the death of
Charles his eldest son, and Pepin the youngest, judged the Crown to Lewis his
middle son (that after was called le Debonnaire) as brother and next heir to
Charles his eldest son, and not to Bernard son to Pepin the youngest son,
that was but in the second degree unto him, although in paternall inheritance,
he represented the person of his father.

Like case, the prerogative that Francis Duke of Aniou had, fell and proceeded
to the Cardinal of Bourbon, not because he is of the house of Bourbon, but
next kin to the Duke of Aniou, because he descends of the Capets, and of the
blood royal of Hugh Capet. And as the house of Bourbon at this day is reputed
to have this right, because the said Cardinal of Bourbon, that is issued from
the same, obtained it, so if the said Cardinal were issued out of an other
house, so it were royal, the family of Bourbon should not be admitted to this
prerogative, but that from whence the said Cardinal of Bourbon were so issued,
because of the nearness of his person.

The Genealogy of Heary of Bourbon, King of Navarre. S. Lewis. Robert. Lewis.
James. John. Lewis. John.
The king of Navarre alleged for his reasons, the genealogy and descent of
the house of Bourbon, saying: Saint Lewis king of France had two sons, the
eldest Phillip the third, surnamed the Hardy, and Robert the youngest, Earl of
Cleremont: of this Robert and of Beatrix daughter of Archambaut of Bourbon, was
borne Lewis Earl of Clermont, and first Duke of Bourbon, created by king
Philip de Vallois, which Lewis espoused Marie Countess of Hainaut, and had two
sons, Peter and James, the Masculin kind of Peter, is wholly extinct, and
there rests none of his side but the houses of Lorraine and of Sauoy by the
females. Of James de Bourbon younger son to Lewis, and of Jane de S. Paul his
wife, issued Francis. Charles. Anthony. Henry. The Duchy of Bourbon. 1327.
John de Bourbon Earl of March: of John de Burbon and Catherine Count esse of
Vendosme, issued Lewis de Bourbon Earl of Vendosme: of Lewis de Bourbon and
Ieane de Laual his Wife, issued John de Bourbon: of John de Bourbon and Isabeau
his wife, issued Francis Earl of Vendosme: of Francis Earl of Vendosme, and
Marie of Luxembourg Countess of Saint Paul, issued Charles de Bourbon: of
Charles de Bourbon and Francis d'Alencon his wife, issued Anthony de Bourbon,
king of Navarre the eldest son, Francis Duke of Anguien, Charles Cardinal of
Bourbon, John Durke of Anguin: Margaret married to the Duke de Neuers, and
Lewis de Bourbon Prince of Conde. Of Anthony de Bourbon the eldest, issued
Henry de Bourbon now king of Navarre, and Catherine Princess of Navarre his
sister.

Wherefore it is evidently seen, that the king of Navarre is a degree behind
the Cardinal of Bourbon, for he is in the tenth, and the king in the eleventh
degree, but it is seen that he is son of the eldest house of Bourbon, and
therefore by consequent, preferred to all the rights, of the house royal.

Paul Aemil. in pud Crasso. Anno. 11110. ^olidin. Hist. Angl. By a statute in
the Court, in the year 1341. By a statute in the year 1517. Filius Fratris
Fratri aequiparatur and ita succedit atque parter si viuerer.
All the Doctors concluded in favor of the Nephew against the Uncle, that says
he is the eldest by the disease of his father, whether it be in the direct or
colaterall line, in successions undivided, as Realms, Empires, Duches, and
Earledomes, and that is observed in France, England, Spain, Portugal, Almaine,
and Sicile. So Archambaut had the Duche of Bourbon from his uncle Hannon: Artus
Duchy of Normandy, from king John his Uncle, third son to Henry the second,
king of England. Lewis Earl of Neuers, the Earldom of Flaun^ers from his
Uncle, the daughter of Guy Vicount of Limoges, the Duchy of Britain, from
John Earl of Montfort his brother, Henry d'Albert son of Catherin: the
Earldom of Foix, from John Viscount of Narbonne and his heirs: Richard son
of Edward Prince of Wales, was crowned without contradiction, and York. Henry
de Bourbon succeeded in the right that Anthony de Bourbon his father had in the
house of Bourbon, by the succession of his ancestors, the title of eldest
son not being lost nor extinct in the father, but continues and is
transported to the son.

The right of eldest, is perfectly ingrafted in the eldest, as soon as he
enters into the world, and is made a man, which right being in him, has
continued in his posterie by the custom and common observation of the Realm.

The reason that some allege, to prove that this right was never gotten in
the father, is not to be respected: for although there were but only (and
sometimes) hope, his son is permitted to claim it, and to seek the
possession as it falls out, and although the son of the eldest, is a degree
further then the Uncle, nevertheless being entered into the place of his
father, he ought to be preferred: further, the right of preferment is not
gotten by our selves only, but by the right and person of others, so that as
long as there testeth any thing of this elder house, an other cannot take place
in any sort whatsoever.

The king of Navarre has another reason, against the which, there can be no
argument that may prevail: which is, that the Cardinal of Bourbon his Uncle,
at the contract of marriage between the said king of Navarre, and the Lady
Margaret of France, acquitted, remissed, yielded and transported unto to the
said king, all and every right, name, voice, and action, present or to come,
that in any case might appertain unto him, as being issued out of the house
of Bourbon, expressly acknowleging the king of Navarre his Nephewe for the true
son, heir, successor, and representation in all respects, of the eldest house.
And so to think by denying his own deed, to attain to the vain hope of the
succession of the Realm, comprehended under the general declaration of the
elder house of the said deceased king of Navarre, there is no likelihood.

So the king not to displease the League, that occupied the principal places
of his thoughts, declared the Cardinal of Bourbon the first Prince of the
blood, although he knew that by justice, and the laws, not only of this
Realm, but of all the best governed estates that ever was, the king of Navarre
was only capable of that prerogative: and the good Prelate perceived not, that
under that quallitie of first Prince, and successiue heir to the crown, which
the league procured unto him, it pushed forward her tyranny with all the force
she might, thereby to usurp the royalty, giving to a king of six and
thirty years of age, a succession that has past the climaticall year of
sixty three. To be brief, it may be said of the League, as Cicero said of
Caezar and Pompey, it presents unto us the picture of the Cardinal of
Bourbon, but will erect the Image of a stranger.

The League took away the Kings Council.
The affairs of the League having had in her poope, the wind, the authority
of the king, and favor of all the people, floating most proudely in the maine
seas, without fear of winds or waves: fearing that the kings great goodness
would not long continue, and that the wise Counselors that were about the
king, would give him advise, and withdraw him from the shipwreck, wherein
they would reduce his authority, ceased not to blow in his ears, that his
Council set a dark cloud before his eyes, thereby to impeach him from seeing
what is the duty of a good king, hyding the truth from him, and staying at
nothing, but that which might content either passion or avarice.

The king to please them, is constrained to pull his eyes out of his head, to
deprive himself of the light that he received by the wisdom of his
Councillors, M. de Chiuerny. M. de Beliure. M. de Villeroy. Ad consilium de
rep. dandume capite est nosse rem public.
in that cloudenesse of his affairs, and whereof he had most need. In the
middle of those treasons of the league, he dismissed those that never gave
peace to any passion against ye course of public vtillitie: that had nothing
in their minds which age had not made rich, grave, constant, and quiet, that
could yield firm and infallible resolutions, that knew the present estate,
that foresawe what would happen, that followed not opinions, but reason, and
that have stayed long in the stern of the French ship, had fought against the
waves, winds, and first troubles of the torment of the League. Then the seals
were left in the hands of Monsieur de Monthelon, Advocate of the Court of
Parliament, an honest man, and one that had no other passion, that drove him
forward, but only religion.

The Duke d'Espernon although he stayed so long from the Court, that it could
not be said, The Duke d'Espernon, Governor of Aniou and Poitou.
that he rule the voluptuous mind of the king his Master, could not so much
absent himself, but that the co^spiracies of the league made him apprehend the
greater mischiefs they would breed in a contented estate, and having received
the power from his Majesty, to command in the Provinces of Aniou, Thouraine,
Poitou, Angoumois, and Xaintonge, road from Loches to Angoulesme, upon advise
given him, that the League had conferated with certain of the Inhabitants
thereof, to deliver the town unto them: there he was received with all the
honor that the people might give to the Lieftenant of a King, and with as much
joy, as if the King himself had been there: but those fair days continued
not long without clouds, this goodness was soon followed with a terrible
torment, and this public rejoicing, with a strange trouble: for although he
showed sufficiently both in words and effects, that he had nothing so dear, as
the conservation of Catholicque religion, and the excution of the Edict of
union, which he had caused to be published, the people nevertheless were
persuaded by the impostures of certain leaguers, that his intent was, to cause
certain troops of Huguenots to enter into the Castle, and to surprise the
Town.

A tumult in the presence Chamber of the Duke d'Espernon.
The Mayor of the Town being altogether a Leaguer, conspired upon Saint
Lawrence day, to take the Duke of Espernon and to kill him, and for that
purpose, upon the same day they entered into the Castle, under pretense to
present certain Posts unto him that came from the Court, and therewith entered
into the high chamber, where discharging two Pistolles, they cried, kill, kill:
but the Gentlemen of his train put themselves in defense, and presently drove
the traitors back: their leader being hurt with a Pistolle, that gave him but
seven hours respite to take order for his affairs: with that an alarm was
given in the Town, and presently the people made Barricadoes, rose in a
mutiny, raged and stormed, but they were like prisoners kept in a strong
Tower, for the Duke d'Espernon held the Castle, and had the Citadell at his
commandment, whereby both through the one and the other, he could let as
many forces enter to relieve him as he should need.

A vainte mutenie made by the people. Captains for the league, summons the
Duke d'Espernon.
The people perceiving that he held the Castle, and that the Lord of Tagens came
in all haste to help him, that the Lord of Bordes their prisoner, Captain of
the Citadell, would not redeem his liberty at the price of his place, that
the Sieurs de Mere, dela Messeliere, de Marquerolle, Desbouchaux, sommoning
them, had found them resolute rather to diethen yield, they determined to fall
to an agreement.

Which Nonsieur de Tagens, Cousin to the duke d'Espernon agreed upon, which
appeased their strife, and therewith they laid down their arms: the dead
bodies were honorably buried, and the prisoners on both parts released.

The Duches of Espernon, who before the commotion was gone out of the Castleto
hear Mass in the Iacobins Church, had been stayed in the Friars Covent, and
threatened to serve for a Gabion, if she caused not her husband to yield up
the Castle: was by the Lieftenant general of the Town, Tumults appeased.
led to the said Castle, and because the gate was as yet rampierd with
stones, she was constrained to go up by a lather, and to creep in at the
window.

The second day after this revolt, being the twelsth of August, one thousand
five hundredth eighty and eight, they proceeded to the election of a new Mayor,
who with the Sheriffs presented himself unto the Duke d'Espernon, to excuse
the folly of the people, and he as if he had not been offended thereat,
received them with the best countenance he could, and sent them away well
pleased, only that he would not suffer the body of the Mayor (principal of
the rebellion) to be buried with the state that belonged to his office.

The History of Gauerston printed at Parris, in the year 1588.
About the time that the Mayor made the first tumult in his utter chamber, he
was in his own chamber, staying the time to go to Mass, and showing the Abbot
of Elbene, and Monsieur de Marimon, a most infamous libell printed, not so much
against him, as against the honor of the Ma. of the king. Which was the
History of Pierce Gauerston, whose life and fortune was therein, compared to
the life of the Duke of Espernon: and the conclusion thereof was, that as the
Gascon Pierce Gauerston, loved and only favored by Edward the second, king of
England, preferred to all offices in the Court, enriched with the treasures
both of the king, and of his subjects, at the peoples request was bannished and
exiled out of England, and after that beheaded: so the Duke of Espernon would
play the like tragedy in France, under Henry the third, king of France. This
libel was answered by a discourse imprinted at Parris, which the Lord of
Mandelot would not suffer to be sold in Lions, because it did lively describe
the tragical actions of estates, and made a most odious comparison of a good
and religious Prince, with a bloody hypocrite, and tyrannical Prince, saying:
that Edward and Henry were all one. He said, that Edward, a man of no
government, Hist. Angl.
subject to his pleasures, of a vilde mind, little caring for the affairs of
his Realm, spent and profaned the treasures of his country, appointed for the
preservation of religion, and gave them to Gauerstone his Mignion: oppressed
his subjects with great and excessive exactions: sold and engaged part of his
lands and demaines: used his Nobles unworthily, not caring for men of good
reputation, being a great hypocrite, thinking to cover a great number of
inormities, by building and erecting a Covent of Iacobius: his Barrons
constrained him diverse times to hold a Parliament to reform the abuses of his
Court, which he caused to be assembled, making show to redress the malady
of his Realm, but it was to entrap his Princes and Lords, and put them to
death, which he did, apprehending the number of two and twenty, whose heads
he caused to be stricken off. He was degraded and deposed of his royal
dignity, and the Lords of his Realm caused him to die, by thrusting a red
hot spit into his fondament.

The Duke d'Espernon complained of the wretchedness of that time, and of the
infamous liberty of Erenchmen, in dishonouring their Prince, and abhorred that
manner of writing, wishing a severe punishment might be executed both upon the
composers and readers thereof, for example to others.

The League having dispatched the kings Councillors from his presence, and
established their tyranny in his affections, desired nothing more but the
overthrow of the Huguenots, for that thorn sticking still in their foot, they
could not march with good assurance, so that they ceased not, till they saw
them assailed in two places, The Duke de Neuers General of the army at Poiton.
that is, Poitou and Dauphine. His Majesty gave the conduction of the army
into Poitou to the D. de Neuers, a Prince full of zeal in religion, and
fidelity to the king, and valerous in arms, who The Duke de Neuers General
of the army at Poiton.
perceiving that the war stayed but only for want of money, lent the king
forty thousand Crowns, proceeding from his part of the partage of the goods of
his fathers house.

The Duke of Guise knowing that the army would not be so soon prepared, and
that while it was providing, the king of Navarre might take the field, and get
the advantage, sent the Regiment of Saint Paul, to Monsieur de Mercury, and
desired him to begin to prepare the way for the army of Monsieur de Neuers,
which marched forward, and to give the enemy as much as he could, thereby not
to give him liberty to march upon them.

The coming of the Duke de Mercury in Poitou.
The Duke de Mercury with his troops, marched along by the river of Loire, to
enter into base Poitou, and because the town of Montagu, (although not long
before spoiled and unwalled) had been repaired and fortified, by Monsieur de
Colombiers, that held it for the king of Navarre) and that the Garrison
thereof, continually molested and hindered those of Nantes, he determined to
besiege it, and so take that retrait from the Huguenots, and to the same end,
caused three cannons to be laid at Pontrousseau to batter it, but being
advertised that the king of Navarre had issued out of Rochell upon the ninth
of August, minding to aid Montagu, he left it and retired to Nantes, leaving
the Regiment of Gersey, to make his retrait, which was surprised and
overthrown within two miles of Pillemil, being the subburbes of Nantes. This
Prince of so generous nature, that he gloried not in vanquishing those he had
overcome, perceiving that Regiment to yield unto his mercy, Victory without
bloodshed.
contented himself with eight Ensigns, and four hundredth and fifty
prisoners, and giving thanks to God in open field, dined under a tree: and
there forgetting the great way he had marched the night before, not to leese
occasion of intrapping that Regiment, the same day he hunted the Partrige, and
in the evening entered into Montagu, to take order for the fortification and
Garrison thereof.

It is said that Caezars tongue did him great service in many enterprises, his
eloquence did in such sort stir up the courages of his soldiers, that
bending their heads forward, they passed on whether fortune and his
commandment would push them. Promptness and celeritie crowned all the
enterprises of the king of Navarre with laurel and triumphs, esteeming that
long discourses are to no effect, where it is more necessary to do then to
speak. The action which is not done with speed, can never take any notable
effect. Pompey was blasoned, and Hanniball likewise, as being too slack in
taking occasions offered. And most part of our armies are broken and
ouerthrown, more by delays, then speediness, we must have so long
preparation for our men before they be ready, while they are preparing, the
advantage is lost: An army from Spain.
while the king prepared and appointed the two armies for Poitou and Dauphine,
that the king of Navarre returned victorious unto Rochel, and that the Duke
d'Espernon told how he had escaped the fury of the people of Augoulesme, The
estate of the army.
and remained eight and twenty hours besieged without meat or drink: news
was spread in all places of France, Their Commanders and Captains.
of the approaching of the great and horrible Spanish army, that had cast
anchor before Calais, on Dunkerke side, staying the aid of the Prince of Parma,
that was to ioyn with the Fleet, with great forces and numbers of horses, to
make their descent in England more easy to be performed.

The army was called invincible, and of a most admirable preparation* which
might be seen by the description thereof, printed at Lisbon, and after that,
translated into French, Dutch, and Italian.

It contained one hundredth and thirty ships, one hundredth nine and twenty
men of quallitie, that went voluntary at their own charges, and with them
four hundredth fifty and six servants to attend on them, The number of the
Regiments.
two hundredth six and twenty Lords, Gentlemen, Captains, Ensign-bearers,
Lieftenants, and other principal officers of companies, with one hundredth
sixty and three servants: one hundredth and thirty regiments, having one
hundredth seventy two Ensigns, and twenty thousand fighting men: among the
which many were appointed to be horsemen, according to the preparations made in
the Prince of Parmaes ships, that prepared diverse furnitures for horses, which
they expected to be ready for them in England.

Every Vessel and Regiment had his visitor, farrier, treasurer, Commissarie for
prouissions, Their Officers and Commissaries.
and his Surgeon.

The Officers of Justice were an Auditor general, his Lieftenant an Alquazil
for the king, and his Lieftenant, four other Alquazils, four Secretaries,
six Vshers, and one Geolier.

The Marshall of the field. The great Master of the Artillery
The Master of the field, Alphonse de Cepede, assisted with twenty Gentlemen,
to provide both by land and sea, for all difficulties that might happen, with
two Ingenieurs.

The chief Master of the ordinances and artillery, had his Lieftenants,
being fifty nine Master Gunners, with a General of the carriages and carts
prepared for the land: and a General for all the instruments of Iron, that were
to be used about them: and for the entertaining and conduction thereof, a
Commissarie of the Mulets, and twenty two Grooms to lead them.

In the Hospital of the sick, there was a General ouerseer and his
Lieftenant, five Physicians, The Hospital.
five Surgeons, five Assistants to them: four binders up of wounds, one
Ouerseer of them: a Great-maister or Steward of the Hospital, and sixty two
servants.

There were religious persons proportional to that great number, first, eight
Obseruants of Castille: 20. Obseruants of Portugal: nine and twenty Friars of
Castille: Their Clergy men.
ten Friars of Portugal: 9. Augustins of Castille: 14. Augustins of Portugal:
six Friars of Portugal of the Order called del Pagna: twelve Carmes of
Castille: nine Carmes of Portugal: eight Friars of the third order of S.
Francis in Portugal: two and twenty Iacobins: fifteen Jesuits of Castille:
and eight Jesuits of Portugal: so that besides the number of fighting men,
there was almost ten thousand that had nothing to do with arms.

An army, how great soever it be, and well conducted, if it has not
provisions and amunitions accordingly, it receives but blasone, shame, and
dishonor: but the king of Spain took not that great enterprise in hand,
without providing as great furniture as should be requisite, whereby the
General had no cause to fear any want, to put the army out of courage.

Munitions and provisions.
For they had eleven thousand Quintals of Biscat: foureteen thousand one
hundredth and seventy Pipes of Wine: six thousand five hundredth Quintals of
Bacon: three thousand four hundredth thirty three Quintalles of cheese: eight
thousand Quintals of dried fishes of all sorts: Rice to furnish every vessel
with three Quintals for six months: six thousand three hundredth and twenty
vessels of beans and pease, eleven thousand three hundredth ninety eight
roues or measures of oil, twenty three thousand, eight hundredth and seventy
roues of vinegre, and eleven thousand eight hundredth and fifty Pipes of fresh
water: besides the victuals and the necessaries of household, that were in great
number, and of all sorts: as platters, goblets, pots, funnels, and vessels of
wood, candlestickes, lanterns, lamps, falots, candles of wax and tallowe,
plates of lead and Ox hides, to stop holes made with great shot, bags of
leather, canuaffe, and buckeram, hoopes for pipes and barrels, eight thousand
sadles of leather, five thousand pair of common shoes, eleven thousand pair
of shoes with strings, cords, nails, horses, wagons, wheels, milles, apple
trees, and all whatsoever belongs either by water or by land, twelve great
pieces for battery, and twelve field pieces, with bags of calves skins for
powder and bullets.

The arms reserved for store, were seven thousand caliuers, and their
furnitures, one thousand muskets, ten thousand lances, one thousand
partisans and halbardes, six thousand pikes, more pickaxes, payles, Their arms
and other instruments, then would serve for seven hundredth pioners. With this
number, and in this manner being prepared, the army departed out of Lisbon,
under the conduct of the Duke de Medina Sidonia, assisted with two and twenty
Lords of Estate, Council, and experience: eighty pages, and ten young
Gentlemen or knights, and servants in great number. But it had scarce entered
into the sea, sailing toward the Grongnes in Gallicia, but there rose a storm
with so great force, that it was constrained to put to land, and there stay,
till wind and weather served: having lost in that storm, three Galleys of
Portugals, and many of them so scattered and bruised, that they were not
serviceable for that voyage.

The storm being ceased, and the wind bettering, about the two and twentieth
day of the month of July, the General caused them to set sail, so
fortunately, that in less then five days after, they discovered the point or
end of Cornwall, and at the same time, they were seen from Plimmouth, by the
Admiral of England, and Sir Francis Drake Viceadmiral, that made them turn
their faces, and gave them such a skirmish, and that so near, that the ships
were in disorder, and a great gallion lost, wherein was found a part of the
treasures that the army brought with it, and all the instructions that the
Duke of Medina had what he should do, having conquered England.

At the last, it got as far as Calais, where it should have joined with the
Duke of Parma, but the army of England, that sought to impeach it, followed
it, and that so near, that it was forced to leave her anker-hold and
confusedly to fly away.

Their principal Galleasse among other vessels, was by the stream cast upon
the sands hard by the Haven of Calais, and there with her ordinances was left
for the Governors of Calais, the rest of the ships were strongly beaten with
cannon shot, and by the English ships scattered abroad, in such sort, that in
those skirmishes, the army was lessened of twelve ships, and above five
thousand men.

Which done, it made toward the North seas, passing between Norway The
scattering of the Spanish army.
and Scotland, and so toward Ireland, where those Northen seas (being as the
risen, according to the time of the year, were very tempestious) used the rest
of the army very hardly, for it drowned and sunk seventeen great vessels
upon the coast of Ireland, and spoiled, brake, and overthrew diverse others, in
such manner, that of one hundredth and thirty ships, there were scarce
thirty that returned into Spain.

The coppie of a Letter sent to Deep, touching the encoumer of the English and
Spanish army, and how the Spaniards had won the victory.
The report of the success of this Fleet, was given out clean contrary to that
which happened unto it, or then was truth, and the innocence of diverse men was
so great, that they assured and affirmed for certain, that the Spaniards had
the victory, for the which, they made fires of joy, and printed whole
discourses, thereby to cover the shameful flight of the Duke de Medina, that
could make no other excuse unto the king his Master, of that overthrow, but
the infidelity and ignorance of the Sailors, and the little experience they
had of those Northen Seas: the want of aid from the Prince of Parma: and the
great storms and tempests upon the seas.

This great overthrow abashed not the league, that more impatiently then ever
it did, pursued the execution of the Edict of union, it saw that the king by
words and oaths, not common but solemn, had sworn in the Cathedral Church of
Roane, in presence of the Clergy, Princes, and Lords of the Court, that he
had sent unto the Bishops touching those affairs: that their Priests in
every Diocese should cause their parisioners to make profession of their
faith, that the Huguenots should abjure their errors in open Courts of
Parliaments, Courts royal, and public places, to make them observe it, but
not contenting themselves therewith, they would have the Edict christened with
the special name of a fondamentall law: and because it could not be done but
by the third estates of France, they besought the king to hold Parliament, as
by the said articles of peace he had promised.

De Commines lib. 5. cap. 4.
The authority which the Senate had among the Romans, the same authority has
the Parliament devised by the first family of the kings of France, which is of
the third estates of the land, which represent the whole Realm. Although since
that time, the name of Parliament is applied to the companies of Sovereign
Courts, that have the ordering of causes both criminal and civil.

That first age of our Monarchy, although rude and simple, that held our kings
like puples under the Majors of the Palace, assembled the Parliament as often
as the public affairs of the Realm required: The kings of France were not
seen but once a year. Aymon lib. 4. cap. 30.
and the kings that as then retained the gross vapors of the Da^ubian air,
and of the Oriental France, were never seen but once every year, upon the
first day of May in their Parliaments: that is, in the assembly of the third
orders or estates of their Realm, in a place called the field of Mars, where
the king was borne in a Chariot of flowers, Aymon li. 4. cap 30.
drawn by four oxen after the rusticall manner, and there placed in a royal
throne, assisted with his Nobility: he heard the complaints of his subjects:
gave order for all things that were to be done that year, and dispatched the
Ambassadors of foreign Princes. Under the second line of the kings of France,
The estate of France in the second line of the kings of France.
the Empire enlarging it by force, and the kings leaving that severe
greatness, to have conversation with their subjects, the estates assembled
more commonly, not at a certain and fixed day, but according to the
opportunity and necessity of their affairs: and therefore Pepin that had
caused Childeric to be shorn and put into a Cloister, desiring to establish
his usurpation by the universal consent of the people, caused the States to
be assembled at Soissons, that confirmed it, and another time at Compiegne:
since that time, the divisions and iealousies of the Princes, made those
assembles to be more difficult: the kings contented themselves with the
Parliament, as an abridgement of the three estates, wherein there was Prelates,
Noblemen, and Deputies, of all towns, with the Council of Parris, to
determine all things that belonged to justice: the Bailiffes and Stewards,
every man in his jurisdiction, administering the causes of the Commonwealth,
but when ignorance, avarice, and cupiditie, entered into that first order, that
an everlasting and continual obscurity, had infolded the beauty of laws,
men waxing more malicious, and thereby fell into diverse deceits and frauds,
brablings and quarrellings took place, Bailiffes and Stewards not administering
justice with such integretie and severity, as was convenient, and our kings
having not means in their Parliaments, that always held about them, to be
still employed in hearing particular men's suites, and the affairs of estate
that daily increased, as the Monarchy augmented, King Philiple Bell caused the
Palace to be made, where sovereign judgments should be given. Since that,
Philip surnamed the Long, ordained that it should be composed of a certain
number of persons, Controversies under the reign of Philip le Bell. Upon this
President, he took the order of knighthood.
one or two Presidents, the first President being the Count of Bourgongne, a
Prince of the blood, eight Clerks, and twelve Laymen, four Masters of
Request, and two chambers of Requests, wherein were eight Laymen, eight Clerks
as Judges, and four and twenty Atturneyes: he called Clerks men with long
gowns, married and unmarried, and the rest Laye-men, Noblemen, or Gentlemen.
The Parliament that served only for justice, hindered not the assembly of the
estates, for the benefit of the Commonwealth, not at a certain or ordinary
time, as in England, every three years, This is a false surmise of the Author.
Reasons and necessittes, urging the assembly of the Estates.
but as often as it pleased the king, and no other to summon them, for one of
these three occasions. The first, when the succession or right of the Crown,
was doubtful and in controversy, or that it was necessary to provide for the
ruling and governing of the Realm, during the captivity or minority of the
kings, or when they were troubled and wanted the right use of their memories
and senses. The second, when it was necessary to reform the Realm, to correct
the abuse of Officers and Magistrates, by troubles and seditions, and to reduce
things to their first order and integretie. The third, for the necessities of
the kings and their Realms, in those assemblies of the Deputies of all the
parts of the Realm, they showed the people in what estate the kings affairs
were, and they were courteously moved, entreated, and exhorted, to grant
subsidies, aids, and assistances unto their kings, which otherwise would have
contented themselves with their rents and revenues, to maintain the glory of
royal dignity, they never used to impose any subsidies or tallages without
the consent thereof: and said not as Lewis the eleventh said, that Frunce was a
medowe that used to be mowed thrice a year: so for one of these three causes,
the estates have been seen to assemble in diverse places and times.

The year 1327.1380. Frosard. li. 2. chap. 58.60. In the year 1484. In the
year 1356. In the year 1412. Philip Earl of Vertus.
They assembled in Parris to choose a Regent during the minority of S. Lewis, an
other time in the same place, to provide for the government of king Charles the
sixth in his minority, and at Tours for Charles the eight, that Lewis the
eleventh had left in infancy.

They assembled in Parris for the liberty of king John prisoner in England,
and for the frenzy of Charles the sixth, whose government was referred to his
two Uncles, the Dukes of Berry and Bourgongne.

They assembled at Auxerre, to swear a peace between the children of the
houses of Orleans, and Bourgongne, and by their advice, the marriage of the
Count of Vertus, brother to the Duke of Orleans, with the daughter of the Duke
of Bourgongne, was made among the joys of this peace: the Dukes of Orleans and
Bourgongne, were seen booth upon a horse, sporting themselves with the other
Princes, to witness their amity and reconciliation: yet it was but a fained
peace.

Monstrelet, lib. 1. chap. 59.
They were again assembled in the reign of Charles the sixth at Parris, under
Francis the second at Orleans, and under Henry the third at Bloys, to appease
the difference of the new religion, abuses, desolations, and excess, to take
order for the administering of justice, to rate the moneys, and to institute the
offices for the government of the treasures: in the two last, the Deputies
required two things, one the extirpation of heresies, but without wars, by a
free and legitimate Council: the second, the easing of the poor people, by
taking accounts of such as abusing the favor and liberty of the king, had
enriched themselves by the oppression of his subjects, to the end, that the
blood being drawn into an other part, might be brought into the empty veins,
to quicken the head, and animate the most noble parts of the body.

In the first, the wicked Councillors and administrators of the public
treasures, were examined and openly named, with a most shameful defamation.

King Henry the third, perceiving this remedy to be necessary, that over much
practicing and devises, was seen to be in all estates of the Realm, and that
he could not defer the purgation thereof, he consented to the convocation of
all the estates of the Realm, and declares what had always bin his fatherly
care toward his subjects, how he had respected their good, rest, and
tranquillity, with all affection that might be found in a Prince, that has
nothing dearer nor in more special recommendation: that he knew well, to to
his great grief, that the effects had not been correspondent to his desire, by
the renewing of troubles happened in the middle of a peace well established,
under the which, he had begun to provide for reformation and re-establishment
of many things, which the miseries of wars had brought out of order.

This, if for the small time that the peace did endure, the people had already
begun to taste some acceptable fruit, it was easy to judge, that i^ would
have been much more felt, without so sudden an alteration.

That we must must impute it to the just punishment of God, that ceased not to
lay his scourges upon this Realm, that it might be known to be unworthy
of the benefit of a peace, wherewith he uses to indue and bless those to
whom he will show any special favor.

That the more men proceed forward, the more they perceive all things to fall
into such disorder and confusion, that in short time if order be not taken
therein, there will not be any more steps of the ancient force and
greatness of this Realm, seen or perceived, which in times past were so
admired by foreign nations.

That for the same cause, his Majesty thought it convenient, for the love and
fatherly affection that he bears to his subjects, to think upon the means
that might be devised, to find a remedy for the same.

That after he had ripely considered thereupon, he esteemed no better means
could be used, then the same that had been practiced by his predecessors, who
among the great disorders happened during their reigns, they were not
comparable to those of his time, because they surpass them. They had recourse
to an assembly of the estates general of the Realm, which at this day would be
more necessary and requisite then ever it was. For that cause therefore he
commanded, that the principal personages of every Province, Baliage, and
Stewardship, should by the fifteenth day of September, assemble the Town of
Bloys, there in open assembly to make their petitions, and to show their
griefs: to speak freely, without meddling with any practices, thereby to
favor the particular passions of any man whatsoever, which will be most fit
and convenient means, to quench and abolish such divisions as are among his
subjects, specially among the Catholicques, and to attain to a good and an
assured quietness, whereby Catholicque religion shall be so well established,
and all heresies purged and extirped out of his Realm: that his subjects
should have no more cause to fear a change, neither while he lived, nor afer
his disease.

The kings commissions being sent and published in every Province, the third
orders, that is the clergy, the Nobility, and the deputies of the people,
assembled in the principal Town of every Province and Corporation, to
confer of their declarations, complaints, greefes, and of the means they
should use to propound them in the assembly, and to choose their Deputies that
might speak for all the Province. When the king sent his commissions, the
league likewise, and it may be by the same means, caused their memorials and
articles to be given to every Baliage and Stewardship, most affected to their
factions, that they might set them down with the rest of their requests.
Whereupon the author of the treaty made, touching the causes and reasons of
bearing arms, by the league made in January 1589. says, that those memorials
were sent to the most passionate leaguers.

The names of the Deputies is to be seen in a discourse imprinted upon this
matter following, by Iamet Mettayer.
That they might procure to be appointed Deputies by the Bailiffes, so that in a
manner, all the Deputies of the third orders, were altogether participants with
the league, and their remembrances formed to require that which they had been
certified of before, and that the credit of the league was such, that the
Marshals and Harbengers for the king, durst not refuse lodging to such as were
marked with their Pater nosters. I would set down the names of the Deputies,
to give the Reader free choice and destinction, of such as were found to be
sent by special procurement, and others that had no other intent but only the
zeal of the augmentation of the Catholicque and Roman religion, the honor
and service of the king: the reformation of disorder: and the comfort of the
poor people: but that is to be seen in a particular discourse printed to the
same end: whereunto I refer the Reader. Mean time, we will go before to
mark out the lodgings for this assembly, for all the Deputies are on
horseback to meet at Lewis, where the king would be.

Here ends the third Book.
THE FOVRTH BOOK OF THE History of the last troubles of France, from the
assembly of the estates, and the peace of Chartres, till the breaking up
thereof, being the sixteenth of January, 1589. And the troubles that began
in the same month at Parris and in other Towns.
WHen folly rauisheth and usurps the ordering and co^duction of a great and
serious matter, it is a hazard if ever it fall out to the contentment of him
that takes it in hand. It is a point of folly in the Duke of Guise, to seek
the kings good will, seeing that of a proud mind he had separated himself
from it by an unreconcilable offense: Folly to suppose that the peace of
Chartres had healed the continual bleeding wounds of the Barricadoes: folly
likewise to come to Blois, seeing the king would not go to Parris: therefore it
was the assembly at Bloys that must make the bridge between the extremities of
their desires.

There they played subtlety one with the other, he that should be deceived,
thought upon nothing else, but to deceive the party that deceived him. The
Duke of Guise was glad of the meeting of the estates, because he was assured,
that among so many Deputies, he should find a sufficient number to authorize
his cause, and give a hard plunge, or rather overthrow to the Kings power. And
the king thought that with his royal authority, he should have credit
sufficient with the three Estates of his Realm, and courage enough in his
heart, there to punish the Duke of Guise for all his vain and glorious
enterprises: each of them traveled for the advancement of their desires: the
Duke of Guise for his part, wrought the hearts and minds of his Adherents by
fair promises, and most artificial subtilties, to procure the more strength
on his side, and to cause all the Deputies to have no other desire and
memorial in their remembrances, then the advancement and triumph of the
league. The king that would not return to Parris, excusing himself by the
preparation for the estates, went first to Bloys, to take order for their place
of assembly, partition of chambers, and lodgings for the Deputies. He gave the
charge of the preparation to the Lord of Marle, one of the ordinary controwlers
of his house, in the absence of the Lord of Roddez, Great-Maister of the
ceremonies of France, to take order for the commodious placings of so great a
company, and commanded him to bring the deputies one after the other as they
arrived into his chamber, that he might see, hear, and know them. And because
the number of those that made most haste, were not sufficient in the the kings
mind, to debate such weighty affairs, he prolonged their meeting till the
last day of the same month, and in the meanetime, all the Deputies arrived out
of every place. So that in less then ten days, Bloys was as it were the
receptacle of all the Realm of France.

This most religious Prince desiring to begin this assembly, with a public
invocation upon the name of God, commanded a solemn procession from the
Church of Saint Saueor, in the great Court of the Castle at Blois, unto the
Church of our Lady des Aids, in the subburbes of Vienne. It was a general
show of the French pomp and magnificence, and specially of the beauty of the
Court of so great a king. Their order was in this manner, first there went the
communalties of the Churches: after them, the Deputies of the people four in a
rank: then followed the Nobility, seconded by Ecclesiastical persons: after
them came Albon Bishops, Archbishops, and Cardinals: four knights of the Order
of the holy Ghost carried the Canape. the Archbishop of Aix bearing the holy
Sacrament. Then followed his Maieftic on foot with the Queens, Princes, and
Princesses. Monsieur de Saints Bishop of Eureux made the Sermon, and the
Archbishop of Bourges said the Mass in our Lady Church, all hanged with the
kings richest hangings: his Majesty sat in the Quier upon a seat covered with
velvet. This procession was made upon Sunday the second of October, and the
next day they were to buy their meeting, but as then all the Deputies were not
come, therefore that day there was nothing done, but appoynting of places and
chambers for conference. The spirituality met in the Iacobins, the Nobility in
the Palace, the Deputies for the people in the Towne-house, the Presidents and
officers of every Order were chosen the Cardinals of Bourbon and Guise for the
clargie, and in their absence the Archbishop of Bourges: for the Nobility, the
Earls of Brissac, and the Lord of Marrignac. For the third estate or people,
Michael Marteau Provost of Merchants of the town of Parris: the Secretaries of
the Clergy, were Master Iues le Tartier, Dean of S. Stenens church in Troy,
and John Martin Cannon of Perigueux, Deputies for the Clergy of the same
places: For the Nobility, Florimond de Dorne, Lord of that place, and Bailiffe
of S. Prerrele Monstier, Claude de Moniournal, Sieur de Sindre, Deputies de
Bourbonnois, and Francis d'Alonuille, Sieur d'Oisonuille, Deputy of the
Baliage and Duchy of Estampes. The Secretary of the chamber of the third
estate, was John Courtin, Sieur de Nanteuil, Deputy for the 3. estate of the
Baliage of Boys. The first sitting was put off till the 17. day of the same
month, for two causes: the first, because they stayed the coming of the
Princes of the blood, that as then were not arrived in the Town, and the rest
of the Deputies.

The other, to have time to avoid the differences and iealousies that
happened, because of the preuentations and delays made, touching the elections
and procurations of Deputies.

The king at that same time caused a fast to be published, and an abstinence
from flesh for the space of three whole days, that men might prepare
themselves to the holy communion, which was received by the king in the Church
of Saint Saueor, within the Castle, the Princes and Lords of the Court in
diverse Churches, all the other Deputies of the third Estate, in the Covent of
Iacobins, where the Cardinal of Bourbon celebrated the Mass, and communicated
unto them.

The sixteenth of October, the Hall where the States should sit, was opened,
which was in this manner: It is in length five and twenty paces, and nine in
breadth, with six great stone Pillars in the middle, hanged with rich cloth of
Arras, wrought with gold, the Pillars covered with hangings of purple velvet,
imbrodered with flower deluces of gold: the top of the Hall, covered with
Tapistrie: between the third and fourth pillar, was placed a great seat in
manner of a scaffold, rising with three steps, about eleven or twelve inches
high: five paces long, and four broad: in the middle whereof, stood a great
footstool about four or five inches high, four foot long, and eight foot
broad: and upon that, an other little footestoole of six foot square, whereon
stood the kings chair: on the right side upon the great footestoole, was the
Queene-mothers chair: on the other side, the Queen the kings wife: behind
their chaires, stood the Captains of the guard: and all along the scaffold,
the two hundredth Gentlemen with their hatchets or poleaxes: on the right hand
of the king upon the great scaffold, there were two banks together, covered
with purple velvet, imbrodred with flower deluces of gold: upon one of
the^rnearest and towads the king, sat the princes of the blood, the Cardinal of
Vendosme, the Earl of Soissons, and the D. de Monpeslier: on the other bank
somewhat further, sat the Dukes of Nemours, de Neuers, and de Retz: right
against those banks on the left hand, the Cardinals de Guise, de Lenoncourt,
and de Gondy: and behind them, two Priors of the Church, the Archbishop of
Langres, and the Bishop of Chaalons.

Before the footeftoole upon the scaffold, there stood a chair without
abacke, right before the king, covered with purple velvet, and imbrodered with
flower deluces of gold, for the Duke of Guise as great Master of France, his
back toward the king, and his face to the people: on the left hand, and upon
the same scaffold, stood a chair for Monsieur de Monthelon, keeper of the
great seals of France, his face toward the Princes of the blood, and his
back to the Cardinals of Guise and Lenoncourt: the place at the kings foot,
that belonged to the Duke de Maine as Chamberlain of France, and that of the
Marshall of France, that should be upon the last step of the scaffold were
empty: at the foot of the scaffold right before the kings chair, stood
atable for the kings Secretaries, being Monsieur Ruze, Lord of Beaulieu, and
Monsieur de Reuol, their backs toward the king, and their faces to the people:
and before them, the Heralts on their knees and bare-headed: on each side of
this table, stood the seats of the kings auditors of all affairs: on the left
hand Monsieur de Bellegarde, chiese Gentleman of the kings chamber, the
Archbishop of Lions, Monsieur Miron the kings chief Physician: on the left
hand, upon an other bank, Monsieur de Longenac, an other of the Gentlemen of
the kings chamber, Monsieur des Escars, Monsieur de Souuray, Monsieur d'O,
three Commanders of the Order of the holy Ghost: at the end of the banks
aforesaid, there stood two banks, one at the end of the other, along on both
sides, that made an Allie, about two or three foot broad: upon those of the
right hand, sat Messieurs of the Council of estate of the long gown, Monsieur
d'Espesse the kings Advocate, in the Parliament at Parris, Monsieur de
Chastelliers, Monsieur Falcon, Sieur de Riz, Monsieur Marcel, Receiver of the
Treasury, Monsieur de la Guesle, Attorney general for the king: Monsieur
Campigny, Monsieur de Pont-carre, Monsieur de Ville-roy, Monsieur de Viart,
President of Metz: Monsieur Petremol: Sieur de Rosiers, Receiver of the
finances: Monsieur de Thou, Sieur de Emery.

And upon the other two banks on the left hand, sat the Council of Estate of
the short gown, Monsieur de Schomberg, Earl of Nantueil, Monsieur de
Cleremont d'Antragues, Monsieur de la Chastegneraye, Monsieur de Rochefort,
Monsieur de Pongny, Monsieur de Richelieu, Monsieur de Liancourt, Monsieur de
Menneuille. And upon the other bank, Monsieur de Chastre, Monsieur de Grillon,
Monsieur de Birague, Monsieur de Chemerault, Monsieur de Manou, all Commanders
of the Order of the holy Ghost, except the Sieurs de Schomberg and de
Menneuille. And these Lords were they that had the handling of common causes
for the ordinary of the Realm, or other particular Governments of Towns,
Provinces, and affairs, wherein the king only might take order.

Behind the banks of the Council of estate of the long gown, on the right
hand of the king, there stood eight great banks before the scaffold, for the
Deputies of the Clargie: on the other side upon the left hand, behind the
Councillors of estate of the short gown, there stood nine great banks for
Deputies of the Nobility: cross hard by on the sides of those banks, was
that of the Masters of Requests: and after them, the Clerks of the house and
Crown of France.

All these were environed and closed with great and strong railes of three
foore high, having but one entery that was right before the kings face.
Between the aforesaid third and fourth Pillars, whereat the Deputies entered,
and within the enclosure of those Barricadoes, round about were the banks for
them to sit upon. The space about the Railes without, was in breadth between
six or seven foot, for the better access and ease of the people, to lean
upon them.

The Legate, the Ambassadors, the Lords, and the Ladies of the Court, were in
the Galleries closed with latises, under the which, were erected diuiers
scaffoldes, eight or nine steps higher one then the other, thereon to place
great numbers of people.

The Deputies according to the order were called a Hussier, standing in a
window that looked into the Castle-yeard, such as he called were received by
the Heraults, (named Normandy, d'Alencon, and Valois, apparrelled in their
Coate-armours of purple velvet) into the railes, that stood at the foot of the
steps, which they still shut as the Deputies entered, and from thence led
them to the enterie of the railes of the Hall, where the Herault, Britain and
Dauphine received them, and brought them to the Lords of Roddez and Marle,
Masters of the ceremonies, telling them of what Province, they were Deputies,
and setting them in their places, they being in that order led forward, the
Herault at the window called others, which were received, led and placed as
the rest: the order used in calling them was thus.

First the Towne-Prouost and Vicounte of Parris, the Duchy of Bourgongne, and
Baliage of Dyon, the Duchy of Normandy, and by order the Baliages of Roane,
Caen, Caux, Constantin, Eureux, Gisors, Alencon, and Mortaing.

The Duchy of Guyenne, and by order the Stewardship of Bourdeaux, Bazas,
Perigort, Rouergue, Xaintongue, Agenois: the Country and County of Comminges:
the Stewardship of Launes, S. Sever, Condounas. High Limosin and the Town of
Limoges: Low Limosin, the Stewardship of Quercy.

The Duchy of Britain, and her dependances: the Earldom of Champagne and
Baliages of Troy, Chaumont in Bassigny, Vitry, Meaux, Province, Sesanne, Sens,
and the Castle of Tyerrie.

The Earldom of Thoulouse, and government of Languedoc: the Stewardship of
Thoulouse, Puy: the Baliages of Velay: Mompelier, the Stewardship of
Carcassonne, Narbonne, Beziers: the Stewardship of Lauragais, Vermandois,
Poictou, Chastelleraut, Fantenay: and Niort: the Stewardship of Aniou and of
Maine: the Baliages of Thouraine and Amboise: the Stewardship of Loudunois: the
Baliages of Berry and S. Pierre le Monstier: the Stewardship of Bourbonnois:
the Baliages of Forest and Beauioulois: the Stewardship and low country of
Auuergne: the Baliages of the Mountains of Auuergne: the Stewardship of Lion:
the Baliages of Chartres, Orleans, Montargis, Blois, Dreux, Mantes, and Meulan:
the Baliages of Gien, Percht, Chasteauneuf, and Amiens: the Stewardship of
Ponthieu Boulonnois, Peronne, Montdidier, and Roye: the Baliages of Senlis,
Vallois, Clermont and Beauuoisis, Melun, Nemours, Nyuernois and Douziais. The
country of Dauphine, and that which depends thereon: the town and
government of Rochel: the Stewardship of Angoulmois: the Baliages of Montfort,
Houdan, Estampes, Dourdan: the Count of Prouence, Grass, Draguignan and
Marseille: the Count de la March, both low and high: the Marquisat of Saluce,
and the Baliage of Beauuois in Beaunoisis. So that to conclude, the Clargie had
134. Deputies, among the which were 4. Archbishops, 21. Bishops, and two
principals of orders: the Nobility 180. Gentlemen: and the third estate, 191.
Deputies, The number of the Deputies.
all Ministers of justice, or of the short gown. The Deputies being entered,
and the Gate shut, Monsieur de Guise sitting in his chair, apparelled in a
roabe of white Satin, the cape hanging backward about his shoulders, (with his
eyes pearcing through all the assembly, therein to know and distinguish his
seruitors, and with one only glance of his eye, to strengthen them in the hope
and assurance of his pretenses, greatness, and fortunes, and thereby without
word, to tell them that he saw them) rose up, and having made a great reverence
to all the company, being followed by the 200. Gentlemen, and the Captains of
the guard, he went to fetch the king, that entered in great Majesty with his
principal order hanging about his neck. When the company perceived him to
come down the stairs, that went straight to the great scaffold, every man
rose up and stood bare-headed: which done, the king took his place, the
Princes standing still, until he commanded them and his Council to sit
down.

There was never any assembly made, wherein was found more excellent French
wits, concerning the resolutions of great affairs, the propounding of
excellent and rare conceits, and for the reformation of the estate. Nor yet
for the pronunciation of Orations, with more grace and eloquence, then in this
God that is the just distributer of his favors to whom it pleases him, has
ordained, that nature should help and adorn certain nations, more then
others with eloquence of speech, but it is a special favor of God, to speak
well and to the purpose, before great assemblies, not of a Commonwealth of
Venise, nor a Council of three hundredth in the cantons of Swisses, but before
the estates of a great king: yea of the greatest Realm in all Christendom,
and in the presence of the geatest king of all Europe.

This eloquence is a gift of God, such and so great, that Moses found no other
excuse, to refuse that notable Embassage, but the rudeness of his speech, as
if the first piece of the furniture of him that undertakes such things, were
the grace of speaking well.

There has been diverse great personages, that have buried and obscured the
best and brauest quallities in them, for the only want thereof, and some have
been seen in a public place, at a bar, and in a Council, that coming in
presence of a Prince, and of a great assembly, became ridiculous to the
company, with blushing and shamefastness, and in the assembly, some were
ashamed to see their bashfulnesse. Heraclites the great Sophister was abashed
before Seuerus, Talthybius and Eurybate, before Agamemnon, Theophrastes in the
Araopage: Herod the Athenian, before Marcus Anthonius. Some stumbled in the
beginning of their discourse, others omitting the principal matter, in the
middle of their orations, and many making a worse end, then a beginning. And
whatsoever is the cause, those that are in such extacies, have no man to supply
their places, and perceiving themselves brought into that point, either
shamefully to stand still and say nothing, or take a new matter in hand besides
the text, and so rather do wrong to their reason and arguments, Great
personages fail in delivering their orations.
then to their speech, as Bartholomew Soncin, before Pope Alexander the sixth:
and Francis Barbare Venetian, before the Duke of Milan.

I commend such as take time to prepare themselves, and wonder at those, who
without preparation, can so readily acquit their charge. Our country of France
has seen and heard, both of the one and other. It heard in this solemn
assembly, of all the estates of the Monarchy, that the Roman eloquence is
retired, and had withdrawn it self into the head of her great king: and that
France likewise as well as Rome, has Seuerus Cassiens, that speak both well
and wisely, without premeditation, and that cannot endure a troublesome study:
that it has Demosthenes and Pericles, that never speak without good advise:
that it has a rare and almost unknown thing unto all Monarchs: which is, The
sign of the weakening of an estate. This is understood of the eloquence of
Sophisters.
that her kings speak without Interpreters: but in this point I must let you
know, that it is a most assured sign of the weakening of the forces of our
estate, when every man takes more delight in eloquent words, then in great
effects, and is better pleased in saying then doing well. For that eloquence
is like a medicine, which is only prepared for sick persons, and eloquence is
employed but in such estates, that are like to fall and decay, and to move and
persuade a people that are stayed.

The multitude of Physicians in a Town, makes me judge the intemperance of
the Inhabitants: the great troops of Counselors and Atturnies that are in all
places, do sufficiently show, that the corruption of our manners entertaineth
quarrelles, and there was never seen so many Orators in Athens, Rhodes, and
Rome, but when they were troubled with civil dissentions.

The League brought with her, diverse eloquent fellows, by their babbling and
devises to make the people believe, that white is black, and truth falsehood,
and to constrain them under the sweetness of their arguments, to swallow
down rebellion, faithlessenesse and disobedience.

And who knows not, that the same day of her birth, had been the obsequie of
her funeral, if in the places where truth ought to triumph, untruth had not
been introduced, their senses filled with smokes, and sed the ignorant people
with devises and laughters?

Plutarch.
Such as sought to win the people, proceeded not all in one kind of manner:
in Athens there were some that would draw them by the eyes, presenting them
with false and devised things: others, by the belly, in seasts and
banquettings: diverse by the purse, and shining beauty of that metal, The
people are taken by the ears.
which bends the most stiffest: but the best advised have begun with the
ears, the beastliness and easy introducing of the people, not being handled
but by them, all other holds are unassured, other rules and observations can
never make them tame.

By it, Pompey, Caezar, Crassus, Lucullus, Lentulus, and Metollus, began their
tyrannies, and aided themselves better with their tongues, then by their
lances: the French tongue was never more adorned, enriched, nor fairer, then at
this time, and I would to God it served only to confound rebellions, detest
Leagues, convince schisms, eleuate the authority of the law, establish and
strengthen justice, euaporate the clouds of errors, that trouble our
understandings, and that the fire of those hot and lively speeches, that make
us to attempt so high actions, and mortifieth cold and moist humors, that
make our affections glance against our sovereign good, and that it would in
flame the courage of good men, against the injustice of the wicked.

Corruption of eloquence in holy matters.
But to the contrary, it is employed to the great disliking of strangers, to
the infamy of Frenchmen, and against a king of France, to rent and disseuer
his authority, blame his holy intents, to accuse his Council, and to pierce
the ears of his subjects, therein infusing the dangerous poison of despising
his Majesty.

They use a phrase, adorned with rich and magnificall words, (without choice or
consideration) to condemn the law, to degrade the Magistrate: and to praise
those that never did good, but when they minded to do evil: they have
borrowed great words of Architecture, Pilastres, Corniches, Architraues,
Amphiteatres, and Theaters, and all for the description of that mischievous
hole or cave of the League, and of that miserable populer state, built upon
four gibbets or stakes.

Against a sort of writers during these troubles
But the holy and true eloquence, is that which always continued with the
justice of the kings cause, all that is induced therein, is firmer and more
solid, the reasons liuelyer and stronger, the words more christian and
Frenchlike, and the forms more ingenious and sweet: not pompious with
arrogancy, nor furred with artificialnesse: not boulstered with blasphemies,
not fantasticated with novelties: nor false nor ridiculous as those of the
eloquent Orators of the league: and if you take away but two or three books,
issuing out of the shops of these Apothicaries, wherein nevertheless, there is
nothing to be read but old fables, well composed under a goodly and a fair
couerture, you shall find, that as they desire not to do well, so they connot
speak well: and all the harmony of their writings, is but a rude discord of
the strings of some old viole, and a building of diverse pieces weak and very
feeble.

The Orations pronounced in this assembly, are not in such manner, and although
there are some that savor of the kennell from whence they issue, yet I esteem
this History would thereby be much bewtified, but we will reserve them for a
larger volume, for that the brevity we have promised in the beginning,
permits me not at large to induce them herein.

That only of the king, full of lively affection, of true magnanimity, of
reasons, pertinent and very likely, is like lively portratures of the beauties
of France, and the evil fauourednesse which the League has borrowed upon her
face, ought to be placed herein, in her proper and original splendure: as not
being a long preambulation or discourse, such as Theopompus, Ephorus, and
Anaximenes, used to the Captains, when they received their charge, and that it
is time rather to do, then say: but a discourse worthy the Majesty of a
King of France, and of Henry the third, that had that great advantage above all
the Princes of his time, to answer promptly, wisely, and aptly, to all
important occasions that were presented, that like an ignorant Pilot, committed
not the guiding of his ship to his mates, and never spoke by an other man's
mouth, had within himself the knowledge of mannaging the rurther, and the
words that gave the understanding of his will.

The places then being appointed and filled, according to the greatness,
order and degrees of every man, all the Deputies standing up, bareheaded, the
King began in this manner to make his Oration, by a grave choice of goodly
words, and with a tongue truly led by his passions, and that yielded no
other sound, then the natural harmony.

The kings Oration to the estates.
MY Lords and friends, I will begin with an humble supplication unto God, from
whom proceeds all good gifts and holy operations, that it will please him to
aid me with his holy Spirit, conducting me as it were by the hand in this
serious action, therein to acquit that which I take in hand, as woorthily, as
the work is holy, desired, attended, and necessary for the universal good of
my subjects, which is the restoring of my estate, by the general reformation
of all the parts of the same, which I have sought as much or rather more, then
the preservation of my own proper life.

Join with me therefore I pray you, in this most instant request, which I now
make unto him, beseeching him that he will more and more strenthen that constant
desire, by him already for that cause rooted within my heart: and that
likewise he will take from you, all particular passions, if there be any,
that rejecting all other parts, but that of your king, you have no regard, but
embrace the honor of God, the dignity and authority of sovereign Prince,
and to restore the country in such manner, that there may ensue so laudable
and fruitful a resolution, accompanied with so good effects, that my estate
may receive his ancient splendure. And this will be a work worthy of the
place whereunto I am called, and witness both your capacities and loyalties.

He whom I have now inuoked, to aid both me and my estate, that is the
searcher of all our hearts, if it pleases can be a witness, that as soon as
he appointed me to be commander over you, an incredible grief entered into
me, touching your public and particular miseries, together with a care, that
ever since has much increased in me, to procure some wholesome remedies, with
as happy an end, as therein it is much more then necessary.

What grief think you, has penitrated in my entrals, within these few
years, since age and experience have made more capable to apprehend the
desolation, oppression, and overthrow of my poor people, withal seeming unto
me, that my reign should be reserved for a light of the just wrath of God,
which I acknowledge justly to hang over our heads, both for mine, and the
sins of my subjects in general.

For this cause, I strove as much as I could, to fluffe up the corruptions and
disorders that had made so violent an habitation there, and to resist the
euilles, which had not all been done by me, and which by my only means, if
remedy might be had, I will appease. For I would say (without boasting of my
self) that there has been no means to reform the deprivation of my estate,
but that I have called it to mind, thereby to establish the same, if I had
been as well assisted, as I was by you good Madame, and as necessity and my
good will deserved: but I cannot sufficiently show how much I have been aided
by my good mother the Queen, which cannot in any sort be declared: and I must
say, that among so many assistances and strickt obligations, whereby she
holds all my subjects tied unto her, that therein they have aspeciall, and my
self a particular cause, that with you in this notable assembly, you should
yield her most humble and hearty thanks.

Which is, that she is not only the cause, that by the grace of God I am now
in this world to be your king, but by her continual and holy instigations,
laudable actions, and virtuous examples, she has in such sort ingraued in my
soul, a right and true intent to the advancement of the honor of GOD, the
preferment of his holy, Catholicque, and Romish Church, and the reformation of
my estate, that the intentions which I have heretofore declared, wholly
tending unto all good things, (whereunto more then ever I was, I am resolved)
proceeds only from her, not once complaining of the labors, indispositions,
or discommodities of her age, in any thing wherein she has perceived or found
the means to advance this estate, having so oftentimes preserved the same,
that she not only deserves the name of the Mother of your King, but also of
your estate and kingdom.

Now my principal care and pleasure being wholly set to restore this goodly
Monarchy, and judging particular remedies not to be convenient for the time,
I determined to assemble my general estates, wherein as in all other things,
for the good of this Realm, it pleased her much to encourage me, knowing,
that by assembling them, I should not leese one hours time, what general
oppositions soever entered into my my mind, and with the which, many men
peradventure thought I should be so crossed, that either I would be
constrained to defer or wholly to remit it.

You see nevertheless, whether I have had that constant resolution, which
belongs to a good king, for the general good of all his subjects, which is
so surely ankered in my heart, that I desire nothing more, then the
conservation of the honor of God and you.

This assembly of the estates is a remedy (with the good counsel of the
subjects, and the holy resolution of the Prince) to heal those diseases, which
tract of time, and the negligent observation of the laws and statutes of this
Realm, have suffered to enter, and to assure the lawful authority of the
sovereignty, rather then to shake or diminish it, as some evil advised men
and full of envy, disguising truth, have made the world believe.

For that good laws well established and observed, wholly fortify and uphold
the Scepter of a king, assuring his Crown upon his head, against all such
practices whatsoever.

You may then well perceive, by this my resolution (that has resisted and
withstood an infinite of impeachments, which certain men would have opposed
against it) the sincerity of my intent, specially for that this assembly of
the estates, is that which as much breaks the evil pretenses and purposes of
Princes, that have their hearts trauersed with devises, and desirous of no
good, as mine is and always shall be most ready, prompt, and altogether
disposed not to desire or seek for any other things, then your good: which if
I do, I beseech God confound me eternally.

Seeing then that you see me so fully bent to procure this peace and common
tranquillity of my estate, and that you cannot allege any thing to the
contrary, ingraue it likewise in your minds, and judge well of me, in regard
of those that would have proceeded in other sort, Withal noting, that
whatsoever lintend, cannot in any sort be esteemed or attributed, as any wales
pretending, to authorize my self either against law or reason: for I am your
king ordained by God, and be only that may truly and lawfully challenge that
right. And therefore I desire not to be accounted other in this Monarchy then
as I am, not being able to wish or desire more honor or authority, then that
I have already obtained. Favor then I pray you (my good subjects) this true
intent, which tends only to the furtherance and advancement of the honor of
God, and our wholly Catholicque, Apostolic, and Romish religion, to extirpe
heresies in all the Provinces of this Realm, and therein to reestablish all good
order and government: to comfort my poor people so much oppressed, and to
erect my authority unjustly imbased: which I desire not so much for mine own
proper interest, as for the good that thereby may redound unto you all. Among
all kinds of governments and commandments over men, the Monarchy excels
all the rest: and the profit which you and yours have reaped, under the lawful
governments of my predecessors, forces you continually to render thanks to
God, that it has pleased him to give you life in such a time, and under such a
Prince, who being of the same race, has not only enjoyed their royal seat,
but the same and greater zeal, (if possible it may be) to the augmentation of
the glory of our God, and the conservation of you all, as I have always
promised, that mine actions should wholly tend thereunto. That mischief which
malice and tract of time has induced into my Provinces, ought not so much to
be atributed unto me, (not that I seek wholly to excuse my self) as to the
negligence, and peradventure some other faults of those that heretofore have
been assistant unto me, wherein I have already begun to take order, as you
may well perceive, but I assure you, that from henceforth, I will be so
circumspect, in making choice of those that serve me, that my conscience shall
be discharged, mine honor inceased, and my estate reestablished, to the
contentment of all good people, and thereby constrain those (who against all
reason have placed their affections on others, and not on me) to acknowledge
their errors.

The testimonies are yet sufficient and manifest, and namely by the witness of
many of you, (as reaping honor by assisting me therein) both before and since
I have been your king, to show with what zeal and forwardness I have always
proceeded for the extirpation of hereticques and heresies, wherein I will more
then ever, expose my body, yea even to a certain death, if need requires,
for the defense and protection of our Catholicque, Apostolic, and Roman
faith: the overthrow of heresies being the most sumptuous tomb wherein my
body may be laid, not the battles only which I have won, but that great
overthrow and abating of the pride of the army of Rutters: whereunto Cod, for
the honor of his holy name and of his Church, had chosen me for an
instrument, are sufficient proofs, the triumphs and spoils whereof are yet
extant to be seen.

Is there any one then so incapable of the truth, that will suppose more zeal
and ardent desire to be in man, for the total extirpation of such heresies,
when more certain signs then mine of such intents cannot be found?

And if it should be, that the honor of God (which to me is dearer the^ my
life) not so much esteemed of by me, whose patrimony do the hereticques occupy
and disseuer, whose revenues do they take up and receive, from whom do they
alienate the subjects, whose obedience do they despise, whose respect,
authority, and dignity, do they violate? And should not I then as much or
more then any man, seek their destruction: open your eyes, and judge
particularly, what appearance may be therein.

The reunion of all my Catholicque subjects, by the holy Edict, not long since
made, has sufficiently testified, that nothing has had more force within me,
then to see God only honored, reverenced, and served, within my Realm, which
I had more proceeded in, (as god willing I purpose to do, even with the hazard
of my life) if I had not been hindered by this division moved by the
Catholicques, (to the great advantage of hereticques) staying my voyage into
Poitou, where I am of opinion, that good fortune would no more have abandoned
mine actions, then it had done in other places, whereby (God be thanked) mine
estate has reaped both the necessary and desired benefit.

And although I am persuaded, you will not omit any one point, tending to the
restoring and reformation of this Realm, yet will I make known unto you, by
some special things, how much I am most earnestly bent (not only by this
which I will now utter, but by the effects that shall ensue) to embrace all
good means, as I am bound, esteeming them most requisite, for the necessity
and urgent uses thereof, both for our souls, our honors, and our estate.

The extreme offense which daily is committed against God, by swearing and
blaspheming, to him so much injurious, and wholly against my desire, causes
me to put you all in mind, not to forget the just punishments that such
blasphemies deserves: which my desire is, should be reformed without favor
or exception either of person or quallitie. The inquiry and punishment of
simony, shall not (as it becomes all good Christians) be forgotten, neither
yet the order which is requisite, touching the sale and multiplicitie of
judicial offices, as being pernicious and insupportable to my poor subjects,
wherein had it not been for the troubles begun in Anno. 1585, I had of my
self taken some order: but now I expect from you the holy and good means
therein to be used: as in the distribution and provision of benefices,
judicial and other officices, of honor, charge, estate, and dignity: in this
Realm, there consists that (which is dearer unto me then life it self) mine
honor, the preservation and splendure of this estate, and the good will of all
my subjects toward me: to the end, that such things may be done with more
deliberation, I mean from hence forward, to appoint some certain times, which
shall be made known unto you, and therein so to distribute them with just
consideration of each man's desert, as in duty I am bound, as reason requires,
my reputation restrains me, and as the good I wish to this estate, forces
me unto: minding that from this time forward, every man shall hold that good
and honor he has, only from me: and for their better means to obtain them
at my hands, I will take order for their more easy access unto my person,
according to the times and hours I will employ to that end.

I likewise will all my subjects, to determine and resolve with themselves, to
live as uprightly, affectionately, and faithfully, in such offices as shall be
committed to their charges, as shall be requisite for the discharge of my
conscience, and their own: wherein from henceforth I am not determined to
endure any defects, restraining my self by oath, never to grant reservation
of any thing whatsoever, reuoking such as heretofore have been granted, and
from this time forth, declaring them of no force, intending not to observe
them, as things that may be prejudicial, and means to move men either to
desire or purchase the deaths of other men, and ungodly both in my self, and
in such as seek to obtain them.

I will likewise give no more suruiuings, determining, that concerning those
already granted, I am minded to refer my self therein to your opinions. It
is most necessary to restrain euocations, graunts, remissions, and abolitions,
that justice should be more prompt, and less chargeable to the people, and
that crimes may be exactly punished. You must not likewise forget the
enriching of Arts and Sciences: the beautifying and repairing of the Towns
within my Realm: the governments and ordering of trade and trafficque of
Merchandises, as well by land as by sea, and the restraining of usury, with
superfluities and excess of things that are risen to most high prises. The
restoring and renewing of ancient ordinances touching the authority and
dignity of the sovereign Prince, with the reverence due unto him and his
Magistrates, which you shall determine as reason requires. The just fear that
you might have after my death, to fall into the government of an hereticque
king, if it chance that God should not grant me any heirs males, is not more
considered of by you, then by me.

And I protest before God, that I have not more care of mine own saluaion,
then desire to bereave you of that fear, which is one of the principal causes
that moved me to make my holy Edict of union, and to abolish that damnable
heresy, which although I have most holily and solemnly sworn, before him
that gives man constancy, inviolable to hold and observe all good and holy
oaths. I am determined the more to establish it, that it should be made one
of the fondamentall laws of our Realm, and that upon the next Tuesday, in
this place, and before the notable assembly of all my estates, I will that
every man shall swear unto it, to the end that none may hereafter pretend any
cause of ignorance.

And our holy desires may not vainly be frustrate for want of means: I
determine to take such order therein, by the counsel which you shall give me,
that as the desert shall not consist in me, it may not likewise proceed from
the small assistance by you given thereunto, whereby the effects of our desires
may be in force.

By my holy Edict of union, all leagues, but such as are made by authority
from me, ought not to be suffered, and although it did not sufficiently
forbid the same, yet neither Cod nor duty does permit it, as being wholly
against it, for that all leagues, associations, practices, devises,
intelligences, leuyings of men and money, and receipts of the same, as well
within as without this Realm, are actions of a king, and in all well governed
Monarchs, esteemed high treason if they be done without the Princes
authority. And although by word of mouth (thereby witnessing my accustomed
clemency in that respect) to omit all forepassed faults, yet as duty binds
me and you all, (to conserve the royal estate) having taken order for the
establishing of certain laws, to be made by my estates, I will by these
presents declare, and from henceforth pronounce as guilty of high treason,
all such my subjects as desist not from them, or that in any sort deals
therein, without my authority and consent, granted under the great Seal of
France. Wherein I am assured that you will not fail, to show your faiths and
fidelities, counselling and requiring at my hands, to renew and fortify this
fair and ancient law, ingrafted within the hearts of all true French men that
defend the same: which I will shall be set down in express words: I am bound
thereby both unto my self, and to my Realm: and you to me: and to the state
of the land, which you now represent: whereunto in presence of the Almighty
God, I summon you all.

In times past, the goodly order and exact policy observed among our
soldiers, bredde and procured an admiration and terror of my nation, together
with a particular and honorable glory to all our French Nobility.

Now therefore weed esire, that the same honor wherewith we have been
admired above all nations, may still be maintained: wherein I will spare no
pains whatsoever: and the like I crave of you, whereby the wrath of God being
appeased, and that our forces may be used to the preservation, and not to the
destruction of our estate, thereby procuring so much contentment and comfort to
my subjects, as that hereafter they may as willingly desire our soldiers both
horse and footmen for their gifts, as they now fear and abhor them, and
that with great reason.

Lastly, I am much grieved that I cannot maintain my estate and royal
dignity, with the necessary charges of this Realm without money: for mine own
particular, it is the thing that least greeueth me, but it is a necessary
evil: wars likewise cannot be well followed without money, and seeing at
this present we are in a good course, to extirpe accursed heresies, it is
necessary we should provide great sums of money to furnish our expenses: for
want whereof (to say the truth) our leuyings of men will be more to our
hindrances then our profits, and yet there can be no exployt done without them.

For my part therefore I promise, not to spare any means whatsoever: wherein
likewise I crave that zeal of you, which you have always assured me to bear
unto the service of God, and the commodity of this Commonwealth.

And therefore you must (showing you the full revenues of my whole estate) have
that consideration, that the Senate of Rome had of an Emperor, who desiring
(as I do) to suppress all subsidies, showed him, that such leuyings of
treasure, were the sinues and veins of the body of the Commonwealth, which
being taken away, it would presently desolue and be unloosed.

And yet I say, that I would to God, that the necessity of my estate
constrained me not to use them: and that at one instant, I might gratify my
people with so goodly a present, as also that my days might be abridged, not
desiring to live any longer, then that my life might be profitable and
advantage to the service of God, and all your preseruations.

Touching the order required for the disposing of my treasures, so much for the
comfort and ease of my people, whether it be concerning the over great numbers
of officers, or other particularities, I am persuaded you will take as good
order by your wisdoms, as shall be requisite, as being one of the
principal pillars, whereby we and all our estate in general, for the most
part are supported.

It is likewise a matter of conscience (that touches our souls healths) to
take order for our debts, which I have not altogether made, but being debts of
our Realm, you ought to have a care thereof, whereunto both publicque faith
and wisdom, binds you all, and you shall be certified what they are.

The King being the patron, whereby all his subjects learn to frame their
actions, it is therefore, that of my natural inclination, I will so govern
mine own person and my house, that from henceforth they shall serve for a
rule and example to all the rest of my Realm and Kingdom.

And to the end I may witness by effect, that which you desire of me, and
which is most deeply ingraued within my heart, touching this great assembly
(having fully determined upon your memorialles and bills) which I desire you,
may be done with all the speed you can, and with your good counselles and
advise (as I will show unto you,) the next day after in open audience in the
Church, that it may be known to all my subjects, and so hold it for an
inviolable and firm law, whereby no man may withstand it but with shame and
infamy, and upon pain to be accessory of high treason, as an enemy to this
country, I mean by oath upon the Evangelists, to bind all the Princes,
Lords, and Gentlemen, that are assistant at this Parliament, together with you
the Deputies of my estates, and therevppon you shall receive the Sacrament, to
observe all the things that therein are contained, as sacred laws, not
reserving unto my self the liberty of exemption from the same, for any cause,
pretense, or occasion whatsoever may hereafter happen.

Which done, I will presently cause it to be sent into all the Courts of
Parliament throughout my Realm, to swear all Ecclesiastical, Noble, and
common persons thereunto, with this clause, that whosoever opposes himself
against it, shall always be holden as a notorious traitor.

And if herein I seem to submit my self more then becomes me, unto the
laws whereof I am the Author, and which of themselves dispense with me
therein, and that by this means, I reduce my rovall estate to more certain
terms and points, then that of my predecessors: It is the principal cause
that makes the generous mind of the Prince best known and discerned, to
address and frame his thoughts and actions unto his good laws, and wholly to
oppose himself against the corruptions thereof: and it will suffice me to
make answer thereunto, as that King did (to whom it was told, that he sought
to leave his royalty in worse estate to his successors, then he enjoyed it
from his predecessors) that he would make it much more durable and assured then
ever it was.

But to end my long discourse, having used authority and commandment, I will
now proceed to exhortations and prayers: and first I charge you all, by the
duty you owe to God, by whom I am appointed and substituted over you, to
represent his person, by the name of true Frenchmen, (that is of passionate
lovers of their natural and lawefull Prince,) by the ashes of the memories of
so many Kings my Predecessors, that have so lovingly and happily ruled and
governed over you: by the charity that you bear unto your Country, by the
bounds and hostages it has of your fidelities, your wives, your children, and
your domestical fortunes, that with all your hearts you embrace this occasion:
that you be wholly and altogether careful for the Commonwealth: that you
unite and join your selves with me, to strive against the disorders and
corruptions of this estate, by your sufficiency, by your integrity, and by
your great care and diligence, abandoning and forsaking all contrary thoughts,
(and following only my example,) not having any other desire, then the only
good of the Commonwealth, and as my self being estraunged from all other
ambition, then that only which concerns and touches a subject, as I my
self bear no other mind, then that which belongs unto a good, faithful,
and Christian King.

If you do otherwise, you shall be filled with all accursednesse, you will
imprint a perpetual spot of infamy in your posterity and names, and also
bereave your posterity of that successiue name and title of sidelitie toward
your King, which by your ancestors has been so carefully left unto you.

And for mine own part, I will take heaven and earth to witness, and I will
be judged both by God and man, that it is not my fault, nor any want of
diligence in me, that the disorders of this Realm, have not been long since
reformed, but that you are the only cause, by forsaking your lawefull Prince,
in so worthy, so holy, and so commendable an action.

Lastly, I summon you all to appear at the latterday, before the Judge of all
Judges, where all men's thoughts and secret meanings shall be opened, where the
maskes and visards of crafts and dissimulations shall be pulled off, there to
receive reward, by you desired, for your disobedience toward your King,
together with your great negligence and small loyalty in regard of this estate.

But God forbid, that I should ever think it, but rather conceive that you
will rule your selves therein, (as I persuade my self) with wisdom,
affection, love, and fidelity, wherein you shall do good service unto God, and
also to your King, you shall be bleffed in this world, and thereby obtain the
name of couseruators of your land and countries.

The Chancellours Oration.
This oration finished, with an extraordinary applauding of all the assembly,
the Chancellor named Monsieur de Montelon, having made two greatreuerences,
began to speak, and confirming the Kings speeches, he commended the zeal
and integrity of his mind, declared the honor and Majesty of Kings, with
the inviolable bond of obedience due unto them: assuring them, that under his
happy and prosperous conduction, they should by that assembly of all the
estates of France, reap the same effects, which in times past had been found
and experiented under the reigns of Philippe le Bell, John the first, and
Charles the eight: charging them all, every one in his estate and degree, to
join and unite their wise and learned aduises unto the kings good pleasure,
therewith to aid and assist him.

And directing the thunders of his eloquence, against the disorders of the
estate, he exhorted the Clergy to reerect the beauty and dignity of the
Church, using therein the means and original disciplines of ancient and holy
Councels, as when rivers or kennelles are stopped, men seek to find out their
Springs, and so to clear them: showing, that if the doctrine and preaching of
the word, had been carefully administered unto the people, so many heresies and
notorious vices, had never sprung up nor taken root in this Realm, nor
yet so much breach of laws, and disobedience toward the Kings, Nobles,
Judges, and Magistrates, had ever been practiced and performed.

Obedience preached by Ministers.
That obedience then is most commonly known and observed, when by the
preachings, instructions, and examples, of Ministers and Pastors, it is
ingraued into the hearts of the common people, alleging this place of the
Scripture: The word of God is lively and effectual, and sharper then any two
edged sword.

Against admission into benefices.
That the King had oftentimes by Edicts and Ordinances, incited and moved them
unto their duties, but never could reap the fruit which he desired: and
therewith complained of their weak provisions, their incapable admissions,
into Ecclesiastical functions: of their ambition and avarice: of their
multiplicitie of benefices, against the cannons and decrees of their non
residences: to the despising of holy law: of the corruption and deprauations
of Monasteries, and of their rules and disciplines, almost left off, and in
such sort weakened, that he said there was but very few orders, wherein great
numbers of Monks and Friars, had not wholly forgotten their promises and vows.

The integrity of religious persons.
Excepting some, that might justly be termed like holy men, the pearls of
religion, who by the perfection of their lives, good works, prayers, and
Orations, had surmounted the obscurities and mystes of this world, pierced the
clouds, and attained so near to heaven, that they are (as Saint Barnard
says:) In susurio cum Deo, and with their extacies and rauishings of Spirits,
they did divert and turn the wrath of God from us.

The praise of the French Nobility.
From them, he turned his speech unto the Nobility, whose virtues are set
down in all our ancient Histories, recommending unto them, piety, bounty,
and justice, wherein they ought to be examples to their subjects.

Obedience to the king, and to the principal supporters of equity and justice:
The ancient oath of Gentlemen.
and having long dilated upon that point, by many examples taken both out of
Pagans and French Histories, he set before them the vices that at this day
reigns among them, specially swearing and blaspheming of the name of God:
where in times past, the ancient oath of the Nobility, was usually to say: Foy
de Gentil-homme: that is, by the faith of a Gentleman, which they did with
reverence and requisite circumstances, as time and place required.

Showing them likewise, what mischiefs proceeded of private quarrels, the
only name whereof is horrible in the ears of all christians, and have always
been severely punished and forbidden by ancient and holy laws, The mischief
of private quarrels
that in their daily praters they promised to forgive such as offended them,
and that they were bound unto it: which if they did, they should not only
preserve their own persons, but their friends and kinsmen, and withal,
participating with that great glory which they should only desire: which is,
to know how to rule their passions and themselves in their behalfes. And that
revenge would be so well wrought by the king and his justice, with so great
opportunity, that thereby they should not only preserve themselves, but be
fully satisfied to their contentments.

Benefices held comme^dably.
To the said vices he added their holding of Benefices, Hospitalles, and
Spittle-houses, founded by their predecessors: showing them, that it was not
only an abuse, but impiety committed toward God and his holy Church.

Lastly, he recommended unto them the bearing and using of arms, according to
the examples of their ancestors. To the third estate he showed, that their
chief support and maintenance, is justice and civil policy: that the judges
in that point held the first place, justice being the foundation and
establishment of all Monarchies, soueraignties and powers whatsoever:
alleging the saying of Traian, who being required by the king of Partheans,
that the river of Euphrates might serve as a border between their Empires,
Justice limiteth the borders of the Empire.
answered, that not the river but justice should limit the borders of the
Roman Empire, and that kingdoms without justice, are but dens of thieves.

Dealing much upon the overthrowing of particular justices, the great abuses
therein committed, with the prolongations, subtilties, and devises (to hide the
truth) therein used, comparing it unto a ship, tossed and tormented in the
waves of the sea, seeking for a safe port, and cannot find it, being hindered
by the crosse-waues and rocks that meet therewith: showing, that such at this
day is the misery of those that seek to end their suites in laws, Prolonging
and deceit in suites.
by the subtlety of men, and negligences of the Judges, by so many delays,
incidences, and prolongations, wherein justice is not to be used, but to the
contrary, it is rather vexed, troubled, and oftentimes wholly overthrown.

That the particular faults of some men, were the principal causes thereof,
who by that means thinking to advance themselves and their posterities, would
in the end, having attained to the full ripeness of their wickedness, felt
the mischief thereof.

An intolerable number of Officers.
That among those abuses, was to be numbered the multiplicitie of offices that
oppressed the Realm. The evil governments, the ignorances of diverse officers
which the king had left unto his Judges to reform, but that his commandment
had been as good undone, as done, altogether proouing wholly unfruitful,
joining thereunto all sorts of policy, in Cities and Towns, in which cases
they are united, by well governed laws and ordinances, every one according to
his charge and necessary function, but that the mischief was, that in these
days, laws are nothing else but written papers: he set down the inexcusable
faults committed in observation of laws, pollices and ordinances, made for the
punishment of swearers, blasphemers, players, idle persons, usurers, unlawful
exacters, cousoners, wicked livers, men using prohibited and unlawful places,
with all such kind of vices: Idle Scholars, the liberty of living idly and
desolutely, without policy or government, but only by bad and disordered
means (causes and originalles of troubles and seditions) which overthrow and
subvert all kingdoms and good Commonwealths, adding thereunto, a most earnest
exhortation: to seek remedies to all those michiefes.

The kings debts.
Lastly, he showed the great debts the king had fallen into, his great
diligences and hazards, by making wars against the hereticques, his piety,
religion, and devotion to the Romish Church: with the rare behavior, actions,
and counsel of the Queen his mother.

Ending his Oration with the unity and concord that ought to be (as a most
necessary thing) in that assembly, thereby to hold the Catholicque,
Apostolicque, and Roman Church, with general and particular estate of all that
are comprehended therein, in true obedience to the king, in all union and
concord: which doing, this Monarchy would be found to be environed with all
happiness, under the authority of the most christian king: and to the
contrary, doing otherwise, they should feel a continual grief and remorse
of conscience within their minds, for disobeying God, their King, and country.

The Archbishop of Bourges Oration.
The Archbishop of Bourges, Patriarch, and Primate of Aquitaine, thanked the
king, in that it pleased him to show his great good will toward his subjects,
saying: that thereby the poor and miserable country of France, which for the
space of eight and twenty years, had been so much tormented, began to
receive some strength, and to take courage, hearing the sweet and pleasing
voice of her king, witnessing his more then fatherly affection toward his
subjects, which would cause him to be honored and belooued within his Realm,
as much as in ancient time, the world worshipped Herculus, Theseus, and other
valiant men, that eased and relieved them from the burden of oppressions and
violences used in those days by Tyrants and monstrous Giants.

Saying, that as God when his people were afflicted, raised Moses, Iosue,
David, Manasses, Iosaphat, Ezechias, and other good kings, so by his
providence, he had sent into this desolate kingdom, a King who from his
young years had been guided by the Spirit of the Kings beloved of God.
wisdom of God to govern his people, and as the young Eagle (a celestial
bird) coming out of her nest, his Majesty pricked and provoked by the
vengeance and generositie of his Predecessors, has thrown the thunder of the
eternal GOD, upon the faces and heads of the enemies of his divine Majesty,
not once sparing his own life for the honor of God, and tranquillity of his
Realm, who in his voyage to Polonia, His voyage to Polonia.
passing and repassing through so many and diverse Nations, has had and
gotten so much experience in all actions, that by the only wisdom and eye of
his virtues, he has dispearsed a great and puissant army of strangers,
Rutters, and Switzers.

A happy hour of his reign.
Concluding therewith by so certain a hope, that under so good and so mighty a
king, they should see heresy suppressed and repulsed, peace assured, the
service of God established, all the Churches restored and reedified, Towns
franchised and freed from caliuers and drums: the Temple of wars closed and
shut up, and that of peace opened unto all men: justice and peace imbrasing
each other: laws flourishing, charity abounding among men, and by one consent
and union of religion, under the obedience of God and the King, who
representing the person of GOD, bears the sword of Gods justice here on
earth, the kingdom of Christ would thereby begin to flourish, as an example
of all goodness in the world to come, whereunto we all aspire.

Great joy made by the estates.
And therewith in the name of them all, adding this exclamation: Viue Rex in
sempiternum: Live King, live, and live eternally: and for the gracious virtues
and notable inspirations, wherewith God has touched your Princely heart, all
your Realm of France sings Benedictus Deus qui misit talem voluntatem in cor
regis: Blessed and praised be God, that has inspired so good and notable a
desire into the heart of our King, which we beseech his divine Majesty to
assist, fortify and conduct, to a most happy and prosperous end, for his
honor and glory.

The Earl of Brssac, his Oration made in ^ame of the whole Nobility.
After the Archbishop of Bourges sat down, the Earl of Brissac stood up, and
for a congratulation of those of his order, he showed the King, that the
Nobility in general, had given him in charge to thank his Grace, for the
good and honor they received, being by his commandments called and conuoked
together by an assembly of the general estates, and in his royal presence,
there to hear and understand his holy and good resolutions, assuring
themselves, that the effects would be as prompt and certain, as it was a
natural and just thing in him to be a true king: acknowledging, that by that
means only, it would make them such as they ought to be, The affection of the
French Nobility in the service of the king and state.
touching the reestablishing of the honor of God, the Catholicque,
Apostolicque, and Roman religion, and of other things profitable to his
estate, and necessary for his poor people. Promising for their parts, to use
the fidelity, zeal, affection, and generositie, that has allwaies been
natural in the Gentlemen of France, toward their Kings and sovereign
Princes. Offering unto his Majesty, the most humble service of their arms,
persons, and lives, to cause him to be obeyed, honored, feared, respected,
and acknowledged of all men, as both divine and humane laws have constituted
and appointed. And withal, to restore his Realm purged of heresies (the
spring and cause of all divisions) to her first and ancient dignity, whereunto
they would expose themselves freely, generously, and liberally under his
authority, even to the last drop of their blood.

The Crati. of the third estate.
The Provost of Merchants within Parris, President for the third estate, fell
on his knees, and for those of his degree, spoke and said: That seeing it had
pleased his Majesty so to open his mind, and to declare his holy intents unto
his people, thereby assuring them of his great charity (truly named most
fatherly) in their behalfes, his most humble, most obedient, and most faithful
subjects of the third estate, first praised God, that it had pleased him to
cast the eyes of his mercy upon them in the extremity of their afflictions,
and then yielded most hearty thanks unto his Majesty, who showing his power,
ordained from above, to rule and govern this Christian Monarchy, with all
courtesy and princely inclination, has not refused to bend his royal ears
to their most humble petitions, to hear their greefes and complaints, and
withal, to show a most singular and special desire, to restore his people to
their ancient force, to whom as then there rested but the only liberty of
speech, and that very weak and feeble, to reestablish holy religion in her
pristinate estate, by the extirpation of all errors and heresies, to rule and
remit all ancient orders (altered by the injury and alteration of times) unto
their first form and manner of being, and to comfort his poor people,
protesting that therein their most humble and most faithful services, should
never be wanting even to the last gasp: which Oration being ended, the
assembly with a marvelous contentment ended the first day of their meeting.

The second day of meeting upon Tuesday the 18. of October. 1588.
The second day of their meeting began upon the Tuesday after, in the same
manner as it did upon the first day, and because the King had been moved by
the Archbishop of Ambrun, the Count de Brissac, and the Advocate Bernard,
Deputies for the three estates, to renew his oaths of union, and perceiving
their pursuit to proceed from the distrust they had in him, seeing that he
having once sworn it within the City of Roane, it was as then needelesse to
renew his oath again, he went nevertheless to satisfy the importunity of
the League, and so began that second meeting with the same action.

The Kings proposition made to the Senate at their meetings.
Silence being commanded by a Herault, his Majesty said, that at their first
meeting, he had showed what great desire and care he had, that in his
reign he might see and behold, his subjects reunited in the true
Catholicque, Apostolicque, and Roman religion, under the obedience which it
had pleased GOD for their parts to give unto him, and for that cause, having
made his Edict in the month of July last, ordaining it to be confirmed and
holden for a The Edict of union, made a law
fondamentall law of his Realm, thereby to bind both himself and them, with all
their posterities, his meaning was as then to have it read openly before them
all: which done, every man should swear to observe it accordingly. And with
that, he commanded Monsieur de Beaulieu his principal Secretary to read it,
together with the declaration made upon the same, so to give it the force and
authority of a law of his Realm, and yet without derogating the liberties and
privileges of his Nobilite.

The reading thereof, with the declaration being ended, the king desiring that
the worthiness of the cause should be preferred, with as much Majesty as it
deserved, thereby to move the whole assembly better to consider the importance
of the contract, which as then they were to make with God, craving his horrible
and most fearful vengeance, might fall upon all those that disloyally should
falsify their faiths thereunto given, as assurances of the observation of his
said Edict of union, he commanded the Archbishop of Bourges, to make an Oration
unto the states concerning the same.

The oration of the Archbishop of Bourges, touching the Edict of the union.
This learned Prelate said, that seeing it pleased his Majesty, that the
instruction of so solemn an oath, should be given unto the people by the
mouth of the Prelates, he exhorted all the assembly (appointed for that great
and solemn actions) to humble themselves under the mighty hand of God, and to
acknowledge his Majesty, together with the effect and quallitie of the oath,
which they were as then to receive, considering that God is truth it self,
and all oaths whatsoever, which are not grounded upon that truth, are false
and unjust.

That the cause of the oath as then presented, was for the Church, the only
spouse of God, The Church is visible. Universal. Catholicque.
visible here on earth, because it comprehends all the faithful that are
the christian communaltie. Invisible in heaven, where it is said triumphant,
universal, for that it makes no distinction of persons, nations, quallities,
conditions, or sects.

One, without division or schism.
One, for that of Alexandria, Ephese, Jerusalem, Africa, and Aegipt, are but
one Church, and her doctrine is one Roman doctrine, not in regard of the
walls of the City of Rome, but by reason of a special nomination and
demonstration that is said of it, that therein Saint Peter, and after him
Saint Clement, and others their successors, have preached and announced the
word of God, witnessing the true christian doctrine, and many other Martyrs
with the price of their blood, which they have freely shed for the name and
honor of God.

The union of the Church.
That the union of this Church is so strong, that it cannot be broken nor
separated in it self, being placed upon the firm rock which is Jesus
Christ, so that the gates of hell cannot prevail against it: it is called the
Lords vinyard, and the Gods sheepfolde, under one head, and shepherd of our
souls.

That to preserve the unity of his Church, it is conuenenient, that all the
children thereof, should be united under Christ their Savior, and under the
king, whose faith has continued from posterity to posterity, even unto his
person, and never separated it self from the unity of this holy and christian
religion.

Let us unite our selves then (said this Prelate), let us unite our selves
together as true faithful Catholicques, let us renew this great and solemn
oath due unto God: let us join our vows and hearts together, and so yield
them and confirm them unto God.

Obedience due to the king.
Let us swear unto our Prince, the obedience and submission due unto him by all
laws divine and humane: let us embrace christian charity: let us abandon
hatreds and rancors, both open and secret, with all suspicions and distrusts
which hitherto have troubled and divided us, and which have hindered, yea and
broken so good intents, and had it not been for them, France had long since
enjoyed a happy peace.

Let us lift up our hands to heaven, to yield unto that great God the oath we
owe unto him, that it may be a memory for ever unto the world, that our
posterities may behold our faiths and constancy in our oaths, and not our
perjury, by the good and holy effects that shall ensue.

And seeing it has pleased your Majesty (most noble Prince) to be the first
that here in presence of us all, shall perform this oath, for an example to
all your subjects, all we with one accord will lift up our hands to heaven,
and swear by the living God, to serve and honor him for ever, to maintain
his Catholicque, Apostolicque, and Roman Church, to defend your Majesty and
your estate against all men, to observe and inuiolably to hold that which is
contained in your Edict of union, at this present read and published to the
glory of God, exaltation of his holy name, and to the conservation of his
Church, and this Realm of France.

The kings oath for the observation of his edict.
This Oration made, the king spoke and said: My Lords, you heard the tenor of
mine Edict, and understood the quallitie thereof, together with the greatness
and worthiness of the oath, which at this present you are generally to make.

The oath of the Spirituality, Ex consilio Triburienfi.
And for that I perceive all your just desires conformeable unto mine, I will
swear before God, with a good and safe conscience, the observation of this my
edict, as long as God shall lend me life in earth: and I will and command, that
it shall be observed in this my Realm, for a sure and steadfast law, and in
perpetual memory and witness of the universal correspondence and consent of
all the estates of my Realm, you shall presently swear the observation of
this my Edict of union, all with one voice, each Ecclesiastical person laying
his hand upon his breast, and the rest lifting their hands up to heaven.

An act of the protestation of the oath.
And to the end that a memory of so solemn an oath may be more pithily set
down to all posterities, he commanded Monsieur de Beaulieu to make an act
thereof: which done, the joy was so great, that nothing could be heard among
them, but crying: Viue le Roy, all the assemby followed his Majesty into the
Church of Saint Saueor, wherein thanksgiving they sung, Te Deum Laudamus.

The kings clemency in taking away the Barricadoes at Parris. Mortales
recidinae.
There the Provost of Merchants in Parris, understood from the King, that the
Parrissians offense had been very great, but that he had forgotten it: that
he made his Edict for the common good of all French Catholicques, and also the
comfort of his poor people: the miseries whereof, caused him to remit the
memory thereof, withal, willing him to be assured thereof, as being spoken
from the mouth of his king, with commandment to be very careful, least the
City of Parris should fall into the like fault, which unto them would prove
both mortal and vnreparable.

A report running in the Parliament house.
And because the Deputies that came last thither, brought news that all the
Country of France were of opinion, that under pretense of that assembly, there
would be some public and notorious vengeance wrought against the principal
estates, and that this report ran from chamber to chamber, it was determined
among them, to enquire thereof, and to know the kings intent, the Archbishop
of Ambrun spoke unto him, and gave to understand the great fear that diverse of
the estates were in, by reason of the report that ran among them, touching a
tragedy (as they thought) to be prepared, confirmed by the advice of
strangers, specially such as little cared for the peace and tranquillity of this
estate.

Salus populi suprema lex est.
The king made answer, that the safety of his subjects, would be his own
defense: that he cherished them as a father does his children: that he knew
the surety and liberty of the estates, that they ought to be assured of his
word, that the occasion of troubling them, should never proceed from him: that
it was an open offense, once to enter into distrust of their king: and that
reports were devised by those that could not love their King, but only seek
the means to cause him to be hated of his people.

The Archbishop of Lions of the counsel from the peace of Chartres.
Likewise the familiarities, entertainments, and shows of amity and good will,
by the King continued to the Duke of Guise and the Cardinal his brother, and
for the love of them both to the Archbishop of Lions, that had been of the
Council from the time of the peace concluded at Chartres, caused those reports
to cease, and made the prognostications (in that behalf sent from all places)
wholly fabulous: which were, that the issue of the Parliament holden in Bloys,
would be horrible and bloody. And I believe, if that the league for her part,
had used no means to kindle the ashes that as yet lay hot within the
furnace, that the fire of the kings chollor had never been kindled.

The intent of the league.
The League therefore assured on that side, set those on work that were of her
sect, in that so solemn assembly, to effect their secret pretenses, which was
so to incroch upon the king, that they would leave him but only a vain
shadow of royal authority, under the conduction and direction of her
tyranny, and withal, to exclude the king of Navarre from his royal
succession.

The league declares and blames the kings actions.
The bridge to pass unto the first point, was to make his actions odious and
intolerable, to reproach him for his liberallitie, his mignions, his edicts,
his dissimulations, and the long oppressions and troubles of the people, to the
end, that consenting to the suppression of estates and offices, he might
thereby procure the hatred of all such as had any interest therein, that is the
most apparent families of the third estate, and not seeking to redress it, he
should be dedeclared not a father, but an enemy to his people: not a King,
but a Tyrant in his Realm: and that the people would presently confine him in
a Cloister.

The King was continually solicited with many petitions, thereby not so much to
make him see the evil, but rather to threaten him, that he should yet find it
much greater, if speedy order were not taken. They set before his eyes the
extreme coldness of the greatest part of all the Catholicques, in love
Petitions made to the king at the beginning of his reign. The king ought to
revenge the dishonours done against God.
and obedience toward him, by reason they were most straughely oppressed with
excessive impositions and subsidies, constrained to live in company with such
as had burned Churches, profaned the Altars, massacred the Priests, and robbed
and taken away their goods.

They brought him to defend the Church, not to esteem so much of the wrongs
committed against the state, as of the injuries done unto religion: not to
suffer any fear to enter into his mind, concerning the enemies of GOD, which
more and more increased, by a certain kind of distrust, which constrained him
to show contumelious passions, not breeding peace, but rather servitude, and
so to dissemble the injuries committed against God: which to prevent, he
should revenge himself like a King, bannish those that counseled him only
for the advantage of heresies, and embrace such as had strayed out of the right
way, and desired to enter into it again, to use his sword of authority
against the obstinate, and to remember this most true and certain maxim, that
were the fault of treason against the divinity of God, left unpunished, there
the fault of treason against man, will proceed so far, that in the end it
will be esteemed no offense.

Strangers authors of new impositions to oppress the people.
They assured him, that the greatest scourge of this Realm, is the stranger,
from whose extreme avarice proceeds all the inventions of new imposts, which
most cruelly impouerish all the Realm of France, that laugh at her ruin, and
make them of great authority, who already have made a great part of his
people to become male contents, and in the end will cause the rest to revolt,
if they be not speedily dispatched out of the Realm, like the devil, that
causes perpetual division, still hindering the rest and quietness of the
common people.

Disorders in policy.
Among diverse disorders crept into the common policy of the Realm, they
moved him of two most great abuses, which by continuance produced all the
rest. The first, touching the giving of benefices unto all persons, without
choice or exception either of men or soldiers: that all the Bishops of those
days, some few only excepted, that as yet have some remembrance of their
estates, and some spark of the fear of God imprinted in their minds, The
pride and couetonsnesse of Prelates.
are daily seen, not to shed tears before the Lord of heaven, and by prayers
to mittigate his wrath and fury bent against us, but proudly to walk within
the Court, and in all places, with great troops of men, the most desperate and
vain persons that are within this Realm.

Their houses are not filled with the noise of Himnes and Psalms, sung to the
honor of God, but with barking of dogs, breeding of hawks, and all kinds
of vain and dissembling speeches. And to be short, there is nothing seen but
ignorance, slanders, adulteries, and shame among them, the only beholding of
their countenances, moves men more to go out of the Church, then all the
Ministers and Preachers of heresy are able to enforce them.

The second is the sale of offices and places of justice, which causes the
most wicked to be most esteemed, that the strongest without reproach
oppressethe weak, that without scruple of conscience they sell justice by
retaile, which they themselves have bought by gross: that Towns and Provinces
abound in murders, and diverse unpunished crimes: that there is no more order
in pollicic, nor faith in bargening: no respect to the law, nor love to
virtue, The policy of the estate of the church
and that a most unbridled liberty to all evil, runs throughout the whole
Realm. Which two abuses to extirpe, they said unto him: Your Majesty is not
to deal in any sort with the spirituality, but if you will undertake so great
a charge, when you have first taken order for your cruill policy, you must
employ your time therein with all holiness, such as belongs to the handling
of divine causes: you are careful to seek and find out men that are
excellent and of good conscience to serve about your person: but what excuse
will you allege, in being less careful to provide sufficient men for the
service of God? your Grace conceiueth not the importance of this fault, you are
the cause that a million of souls are lost, and it is a most great fault in
those that should advertise your Majesty thereof, if they do it not: If you
repent not great and forepassed abuses, and hereafter suffer it not to proceed
any further, it is most certain, you can never avoid eternal damnation.

Ministers disturbers of the church, of justice and policy.
And let your Majesty be assured, that if you divert not these ruins, that
are likely to fall upon us, if presently you do degrade a great number as well
of Ecclesiastical Prelates, as civil Magistrates, who at this day are
officers in all your sovereign Courts and jurisdictions, you cannot preserve
your estate: you must degrade and punish with death a great number of the most
manifest offenders therein: for that has already been done within your Realm,
and bred a great contentment.

Then you must inquire and search out for men of good and honest behavior,
wherewith you must replenish your Council, and then God will be assistant
unto them (for Gods spirit is always with the just man) and thereby your
enterprises will surely take effect, sooner by the hands of those whom he does
bless, then by such as are profane persons, whose works are accursed. It is
very true, that we find not so great numbers of honest men walking abroad,
Rari quippe boni.
yet how corrupt soever the world may be, it was never known or found to be
void of some most excellent and virtuous men: what numbers of excellent wits
and zealous persons, are yet at this day in all the Provinces of this Realm?
how many heretical courages, replenished with holy magnanimity and incredible
boldness, as among the Nobility of this land (not blasphemous Gentlemen, but
such as love and fear God) that never were in your Court, but rather dwell and
remain in their own houses without any employment? How many great, rich, and
commendable wits, are distributed and lie hid within the heads and minds
of men of all sorts, and yet wholly despised of diverse persons? who if they
were employed in diverse charges, would within short time, wholly redress all
the disorders and ruins of our estate: but such men are only known of GOD,
and of some honest men: if in your Majesty's Court, there were a zeal and a
desire of salvation and amendment, their places and habitations would be
continually sought and found out, Reformatiof the excess and disorders in the
court.
and men upon their knees would entreat them, desiring them to help to
redress this fauage and barbarous time wherein we live: and that in stead of
civil wars of poverty, of miserable servitude, and infinite other
mischiefs, they would bring us a holy peace, together with the abundance of
all good things.

But the blind providence of your Court, is only to find out new means of
recovering money: it only regards that, as an Angel of desence: it places
all her confidence in gold and silver, wherein are seen nothing but Italian
banquers, and inventions of new imposts: it is much deceived, it is not the
great and massy Scepter of gold (as an ancient wise man says) that is, not
the great treasures that makes Princes to flourish, but rather the dutiful
amity of their subjects, which proceeds only from the good order of justice,
and the election of capable persons, fit for the government of all estates.

Touching the proposition made to the king, to cut off the superfluous number
of officers, and to abolish the corruption of the sale of offices, from whence
he receives not one penny profit, which is not tempered in the blood of the
common people: such as found themselves interested thereby, (fearing to loose
the profit and commodity of their places, and those specially that concerned
the receipt of treasures) made a great and goodly declaration to the king, to
move him to the contrary, and to hold the^ in their places which they
possessed under the title of officers for his Majesty: showing him, that the
good and comfort of the people (which was thought would be procured by the
suppression of their offices) is the greatness, glory, and riches of his
Crown, and of his people, which is always oppressed and trodden under foot by
such as are mighty, if there be not some that like a bar interpose
themselves between the power of the one, and the weakness of the other, which
is specially done by the offices, as well of justice, as of his Majesty's
treasures: that the erection of offices, rather wants aid and profit, then
oppression and wrong unto the people, for that without them, the people must of
force have been constrained to help the King in his wars with their own
goods.

The decree of Charles the fifth, dated the 28. of May. 1359.
That it is a vain thing, to seek to make those offices that ought to be
perpetual, to become annual, and so to be exercised by Commissaries, for that
is not to be endured in any estate or Monarchy: and Charles the fist seeking
to erect that order, during the prisonment of king John, perceived so many
discommodities, discontentments, and seditions therein, that he revoked the
suspencing and deprivation of such offices, and himself in person pronounced
the decree thereof in open Parliament.

That it is easy to judge by the passions and instant pursuites, of the
greatest of those that demand commissions, that they have a most extreme
envy, to confound the order and principal supports of the royal estate, so to
transfer it to the occupation and mannaging of a small company of men, or
else to put the rurther of this Monarchical ship into the hands of the
common people, and such as have least skill and knowledge to rule it, and by
that means to bring the head under the foot: that diverse of those earnest
petitioners, had not sold their offices (which they had likewise obtained by
the same means) for the most advantage, they would think themselves most happy
at this day to join with 80. or a 100. thousand officers, whereof that body is
composed which at this present, imploreth justice due and worthy the desert
of their cause.

That the suppression of so many estates and offices (which at this day are the
chief and most orient brightness of the honourablest families among his
subjects) would unfeignedly draw on the desolation, decay, and total ruin of
the best Towns in all this Realm: wherein the youth for want of good
exercise, should easily throw themselves headlong into vanities and follies,
whereof idleness only is the cause, and therefore they most humbly besought
his Majesty, to maintain them in his service, suffering them to continue
therein, and to enjoy their offices as they had usually done.

The bills of the three estates.
Which allegation being ended, the complaints and petitions of the three
estates, were read in such large and ample discourses, that the least town in
France, had matter sufficient to make a long and tedious declaration. All of
them in general complaining, (besides the excess of tallages,) of other
subsidies, impositions, customs, furnishings of fifty thousand soldiers,
tallies, augmentations, and increasings of new forces, impostes upon wines,
lendings of money, both general and particular, subsidies of one hundredth
souls for every process, redeeming of their commons, new inventions touching
the pauing of walled Towns, the raising and calling down of moneys, the
surcharge of two, three, and four souls upon every frank, the universal
number of tallages, The common peoples complaints.
the fourth and eight part of wines that are sold by retaile, with other
superfluous impositions: and to conclude, the people complained of the
publicque calamities and oppressions, which made them as bare and naked of ease
and fatness, as the body of a man that is appointed for an anatomy.

The Nobility complained of their services done without recompense, and of the
indiscrcet distribution of the kings liberallities and rewards. The Clergy
made a greater noise, and found themselves grieved, that neither the sums of
money, nor yet the great charges leuyed upon them, had not in any thing advanced
the service of religion.

Whereupon the King supposing to sustain the golden world, and thereby to
restore and procure great rest and quietness to his people, almost spoiled and
utterly overthrown, he commanded the Deputies to invent all the means they
could for their comfort. And from thence sprang the Edict of the suppression of
offices newly erected, and the ouerture of the discharges of talliages, but
with a most industrious stratageme of the League.

They moved the king to reduce the talliages of the year 1576. which they did
to this end, that if the king agreed thereunto, he should perceive himself
bereaved of the means to pay his soldiers, to content his servants, and to
maintain the greatness of his royal estate: and if he refused it, it would
be an evident occasion to make the estates fall in a mutenie, and so to effect
their secret determination, which was to appoint a Protector over the King, and
to drive his faithful subjects from him.

Read the kings declation upon this point.
The Duke of Guise persuaded the King not to grant it, to the end, that
thereby he should not imbase his authority at the states pleasures: on the
other side, he provoked and incited the Deputies (which daily repaired to his
lodging, there to conclude their propositions and aunsweres) to continue their
pursuit. But the king to shun their fury, consented to the reduction of
tallages, hoping nevertheless by that means continuing the Parliament, he
would show them, that with so small sums of money, he could not maintain
his royal estate, nor yet proceed in wars against the Huguenots, which all
of them had so solemnly and faithfully sworn unto.

Mean time, they began to enter into the depth of their pretenses, A
proposition made before at Mallet and Bobier.
and sought to have pursuits made against such as had been appointed the kings
receivers, and thereby abused his liberallitie, that they should be constrained
to yield account, they showed the king what loss he had sustained, by his
careless contract made touching the farming of salt, for the term of six
years, then ended in the month of September, 1588. to the great deminution of
his treasure, and oppression of his subjects, for that the loss thereby
sustained, did yearly amount unto the sum of a hundredth thirty six
thousand Crowns, and for the other six years, four millions and eight
thousand crowns, by not rating the farm of the imposts of salt at as high a
price as they should be.

This advise being great and very important, for the increasing of the Kings
treasures, was given by the Presidents Mallet and Bobier, (that had labored
for the space of six years to discover the same) covered and disguised with
the Sophisteries and subtilties of their participants.

Mean time, that the estates were busied in the Parliament, let us see what
the kings forces did against the enemy. The Duke de Neuers led one army into
Poitou, and the Duke de Maine conducted the other into Dauphine.

The army of the Duke of Neuers in Poictou.
The Duke de Neuers with a great and strong army passed into Poitou, promising
not only to reduce the whole Province under the kings obedience, but to
restore the loss he had sustained by the battle of Coutrus, by some
profitable and worthy exployt: he being assisted by Monsieur de la
Chastigneraye, Master of the Camp, of a Regiment of footmen, Monsieur de
Sagone, Marshall of the light horse, Monsieur de Lauerdin, and Monsieur de la
Chastre, Great-maister of the field: the army being composed of Frenchmen,
Switzers, Italians, and diverse voluntary Gentlemen.

The siege of Manleon.
The Town of Manleon was the first place which they pretended to besiege: and
to the same end, it was presently environed with great numbers of horse and
footmen: It is the law of arms to punish such as seeking to strive against
the stream, some to oppose themselves by rash and vain resolution, to hold a
fort, which of it self is wholly weak and vndefensable. And for that kind of
foolish hardiness, Anne de Monmorancy Constable of France, hanged such as he
found in the Castle of Villane, and all those that were in a Tower, standing in
the subburbes of Saint Anthony of Pauie. Yet the Garrison of Manleon, although
they well perceived both want of amunitions and weakness of their walls,
would neither parley, nor yet yield, until they saw the last extremity, but
when they sought by articles to compound the assaylants, using all inhumanitie
against them, being disarmed, bathed their victory in the blood of natural
Frenchmen.

Montague taken.
From thence they marched toward Montagu, where Monsieur de Colombiere
Governor of the Town, issued and skirmished with the Duke de Neuers forces,
with equal loss on both sides: which done, after some resistance made, and
certain Cannons shot against the Town, the soldier fearing the event of
cruel assault, not long after, drew to an honorable composition, and so
yielded the Town.

When Montagu had yielded, the army went to batter la Ganache, a Town with a
Castle, lying between Poitou and Britain, as I will show you hereafter.

The Duke de Maine at Lions.
The Duke de Maine being at Lions, and from thence, minding to pass into
Dauphine, found his affection as much cooled, as at the first it had been
greatly inflamed, and knowing such pretenses to be dangerous, and over
lightly grounded upon the mutenie of the people, he stayed his proceedings,
expecting the issue of the Parliament: and while he continued at Lions,
Monsieur de Mandelot died, being in great fear to be displaced from his
government, by the Duke de Nemours, that had the grant thereof, and for the
same cause, he doubted the coming of the Duke de Maine, to be to that end.

He fell sick about the end of the month of October, troubled with a windy
colicque, The sickness and death of the Lord de Mandelot.
and certain fittes of an ague, the gout likewise ceasing upon him, and all
at once: Yet he seemed not to be in any great danger, till Sunday the
thirteenth of November, when he changed in such sort, that on wednesday after,
in the morning, feeling his forces to decay, he began to think upon his end,
and comforting his Lady, he besought father Edmond Auger, to show the king
that he died poor and indebted, by reason of his Majesty's services. He
recommended his wife and children to the Sheriffs and Magistrates of Lions,
desiring them not to show themselves friends to mutable fortune, that they
would not suffer him to die like a ^ancrout, and that his goods and mooueables
might be openly sold: he made the like declaration to the Strangers in the
Town. And upon Saturday at night he received the extreme unction: which
done, he besought God, that it would please him yet to give him life for the
space of two years longer, if he thought it good for the profit of the
Church, the service of the king, and the commodity of the City of Lions.

Presages of the leaguers affairs.
The next day the Duke de Maine went to visit him, where for a certain time he
had some conference with him. And this Gentleman, that had always had a great
insight into the affairs of the League, by a spirit although not prophetical,
yet prognosticating said unto him, that the end of the Parliament at Blois,
would not be so agreeable as the beginning, that the wound of the Barricadoes
of Parris, was yet bleeding, and that the taking of the Marquisat of Saluces,
had much increased it, that the Duke of Guise should never find the means to
pacify the sea, by him so much troubled and tormented, and that the supposed
aid of strangers, which he expected would fail him, he died the four and
twentieth of November, and was buried upon Saint Andrews day, at whose
funeral the Lady his wife showed, both by her apparel, honor, and order,
that amity continues as well after as before man's death: Father Edmond Auger
made the funeral Sermon in presence of the Duke de Maine, and among other
things, commending his person, said: that he had never subscribed to the
League, and that he died constant in religion, and the service of the King.

But now let us return again unto the Parliament, where the king labored
with great pain, to procure the remedies which he expected from the wholesome
counsel that should be given unto him, and like a wise Pilot, that scoureth
and makes clean the plankes of his ship, thereby to cleanse it of all filth
that might hang upon it, and so to hinder the like fish from catching hold
thereon, which in the middle of the stream uses to stay the course of the
greatest ship: that is, he sought to cut off all the difficulties that
hindered his Realm from passing out of the troublesome waves of long and
continual wars, Remore, a fish, stays a ship.
and thereby could not arrive at the haven of happy peace: but as he
continued in his great labor and holy desire, that goodly harmony of the
assembly of the estates, began to jar upon the news of the taking of the
Marquisat of Saluce, News of the taking of Carmagnoles
by the Duke of Sauoye, and of Carmagnoles, the Frontier-Towne of France and
Italy.

The estate of the Duke of Sauoye.
I must hereunto add this discourse, which of force I must declare at large,
the better to make it known, first showing the estate of the Duke of Sauoy:
then, what were the principal causes of this enterprise, the right and
reasons, wherewith he defended himself, and the means he used to attain
unto the same: I will put this proposition, that this Prince is bound and a
neighbor unto France, and in that case, neither ought nor may be an enemy
unto it. He is the son of that great and polliticque Prince Charles
Philebert duke of Sauoy, who so wisely found the means to recover that which
his father had lost.

The praise of Charles Philebert Duke of Sauoy.
The principal glory, and truly as I think, the most necessary for a Prince
of his quallitie, was, that among so many troubles, and between two great
Monarchies striving together, he could behave himself so well, that neither
the one nor the other once touched him, maintaining his country in peace,
affectioned to the service of our kings, as he that had received that honor,
to marry the sister of king Henry the second, a friend to the King of Spain,
in whose Court he had passed over the most part of his greefes for his
forepassed losses, a good neighbor to the Switzers, and other Princes of
Italy: to live in peace, he permitted the free access of Huguenots into his
Towns of Thurin, and assured them a retrait into the valleys of Angrongne,
Lucerne, Saint Martin, Pragela, and la Perouze, without constraining them (as
he might well have done) to use the Catholicque religion, and looking into the
depth of diverse things, he made means unto the king of Navarre, for a match
to be made between the Lady Margaret the Kings sister, and his son: and
what he practiced for his own benefit, the same he counseled unto others:
for when he perceived that Henry king of Polonia threatened to renew the
wars, as soon as he should set foot within his realm, he dissuaded him
from that resolution, setting before him, the incertitude of wars, which most
commonly are sweet in the beginning, but difficult to be pursued, and most
bitter and hurtful in the end: See the order of Montagu
He desired rather to leave some part of his Lands unto the Switzers, then
to seek to win them by arms.

He behaved himself so well in his counselles, (which our kings rejected) and
imprinted such an opinion of his wisdom, greatness, and felicity, within
his subjects minds, that the Sauoyen not knowing, nor being able to imagine
any greatness more elevated or happyer, then that of their Duke, that they
said, that if the king of France could have guided his affairs in as good
sort, he had been man sufficient, and fit to have been Great-Maister of
the Duke of Sauoyes house.

Charles Emanuel Duke of Sanoy.
Charles Emanuel his son, perceiving that the wisdom and policy of his
father, had left his estate in good security with a reasonable great quantity
of treasures, and yet not so much as would suffice to make any foreign wars,
determined to employ that generositie, naturally ingraffed in him, in some
goodly enterprise: he threatened Ceneua, and made show of doing some great
exployt against it, but acknowledging the insufficiency of his forces for his
so high an enterprise, they determined upon a marriage, and married the King
of Spaines youngest daughter, and with her, the passions of his father in law.

The Duke of Sauoy cannot live in peace if the king of France be his enemy.
At the beginning it was thought he would have contented himself to have been
friend with France, allied unto Spain, that upon the apprehension of the fall
of our estate, he would never pretend any thing against us, that he would
stay himself more upon things certain, then upon uncertain and variable:
that knowing, that upon the one side he had the Almaines: on the other, the
Switzers: on the third, the Venecians: and on the fourth, the Princes of
Italy: he would become friend to the Frenchmen their friends: It was thought,
that if he had ambition in his mind, it would vanish under a more just title,
that feeling himself weak, he would enterprise any thing against a mighty
King, nor would not break the bond of amity, for his part due unto him:
holding his estates from this Crown, which of late of mere courtesy had
restored Sauignan and Pigneroles, unto him, yet without apparent necessity,
and without any reason whatsoever, he undertook the usurpation of the
territories of France, bordering upon Piedemont.

And yet it was not done without pretense, declaration, and excuse, for first
he wrote unto the Pope, that the fear he had least Monsieur de Desdiguieres,
should cease upon certain of his Towns, and so in the middle of his country
make a retraict and refuge for the Huguenots, had constrained him to divert
that mischief generally from the Church, and particularly from his own
estate, which he desired to continue in the purity of the ancient religion:
under the obedience of the holy sea of Rome.

The duke of Sauoyes pretense why he invaded the Marquisat of Saluce.
He excused himself unto the King, touching this breach of peace, saying: that
the only zeal of religion, together with the fear of the contagious
neighborhood of hereticques, had constrained him there unto, sending an
Ambassador to give him notice thereof, and so to disguise that injury with the
fairest and most counterfeit he could devise.

At the first, he made show as if he would not hold those places but under the
kings authority, and by little and little, he usurped all soueragne power,
degrading the kings officers, erected the Sauoyan cross, and threw down the
flower deluces of France.

Ann. 1481.
His officers covered this usurpation with an other title, and maintained that
the Marquisat of Saluces is holden infest of the Duchy of Sauoy, and that one
of the Marquises thereof, being a brave and valiant Gentleman, disdaining in
person to do homage to Charles the sixth, Duke of Sauoy, being very young, was
for his misprision declared a traitor, driven out of his Countries, and his
Marquisat confiscated.

The Marquess of Saluce infested into the country of Dauphine.
But the truth is, that this country has always been infest to the
principality of Dauphine, contained in the gift that Prince Humbert made unto
the Crown of France, and namely, that the Marquess of Saluce had recourse unto
the king of France, who received homage and fidelity of him, and ever since,
his successors did continue the duty of vassalles unto the Kings, Charles the
eight, Lewis the twelfth, and Francis the first.

From thence it proceeds, that he which enquired and gathered into a great
volume, the causes and reasons of the raising of arms in the month of
January, reports this surprising of the Marquisate of Saluces, to be derived
from principalles of the League, that dismembreth their Crown and
Commonwealth, perceiving that neither of them could preserve it whole and
entire, and these are his words.

ABout that time, the Duke of Sauoy supposing the king by reason of his
departure from Parris, to be wholly overthrown, sent to speak with Monsieur
de Guise, minding to enter into League with him, upon condition, that for his
part, he might have the Marquisat of Saluce, Prouence, and Dauphine, which the
Duke of Guise would by no means consent unto, desiring rather to keep the
kingdom wholly for himself, which was the cause that the Duke of Sauoy moved
at his answer, sent Monsieur to the King at Chartres, in the month of
August, to offer him all love and friendship: whereat the Duke of Guise
being offended, practiced the said intelligence and league, granted the Duke
of Sauoyes request, and the said Duke of Sauoy was advertised of of the
resolution taken against the king in the Parliament at Blois: to the end, that
for his part, he might find the means to dispatch his business at the same
time: wherein he slept not, forgetting nevertheless the promise made unto his
Majesty, and that of his own free will, for he prevented the time of the
execution thereof, by the surprising of the Marquisate of Saluces, which served
as a preparation to the conspiracy made against the person of the King, as
every man judged, as being most easy to be perceived, that the Duke of
Sauoye, who in regard of the puissance of this great Realm, is but a mean
Prince, and has la Bresse, Sauoye, and Piedemont, so near unto the limittes
of France, that it lay in the kings power to bereave him of the greatest part
thereof: and that in very short time, if he were not aided, or that his
Majesty had not hindrances otherwise, which made it apparent unto all the
world, that he enterprised not the taking of Carmagnolle, Rauel, and Saluce,
without assistance: and that on the other side, the king should be retained
and hindered from making war against him, although that after such
hinderance, he might be well assured, that the Parliament being ended, his
Majesty would recover both his said Marquisate of Saluce, and wholly
ouerrunne him, if he left not off in time.

For my part, I have heard it reported, that this young Prince foreseeing
Cadenti arbori, securim in iecit. A politicque maxim of Spain. Multa fieri
prohibentur, quae tamen facta tenent.
seeing the dissipation of our estate, assured himself that it would be best
for him to be the first at the dinision, as son and husband of two
daughters, issued from the blood royal of France, and so goodly a piece of
land, lying in the middle of his country, would be sufficient cause to awake
a man that were most sound a sleep, to move and heat the most cold and
greatest Pollititian, and that although there appeared injustice in the action,
yet there would be reason found to the possession thereof. Concluding his
determination by this maxim holden in Council of Spain: That diverse things
are forbidden, which are good and hold steadfast, being once done.

And to execute his pretense, for the space of a whole year he had solicited
the Governor of the Citadell of Carmagnole, who playing on both side, on the
one side took money of the Duke: and on the other side, he advertised the
King thereof, and wrought so well by that means, that having gotten above five
and twenty thousand Crowns, he withdrewe himself unto the Court, without
delivering the place which the Duke of Sauoye had bargained for, who
perceiving himself deceived, and that the Barricadoes at Parris gave the King
work in hand, and more then he could do, he determined to surprise the
Citadell of Carmagnole, by the means of a Corporal called la Chamber, whose
treason being discovered, and his fact once known, he was hanged by the
feet in the Marketplace of Carmagnole, and then with all his confederates put
to death as he deserved: but that notwithstanding, the duke perceiving the
kings mind to be otherwise occupied, then to think upon the Marquisat, of
Saluces, he leuyed great numbers of men, Marquess of S. Sorbin.
causing the Marquess of Saint Sorlin to mount on horseback, and under the
pretense of a false report given out touching the besieging of Montferrat, he
approached in so good time, that upon Al-saints day at night, he surprised
the Town of Carmagnole, that for the most part was kept by soldiers of
Piedemont.

And the Castle that had always been victualled for above the space of two
years, at that time was found wholly unprovided, because that Montseur de
Saint Siluie, that had succeeded in the place of la Cost, had caused the
victualles to be carried forth, to have some fresh in their place, in such
sort that the Captains fearing to endure great misery and famine, with small
honor yielded up that impregnable Fort, wherein there was found above four
hundredth cannons, Ordinance found at Carmagnole.
great and little, with great quantity of powder and shot, and by that means
the double Pistollets that flew about on all sides, bare away the double
cannons of this Frontier-Towne of France, so that in less then threce weeks,
the Duke wanne all the Marquisats of Saluce, and also the Captains and
Frenchmen soldiers retiring, with lives and goods saved, drums sounding and
playing, Ensigns displayed, weapons in their hands, but no matches lighted,
and without their pay of three months, which the Duke had promised them by
his agreement.

This victory and conquest made the Duke hold up his head, and his servants
made him believe, that although he were forced to yield it up again, in the
mean time he should enjoy it, and that it is good to bring things to pass when
time and opportunity serves. And for the same cause, he made certain pieces
of money of the value of a Duket to be minted, stamped with the picture of a
Centaure, treading a Crown of gold under his feet, with this devise,
Opportune.

The taking of the Marquess of Saluce, troubles the state.
Not long after, the king received the news thereof, and considering the
troubles, distrusts, and commotions, practiced by the League, he imputed this
surprising to a brauado, together with an evil will against the good and
quietness of his estate: and knew full well, that the Duke of Sanoy, believing
that the division of France would impart a piece thereof to every man, he went
to take his part, and that rather for the situation, then any other right or
title he had unto the Marquisate of Saluces, thereby to join it unto
Piedemont, and that he had forseene, that his Majesty being hindered by
quenching the fire that flamed within the heart of his Realm, he would not
have the means to aid himself in his extreamities.

The full relution of the French Nobalitie, to make war in Sauoy.
Such as at all times had the flower deluce, and the respect of the glory of
France lively imprinted in their hearts, not being able to support the injury
wrought (in the presence of all the estates of France, as then assembled in
Blois) touching the taking of a place, which was the only treasury of the
spoils of such conquests as the Kings of France brought out of the country of
Italy, showed the King, that it would be necessary for him, to make peace
within his Realm, and to revenge that injury, to drive away the Goat that
eats the colewoorths, while the Good Man is fighting with his wife: to chase
the wolf, that assayleth the sheepfolde, while the Sheepheards are quarrelling
together: For so the Romans agreed together, when they perceived the enemy
before their Capitol: so the Spaniards left of their mutenie, when they beheld
the white cross before Fontarabie: so the Frenchmen appeased their debates, to
join together for the driving of the Englishmen out of Normandy.

They told the King, it would be accounted a point of great cowardice in
them, if they should seem to be offended thereat: if they should endure the
pride and ambition of their so weak an enemy: if they should suffer the
Crown of France to be dismembered, specially the places which are particularly
allotted unto the eldest son of the King.

The king is resolved to follow strange wars and to pacify civil broils.
To suffer that a mean Prince should in a brauado take away from a King of
France, that little plot that rested unto him of the territories of Italy,
together with four hundredth pieces of Cannon-shotte, the Frontiertowne of
France lying beyond the Mountains, that place that was able to withstand the
most proud forces of the Spaniards: which only rested unto us as an assured
pawn, therewith in short space to recover again the countries of Naples and
Milan.

The King being in flamed with just grief, was fully moved at this tyranny,
and judged this branch of mischief to spring out from the body of the
coniurations of the League, for the which cause he said he would make peace
with the Huguenot, to serve himself by their means, against such as sought to
pull off his clothes, before he meant to go to bed, minding to quit himself
from the rule of such as like majors of the Palace, sougt nothing but his
subjection unto their passions.

The Duke of Guise excuses himself.
The Duke of Guise perceiving that all the assembly, the whole Parliament, and
all the kings servants, judged this inuation to be done by his means, and to
be the only effect of the League, and that it bred hatred and repentance in
the hearts of those that esteemed his proceedings to be most just, he besought
the king not to be moved thereat, assuring him, that as soon as his Majesty
should have quenched the fire which the Huguenots had begun to kindle within
his realm, he would be one of the first that should pass the Mountains, to
make his foreign enemies yield their pray, desiring his Majesty to give him
that commission, but first he said, he ought to assure his people of that he
had promised them by oath touching the holy union, and the good resolution of
the Parliament.

The king that could not well disiest this advise, receiving it as from the
heart of him that had given the spirit and motion to the mischief, by his
continual practices with strangers, perceiving that neither his Edict of
union, nor yet the obligation of the oath which he had taken (concerning
religion) of all the Princes of the League, to make them depart and leave their
secret associations, as well within as without the Realm, had not wrought that
effect which he expected, he determined from that time forward, to be
revenged of all forepassed offenses, persuading himself not to be bound to
observe the Edict of union, seeing the League had first begun to break it,
consenting to the pernicious intents of strangers, Read the wars of Geneua in
the book following.
and not withdrawing themselves from the mutual intelligences it had with him:
but in the mean time, while he dissembled his displeasure against the Duke of
Cuise, he used another means against the Duke of Sauoy, which I will show
hereafter.

That the king of Navarre was not much grieved at the injury which a mean
Duke had done unto a mighty king, it is not to be doubted: yet he rejoiced
thereat, being in hope of some good fortune that might thereby ensue, and that
it would be occasions to end the divisions and partiallities within the Realm
of France. At such time as this new trouble sprang up among the assembly at
Blois, he was in Rochel, where he called an other assembly of the Churches of
his religion, seeing the artificial devises of the League, had shut the gate
against him, where he ought to hold the principal place, as the first Prince
and chief Magistrate of France.

An assembly at Rochel.
This assembly began the fourteenth day of November, in the Townhouse of Rochel,
the King of Navarre being present, assisted by Moniseur de Turenne, Monsieur
de Trimouille, and other Gentlemen of his house and Council, as in a manner
there is not any Province in France, wherein this religion has not purchased
some acres of land, and by that means there were Deputies from all places.

By whose advise and resolution, sprang the request presented unto the States
at Blois, The Protestants demands a Council.
under the name and title of the Frenchmen exiled for the religion, beseeching
the king to restore them unto the liberty of the first Edict, which from the
name of the month wherein it was published, was called the edict of January,
to ordain that a national Council might be assembled, where the Doctors on
both parts with good security, in presence of his Majesty and all the
assembly, might peaceably debatetheir differences and holily decide and resolve
upon the same, to grant them the free liberty of possessing their goods, for
supplying their necessities, and to permit the registring of their
supplication, together with the consenting thereunto, by his Majesty's
pleasure, to the end that nothing might be done in that assembly to prejudice
them.

This petition was badly framed at that time, as being wholly contrary to the
principal intent of that assembly, which being for the most part composed of
men, chosen and purposely taken out from among the most passionate aduancers of
the League, desire rather to destroy then instruct, such as had strayed aside,
and sooner to drown, then to wash the infected. And therefore not being
satisfied with the Edict of union (the right destruction of the Protestants)
they ceased not, until both from the king himself, and all the assembly, they
had procured a declaration of the perpetual disabilitie of the king of Navarre,
to the succession of the Crown. Yet their artificial poisons do not so fully
infect all the body of that assembly, and their minds were not in such manner
tied unto the opinions of the League, but that there were some persons, both of
dignity and reputation, that would not permit that the means should be taken
from the king, to reunite his subjects in one religion, seeing that the intent
of the Parliament ought only to tend unto a public peace, and therefore they
counseled him to procure a lawful Council against this schism of
conscience, which should be either universal, or national, a most sovereign
and assured remedy, proved heretofore against more pernicious herefies, then
these of our time, whereby the bodies of Commonwealths have bin purged of
their infected blood, and filled again with good and viguerous humors.

Chiections against the instruction asked by the king of Navarre.
Others, that commanded both the mind of the king and all the estates, said:
that truth once debated and determined, ought not to be brought in question
again: that it was no reason, that the apperite of some newters, that had
withdrawn themselves from the common society of the Church, to play their
parts alone, and to induce the madness of their evil timbered brains, should
seek to trouble all Christendom by assembling of a Council: the resolutions
whereof, can be no other then those at other times assembled, truth having
but one face. And therefore counseled his Majesty to provide that his
successor might be of no other religion then his own, and to assure all his
Catholicques therein, that feared nothing so much, as the establishing of the
King of Navarre, in the succession of the Crown of France.

The king had promised by his Estict, to take an order touching his successor,
but at that age wherein he lived, and in the young and lusty years of the
Queen his wife, he hoped that God would bless him with some masculine line,
that might avoid the difference of those ambitious persons. And therefore he
took no pleasure to hear any speech of that which in his mind seduced to
imbase his authority, and to make his grave before he was dead. For that
as soon as a Prince has declared who shall be his successor, his testament is
made, and then in his Realm, he is accounted but as the sun that goes down,
every man casting his eyes upon him that shall succeed. It was a capital
offense in Rome, to seek to know what should be done after the death of the
Emperor: and the Emperors of Turkey cannot endure the sight of the children
their successors, but send them far from the Court, and never see them but
when they are first borne, or else when they are circumcised. There are diverse
well governed and peaceable Monarchs, wherein such are punished as are over
serious to inquire what may happen after their Kings death.

The Parliament holden in England, 156^.
The Parliament of England, that solicited the Queen to nominate her successor,
among those houses that aspired thereunto, received no other answer from her,
but only that she was of opinion, that they sought to make her grave before
she was dead. And to cut off such seditious curiosities, she caused an Act to
be made, that no man should presume to speak or dispute of the succession of
her kingdom. Ne quis assirmet vel existimet vel coniectet cui nam regnandi ius
debeatur.


The death of king Francis the first. 1547.
The jealousy of him that is to succeed is incredible, and so much
distrustful, that the father cannot endure the hope of his son: the gold of
this History is too weak, therein to place the Oriental pearls, which I
find in so many notable discourses, that are made concerning this last motion,
he that wrote the free and excellent discourse (so called) rehearses this
domestical example of our kings, that the great king Francis being weak and
sick, in his Castle of Fontainbleau, about the beginning of the month of May,
in the same year that he died, his disease increased so much, that they
esteemed him either dead, or that he would not long continue alive. Whereupon
all the Court in great haste ran to seek the Dauphine, prince Henry, who for
the same jealousy of succession, durst not come in his fathers presence for
the space of six or seven years before, in such manner, that most of all the
chief Courtiers had left the king, every man going to worship that new son.
Mean time, the king recovered his health, and his disease being somewhat
cured, there was a Procession to be made, which is yearly observed with great
solemnity through out the Realm of France, against which time, the old King
rose up, and came out of his chamber, his face and hairs dressed and combed,
not as if he had neither been sick nor aged, withal, putting on certain
youthful garments, and in that sort was present at the processions: and being
returned, he used this speech: I will once again put them in fear before I
die. And it was true, for suddenly the chance turned, for that as soon as the
news was spread abroad, that the king had recovered his health, all the
Courtiers by degrees repaired unto him, much abashed and in great fear: and
then the Dauphine for his part was left as naked without company, as his father
had been before. There the king showed himself like a king, and so he ought
to behave himself like a king.

Non legiones, non classes perinde sunt firma imperii munimina vt numerus
liberorum. Tacit.
But to the contrary, the king not only permitted a conference touching the
succession, but suffered his subjects to rise up in arms for the trial
thereof, and that before all the assembly, there should be a proposition put
forth, touching the excluding of the lawful successor. Is not this as much as
if they should compel him to make his testament, and to strive as though he
were at the point of death?

Wherein you may behold the extremities of the League, that seeking to
overthrow the estate, would beat down the supporters, with all the Princes of
the blood, who being alive, it is vain for them to seem to lay hold on the
tree, or once to dig the mine of their pretenses, for neither arms nor
fortresses do so well defend and maintain an estate, as the number of children
of the Princes family, which is the means to break a perpetual order of
succession, as long as they live, choking the ambitious hopes of such as would
over throw and subvert it. Then the League can never attain unto the end of
their course, nor their forces remove the Crown of the branches of Valois and
Bourbon, to the house of Vaudemont, if first they procure not the degrading of
all Saint Lewis race.

Propositions made the fourth of November. 1588.
The king to please the inraging appetites and desires of the League, consented
they should determine of that which the greatest part of the league had alrea
die resolved: which was the condemnation of the king of Navarre: it was first
debated among the Clergy, where by them, without great resistance, it was
determined, that this Prince should be hold for an hereticque, and their
leader a Relaps, excommunicated, deprived of the government of Guyenne, and of
all his honors, unworthy of all successions of Crowns and royalties: which
they appointed to be signified to the rest of the estates: the Archbishop of
Ambrun, the Bishop of Bazas, the Abbot of Citeaux, and other Ecclesiastical
persons, opened their intent unto the Nobility, and the rest of the estates:
who altogether entered into conference, touching the waightinesse of that
action: and conforming themselves unto the first advise of the Clergy, they
appointed twelve of each degree, to give the King intelligence of their
determination, and the Archbishop of Ambrun in the name of all the estates,
opened it to the King. But his M. remembering that the king of N. had often
showed him, that he had bin born and bred up in that form of religion, that in
conscience he could not leave it without instruction: that if he did it in hope
or despair of enjoying a kingdom, he should thereby reap the blasone of
inconstancy, infidelity, and hypocrisy, thereby not to make himself capable
to be a king, but rather unworthy for the place: that he was ready, and
always will be, to be instructed by a free and lawful Council, and to leave
his error, truth being made known unto him, found this proposition very strange
and passionate, wherewith he rested wholly unresolved. Such as prefer the
hopes and right of succession in this Prince, showed him, that the submission
he had made, The king of Navarre, in hope of a Crown wilt not be instructed. A
discourse taken out of an answer made by the king of Navarre. The Edict of the
liberty of conscience, in an. 15^1.
and which he still continued to make during these troubles, are full of
justice and all good consideration, because he does not willingly defend any
thing, but that only which honor and zeal of conscience forces him unto: that
the law of this Realm depriueth not a child of a direct or collateral
succession, because of religion: why then should it deprive a Prince? The law
admits all persons indifferently into any office, and why should it not do ye
like in an estate? The law permits every man the exercise of his religion,
and excludes no man, why then should the Prince be debarred from this
privilege? and the Prince that makes it, why should he be burt hened in his
conscience, in the thing specially that touches him most near? it being he
that gives liberty unto others: I say the law of this estate, for it is the
law whereby we live in peace: that is, to restore this estate unto her first
being, and thereby to withdraw it from continual misery. A law made and
determined at the Parliament holden in Orleans, not a forced Parliament, not
suspicious, not leagued by the devises and subtle practices of such as at this
day trouble the Realm of France: and which is more, a Parliament summoned by
themselves, in the time of their greatest credit, and namely at their
instance, which from that time hitherto, we never desired to infringe, until
we were constrained to enter into civil wars, and when I speak of civil
wars, under that word I think may well comprehend all sorts of calamities
and confusions: a law that is very just, as being most necessary: a law,
which at this Parliament is not allowed, for that the reuocation thereof, is
our destruction: a law judged: a law sworn unto by all the Princes,
Governors, Lieftenants, Councillors, Courts of Parliament, Presidents,
Towns, and communalties of this Realm, and by those namely, who at this day
would protest against it. And yet he remitteth mitteth the deciding of the
cause of religion to a free Council, and til then, no man in this estate can
be esteemed or holden an hereticque, and whosoever submits himself unto
it, by all right cannot be said or reputed for an obstinate or schismatic que
person.

The king would they should summon the King of Navarre.
The King provoked by these reasons, thought it unreasonable to condemn the
king of Navarre, before he answered for himself, and therefore made answer
unto the Lords and other Deputies, that it should by to see if that were good
and expedient, to summon him once again to swear unto the Edict of union, and
so to declare himself a Catholicque.

The League would not hear of that advise.
This answer made by the King, was showed unto the estates, and by them a
collection was made, of all the means that had the king of Navarre unto the
Church, the absolution which the Cardinal of Bourbon his uncle had obtained
for him, his Relaps into his errors: that he had abiured the voyages made by
the Queene-mother, to seek to win him: the Doctors whom the king himself
(desirous of his conversion and his good) had sent unto him, and the
excommunication pronounced against him in the Consistory of Rome.

They set down the pains due unto hereticques, as also to such as are
relapsed: they accused this Prince to be both the one and the other, nourished
and brought up from his infancy in that new and erroneous opinion, and that
being such a person, he was not worthy eytherof respect or obedience, no
not of so much honor, as once to be saluted: that they might not communicate
with him by any means: that there is an eminent danger of the loss of
religion, and that it would be put in great hazard, if once they should
acknowledge him for their king, who both by his power and example, might easily
compel his subjects to yield to his religion, finding nothing more assured nor
certain, in all ancient Histories, then the decay and ruin of religion, when
the chief Magistrate sought not to preserve it in all purity.

Hereticum ho minem deuita. Nee aue dixeritis illi. 1. Tim. 3. John 2.
They said the King of Navarre held the same opinon, that had already been
condemned in the Council of Trent, and by other Councelles, that he
perseuered therein, and that having oncereiected it, he received it again,
and thereby constrained the holy Sea of of Rome to declare him a Relaps,
excommunicated, and incapable of the succession of this Realm: concluding
thereby, that he ought by that assembly to be declared such a person, and to
leave this law for a perpetual memory unto the Realm of France: that an
hereticque may not enjoy the Crown of France, and that it is a thing wholly
against his sacrying, and the oath which at his coronation he should make, but
much more prejudicial unto the honor of God, and the good and quietness of
this estate.

The law to hear such as are accursed, is not civil and particular, nor
observed in one or two Commonwealths, it is a law drawn from nature it
self, and the common consent of all nations, practiced by those who for their
guide have had a true and perpetual reason in all their actions, and it
seems that God himself, to whom all the secrets of men's consciences are
open, that knows all things, that has no need of humane witnesses, nor yet
to follow the order or manner of a Parliament, would not pronounce his
definitive sentence against the ingratitude, felony, disloyalty, pride, and
presumption, of the first man Adam, before he had called him to judgment,
examined, confirmed, and understood his reasons, The law to hear the accused.
leaving this infallible doctrine unto us, that we must not condemn any man,
how grievous an offender soever he be, before we have heard him, and well
examined his cause: it was the natural equity of this law, that caused
Sicynius to oppose himself against the decree of the Tribunes, pronounced
upon Cariolanus, condemned without being heard: this reason moved the
Ambassadors of Etrurie, to persuade themselves that the Romans would grant
them the repeating of Tarquinius Superbus, because he had been banished,
and never heard speak in his own defense, and that great author of Roman
eloquence, complains that he had been banished, without offense, without
accuser, without witness, and without permitting him that liberty, which is
never refused to enemy nor slave. And he it was that cried out against
Verres, saying: Crimen sine accusatore sententia sieve consiliio damnatio sieve
defensione.
that in condemning his host Sthemius Termitanus without hearing him, he had
forced and violated nature. And this misgouernment of condemning men being
absent, was never induced but by the outrageous envy of Tyrants, against the
common tranquillity of their countries, it was never practiced but by those
furious Donatists, that deposed Cicilia from his Bishoppricke of Carthage, he
being absent: and the holy fathers of Rome have always detested this
practice. Liberius says plainly and boldly unto Constant, that he would never
sign to the bannishment of Athanasius, as being extreme injustice to condemn
a man, that has neither been summoned, nor once heard to speak for himself.
Innocent the first, excommunicated Arcadius and Eudoxia his wife, because that
without inquiring of the matter he had condemned Chrysostom. Pope Clement
blasoned and reproved the Emperor Henry, because he had bereaved Robert of
his Kingdom of Sicile, and proclaimed him traitor, without hearing his excuse.

The King of Nauarres answer.
It may be, that if the King of Navarre might have been heard to speak, he
would have given them to understand, that the Pope had been deceived, or
seemed in declaring him to be an hereticque, obstinate, and relapsed into
heresy, he would have said, that he never knew nor understood, that there
should be any other truth, then that wherein the Queen his mother had
brought him up: it is true, that after the massacre committed upon Saint
Bartholomews day, he was constrained to use time as occasion then fell out, and
to submit himself unto their tyrannies: The king of Nauarres mind was not
free in Anno. 1572.
but so much against his mind, that as soon as without danger he might once
make it known that his conscience was at liberty, he showed thedesire he had
to be instructed, and to submit himself to the free and lawful judgment of
a national Council within the Realm of France, he wrote to all the degrees
of France, both Clergy, Nobility, Parliaments, and common people, that he
had nothing more lively imprinted within his mind, then a desire to see the
reunion and reduction of the service of God under one kind of religion: and
therefore that he could not be called a Relaps, for that to be such a
person, he must first have been condemned and judged as an hereticque: that
he had publicquely abiured his error, and then received into the Church, and
that he had returned again unto his first heresy. But now he is the man
that never had been accused of heresy, nor never abiured the opinion which at
this day he holds, for that as soon as he found convenient means to depart
out of the Court, wherein he had bin stayed by the accusations that his enemies
made against him, unto king Charles the ninth, he retired into his country of
Bearne, where he made it known, that he had no other belief, then that which
he had always holden: nevertheless, as often as the king desired to have him
united to the Catholicque, Apostolicque, and Roman Church, he always desired
to be instructed, and to the same end, that it would please his Majesty, to
be a means to assemble a free and lawful Council of the universal Church,
or else to call a national Council of the Church of France: submitting
himself to all discipline, and to the free and lawful judgment of that holy
assembly: which his Majesty acknowledging to be most requisite, The king of
Navarre, first king of all Europe, next to the king of France.
granted both to him and his partakers by the Edict of pacification, made in
Anno. 1577. These reasons being neither presented, nor considered of by thec
largie, the most affected to the aduanceme^t of ye league, executed their
pleasures upon one of ye greatest Princes in Christendom upon the first prince
of ye blood: yea, and the first child of ye most and ancient famous family,
bearing Crown within this world, which ye heavens borne and brought forth
capable to command over France, when God shall see his time, and to deprive him
of the right, that nature had affoorded him, without summoning or once hearing
what he could allege unto the contrary: So that in the end, the kings advise
to cause him to be summoned to swear unto the Edict of union, was found to
be without reason, and the Clergy resolved that he neither can nor ought
any more to resist. This conclusion was borne unto the Nobility by the Bishops
of Chaalons and Champaigne: and to the third Estates by the Bishop of
Comminges: the Archbishop of Ambrun, companion of the 12. of each order that
were appointed thereunto, declared the States minds unto the king, which was
not to use other means to summon the king of Navarre, and that his heresy and
incapacitie to the Crown were sufficiently known.

But if the king knows not three things, he knows nothing: he reigns
without reigning: he cannot defend himself, his family, nor the peace. He
suffers himself to be bereaved of the inseperable quallities belonging unto
his person: that is, power and authority: he suffers them to declare those
of his family to be unworthy of succession: he permits them to take
away the peace and tranquillity of his Realm, to give it unto his enemies: so
that to this proposition of the League, he answers, that he would satisfy
the Deputies reasons, and resolve upon them.

But while they were busied to band themselves against a Prince capable of the
Crown of France, and issued from the royal branch of Bourbon, upon the which
family, God has bestowed more particular blessings, then upon all others of
the same tree and lineage: as Aniou, Alencon, Eureux, Berry, Bourgongne,
Angoulesme, Orleans, and Valois, that are all gone and extinct. God suddenly
entered upon the Theater, and showed that his judgments are wholly contrary
unto the judgments of men, and that his spirit moving eternally, works
continually to his glory, and that he can change the minds of men, (when they
think least thereof) clean contrary to their desires.

For the king was advertised by all his servants, and such as made no account
of him, the Duke of Espernon by letters assured him, that a great conspiracy
was intented against his person. The Duke de Maine commanded a Gentleman to
show the king, that the Duke of Guise sought most ambitiously to climb above
the degree of a subject, that he practiced some secret matter contrary to his
Majesty's service, All this agrees with the Kings authority.
and that the execution thereof, would shortly be performed. The Duke of
Aumale sent Madame d'Aumale his wife, to show the king of a secret Council
holden under a prodigious attempt against his person

The King determined to put the Duke of Guise to death.
The kings heart by these aduises being stirred up with a new force and
liuelier courage, and minding to prevent the Duke of Guise, discovered his
intent to four of his friends, whom he knew to be as much affected to the
surety and welfare of his Majesty, as wholly estranged from the pernicious
Council of the League, and showed them, that he was fully resolved to quit
himself of the Duke of Guise, who as a new world, was already worshipped of
all the people.

Introductio^^ against the duke of Guise
They set before his eyes the register of this Princes actions, those specially
that offended the king and his estate, namely the edict of union, wherewith he
armed himself as with a target made of Diamonds.

Guise holding no other quallitie in France, then only of a mere subject, had
erected a League, raised men of war, practiced with strangers, without
authority, advise, or permission from the king, enterprised upon towns, and
troubled and broken public peace.

Morosin, and the Ambassador of Spain, assuring them, that he meant not to
leave off the good intelligence he had with their Masters.

France and others, thereby still to maintain the soldiers on his side,
against the service of the king.

in Picardie, he had impeached the advancement of the army that should have
passed into Guyenne against the Huguenots, and in all places exclaimed against
the Kings actions, esteeming him fitter to were a sack, then a Scepter.

France, and of their religion, and to impeach the succeson of the king of
Navarre to the Crown: and yet the King had been advertised by the said King
of Navarre, that the Duke of Guise had sought his favor so far, as that he
offered him his son in hostage, and that he, with seuenteen Princes of his
house, would come to visit him as far as the river of Loire, to do him
service, and to make him the greatest and peaceablest king of France that ever
was: the Bailiffe of the Mountains of Dauphine, and Monsieur de Bethune,
being employed in those affairs: and a great person of estate, that never
could endure such Petti-Maisters, after the king of Navarre having discovered
that this practice could not be for the good and quietness of this Realm,
advertised the Queen Mother.



Saluces was done by his advise, and that then when his Majesty complained of
that injury, and that it was requisite to continue peace in France, and to
make war against strangers, who in a brauado sought to dismember the estate,
he stood against it, and said they ought rather first to heal the interior
ulcer, then to enter into wars that any way touched the superficial evil.

Guise had constrained the King against his will, to make waarre against the
Huguenots, and that he had sold the Marquisat of Saluces, to the Duke of
Sauoy, to the end, that under pretense of recovering it again, he might
divert the wars from Guyenne.

Blois, upon assurance given them of a commodious change.

Lorraine.

Parris, persuading themselves, that as then he had mounted to the highest
degree of his greatness, said openly throughout his lodging, that it was no
time to make any more delays, (for such were their proper terms) and that
there rested nothing to do, but to conduct their Master to Reims.

Parris, as if it had been in a Town new conquered: that his Lacqueys had
more credit with the people, then his Majesty's principal servants: that he
boasted both by word of mouth and writing, that it was in his power to hold the
king, that is, to stay him prisoner, or else to use him worse.

Parris: and that he could arest the king, being in the middle of five or six
thousand men, and all of them the kings friends, and yet he entered into
Parris but with eight horse: he was so well assured of the good wills and
minds of the Inhabitants, that received him with the cries and open
reioycings, which only belong unto a sovereign Prince.

Parris, nor to dispose of the Bastille at his pleasure.

Blois, was wholly made to seal a contract of some new royalty: and that
already diverse said, that he made too long delay to execute his intent.





Romorantin, forbidding them not to administer victualles nor ammunition, to the
company of Monsieur de Souuray, and they had express commandment to send
unto him.



Charlemaine) to reestablish the greatness and usurped authority of the
ancient Majors of the Palace, to the end, the king should only bear the
name, and that he might deal with him, as Charles Martel did with Chilperic.

Some that were present at this Council, the more to stir up the kings mind,
by the ancient peril of an unrecoverable fall from his authority, to show
him, that his Majesty was to remember the dream he had before the League
began: which was, that the Lions and wild beasts, by him nourished in his
Castle of the Louure, devoured him, The kings dream or vision,
and that being moved with this vision, he had caused them to be killed:
and among the rest, one Lion being the most furious beast of them all.

Lastly, they put the King in mind of Salcedoes process, which had discovered
all the pretense of the Council holden at Nancy, the first article whereof,
was, to cease upon the Kings person, of the Council of five persons, holden at
Parris in the time of Lent, in An. one thousand five hundredth eighty seven,
wherein the Duke de Maine covertly inuayed against his Majesty: Of the
memorials taken about the Advocate David, of the letters sent by the Queen of
Denmark, to her son the Duke of Lorraine, which were found about the Abbot
of Billy coming from Rome, and withal, the attempt of the Barricadoes was not
forgotten, therewith to end their Council.

Considerations that stayed the kings mind.
But three things caused the kings mind to waver, and to stay long before he
resolved upon it: one, the respect of the Pope: the second, his oath made
touching the protection of the states: and the third, the troubles that this
execution would breed, by their means that favors the Duke of Guise.

Touching the first, it was showed him, that his holiness being advertised of
the Duke of Guise, at the erecting of the Barricadoes had ceased upon the
Bastille, and Bois de Vincennes, he said unto the Bishop of Parris, that the
enterprise was over bold, that it touched the estate, and that the offense
would prove unrecoverable. That his holiness had often written unto his
Majesty, that he should assure himself of the estates, what means soever
he made, and that in these so apparent dangers, there is no remedy
whatsoever, but it may be used: that he needed not to inquire if it were
lawful to be done, and that it was for the same cause, that his Majesty had
obtained a Confessor, by him to be resolved of all things touching or
concerning the holy Sea of Rome.

That the heads and authors of factions, are so odious unto Princes, (jealous
of the quietness of the estate) that therein they pardon not their own blood:
as king Philip, that pardoned not Charles his own son, that sought to
surprise the low Countries. And the Duke of Guise, when speeches were used
touching the disobediences of the Duke of Aniou deceased, had always this
example (of extreme justice) ready to produce: It is known why the Cardinal
of Caraffe was strangeled. Pope Sixtus at this day living in the first year of
his pontificates, put to death the Count de Pepoly, one of the most famous
families in all Italy, because he kept certain banished persons his kinsmen,
secretly in his house. In this Realm of France, John Earl of Harcourt, of the
blood royal of Scotland, Lewis de Luxembourg, Constable of France, Jacques
Count de la March, issued from the house of Castille, and diverse others of as
great quallitie and estate, as the Duke of Guise, have endured shameful ends,
because they practiced and made secret leagues with foreign Princes and kings.

Guise had borne arms for the religion, but after the Barricadoes once
erected, he believed it not, and although religion were the cause of the
wars, yet should it not be lawful without the kings authority. The example
is both good and memorable in the History of the king of Spain, called
Leoncilde, both an hereticque, and an Arrian. This Barbarian pursued the
Christians, and pardoned not his owneson, that had bin instructed and converted
unto Christian religion, by Leander Bishop of Tolede, he banished him out of
kingdom. This young Prince being moved at the miseries and persecutions of
the Christians in his country, Qui contra genitorem quamuis hereticum talia
cogitarer.
didtwise raise arms against his father: at the first he was overthrown and
sent into exile: at the second time, he was put to death, and slain upon
Easterday. S. Gregory Archbishop of Tours, in this example notes the effects
of the judgments of God, and condemns the boldness of this Prince, that The
king is not bound by oath nor obligation unto his subjects.
rebelled against his father, and his king, although both an hereticque and an
Arrian. Touching the oath which is the second consideration that stayed his
Majesty, and which is never broken nor neglected, but repentance follows, it
was told the King, that even as between the bondman and the Lord, there is
no obligation to be made, that there can be no strickt promise between the
subject and the Prince: that the promises made, are not to be observed: that
if faith be not to be holden with him, that cannot justly be called an
enemy, and that has no authority to make wars, (who by the law is termed
a thief or a rouer:) the Prince is not bound to keep his promise with a mean
subject, who by his rebellion has first violated his own faith unto his
Prince. Necessity has no law, we must use time as occasion serves: that
is, when necessity compels, and when men break their faith and promise. In
great assemblies, great examples of punishing rebels are done and executed:
as at the marriage of the Emperor Zeno, with the daughter of Ardaburis, where
the Bridegome was slain, Balisene and the Emperors father in law, committed
prisoners. The kings of England and Polonia, have often summoned Parliaments,
therein to take and surprise the Lords that had rebelled against them. Our
kings have arested them being at their bankets. These great motions have
always some extraordiry event, but necessity and public utility does
authorize them.

A league grounded upon the good will of the people.
The third objection of this unresolved resolution, was the great credit which
the Duke of Guise had gotten among the people: whereupon it was showed the
king, that as the said Princes part, had no other credit but among the
multitude of the common people, so there is no foundation more ruinous and
unstable. That the principal families in Towns, his Majesty's officers, the
governors and men of commandment will not stir, but only to cause the
people to arise, which will be altogether abashed, seeing him thrown down, that
was the principal of their rebellion, that the Courts of Parliaments in Parris
and Roane, the Town of Orleans being the Citadell of France, and Lions the
Bulwark of his Realm, would never change party, nor yet estraunge themselves
from the fidelity of good and true subjects. That the Duke of Guise is like a
great tree, that standing upright, and having a large root, causes the
branches to spring out, and the leaves to flourish, A comparison made upon the
death of the Duke of Guise.
but when it is lopped down to the bare body, as long as any sap is within
it, it will bring forth some small twigges, and a few pasle leaves, but if
the heat of the sun does once pearce it, that little sap that rests,
consumes, the tree dies, her leaves hang ready to fall off, because the
ridicall humor is wanting, and such as hid themselves under the shadow of
her branches are all discouerd. And because they perceived the K. ballancing
his resolution, toward ye rigor of his vengeance, such as feared least he
should alter his mind, that the opinion they had holde^ in this Council would be
discovered, assured him that the D. of Guise would first begin to unwind his M.
spindle: that he would surprise him: that it was already published within
Parris, that this year 1588. is the climaticall and last year of his reign:
that already it was determined how long he should be holde^ in a Cloister: The
pollitike and unlitary discourse of Monsieur de la Noue.
that the cizors had bin showed wherewith he should be shaue^ and put into a
Monastarie, like Childeric: that is was said, that a raisor should make the
last crown of the three, which the king expected. The king believed that the
life of the Duke of Guise would be his death, and therefore he was fully
resolved to rid him of his life.

Advise given the king to keep the D. of Guise in prison.
A Knight of both orders, thought it more expedient to keep him in prison, to
the end, that he might be judged and condemned like a traitor, but the rest
of the Council said: who will accuse, who will labor against him, who will
execute the judgment, among so many participants and friends, that will move
both heaven and earth to save his life? In matters of treason the punishment
must first proceed before judgment, as lightning comes before thunder: and
as this crime is altogether extraordinary in the head, the like is the form of
the punishment. We must leave the forms and manners of justice, Andronadorus
and Themistius slain.
to prevent and punish the culpable, and then at leisure to frame their
process.

The Senate of Siracuse, caused Andronadorus and Themistius, that sought to
renew the tyranny of Nero, to be presently slain by the hands of the
Magistrate himself. The Romans, being a Commonwealth so humane, so
polliticque, and so great an enemy to contrary actions, held it for a maxim,
that where the estate is in danger, men may begin to remedy by execution.
And therefore Cato in his Oration against Catilina, says: that we must rather
quit our country of a traitor, then consult what death he shall die, having
taken him. To put the Duke of Guise in prison, would be as much, as if we
should take a Bore in a net, that being over strong, would break the cords,
and which is to be feared, would spoil both the hunter and his hounds, all at
one time. When the serpent is slain, the poison has no more force. Incide
semel quicquid iucidendum est. Lips.
A dead man makes no more war, it is dangerous both to delay and to disclose
this counsel, and therefore punishment is more necessary, then the force of
justice.

The Duke of Guise was advertised from all places, that it would be dangerous
for him, to stay longer at the Parliament, but the more he entered into
distrust, the more the favors and unaccustomed kindness on the kings behalf
used toward him, stayed his intent: one of his principal Councillors told
him, that withdrawing himself from the Parliament, he should bear the blasone
to have abandoned the country of France in so important an occasion, that he
would easily loose his country, seeing he forsook it: that his enemies would
make their profit of his withdrawing from thence, and that they would overthrow
all that which with so much pain and pursuit had been procured for the
assurance of religion.

Want of providence in men.
It is strange, that men being at the point of their misfortunes, do
oftentimes loose al providence, wisdom, and judgment, to avoid the
mischief that is ready to fall upon them. There are certain birds which
foresee tempests, and know on what side the wind and storms will happen.
Rats forsake a house, that for want of reparation is ready to fall: but men
not only close their eyes against the mischief, but run headlong into the
middle thereof. The Duke of Guise was advertised from all parts both within and
without the Realm, that the Parliament would end with a bloody tragedy.

The day before his death, as he sat down at the table to dinner, he found a
little scroule of paper under his napkin, wherein was written, that he should
look unto himself, and that there would be some mischief wrought against him,
and in the same paper with his own hand he wrote two words, saying: (they dare
not) and so threw it under the table.

There was no other speech among the states, but that the execution should be
done upon Saint Thomas day, the aduises came both from Rome and Spain, the
Astrologians filled their Almanakes with threatenings: and the evening before
his mischief, the Duke of Guise was assured by the Duke d'Elboeof, that the
next day he should be slain.

But all this notwithstanding, he was so careless of his safety, that in a
manner he was wholly blinded, and forgot himself. He kept the keys of the
Castle, as being Great-maister, but the evening before his death, they fell
into his enemies hands, who thereby had the means to bring in those that ought
both to advance and execute the kings pleasure upon him.

The king in the mean time, that feared to be prevented, not minding any
longer to delay his purpose, thought to execute it at a supper, which the
Archbishop of Lions should make both him and the Cardinal his brother upon
the Sunday before Saint Thomas day, but he referred the execution until the
Tuesday following, the Duke of Guise having but small company with him in his
chamber, yet he let that day pass, and went to walk in his Garden, followed
by the Duke of Guise, who approaching his death, had certain speeches with the
king that much offended him, whereby he changed his collor into fury. And
after many words, both over hardy and bold, wherein he had been instructed and
counseled by Cardinal Morosin, he perceived, that all things proceeded from
evil to worse, and that the things which seemed curable, were become
incurable.

The king suspected the Duke of Guise, to use these speeches either to induce
him to bereave himself of his authority, and to give him all sovereign power,
or else to find some means of coffeehouse, that thereby he might break up
the Parliament, and so make his Majesty odious to his subjects: wherewith he
could not so much dissemble his displeasure, but that such as were present,
perceived well, that it would be the means to open the wounds that were
thought to be healed, he determined to stop the hopes and enterprises of this
Duke, with the price of his life, and no more to endure so many insolences and
braueries of the league, that esteemed it a title of honor to bear the name
of Guisart, and of infamy and dishonor to have the name of a servant to the
king.

The death of the Duke of Guise upon the 23. of December. 1588.
Upon Friday the three and twentieth of December, he sent for his Council,
and willed them to assemble somewhat sooner then ordinarily they used to do,
because he determined after dinner to go to Nostredame de Clery, which is
between Blois and Orleans, there to keep his Christmas. The evening before,
he had sent into diverse places, to assure such towns as he judged to be
most wavering, and provided for all things necessary, being in the middle of
so many seruitors of the League: and sent for certain of the five and forty,
to the number of seven, showing them, that he had endured too much at the
hands of the principal Ruler of the League, that he would no longer have a
Master, and that he had determined to put the Duke of Guise to death. The
order of the execution being devised, the Cardinals de Vandosme, de Guise,
and de Gondy, the Archbishop of Lions, the Duke of Guise, the Marshalles of
d'Aumont and de Rets, Monsieur d'O, Monsieur de Rambouillet, Princes, Prelates,
and Lords of the Council.
Monsieu de Maintenon, Monsieur Marcel, and Monsieur de Petremolle, came to sit
in Council: and the king had given order to shut the Castle Gates, as soon as
they were entered.

There is nothing that so much iniureth the truth of a History, as passion,
which makes man's judgment to yield which way it will, and causes him to
err, and to seek to disguise the truth.

Diversity and contrariety in Historians.
There is a marvelous uncertainty in the circumstances of this History,
whereunto every man gives what show and color it pleases him, and turns
the fairest side unto his passion, so that among so many varieties of
judgment, a man can hardly find a certain truth.

Some write, that as the Duke of Guises eye on that side his face where he had
the scarre, began to water, not finding a hand-cherchef in his pocket, he
desired Monsieur Otoman Treasurer of the house, that stood by him, to take the
pains to go to the chamber-doore, to see if he could find any of his Pages
or Lacqueys, and to command them to fetch him one, and that Monsieur de
l'Archan Captain of the guard, caused one to be fetched by Saint Prix, chief
Groom of the kings chamber.

Others say, that as the Duke of Guise stayed till all the Council were come,
The Duke of Guise was in a new suit of russ^^.
he talked with the Archbishop of Lions, who perceiving him to be in a new
suite, and that somewhat thin, said unto him, that the indisposition of the
time being cold and moist, required a warmer kind of garment, and that upon
those speeches his nose bled, he was a cold, he commanded one of the
officers of the Councel-chamber to make a fire, and one called Fontaine to
fetch him a hand-cherchef.

He that wrote the recuell of the third volume concerning the league, says:
that the Duke of Guise before he went out of the Councel-chamber, sent a Page
into his own chamber, to fetch him a clean hand cherchef, and that his
Secretary in one the corners thereof, tied a small note in writing, for an
advertisement unto the Duke his Master, withal speed to leave the Council,
otherwise it would cost him his life. And that the handcherchef was brought,
but not delivered, being taken from the Page, together with the note, as he
went up the stairs.

The Council being set, about eight of the clock in the morning, and
reasoning of that which Monsieur Petremolle had proposed: The Lord of
Pretremolle understands their agreements.
the Duke of Guise felt certain strange motions at his heart, with diverse
extraordinary passions, his spirit being the Prophet of his evil fortune that
ensued, and in that distrust he felt a weakness at his heart, wherewith he
willed the Usher of the Councel-chamber, to go to Saint Prix to fetch him some
preserved Lemons, and he sent him some prunes of Brignoles, and reisons of the
sun, whereof he eat, and put the rest into a cup, wherein they were
brought. With that, the King sent for him by Monsieur de Reuol, one of his
Secretaries, and as he went out of the Councel-chamber, to enter into the
kings lodging, and that he lifted up the Tapistrie to go in, he perceived
himself to be charged both with Rapiers and Poinyards, by five or six of the
five and forty, but they could not enter so fast upon him, but that he
defended himself till he made them drive him once about the chamber, minding
not to leave his life like a coward, thereby to show the last sign of his
invincible courage, that made him so much esteemed and as yet gives an
honorable memory of him, to all those that commend the valor of a valiant
courage. The same Collector of the proceedings of the league, turns the bias
an other way, with an over thorny and sharp judgment, and a balance too much
unequal, setting down this action contrary to the truth: for he reports it
in these words, saying: The Duke of Guise thinking to go into the kings
chamber, and issuing out of the Council chamber, into the entry that leads
to the kings lodging, redoubled his distrusts, and would have returned back
again, which nevertheless he did not.

And it had oftentimes been told him, that Monsieur de Longnac had
enterprised to kill him, in such manner, that he hated him, and had him in great
suspicion, and as he went toward the kings chamber, he perceived Monsieur de
Longnac sit upon a trunk, with his legs crossed, thinking verily he had
been there of purpose to assail him, (as showing to be moved with most
violent distrust and deep suspicion) and although the said Monsieur de Longnac
moved not, the Duke of Guise notwithstanding thought to run at him, and
laid hand on his rapier, being half drawn, as then having his cloak cast
about him like a scarf, which he used ordinarily to do, and his rapier under
his cloak, which by that means he could not so hastily pull out, but that
some of those that were in presence (perceiving him to be so bold at the kings
chamber door) prevented him. This is the advice of the Collector, the noise and
bustling among them was presently heard within the Councell-chamber, which made
the Archbishop of Lions to come forth, and went to knock at the chamber
door, where as then they had newly slain the Duke of Guise, and yet he came
time enough thither, to hear his last words.

The astonishment of the Cardinal of Guise.
The Cardinal of Guise was in a marvelous maze, his senses troubled, and his
courage abated, and as he sought the door to go out, he with the Archbishop
of Lions was arested by Monsieur de Larchan and his guard, that made conscience
to lay hands upon them, because of their order. They desired Monsieur de
Larchan to bring them into some chamber, that they might not be a wonder to
such as passed by: wherewith they were Iedde into a little chamber over the
kings lodging, made not long before, therein to lodge the Feuillans and
Capucins, where for a time they remained without either seat or fire.

The Cardinal of Guise could not cease by his words, to pour out the heat of
his passions and his greefes, and in that chollor spoke certain words, which in
a quiet and more sencible mind he would not have uttered, so that he renewed
the Kings fury, who therewith commanded la Bastier and Monsieur de Valence,
two of the five and forty, to kill him. The one refused the commission,
saying: that his hands should never be defiled with the blood of a man of the
Church. The other determined to execute the Kings pleasure, and being
accompanied with fix of his companions, he mounted up the stairs close to
the chamber door, where he was, there they stood disputing which of them
should begin, and as he thought to enter, he felt a certain motion that
stopped the heat of his fury, The imprisonment of the Cardinal of Bourbon.
and made him to godowne: presently after, the Duke of Guise was slain, the
king appointed a guard to attend upon the Cardinal of Bourbon, who as yet was
in his bed, and to stay Madame de Nemours, the Duke de Nemours, and the Duke
d'Al-boeuf.

The Prince of Iuinuille.
The memories of the League write, that the great Prior rose up, and went very
early to call the Prince de Iuinuille, to play a set at tennis, whereon they
had agreed the night before, and finding him in his bed, desired him to rise,
who being soon up, and speedily made ready, whether it were because the great
Prior was presently followed by certain of the guard, or otherwise, it is not
certainly known: he entered in distrust, and presently after, would have
forced a door that issued out of his chamber, and so have saved himself,
wherewith the guard took him.

And the great Prior perceiving by that means, that their set would not go
forward, he took his leave and departed: but the truth is, that when the
Duke of Guise was slain, the Prince Iuinuille his son was hearing Mass in
the Chapel of the Castle, and coming out from thence, as he thought to go up
the stairs to find the great Prior, with whom he had made a match to play at
tennis, he was stayed by the Archers, and seeking to defend himself, they
held him, and led him into the chamber of the great Prior. Mean time, the
Switzers were set to keep the Duke of Guises lodging, that no man might come
forth. Monsieur de Hautefort, Monsieur de Pericard chief Secretary, and
Monsieur de Barnardin, chief Gentleman of the chamber to the Duke of Guise,
were taken.

It is said that Pericard being brought to this extremity, either to speak
for life, or else confess for death, disclosed all the secrets of the League,
and wholly instructed the king of his Masters intent. Monsieur de Richelieu,
Marshall of the house, accompanied with his Archers, and certain soldiers of
the company of Mo^sieur de Gast, went into the Townhouse, where the third
estate were assembled, and there laid hands upon the President de Neuilly, the
Provost of Merchants in Parris, Compan and Corteblance, Sheriffs of the said
Town: Monsieur le Roy, Governor of the Town of Amiens: the Count de
Brissac, Monsieur de Bois Dauphine, and other Gentlemen affectioned to the Duke
of Guise, that were all arested, the rest stayed neither for boots nor
spurs, to get them thence, this accident being so fearful unto them.

Monsieur de la Chastre justifies himself.
The Duke of Guise had two principal servants, that were as disposers of all
his secret intents: the one, the Archbishop of Lions: the other, Monsieur de la
Chastre. The first was safe enough from any more troubling the king, but
touching the second, he had him in great distrust, by reason of the perfect
amity that he bare unto the Duke of Guise: but as soon as he had received the
news, he went presently to the Duke de Neuers in the army, under whom he
was Marshall, and said unto him: that although he had always been a servant
to the Duke of Guise, yet he still held and continued his faith constant unto
the King, and because the great amity he bare unto the Duke of Guise, might
cause him to be suspected by the King, he willingly yielded himself into the
Duke de Nemours hands, to justify his actions, and not long after, he went in
person to present himself unto the king, assuring him, that from that time
forward, to become his faithful servant.

Monsieur d'Antragues in all haste mounted on horseback, to assure the King of
the Town of Orleans: but there he found Monsieur de Roissieu, who Orleans
holden for the League.
the same morning had been the with D. of Guise, and perceiving the Guard to be
stricktlier disposed, then ordinarily they were, and knowing the kings
commandment, to shut the gates while the Council sat, he entered into a
marvelous apprehension of the cause, and presently departed out of Blois, to
take order for the Town of Orleans, sending express messengers in all have to
advertise the Duke de Maine his Master being at Lions.

The Queen Mother advertised of the Duke of Guises death.
The first thing that the king did, after he came out of his chamber, was to
bear the news unto the Queen his mother, to whom he said, that as then he
was absolute king, and that he had no more companions. She at the first was
strangely abashed, and said unto the king, that it would have fallen out hardly
for him, if he had not taken order for the assurance of the towns, where the
name and memory of the duke of Guise had credit and authority. Councelling
him by the Cardinal de Gondy, to advertise the Popes Legate: which done, she
went to visit the Cardinal of Bourbon that lay sick, and was kept prisoner.
And as soon as he espied her, with tears in his eyes he spoke unto her and said:
Ah Madame, you have brought us hither unto the slaughter. She that seemed to be
much abashed at so violent and unexpected change that then had happened,
assured him, that she neither had given consent nor advise to any such thing,
and that it was a most incredible grief unto her soul.

The death of the Queene-mother, upon the fifth of January, 1589.
But the Cardinal redoubling his complaints, she left him stricken at the heart
with so great grief, that presently she went to bed, and died therevppon, the
fifth of January after, much lamented by the king her son, who as yet had need
of her counsel. The king going out of his mothers chamber, went to hear
mass, where at large he informed the Legate of the causes that had
constrained him to put the Duke of Guise to death, as having attempted against
his person.

About evening, the Cardinal and the Archbishop of Lions, were taken out of
the chamber, wherein they had been shut, to lead them into an other, stronger
and darker then the first, in the highest part of the Castle. But sorrow and
grief had so much seized upon the Cardinal, that what apprehension of death
so ever he must have, he could not choose but sleep, as soon as he was laid
upon the mattresse prepared for him. After his first sleep his spirits
revived, and considering the extreme imbasing of his greatness, and the fall
of his house, he complained to himself of his misfortunes. The Archbishop of
Lions used all the means he could, to dissuade him from the thinking of any
other thing, then only of death, which he suspected to be the end of both
their persons. They employed all their Philosophy to make it seem easy and
less fearful, thereby to dispoyle it of the horrible and strange shape
wherewith it is figured unto us. They confessed themselves each to other,
reconciling themselves to God, committing their causes unto him, and in that
conceit of death, they only attended the commandment when and where they
should receive.

With that, the Cardinal had desire to sleep, until morning, that the
Archbishop of Lions rose up and left him sleeping, and not long after, he waked
him to rise to Martins. The king in the mean time was counseled, yea and
solicited by most violent reasons, to put ye Cardinal to death: which counsel
at the first Justice regards not the qualities of men.
seemed perilous unto him, considering the quallitie of that Prelate being a
Peer of France, Archbishop of Reims, Cardinal of Rome, and President of his
Order in the Parliament: but after he had been showed, that justice has her
eyes closed, not to behold the quallities of men, and that the greater
authority a man is in, the greater is his fault: that treason is more
apparent, and a worse example in a Cardinal, then in a simple Priest. That the
Cardinal of Guise would succeed in the credit of his brother, and that he had
already used threatening speeches, he determined to make him follow after his
brother the Duke of Guise, and therevppon commanded Monsieur de Gast, to kill
him, who excused himself of that commission, saying it was not a thing
convenient for a Gentleman of his calling. But in fine, for four hundredth
Crowns, they found four instruments to execute that commission. One of them
went into the chamber where the Cardinal sat, and making low reverence, told
him the king sent for him.

The Cardinal before he went, asked if he sent not likewise for the
Archbishop of Lions, but answer was made, that he only must come unto him,
whereupon with an assured countenance, that not seeming to think upon the
mischief that attended on him: about three steps within the door, he bad the
Archbishop of Lions farewell, who perceiving the Cardinal to go without any
apprehention of death, said unto him: Monsieur, I pray you think upon God: at
the which word, the Cardinal ceised with fear, was abashed, and turned his
head toward the Archbishop, who at that instant fell down upon his knees
before the Crucifix, recommending his soul unto God, believing steadfastly that
they would do the like to him that he supposed they meant to execute upon the
Cardinal, who being about three or four pases without the chamber, was
enclosed by four men, that with blows of rapiers, poinyards, and partisans,
dispatched him of his life, and being slain, they stripped him.

The King going to Mass, accompanied by the Cardinal of Vandosme and others,
met the Barron de Lux, who falling down on his feet, offered his head to save
the Archbishop of Lions his uncle. The king that loved the Gentleman, and that
desired not to loose such a Prelate, thinking by his means to attain unto the
Quintessence of the Leaguers devises, assured him of his life, but not of his
liberty.

Not long after, the king sent Monsieur Guiotard and Monsieur Languetot, two of
his privy Council, with a Clarke, to examine the Archbishop touching the
causes and accusations laid against the Duke of Guise. He said unto them, that
they being Laymen, had not any jurisdiction over an Archbishop, and that he
being such, might not answer unto them, desiring them not to trouble him any
more therein.

The answer of the Archbishop of Lions upon the Duke of Guises accusation.
They returned this answer unto the King, who presently sent the Cardinal de
Gondy, to persuade him to satisfy his commandment, and to answer to the
propositions that should be made unto him: the Archbishop answered him and
said: that he could say nothing against the Cardinal, nor the Duke of Guise
his brother, with whom he had embarked himself: that for his own person, he
neither could nor ought to answer before any man but the Pope, or to those
whom it should please him to appoint: and that as Primate of France, he had no
other Judge. And that that the Cardinal de Gondy himself being Bishop of
Parris, was under his primatie: that if the Cadinall Morosin, Legate for his
holiness (by the advice of other Prelates assembled in the parliament) thought
it convenient for him to answer, he would follow their resolution: and that so
doing, it should be they and not the Arch. of Lions, that should break the
Privileges and immunities of the church.

The king to the contrary esteemed, that considering the quallitie and
importance of the cause, he was not bound to have recourse unto the Pope, to
examine the truth of the Duke of Guises actions. It was showed him, The king
has power over Bishops.
that the privilege which the Archbishop demanded, much derogated the
sovereignty and power of his Majesty, who at all times had jurisdiction over
the Bishops of his Realm, specially in things touching the Crown: and when
process was to be made against Giles Bishop of Reims, and Didier Archbishop of
Vienne, the king used the help of the Bishops of France, and had no recourse
unto the Pope: Chilperic sent Pretextatus Archbishop of Roane, to the Council
holden in Parris, to be judged by them, but with this clause: (Although that
of our own authority we could deal therein, it being treason for the which
he is accused, nevertheless, Gregory de Tours, Atmon Ado, Vincent.
because it concerns our own person, to the end it shall not be thought,
that we will do otherwise, then by justice and reason, we give you leave to
deal therein. The Emperors themselves, never remitted the examination of
causes that touched the estate of their Empire, unto the long and solemn days
of the Popes Council. The Emperor Zenon condemned and bannished two Bishops,
the one of Alexandria, named John, the other of Antioche, named Calendion:
Euagriu^s lib. 4.
whereat Pope Simplicius was offended, and for the same cause wrote unto the
Emperor, who made him answer, that the execution was not done for any
Ecclesiastical crime, neither yet touching religion, but that one of them had
lied in his own presence: and the other favored Basiliscus his enemy. And
good Popes never sought into that jurisdiction, whereby to pervert the order of
polliticque laws. Saint Gregory admonished Victor and John, C. experientiae
ca. sequ. 11. q. 1.
Bishop of Taurese, (which as the^ was the Metropolitan Church of Dalmatia,
founded by Justinian, in the Town by him called Justinian, after his own name)
to cause two Bishops that had troubled the state of Aquilee and Millan, with a
good guard and all speed to be led unto the Emperor: and such was the
institution of the fathers, assembled in the first general Councels of
Constantinople under Theodose, and in that of Carthage, to remit
Ecclesiastical causes to the judgment of the Clergy, Pauliuus Bishop of
Aquilee.
but the persons to the temporal Magistrate, when it is a crime, the
punishment whereof, depends not upon the authority of the Ecclesiastical
Judge, and is to be otherwise ordered, then by Ecclesiastical and Canonical
censures: It is true, that the ordinances of France, full of respect and
reverence toward the church, have induced ye Concorda^ce of the spiritual and
the temporal Judge, when the cause depends upon privilege, and ordain that
the process should be jointly made, to the end, Co^currance of the spiritual
and temporal Jurisdiction.
that if the offender be found guilty, he should be degraded, according to the
prescript order and ordinance of the cannons, and then sent to the secular
power to be condemned to death, or other punishment according to his offense,
but where it concerns the Commonwealth, surety and preservation of an
estate, it is not the manner to follow the ordinary course, thereby to avoid a
great disorder, and the extreme necessity to provide things present, ought
not to be restrained unto the long detractions of the Romish Courts.

The king provoked by these reasons, after he had let the Archbishop rest in
prison for the space of fifteen days, with resolution to refuse all the
Judges that should be sent unto him, but such as were appointed him from Rome,
sent the Bishop of Beauuais, and Mousieur Ruze his Secretary, to certify his
pleasure unto him: which was, that he should answer to the Articles by them
to be propounded unto him, wherein they persuaded him, not to deny the King,
that had not refused to grant him pardon of his life.

The Archbishop of Beauuais.
The Archbishop asked the Bishop of Beauuais, in what quallitie he had taken
that charge upon him, framing an argument consisting in two points. Asking him
if he came thither as a Bishop, or as a Peer of France: It as Bishop, he said
he could not examine him, he in that point being his superior: If as a
Peer of France, it was a temporal office, and therefore he could not
answer, nor the Bishop examine, saying: You have been in the Courts of
Parliament, where you never saw process framed against a simple Priest,
without the consent of his superior: I thank God, I have red what authority
and privilege belongs unto the Church, and cannot believe, that the King in
any wise is minded to infringe it, nor yet to begin with me, and seeing he
has granted me my life, he means likewise, that my conscience should be
at liberty, the honor and respect whereof, is dearer unto me then a thousand
lives. The Bishop of Beauuais perceiving that he could not effect his charge,
withdrew himself: the Archbishop desiring him to acquaint the king with his
reasons, and to beseech his Majesty, that he might be comforted by some
religious persons, and to have Mass within his chamber. Which the Bishop of
Beauuais certified unto the King, who made answer, that he would put the
Archbishop in such a place, where he should have both religious persons, and
Masses as many as he would desire. In the mean time, upon advise given unto
him, that the great blow which he had given the league, had not in such manner
astonished it, The rising of Parris.
but that already diverse of them began to rise and to levy arms, he had
recourse unto his first remedies, and to that dangerous maxim, by him usually
observed, as never doing any thing but by halues. And while he sent tongues,
and not arms, therewith to retain the people so well prepared unto sedition,
he found the town of Orleans to revolt, both against him, and Monsieur
d'Antragues, Orleans is declared against the Citadel and the Governor.
Governor of the Citadell, that the Town of Parris had already showed the
beginning of their mutenie against his Castle of Louure, his arms, and his
servants. But the contentment he had received, to see his enemy dead, made
him so careless, touching the rest of his affairs, that in stead of mounting
on horseback, to show himself to those of Parris and Orleans, and to send
for the army in Poitou, therewith to stop the passages and forces of the Duke
de Maine, he contented himself to publish a forgetting and remitting of
things past, and renewed the Edict of union, thinking that the Catholicques of
the League, The Kings declaration touching the things past, upon the 23. and
24. of December.
would lay down their arms raised against their king, to employ the same
against the King of Navarre.

In his declaration he says, that at all times (and especially since his
Edict made in the month of July last) he had assayed by all means possible, to
unite all his good Catholicque subjects, in peace and concord under his
authority, by the same union and the effects thereof, to reap the fruit by
him always expected, and sought to purge his Realm of heresies, therein
wholly to establish the faith and Catholicque religion, foreseeing that by the
division of his said subjects, there could rise nothing but a total desolatio^
of religion and ruin of his estate: that although for ye space of certain time,
there had bin some about him that most manifestly practiced in his presence, and
elsewher by their adherents, to renew and raise division, to cause his actions
to be disliked, and wholly to suppress his authority, nevertheless, with
great patience and calamity, he had tolerated the effects of the evil will
in those respects appeared to be in them, assaying by all the favors and
courtesies he could devise, to mollify their hearts, and to draw them unto
those things that concerned reason, with the good and profit of his estate, and
the conservation of religion.

That this notwithstanding, they not being dissuaded from their pernicious
devises, by the aforesaid effects of his good and holy intents, neither yet by
any other considerations, his Majesty had discovered that they had proceeded
so far, as by new inventions to enterprise against both him and his estate.

That to withstand the same, to his great grief he had bin constrained to
prevent their sinister dealings: but that for the singular love and good will
natural in him, and which he has always continued, and will continue unto
his said Catholicque subjects, with like care of the quietness, safety, and
conservation of their lives, as much as any father toward his children. He
had therein used so much clemency and moderation, that he had restrained and
laid the pain and punishment only upon the heads and authors of the evil,
sparing their adherents and servants, and favorably received and admitted them
among the rest of his good subjects, upon promise by them made, from
thenceforth to become his true and faithful subjects.

That although, not only by his actions past, as by this last proceeding, he
has given and declared by evident testimonies, of his holy intent and
clemency, that no man ought to doubt: nevertheless to make it more manifest
to all his subjects, his Majesty declares and protests, that this which
has happened, has been effected by reason of the preuentions used against
his Edict of July, and since that time.

And in the execution of that which is contained therein, his will and meaning
is, to keep and cause it to be kept, and to observe and maintain it from
point to point for a law, as it has been established and sworn in the
Parliament, according to the form and tenor thereof.

Forgetting and wholly remitting, all whatsoever is or has bin done against
duty and fidelity, by those that have participated in the said practices,
upon condition, that hereafter they shall depart and wholly forsake all
leagues, associations, practices, devises, and intelligences, with all persons
whatsoever, both without and within the Realm.

The practices against the Edict of union, whereunto the King refers the
cause and motion of the death of the Cardinal and the Duke of Guise, are
specified in the treaty written, concerning the troubles that ensued this
execution.

Causes of putting the D. of Guise to death.
The first, that as soon as the edict of union agreed upon within the City of
Roane, was published in the Parliament House, the principal heads of the
League, in stead of causing their partakers to leave their arms, had
entertained them with further hopes and means, contrary to the Edict sworn,
summoning them to be in a readiness to effect a great exployt. The second,
that they had determined to seize upon the Kings person, and to co^strain him
to dismiss his Council, whom they thought to be most faithful unto him, and
least affected to the advancement of their intents, and to bereave him of his
authority, yea and of the name of a king.

The third, their practices, leagues, and devises, to break the liberty of
the Parliament, and to hinder them from consulting with the king, touching the
good of his estate, and the quietness of his people, having a great number of
the Deputies so much affected to their pretenses, that they never assembled,
before they had first consulted with the Council of the Duke of Guise,
touching their aunsweres, propositions, and resolutions.

The fourth, the fained persuasions devised against the good intents of the
king, to dissuade him from the easing of the long oppressio^s of his people:
the Duke of Guise on the one side, counselling him not to imbase his authority
so much, as to deprive himself of the means to maintain the glory of his
Majesty royal, by reducing the tallages to a lower rate then was convenient:
and on the other side, he persuaded and pricked forward his participants to
crave it, by that means to make his Majesty odious among them, by refusing
the easing of his peoples oppressions, or else to force him thereunto.

The sift, the confirmation of the treaties and confederacies made with
foreign Princes, as the king of Spain, the Duke of Sauoy and Lorraine, and
the five small Cantons, the leagues and intelligences with diverse Lords and
Governors of Towns and Provinces within the Realm, all contrary to the Edict
of union, which they had sworn and promised so religiously to observe. A great
person in our time, in the second part of the History of the League, Vulgus
audacia turbidum nisi vim metuat. The second discourse of the state of France.
notes the unrecoverable fault of the king after that action, that busied
himself to justify his pretense, and to flatter the people, who by lenity
become obstinate, and by severity are constrained. This great tree ouerthrown
(says he) such as shadowed themselves thereby, were for a time discovered: and
without doubt the Duke of Guise himself was all the League, he only had more
parts and valor, then all his participants together. And if the king had been
resolute to go forward with his actions, and not to do them by halues, as his
manner was, and if within two hours after the act performed, he had mounted on
horseback, and so had added his presence and his forces unto the fears of the
towns that held with the League, abashed at that great accident, it is very
likely he had avoided the mischief which after fell upon him. But God that
derided the vain enterprises of the one, mocked the remedies by the other
provided. This Prince, who nevertheless wanted neither judgment nor courage,
had no sooner perceived his enemy dead, put presently persuaded himself to
have no more in all the world, and certainly being among his familiars, he used
this speech, saying: This day I am king, and yet to the contrary, from that day
forward his royal estate begane to decline. Incauta semper nim^^ presumptio
and sui negligents. Egesippus.
This presumption caused him to be so careless in his affairs, that he lost
Orleans, which he might have saved by showing himself unto it: and that he
suffered the D. de Maine to come and fortify himself with men and munitio^: he
laughed at those ye moved him with all diligence to send for his army that lay
in Poitou: he was offended against such as counseled him at the same time to
use the aid of the king that now is, and of the Huguenots: and to conclude, so
much despised all things, (which nevertheless within one month after, he was
constrained to do) that within six weeks, he perceived himself to be
reduced, only to the Realm of Tours, Blois, and Baugency.

The fourth of January, 1589.
And so after the death of those two Princes of Lorraine, and the imprisonment
of the rest that were most suspected, despising all the advice given him to
enter first into the field, and that doing so, he should have a great
advantage upon his enemies, he commanded the estates to proceed with the
Parliament. They presented him the bills of the three estates, and again the
third time, the Edict of union was published by Monsieur Ruze, and sworn by
his Majesty, with most solemn protestation to observe and cause it to be
holden for a law of the Realm.

The king of Nauar understands of the death of the Duke of Guise, the 26. of
December. Lachrymas non sponte cadentes effudit genitusque expressit pectore
lato.
His Council besought him to reiourne the Parliament until an other time, but
he was so much affected to hear and determine upon their bills, that he
forgot both the care of his person and estate, and would not leave off the
assembly, until he heard that the Duke de Maine was already before the
subburbes of Parris, and that he went to aid Orleans, with all those with
whom he had practiced to revenge the deaths of his two brethren. The king of
Navarre received the news of this execution, being at Saint John d'Angely, by
two Posts expressly sent from Blois on horseback, to certify him thereof.

And he that was never found to be void of great modesty, in his most
haughty enterprises, nor yet without constancy in all the greatest crosses
which both time and men had wrought against him, bewailed not so much the
death, as the evil fortune of the house of Guise, it is the nature of those
that are most couerteous, not to behold the head of their enemy, but with a
sad and sorrowful eye. Antigonus bewailed Pyrrus: Caezar Pompey: Rene duke of
Lorraine: Charles Duke of Brurgongne: and the Earl of Montfort, Charles Earl
of Blois. It is true, that he knew this accident would be a great help
touching his justification, that thereby he was discharged from being cause
of the mischief of civil wars, and that the king having judged and found
the Duke of Guise to be most culpable touching the troubles of the estate, had
punished him according to his desert. He said that all the world (he only
excepted) imagined mischief of the house of Lorraine, and would be glad to see
the indignation, declarations, and forces of the king his Lord, bent against
them. But for his part, he could not do it, neither yet does it, but only
that of two evils, he is constrained to choose the least. Yet did he not
refrain to pursue his enterprise against the Town of Niort, which was in this
manner: The troops that were to execute the same, under the conduct of Mousieur
de S. Gelais, giving forth that they went for Congnac, by night marched within
half a mile of the town, the lathers and other warrelike amunitions, passing
about a bowe-shot from the walls: and because the moon shined very bright,
they were forced to stay till it was down, least the assaylants should be
discovered, who in the mean time slept upon the Ice, wearied with long
travel and troublesome way. The taking of Niort.
The execution being followed in convenient time, Messieurs de Ranques,
Valiers, and Gentil, having founded the ditches, caused their lathers to be
brought, and other instruments, Wherein valor consists.
near unto the gate which they meant to assail, I would desire such as shall
read this point, to consider and note, that notable enterprises are not
executed without good order and discretion, and that the honor of arms
consists not in strength, wherein many beasts have great advantage over us,
nor in that kind of furious assault, which is more natural to beasts then
men: neither yet in the hearts of the Actors, which go where blind conductions
leads them, but in the good order and policy established by the Leaders.
The approaching of those that bare the lathers, was not so secretly done, but
that the Sentinel heard some noise, and presently cried: Quivala. Whereat if
the assaylant had either been fearful or troubled, the enterprise had bin
discovered, and so have lost their labors. But they stayed, and stood so
quietly, that the Sentinel himself answered to the Corporal and said: I
heard a noise, but I perceive it is nothing, and upon that, the lathers being
artificially made to join together, were raised against the walls, about six
and thirty or forty foot high. Scaling Lathers set up. Galeati lepores.
Liuius 28.
By this escalado the Sentinel was surprised and thrown over the wall, and
then the Court of guard, wherein they found but seven or eight poor artificers
(for that commonly within Towns, the rich do watch by the eyes of the poor)
that saved themselves because they should make no noise.

And although it had been determined to let as many of their men mount up by
lathers, as possibly they might, it chanced nevertheless, that one of the
small number that had entered, perceiving himself in some peril, cried unto
the engenier, and thought to spoil all their enterprise: for that cry made an
alarm among all the Inhabitants, and served to the engeniers for a watchword,
to play with their Ensigns: being before the Rauelin, which made an ouerture
of the gate, and at that instant, the Engine wrought against the bridge of the
Town, which brake but two plankes of the bridge, and so the gate opened in two
parts, the entry of the bridge was very straight, where one man alone could
hardly get in, and yet he must descend by one of the lathers into the ditch,
and then with the same lather go up to the entry of the bridge, two men well
armed had been sufficient to have kept it against them all.

In the end, by means of that entry, and by their escalado, the first that
entered were Messieures de S. Gelais, de Rambures, and de Parabieries, who with
their companies, met hard by the Towne-house, where they began to cry, Viue
Navarre: and there among the people, being in fear, surprised, and abashed,
they found so small resistance, that in less then three or four hours the
assaylants entered, vanquished, and became Masters of the town, being put to
the spoil, and yet without murder, violence, or injury done unto the
Clergy, that were not once touched: the king of Mauarres intent being not to
constrain them in their religion. He received the news of this surprise at
S. John d'Angely, whereas then he remained: the government whereof, he
committed unto Monsieur de S. Gelais. Monsieur de Parabieres, commanded in the
Castle, wherein he found five pieces for battery, and two long coluerins,
which he that was Captain thereof, had caused to be made, therewith (as he
said) to salute the king of Navarre, when he should approach the walls of
Niort.

The siege of Ganache.
In the mean time, Monsieur de Neuers besieged la Ganache, a very strong Town,
lying in the marches of Poitou and Britain, with six battering pieces, four
double, and two demi coluerins: after he had summoned Monsieur du Plessis by a
Herault, to yield the Town unto him. The battery began upon New-yeares
day, and within four days after, the breach was reasonable great to give the
assault, which was done with great fury, and answered with the like courage,
whereby the assaylants left at the least fifty of their me^ dead within the
ditches, the assieged loosing at the same time two good Captains, and certain
soldiers.

The next day Monsieur de Paluau sent a drum to Monsieur de Plessis, to
advise him to grow to some good composition, saying that he had obtained
sufficient honor, by defending so weak a place, that his wilfulness hindered
the king of Nauarres affairs, and that the Duke de Neuers had fully resolved
not to leave the siege, before he brought the Town under subjection,
whereupon he engaged his honor.

Monsieur de Plessis resolved upon a conference, hoping by that means to
certify the king of Navarre of his affairs, the effect of the conference, was
to yield the Town, and to issue armed, their goods saved.

Mean time, the king of Navarre issued out of Niort, minding to relieve the
Town, but a sickness (proceeding from a great chaffing of his body, which he
did, lighting of his horse to heat himself being extreme cold) seized
upon him: which stayed him in a little village called Saint Pere, where he was
troubled with so fearce and cruel fittes of a fever, that having been let
blood, and all remedies used that possible might be found, it was thought he
would have died, and the report of his death was brought unto the Court.

But God who in so troublesome and confused a time, meant to use the service of
so great a Prince, whom he had saved from so many perilles, to make him the
wonder unto kings, and the king of woonders, The king fell sick the 9. of
January.
stayed the arest of death, which the Physicians had pronounced against him,
restoring him unto a lively and good health, and of a beholder, made him enter
upon the Theator, not as one that upon a sudden, by accident, fear,
foresights, nor hopes, should represent a king in a commodie, but to fulfill
the true and lawful office of a king.

After he was recovered, perceiving that Messieurs de Chastillon, de la Roche
Foucaut, de la Trimouille, and Plassac, could do nothing touching the relieuing
of Ganache, and that the Duke de Neuers with his army, made toward Blois, he
took the places bordering upon Niort.

The judgment of the Huguenot* touching the death of the Duke of Guise.
The Huguenots in their writings published at that time, acknowledged not that
action of the 13. of December, as a clap of thunder that makes more noise then
it does hurt, nor as a disgrace of fortune, whereunto the greatest personages
are most subject: but as a work of God, and as one of the most notable works
that he had wrought for them, thereby beginning to work their revenge, for the
massacre of Saint Bartholomewes day, and to relieve them out of the miserable
estate wherein they lived.

The Catholicques that never separated themselves from the ancient fidelity
of France, nor from the service of the king, considered not so much upon that
which had passed at Blois, as upon the cause thereof, they admired the kings
long patience, that rather suffered those Princes to do what pleased them for
the space of certain years, then once to punish them for a first, second, and
third fault, and that in the end, this long patience changed into a just fury.

These Princes made leagues both within and without the Realm: without his
Majesty's consent or knowledge, they seized upon towns and strong places in
the land, every man forsook the king to follow them, they would have the king
to yield them account of all that he had spent and done since his advancement
to the Crown, they had dispearsed injurious and slanderous books throughout
the Realm, and by them, made the name of the king to become odious: besides
the disputation by them made touching the right and title unto the king of
France: as if the king and all his Predecessors had enjoined and holden the
kingdom wrongfully from the house of Lorraine, at this day living. And to
conclude, they were at the point to kill the King, if they had not been
prevented.

As then one rejoiced at the death of the Duke of Guise, esteeming it for a
work of God, all the League to the contrary, made great sorrow.

Two days after the execution, the sixteenth displayed their old colors, and
cried out: murder, fire, and vengeance: they presently made a collection of
moneys to maintain wars, the poorest artificer among them, was content to
impart at least six Crowns, and some having no money, (that they might not be
found without affection to that commotion) sold and pawnde their goods, to be
contributaries unto it: gold ran like a river along the streets: they found
hidden treasures, and it seemed that France had nourished thieves, to make an
almasse of treasures, for those enraged people. Parris became the infamous
Theater of rebellion, wherein the sixteenth like furies issuing out of hell,
showed the fire and flame wherewith they enclosed and murdered the poor
country of France. Under those mad dogs, and stinking impostumes of the
Commonwealth, was practiced the most filthy and straungest rising that ever
troubled the estate of any Town. To please the sixteenth, they must displease
God, their king, and their own conscience. He was but hardly thought on, that
had not half a dozen of great outrages, wherewith to detest that execution,
and an elegy for the memory of the Duke of Guise, and all with the most sad
and sorrowful countenance that might be devised: withal, pouring out some
notorious and blasphemous oaths, the better to counterfeit a disliking. He
that could not recite the memorable actions of the Duke of Guise, eleuate him
to heaven, with open mouth speak evil of the King, detest his actions,
abhor his life, and account the execution done at Blois, as most cruel,
barbarous, and in humane, was neither accounted an honest man, good
Catholicque, well affected, nor yet zealous.

There was no foolish Poet nor Ballet-singer within Parris, that devised not
one couple of songs touching this action, nor any Preacher, that found not one
place in his sermon, wherein to utter a multitude of injuries against the king.
There was no Printer, that set not his Press on work with discourses made
touching his death: but above all, there was great disorder and liberty
permitted in Preachers, that who not only cast forth a million of injuries
and vilanies against the king, but in stead of preaching the Gospel, they
kindled a revolt and sedition within the hearts of the people, that never came
from hearing them, but their heads were set on fire, and their hands prepared
to seize upon those poor Pollititians that were set before their eyes.

All this is drawn out of the discourses that were published at that time in
Parris, or from the report made of such sermons.
One reproached the forgetting of the services done by Claude Duke of Guise,
unto King Francis, that was found almost slain among the dead at the battle
of Marignan, against the Switzers: of Francis de Lorraine to the Kings, Henry
and Francis the second: who after so many notable exployts was slain, during
the siege of Orleans: of Henry de Lorraine, to Charles the ninth: and Henry the
third at Iarnac, Sens, Poitiers, Moncontour, Auneau, and Vimory, and slain at
Blois.

An other made his Auditorie weep, by showing the manner of this execution.

The third blasphemed against heaven, speaking against the providence of God,
and the manner he used in his judgments, touching the death of those two
Princes.

The fourth said, that the Duke of Guise for a terrestrial and mortal, had
obtained a celestial and perpetual Crown in heaven: and by his death had
opened the passage unto his successors, by that means to possess the thing
which he with so great reason and justice had pursued.

The fifth, taking the simple people to witness for the remembrance of things
past, cried out in open Pulpit: Who knows not, and that most evidently, as it
were at his fingers ends, that the Prince of France, and the brauest knight
that ever set foot in stirrope, lies now upon the ground? Was it not he that
by his only presence defended Parris, the most puissant City in the world,
from an universal spoil and destrustion? Was it not this Prince, that took
the naked sword out of the soldiers hands, that held it ready at the
breasts of the poor Citizens of this town? Was it not that valiant Leader
and General of armies, who so many times and so happily beat down and cut in
pieces the enemies of our God, who for reward and recompense of all his good
and valiant services, is now stabbed to death.

They added, that France was sick, and that it could not be healed of her
sickness, if it had not a drink of French blood administered unto it.
The sixth, the better to kindle and increase the fires of commotions, openly
cried out: to arms: and made the word of God a trumpet of sedition, saying:
Be of good courage my masters, you must slumber no more, the God of battles
is on your side, he stretceth forth his arms unto you, you know not your own
forces: Parris knows not what it is worth, it has sufficient treasure to
war against four Kings. Take courage, turn back the weapon that is ready
to strike you: a good war will procure a peace: without this war, peace
will be your overthrow and destruction. For what has Christ to do with Belial?
this war will be your liberty and freedom, which if you neglect, God that
reuengeth the injury done unto his servant, will make you pay the interests
of your so cowardly slacknesse.

So that sufficient persuasions were used, to stir up and move the most
cold and fearful mind, and to cause the veriest coward to arm himself.

Such was the end of the Duke of Guise, a Prince (without all doubt) of valor
and courage, the League called him her Caezar, and made goodly comparisons
between them. For my part, take away the name of Christian, and I cannot find
so good a comparison between Camille and The mistocles: Read a book imprinted
at Zurich, under this title. Carolus Magnus rediuinus.
Numa and Licurgus: Scipio and Epaminondas: Marcellus and Pelopidas: Pompey and
Agesilaus: Silla and Lysander: Charles the great, Henry the fourth at this
present reigning, (the wonder of kings, and the king of woonders) as there is
between the lives of Julius Caezar, and Henry de Lorraine, the one being cause
of the overthrow and ruin of his Commonwealth: the other, of all the miseries
in France. A comparion between Casar and the duke of Guise Abanco Martio sunt
Martii reges quo nomine fuit matter a Venere Iulis cuius gentis familia est
nostrae.
Caezar alleged himself to be issued on his mother side, from the Kings of
Alba, and that his father had his original from the Gods, the race of Iules
being descended from Venus, and therefore he caused a Temple to be erected,
Veneri, Genetrici.

The Duke of Guise (and all his family) affirmed themselves to be issued from
the king of Jerusalem: and the Dukes of Lorraine, by their father, and from the
king of France, by Anne d'Est, daughter to Renee of France, daughter unto King
Lewis the twelfth. Caezar was of a goodly and tall stature, well limbed, full
faced, and quick attractiue eyes.

The Duke of Guise was one of the fairest Princes of the Court, big and high of
proportion, an amiable face, so quick of eye, that thereby he pierced into all
places, Plut, in the notable saying of ancient Kings, Princes and Captains.
to know and choose out his servants farthest distant from him, and in the
greatest prease. Caezar increased in ambition, as well as in years, in
greatness of courage, as well as in body. And as willingly a generous nature,
in good time discovers it self, being but young fell into the hands of
Pirates, that asked him 20. tallents for his ransom: but he smiled at them,
because they knew not how much their prize was worth, and gave them fifty,
and being kept and watched carefully by them, he sent commandment unto them
to be quiet, and not to make any noise, that he might take his rest.

The Duke of Guise, as young and Eagle as he was, assayed by all means to take
his flight, farther then any of his time, very haughty, dissembling and
advised, he could not submit himself to those from whom he ought to have
expected his adua^cement, he differed in nothing from a kings child of France,
with whom he had bin nourished and brought up, showing most evidently, that his
nature was to command, and not to obey: to go before, and not to follow after:
in his first action he so much disposed the thoughts of the Frenchmen, that
they believed such parts to be in him, as were most fit and proper to cause a
great change and alteraion in the Realm where he should live.

His first exployts in Navarre.
Caezar began very young to bear arms, and yet not so soon as Alexander, and
reading his actions, began to weep, when he perceived that at his age,
Alexander had already conquered Darius, and that as then he had done nothing.
The Duke of Guise, in the spring time of his years, was in the wars of Hungary
against the Turk, defended Sens and Poctiers, fought valiantly at Moncontour,
and brought honorable marks of his courage from the battle fought against the
Rutters. Caezar used so great diligence in traveling, that he departed from
Rome, Hic diligence.
and within three days after, he arrived at Rhosne. The Duke of Guise made
such speedy iourneyes, that when some thought him to be fifty leagues off,
he was found to be in a manner at their heels.

The promptness of his exploits.
Caezar had no sooner begun an enterprise, but he finished it with speed. The
duke of Guise was so vehement and hasty to execute his enterprises, that many
esteemed his celeritie to be a kind of rashness.

Veni, vidi, vici. His dissimulation.
Caezar used dissimulation, wisely and happily to serve him for advantage.

The Duke of Guise was so expert therein, that he dealt in his exterior
affairs as he thought good, to hide the secrets of his heart, and although
he desired nothing so much as the raising of arms by the league, yet he made
his brethren believe, (when they provoked him to take occasions offered) that
it was not his desire, wisely dissembling it, to the end, that if the effect
had not fallen out as they desired, he might impute the fault unto their
Councelles, or at the least, object against their pursuites, or else he did it
to the end he might hold them stricktly bound and engaged unto the
enterprises, which of themselves they counseled him to take in hand.

His foresight. His cunning and slights, Com. de Caezar, Lib. 1. of civil wars.
Caezar was marvelous expert in the science of taking occasions when time
served, and to use them to his advantage, whatsoever it cost him, oftentimes
he made show to agree to that, which he sought to impeach, as the means
which the Switzers desired of him to pass through France, wherein he made a
good show and countenance unto their Ambassadors that made suite unto him for
the same, until he had means and force to withstand them.

The Duke of Guise was an excellent cunning Prince, to use both time and
occasion, and his subtilties were notable stratagems, against the most violent
effects of his enemies. The Reisters bare with them into Saxen and Pomerland,
the effects of his so subtle practices by their incounters at Auueau and Vimory.

Caezar with a small force, and wholly contrary to military reason,
enterprised all things, and durst set upon the forces of Scipio and Iuba,
being ten times greater then his own.

His army were of more courage then number.
The Duke of Guise said with Caezar, that high enterprises ought speedily to
be done, and not long consulted upon: and with a small handful of men,
determined to oppose himself against the furious army of the Almains, he
discommended and disliked the monstrous multitudes full of disorders and
confusions, that form and frame a most dangerous confidence, in the hearts of
the greatest cowards, that trusting to their great numbers, despised the power
of their enemy, he had a small number of soldiers ruled and governed within
certain limittes, that need no great quantity of ammunitions, nor retrait.

His courtesy toward his soldiers. Dux plerumque in opere, in agmine,
gregatio militi mixtus, in corrupto ducis honor. Tacitus. His credit with his
soldiers.
Caezar flattered and favored his soldiers, terming them companions, and
calling them by his own name. The Duke of Guise knowing the humor of his
soldiers, and that there is nothing which so much inflameth the heart of the
soldier, to a desire of honor and glory, then when he is noted and marked by
his General, he favored his soldiers, and honored his Captains, promising
them more then he could do, and never denied them any thing that lay in his
power.

Caezar had such credit among his soldiers, that they offered him in the
beginning of the civil wars, to follow him at their own expenses, and many
of his soldiers that were taken prisoners, offered rather to die, the^ to be
constrained to change parties, and sooner to endure most extreme famine, then
to yield up the Towns they held for him: witness the honorable siege of
Salone, wherein being vexed with famine, and constrained to cut off the hairs
of their wives heads, thereof to make stringes for their bows, having placed
their women and children upon the walls to make show, they made so furious an
issue, that therewith they put their enemies to flight. The Duke of Guise
ordinarily termed the father of men of war, so much respected and beloved of
his soldiers, that neither for want of pay, nor discommodities, there was ever
any mutiny seen among his troops, and few or none were ever found, that
during his life forsook him, to serve under any other General. And yet the
Captains that were brought up under him, are still employed.

The execution of his commands. Facta non dicta mea, vos milities sequi
volo^nee disciplinam modo, sed exemplum etiam a me petere. Liuius. His strange
ambition.
Caezar never sent to any place where he might go himself, nor commanded
that to be done by other, which by himself might be effected. The Duke of
Guise always being first at any exployt, never trusting to any thing, but his
own watchfulness and diligence: the enemy found him always before them,
with a magnanimity and resolution, rather to die, then to be vanquished.

Caezar suffered himself to be wholly led by the furious passion of ambition,
to make himself great by the ruin of the Commonwealth of Rome. The same vice
was the cause that the Duke of Guise lost the greatest part of his praise.

Caezar enterprised to overthrow the laws and orders of the Commonwealth,
passed the Rubicon, entered Italy with arms, took the treasures of the
Commonwealth, usurped the office of perpetual Dictator, wan towns by force.
The Duke of Guise enterprised to trouble the order of succession, caused the
drumbe to strike up in the middle of peace, took the kings towns, placed
Garrison therein, and fortified himself.

He could not endure acompanion.
Caezar could not endure a companion in his government. The Duke of Guise for
the same cause, moved the great trouble of Barricadoes, and constrained the
king to quit him the place.

His debts.
Caezar when he passed Rubicon, hazarded either to win or loose all. The
Duke of Guise by a popular fury, hazarded both his life, his honor, and his
place. Caezar was indebted a million of gold more the^ he was worth. The Duke
of Guise to accomplish his enterprises, died poor, and almost as much indebted.

Caezar used the favor of the people and the tribunes, for the whing of his
ambition.

His purposes grounded upon the common people. His popularitie.
The Duke of Guise found the principal support of the League, to consist in the
good will of the people, and in the multitude, being desirous of novelties.

Caezar marched always bare-headed to make himself more common, gentle, and
amiable. The Duke of Guise to command great men, humbled himself unto the
meaner sort, as he passed through the streets, with his hat in hand, saluting
every man, either with head, hand, or speech.

The greatness of his thoughts.
Caezar durst conceive in his mind, and then execute his thought, to make
himself perpetual Dictator, and to usurp the sovereignty of the
Commonwealth. The Duke of Guise with as much courage, less reason, and more
danger then Caezar, enterprised to be king, or wholly to be overthrown.

His boasts.
Caezar vaunted to have made Rome the Queen of the world, a name without form
or body. The Duke of Guise by the league, taking away both order and royalty,
being the form of this Realm, and that which made it flourish, might well
say, that he had made France without life.

His exercise
Caezar loved Astrology: the Duke of Guise believed the Astrologians that
assured him of his greatness, of the kings death, of the death of the house of
Bourbon, promising him that the Crown should change families, and from the
Capets, should fall into the house of Austria.

His mind could not endure much apprchension.
Caezar could not endure the apprehension of conspiracies devised against him,
and said: that he had rather die, then to live long in distrust, esteeming
that death which is least doubted, to be best: the Duke of Guise desired
rather a fall, that might be the end of his miseries, then a continual danger.

He despised the advice of death.
Caezar despised the advice given him, touching the conspiracy of Brutus: the
Duke of Guise esteemed it fables, that was told him touching the mischief that
fell upon him, and could not be persuaded, that he should so soon end his
triumphs.

Haruspices praemonuerant vt d^^gentissime Iduum Martiarum caucret di^m.
Velleius Pater. L^belli coniuratione nunciantes ^^ats, abconeque protinus
lectierant. Velleius Pater. His death. His Sepulcher. Guisius and Cezar, medio
perite sedio perite senatu. The years of his death. Sydus Iul. Hob. Sar. lib.
8. Ennead. 6.
Caezar would not read his friends letters, that advertised him of the
enterprise practiced against his person. The Duke of Cuise iested at the
letters written unto him from all parts, and said that it was done at the
leaft thirty times every day.

Caezar was slain with blows of rapiers: the Duke of Guise with poinyards.
Caezar fell dead at the feet of the Image of Pompey, whom he had so cruelly
pursued. The Duke of Guise died at the kings chamber door, where he had made
so many brauadoes, and so much despising of the kings authority.

Caezar had the fire for his sepulcher: the body of the Duke of Guise was
burnt.

Caezar was slain in the Senate: the Duke of Guise at the Parliament, when he
came out of the Council chamber.

Caezar died in the 56. year of his age, in his climaticke year, and upon his
birth day. The Duke of Guise, in the 42. year, which was likewise his
climaticall year.

Caezar was accounted among the Gods, and so esteemed of by the common people:
the league cannonized and honored the Duke of Guise with the name of Marter,
and were long time in doubt, if praying for him, they should do wrong to the
holiness of his condition, being freed from the pains in the other world.

Caezar debaucha Cleopatra.
Here I will end the comparison of the hearts and humors of those two Princes,
and touching nothing of the sobriety, courtesy, affability, and
familiarity, that was equally both in the one and the other, nor yet of that
amorous complexion that so much resembled Caezar, and auanced the mischief
and troubles of France. And touching the end of the Duke of Guise, I say, that
as themnrther of the Dictator Caezar, served for a protext unto Anthony and
Augustines, to overthrow the Commonwealth of Rome: so this death of the Duke of
Guise, put weapon into the hands of the Duke de Maine, like Anthony, to destroy
both himself and his country.

Being at Lions, he received the news of the death of the Duke of Guise, and
the imprisonment of the Cardinal his brethren, upon Christmas day at night,
and said nothing until the next day in the morning, that he went from the
Archbishops Palace, (where he was lodged) to Saint Nisier, and there finding
the Official of the Archbishop prick of Lions, told him he was desirous to
walk a turn or two along the painted Gallerie. Thither he sent for Monsieur
Bothcon, the Marquess of Vrfe, and certain of the principal officers of the
Town, showing them what had been done in Blois, against the persons of his
brethren, and of the imprisonment of the Cardinal of Bourbon, the Archbishop
of Lions, and others.

This accident made the assistants so much abashed, that they all stood in a
maze, some of them thinking more upon the manner, then the matter, and more
upon the authority of the estates, then upon the kings collor.

Others, what assurance soever they had of aid to be ready to be employed at
all assayes, yet were they constrained to shrink in the shouldier. They judged
the wound to be great, and that it would be hard upon the sudden to find a
fit plaster: such as without inspiration had foreshewed, that the king would
be revenged of the Duke of Guise, for his over great boldness, and the day of
the Barricadoes, had already disisted the astonishment of that blow.

The Duke de Maine thinking upon the death of his brother, forgot not his own
safety, asking them, if that staying in the town of Lions, he might beassured
of his life: they besought him to move his servants, in that which should be
against the kings will and pleasure, to whom they were bound, and privately to
all others, and could acknowledge no other sovereign then he. The Official
of Lions, that had known his nature to be more stayed, and less ambitious,
desired him not to arm himself against his king, who without all doubt would
receive him into favor, The Duke de Maine counseled not to arm himself.
when he should once perceive him to refer the desire of his revenge, to
reason and good discretion, and not prefer the interest of his house, before
the benefit of the whole Realm of France, which trembled at the apprehension
of the calamities that this war will draw on.

That he should advise himself, before he passed the Rubicon, into what
danger he would fall, the good and quiet estate that he should leave behind
him: that to set the people at liberty, he would abandon it to the spoil:
that to defend the Monarchy against the king, he should make him the head of
a confused and monstrous Monarchy, against the laws of the Realm: that God
will never abandon the protections of Kings, how vnagreeable so ever they be
unto him, against the rebellion of the people: for kings are the image of God,
the children of heaven, Gods among men, and whosoever armeth himself against
them, strives against God. Then he foreshewed him, that if in that imbarking,
he thought not upon the storms and tempests, how he might shun them, he
would think upon them but too late, when they might not be avoided, when all
the owers would be broken, and the waves strike against his vessel: when
danger should vanquish his art, and necessity force his wisdom: that of the
wind of the peoples favor, which of long time has bin disposed unto rebellion
and troubles, makes his sails blow full: and that furiously he would thrust
his pretenses into the maine sea: that nevertheless he oght to consider the
vnco^stancie and lightness of the people, who having shaken off the yoke of
the Vulgus infidum bonis. Horat. Vnum imperij corpus, vnius animo regendum
videtur. Tacitus.
kings obedience, would do as much unto a Prince, to whom it shall not be bound,
but as to Proctor of their mutenie. That there is nothing more unconstant, nor
more disloyal, then the common people, traitorous to the good, and dutiful to
the wicked, and that rewards those that do it good, with ropes, exiles, and
public execration: that in the end, after many attempts and proves, of all
sorts of principallities, it will always return again unto the royalty,
France not being able to endure the government of two kings, no more then the
body two heads, nor a ship two Pilots: that France no more then the whole
world, without a general consuming, cannot endure two suns: that the people
continues not long in their fury, it loses breath in the first setting
forward, Si duo soles, velis esse pericu^um ^e in cendio omnia perdantur.
Serenus.
like a reed that begins with a long and straight pipe, and suddenly it
windeth and is crooked, loosing the vigor that it showed in the first part
thereof.

The Duke de Maine, being as then Master either of his good fortune, or
overthrow, held the conduction of the Leaguers affairs at his disposition, and
by a good resolution, could reunite the Catholicques by his brother led astray:
but his passion leading him at her pleasure, and that it represented unto him
the advantage he had to succeed in the favors, credit, and authority of his
brother, and by consequent unto his hopes, he rejected the advice of good
counsel, and thinking that they sought his life, determined the same day in
all haste to depart from Lions, and went to Mascon, and from thence to Chalons,
where he assured himself of the citadell: from thence he got to Dyon, where
he received letters from the king, by the which, the king assured him, that he
desired to continue him in his favor, staying the punishment of things past
upon the death of his brethren, whom he had put to death, to save his life,
whereof he had advertised him.

The Duke de Maine attributing the clemency and favor of the king, to an
affection, languishing, feeble, and faint, and to a fear he had to have him
for enemy, or to loose his friendship, not being able to moderate his
chollor, nor to incline himself unto a general and good end, hardened
himself in his resolution, received the pestilent breath of those minds that
bad framed themselves to tyranny, feared not the king, and made less account
of him, then of the chain of Tartaria.

While he continued at Dyon, he gave out commissions to assure himself, and
to seize upon diverse places, and among the rest, one of the Messieur de Rosne
and de Saint Paul, to command in Champaigne and Brye. He had no great trouble
to constrain them of Dyon to revolt against the king, bridling them by the
Castle: there was none but the Court of Parliament (who perceiving that they
could not shine without the light of the authority royal) that would not
consent to that rebellion, and therefore the principal officers were driven from
thence, the rest imprisoned, some poor people fearful for the discommodities
they might reap, remained in miserable slavery, under the confused and
disordered democratie.

The kings Letters to the Duke de Maine.
From thence the Duke de Maine went to Troy, a Town long time before spoiled
and corrupted by the participants of the Duke of Guise, where he was received
with honors due unto a king.

The king perceiving that the league caused all the towns beyond the river of
Loire, Chalon, sur Saone, Dyon, Troy, Parris, and Orleans, to rise against
him, and that if he sat with arms crossed, it would not ease him, was
constrained to leave the affairs of the Parliament imperfect, to provide for
the safety of his person: and to remedy the violent intents of his enemies,
and before the Parliament brake up, upon the fifteenth and sixteenth days of
January, he heard the declarations of the Deputies of the third estates,
wherein may be found the examples of the disorders, which at this time trouble
the Realm of France.

The Oration of the Archbishop of Bourges.
The Archbishop of Bourges, President for the spirituality in the Parliament,
after the death of the Cardinal of Guise, made a long discourse of the
miseries and calamities, that had continued for the space of eight and twenty
years within the Realm of France, touching the causes thereof, assuring them,
that the despising of the name of God, is the cause of our evil, having broken
the band that tyeth and unites us unto God, that is, religion, which is the
signer, the band, and foundation of all Monarchs and Commonwealths.

Difference in religion.
That the division happened in the unity of this religion, separating the
hearts and minds of families, and then of communalties, has produced this
disorder, that thereby they should have seen nothing but fire and weapons
throughout France, nourishes this long civil war, which to entertain, has
been the means to seek out so many prodigious inventions, to overthrow and
spoil the people, by so many subsidies, sale of offices belonging to justice,
and treasures, with the alienation of the sacred patrimony of the Church.

The kings zeal to his religion.
That the king in his youth being adorned with so many victories, obtained
against schism and heresy, had given to understand, that the honor and glory
of God and his religion, was dearer unto him then his own life, ought not to
permit, that heresy should oppose it self against the true religion of him
and his forefathers, a new, against the true alter, and a king against his
authority royal. That having reestablished the assurance of the franchises of
religion, he ought with a care woorthieof a royal name, to purge the disorders
and the abuses which the corruption of this world has induced into all
estates, Abuse in the Church.
in the house of God: in the church, in the Nobility, in arms, in
Magistrates, in justice, and in the people: and on the one side, showing the
disorders: on the other, he applies the remedies: and because the liberty of
these last troubles has increased them, we will present them like evil
ulcers, which spoil this polliticque body, and that will become incurable, if
the remedies that follow be not applied.

The unworthy promotion of Prelates.
1. Disorder. In the Church, simonie, ignorance, corruption: into the Lords
sheepfold, are entered false Pastors, not by the door, but over the walls like
thieves, by unfit promotions, by money, by treasure, by favor, and not by
learning or good example: so that among the learned, they introduce ignorant
men: in stead of fathers and tutors of the Church, destroyers: in steed of
Pastors, ravening wolves. An abuse which has drawn with it, a chain and band
of all sorts of euilles, for the advancement of ignorant and slanderous
persons, unto Ecclesiastical dignities, has brought forth heresy, heresy
division, and division, ruin and destruction.

Remedy. To restore the ancient form of the Church, the election of God, wise
and learned Prelates, that love God and his Church, and faithful Ministers of
Gods word.

The nomination.
2. Disorder. The introducing of nominations of Abbeys, as also upon the chief
Prelates of the same, the Monasteries which in times past, were the
Congregations and colleges of al doctrine and piety, renowned among the
Christians, as among the ancients, the Schools of Nazariens, Levites,
Egyptians, Medes, Persians, and Athenians, that had nourished and brought up
holy Saints, Basiles, Chrysostomes, Saint Benets and Augustines, have now in
them all sorts of people indifferently, not only Lawyers, but Citizens,
soldiers, men without learning and crudition, and without either name or mark
of spirituality, with women and children: from whence proceeds the foul
disorder of the Monastical life: Monasteries of the holy fathers.
the ruin of the houses and goods of the Church: the sacred Temple without
prayers, profaned, and occupied for ye most part by me^ of war, who in stead
of sustaining and nourishing religious me^, do therein feed their horses, dogs,
and hauks, frustrating the service of God, appropriating the inheritance of the
Church unto themselves, giving for dowries to marriages, and divided the
Vinyard of the Lord.

Remedy. To choose and nominate good and holy personages, that shall be of
requisite estate and quallitie, to serve God in those places, that shall commit
good Priors to give good example, and help to reform, thereunto employing the
aid of the arm, and force of justice, that from this time forward, all
Harpies and wild Boores, which spoil David's Vinyard, avoid and depart from
all such holy, consecrated, and appointed places. And to this end, let
informations and decrees be made against them: those that detain Abbeyes, and
are not of that quallitie, and those that usurp and detain the goods, tithes,
and other revenues, and according to the informations, let process be made, as
against sacriledges and rauishers of the riches that belong unto God and to the
poor.

The Commanders.
3. Disorder. Those that were called by our Savior unto the Ministry, for the
ease of the Apostles, which are Priests and Vicars, whose service is so
necessary in the Church of God, is at this day the most miserable, and most
afflicted order. They are driven and cast out of their houses by the
Catholicques, and where they are suffered to continue, their goods are robbed
and taken away, they are spoiled and sacked, or else constrained to give part
to him that is strongest: the soldiers consume them, the Lords of the places
apropriate their tithes, and the people will not pay the duties belonging unto
them, both by humane and divine laws. Remedy. Faults of the Clergy.
That it will please the king, adding unto the ordinances, concerning this point
made in the last Parliament, that it may again be enjoined unto all
Governors of places, and Atturneyes for his Majesty, every man in his
jurisdiction, yearly to send process verbal unto the Parliament, containing
the names of the Vicars, with a testation from every of them, touching the
possession and inioying of their goods, and what is kept or withholden from
them. And because diverse poor Vicars dare not openly complain, let it be
enjoined unto the Governors and Atturneyes for the king secretly to inquire and
inform of the usurpation that is made upon the said Ecclesiastical persons.

The alienatio^ of Church-liuings.
4. Dis. The riches consecrated to God, and given to him, his Alters and his
Priests, the goods that belongs not to those that fell it, is sold,
withdrawn, and alienated, thereby to consume and bring to naught the
Ecclesiasticallestate: the goods of the Church is not to be alienated, for any
cause or occasion whatsoever, or with what authority so ever it is done, it
belongs unto God, it is sacrilege to lay hands upon it, if it belong to the
spirituality, whether it be in property or use, it is no point of justice to
incroch upon it, specially without their consent, but it belongs to them both.

Saint Augustine and diverse other good fathers, permitted the selling and
alienating of the goods of the Church, for the redeeming of Captains, and to
relieve the poor, but that was the holy vessels, mooueables, and the money of
the treasury: but touching the immooueables, that was never known, one only
Charles Martell, spotted and defaced his memory by a horrible serpent found
within his tomb, because he attempted to sell the goods and immunities of the
Church. So great wars against the Albigeois, so great necessities and wars
against the Englishmen, could never break open this Paladion, which the
suggestion of secret and covert Huguenots has invented.

Remedy. That it would please the king, to grant unto the Clergy, the
perpetual restoring of the goods of the Church that are sold, repaying the
just value, with all costs and charges, and that such as hereafter shall
venture to sell or buy the goods of God and the Church, shall now and at
altimes be declared and accounted, both unjust sellers, buyers, detainers, and
occupiers, with this clause, to be bound to the restitution both of the
principal and the profits.

The great number of Benefices. The usurping of Hospital rene^^es.
5. Disorder. The plurality of Benefices, for that as no man can sit upon two
seats, so all Ecclesiastical persons, well and truly to discharge his duty,
cannot hold two benefices, which require two Ministers, he cannot pronounce
the word of God in two places at one time, which is principally understood by
two Bishoppricks, or two Curates, that have charge of men's souls, and
consequently require a continual residence.

Remedy. To cause the Council of Trent to be observed, which has so amply
provided for reformation of the Ecclesiastical estate, together with the
maintenance of faith and Catholicque religion.

6. Disorder. The manifest sacrilege of such as detain and usurp the
revenues of Hospitalles, Spittle-houses, and others goods destinated and
appointed for the use of the poor, founded for the ease of Towns, Villages,
and Burrows, and of all the people. The goods of the poor in diverse places,
are applied to the use of Laymen, to the communalties of Towns, to the common
charges thereof: to voyages, and processes: yea apropriated to the private use
of diverse men, a great hinderance to the poor, and unworthy the name of
Christians in this Realm. Hospitalles have been made and erected under
Cathedral Churches and Bishoppricks, to the end that Prelates and Pastors
should have the care thereof: but since charity is converted into avarice, the
charge and administration has been transformed to the Layetie.

Remedy, if it please the Layetie to continue this charge, and that the later
ordinances seem fitter then the ancient constitutions, at the least, let the
spirituality be present at the distribution and yielding of account, to see
and understand the fidelity and duty that shall be used toward the poor,
and to reform the abuses, sacriledges, and usurpations, that therein are used.

7. Disorder. In times past, no man might be admitted to the place of
commander Knights of the order of Jerusalem.
over the order of the knights of S. John's in Jerusalem, not being noble borne,
and that in the third degree, and by order of antiquity, now that goodly order
of degrees of antiquity, which procured a hope unto young men, (as new fruit
unto the spring) to attain unto that honor in their Automie, has been broken
by the entry made by certain Princes, by favor and greatness of their
house. If this disorder had only rested, it had been a thing somewhat
tolerable, and that might have covered it self by greatness and authority.
But now, that by this consequent, this disorder is induced (like the linkes of
a chain following one the other) to all persons indifferently without
consideration of antiquity, nor any other respect but of favor, or rather (as
I may say) of importunity, the sudden overthrow of this goodly order is like
to ensue.

Knights of S. John's of Jerusalem.
Remedy. The king knowing the honor of this order, that has cost so many
men's lives, to defend the name of Jesus Christ against the Turks, Moors, and
Barbarians, that has advanced the cross, throughout all the Mediteranean
seas, even into Africa, ought to suffer or permit that it should be lessened
or imbased by these disorders, but rather preserved to the glory of God, and
the honor of this Realm.

Deceiving of the Universities.
8. Disorder. The Schools and Universities, depending upon the care and
administration of the Church, which yield the Ministers of doctrine and word
of God, now are full of disorders and licentious persons, by the means and
mischiefs of wars and rebellions.

Of justice and faithfulness.
Remedy. His Majesty, according to the wisdom and love that is ingrafted in
his mind toward learning and virtue, ought to choose and name capable persons
for this reformation, long time desired, so many times promised, and still
unperformed.

Disorders i^^ the estate among the Nobility.
1. From thence he turned to the capitulation of the disorders known to be in
the Nobility, the valiant and generous French Nobility (says he) has
continually been the terror of all nations, and the nations adjoining, that
have addicted themselves to the profession and exercise of knightly prowess,
confess and acknowledge to have learned it of the Frenchmen: these valiant
French knights have preserved the honor and virtue of France, as long as it
was respected and had in honor, but since, that in stead of Nobles, there has
been new introductions taken out of the Common people, and that they have been
raised to the honor due unto the Nobility, and of such men which command
over companies of men at arms, it has wholly altered and changed the glory of
this French Chivalry, and many have degenerated from the virtue of the
ancestors, and obscured their renown, some using trades and trafficques of
Marchandises, keeping in their houses, and not going into the field, other
giving themselves to spoiling of the poor, to almasse corn, to take and
apropriate benefices, and other goods belonging to the simple people, and to
destroy their neighbors and tenants, in such sort, Advertisement to the
Nobilitis.
that diverse others, more valerous and virtuous, beholding the manner and
behavior of many of these Gentlemen, being grieved to haunt the company of
such men, had rather employ their times in the wars, with the king and his
Lieftenants, virtuously to oppose themselves, and show the effects of their
valor, then to be in the company of those in whom there remains but only the
name and shadow of Nobility.

Remedy. The King, which is the head and father of Nobility, ought to reerect
that goodly order of knighthood, ordained by his predecessors, to restore
decayed trees, and to refresh and renew it, pruning the unprofitable branches,
and so to reduce into such order and form, and with such Discipline, that the
people may not be oppressed, and to that end, cause certain stipendes to be
yearly paid for the maintenance thereof.

Excess in wen of war
2. Disorder. The cruelty, violence, and rapin of soldiers is so great, that
there is no difference in them from the fury of Barbarians, being Conquerers
of their enemies, there is nothing else but fire and blood, that have entered
into diverse places of this Realm, but to beat, bind, ransom, imprison,
sack, violated women and maids, to pull young children from their mothers
breasts, spoil, break, rent, and throw the goods of poor people under the
horse feet, and to bear away the rest, to leave the wife and children in
great misery without bread, Nonfacile in officio potest miles co^tineri abco
qui necessaria no^ sub ministra. Xenophon.
following after their husbands and fathers: and horses led away by them, is an
ordinary thing among soldiers: these evils happen partly for want of policy
and commandment, and partly for want of pay and good order, and distribution
of the treasures of this land. To lead soldiers into the wars without money,
is properly to make them become thieves, and whosoever bears arms, and has
no maintenance, he must needs have some by what means soever it be.

Evil governing of treasures.
3. Disorder. Treasures evil governed, are like water powered into a sieve or
basket, which presently runs out, and never is filled: as to the contrary,
the better and more certain revenue consists in lands. The immoderate
leuyings of moneys, which are drawn from the people, are compared to the Milt
with in a man's body, which the more it fills and swells, the more it
destroys and dries the rest of the body, and in the end kills it.

Remedy. The cause or pretense of such leuyings of money, has been the wars
engendered by heresy and division: and seeing that war is the cause of the
overthrow of the people, it must be brought unto an end, and by the aid and
help of all this Realm, seek a final remedy to this miserable division,
without deferring it so long to the utter undoing of the people.

Corruption in government
4. Disorder. Among other mischiefs, which war indureth, it has corrupted both
laws, manners, and policy, it has bred a marvelous disorder in justice:
Judges are bound to give judgment according unto the laws, as they have
sworn and promised at their admitting.

Nevertheless, part of the Judges at this day, have so great a pride in
themselves, that they affirm themselves not to be bound to judge according to
the laws written by the Iurisconsules, that they are not bound to the imperial
laws, but only in those points which they find not decided by the ordinances
royal (which have handled but few causes touching law: but only contain
certain general constitutions) they will judge according to their own
equities, and therein, as every man's wit and sense serves him, so many heads,
so many opinions, so many sovereign Courts, so many sentences and judgments.

From thence proceeds the co^trarietie of sentences, and diversity of
judgments, in one cause, and in one matter, whereby the poor suitors fall into
an infinite of charges, and continual suits.

This mischief happens many times by the ignorance of youth, which run to
ruin by presumption and philautie: for that such as are learned in the laws,
and that have a good conscience, take pains to satisfy their offices, and to
limit their zeal of justice according to conscience, and the doctrine they
have attained unto. Otherwise there should be no difference between the Judge
and the Artificer, but only in the gown and the cappe, together with their
pattents received from the king.

Remedy. This sore cannot be healed, but by good and faithful examiners in
sovereign Courts, for they do lightly prove and sound the depth of the
learning of such as present themselves to be admitted, they throw justice and
the subjects of this Realm, into the waters and puddles of errors and
ignorances, from whence they cannot get out. But if it were permitted unto
young men (by their Parents) to study the time in that case appointed, without
taking them from the Universities, as fruit from a tree before it is ripe, to
place them in the seat of Justice, this would be a great means to make them
capable, but the ambition of fathers at this day is so great, and they are in
such fear to leave their children without offices, that they had rather
therein, see them unworthy and deridid, then wise and honored: which partly
to remedy, all reuersions must be cut off, and no more granted.

The sale of Offices.
5. Disorder. The corruption that is used in justice, by the sale and infamous
building of offices belonging to the same, a great shame to this estate, and in
our time time, wherein this Realm only among all Monarchies and Potentates,
yea the most barbarous, justice and the Justices office is sold by public
authority, and given to him that offers most, although he be the most
unworthy. The excuse is made upon the public necessity of this Realm, as
if the sale of offices, the money whereof, for the most part, is disposed and
goes to the receivers, that enrich them, that small sum which is clearly
left, can be so great maintenance to the Realm from this first sale of
offices, which is done by public authority, ensues a consequence which
seems to be natural, yet very evil, that whosoever has bought an office
by great, may sell justice by retale, to make up his money. From thence
proceeds the corruption of Judges, that even as at the entery into their
offices they are forsworn, affirming that they neither gave nor paid any money
to attain the same, they become much more perjured in their consciences,
betraying and selling justice, drawing upon them the curse of Judas, the
perpetual trembling of Cain, and the Leprosy of Ciesi, with other such like
executions and maledictions. It is the corruption and damnation of the wicked
Judges, which makes honest men abstain from the places, and yet some of them
how honest soever they show, they have some spark of covetous desire, to
handle spices and sweet sugar, yet much more bitter then the honey of Sarde.
And as this sale of offices, has increased a great number of Judges,
Counselors, Atturneyes, Clerks, and Soliciters, whereof there are so many,
that make their advantage by sucking the treasure and blood of the people, that
it is well known, that law costeth the people of this Realm, twice as much
more as all the tallages: and not only the common people, but also the
Nobility and great personages, whereby many good houses are overthrown.

Remedy. Is the reducing and surprising of this great number of Judges, to the
ancient, just, and first number, and the interdiction of the sale of offices,
by public and perpetual law.

The Archbishop of Bourges having set down the other disorders that spring,
and have their issues out of the first, he besought the king to take order
therein, by a good and perfect reformation, which shall cause the people to
increase, justice to flourish, and assure the tranquillity of this Realm, to
make it continue as long as the moon continues in the Elements: and so he
ended his Oration.

The Oration for the Nobility.
The same day Charles de Cosse, Count de Brissac, Lord of Estland,
Great-Panetier and Falconer of France, who after the death of the Duke of
Guise, had reobtained the kings favor, and continued in the honor which
before he had to be President of the Nobility of France, began his
Oration, and having excused his insufficiency, he assured himself, that the
king considering, that the profession of a Gentleman consists more in deed,
then in word, he would with his Graces favor, cover the imperfection of his
discourse, and that as in the disputation between two Musitions, Piton and
Cephiseus, Pirrus gave judgment, that Pelibercon was the better Captain: so
his Majesty hearing the thundering eloquence of Monsieur de Bourges, and
Monsieur Bernard, would judge him but to be a soldier: which done, he said:
That the long reign of the king, had sufficiently shown, that it is not the
hand of fortune, that have environed the forehead of his Majesty with a double
Diadem, but God, that has established him for our King, and that before,
chose him for Monarch of a people further distant, not for the greatness of
his royal lineage, nor for the universal signs and tokens of the valor of
Frenchmen, but for the piety, faith, clemency, and magnanimity, wherewith it
has pleased his gracious goodness, to have adorned his Majesty in his most
tender years.

That it is sufficiently known, that in his reign only, the heavens have not
permitted the birth of so many mischiefs, but that during the times of great
kings his predecessors, heresy, schism, disorder, and division, has entered
into the peoples hearts: and that we must believe, that God has caused him to
be borne in the middle of the troubles of France, reserving unto him that has
supported the pains and travels, the honor and glory unto so just a labor: to
the end, that by the hands of so famous a Prince, France having prostrated it
self unto the furies of hereticques, may not only be succored, but revenged:
not saved, but increased: not flourishing, but elevated above all nations: and
that from this triumph so much desired, his Majesty shall reap the honor:
his estate the principal good, and all the people of Europe be participants
to this happy chance, it being an assurance unto his Crown, the most assured
stay of all Christendom.

The memorable victory of the ^ing against the Rutters.
That the victories which France desires to see his Majesty obtain, shall be
but a continuation of the overthrow by him given to that great and searefull
army of Rutters, Switzers, Lansquenets, and French Huguenots, which by the
good conduction and vigilacie of his Majesty, received more shame and loss,
then it hoped to reap in riches and honor: and the Switzers found more favor
and mercy, then before they had showed boldness and desire to do him
injury: those that were saved, returning like trumpets of his renown,
publishing the honors, praises, and victories of his Majesty.

That now the prayers, tears, and travels of ancient Frenchmen, seemed to
ask vengeance against those, that after so many religious times, have violated
the Sepulchers of their fathers and ours, who by fire, fury, and rage, would
pull from among us, this only religion which those holy fathers had planted
throughout the world.

That of all reprobates, there can be no sect found, that is so dangerous nor
abominable, as that of the Hugunots, and as their impiety is extreme, so
ought their punishment to be the like.

That it is known, whether the fury of the enemy be greater, then the
disorders are deplorable, which are found to be in the Church, by negligence,
ignorance, confidence, and abuse.

And proceeding to show the affection and zeal which the Nobility continues
in the assistance of the King, to remit religion and the state in their first
splendure, and with the price of their lives, following the example of their
elders, and the hereditary generositie of such as have driven out and
vanquished the Goths, Vandales, Arrians, Albigeois, Lombardes, Sarazins, and
Pagans, that have pursued the defense of the faith, and victories of the kings
of France, from the furthest parts of the Ocean Seas, far beyond the
Western, and that have not left any place for the reputation of their honors,
within the compass of the circle of the sun: he besought his Majesty, to
favor the antiquity of the privilege and right belonging to the Nobility,
in them to acknowledge the services done unto his predecessors: The prowess of
ancient Frenchmen,
to reform the rules and military ordinances of the Kings his ancestors: not
to permit, that any by money or favor, may attribute unto himself the name of
a Gentleman, to maintain the privileges of the order of the knights of Saint
John's of Jerusalem, to cut off the superfluities: in justice to moderate his
subsidies: order his treasures: reestablish the Magistrate: ordain an order
and policy among soldiers: cause the Church to be reformed: and to punish
the enemies of our holy religion. And so wishing a thousand prosperities to the
king, and peace unto his subjects, he ended his Oration.

The compl^^^ts of the third estate. The agreement of subjects to the kings
obedience. Heresy and schism.
Monsieur Bernard Counselor of the Parliament in Dyon, presented the
complaints of the third estate, beginning his Oration with a solemn
thanksgiving, for the promise made by his Majesty, fully to execute the holy
Edict of union, written, marked, and pointed unto by the finger of god, by the
which heresies shall be driven away, as clouds that are dispearsed by the
sun: exhorting all the towns and subjects of this Realm, besides this union
in one only religion, to enter into an other union and good intelligence for
the service of the King, continuance of his dignity, and in defense of the
good of the estate: every man remembering, that the Prince is given of God to
command, and the subjects to obey. He discovers all the infirmities of this
polliticque body, which beside the ulcer of heresy and partiallities, have
most straungely corrupted this Realm.

Blasphemies are natural and ordinary speeches among diverse Frenchmen:
adultery is a sport: coniuration is a subtlety of spirit: curiosity,
honesty, and simonie, a common trade of merchandise.

Simony.
Simony is not only a spiritual Leprosy of the Church, but a poison which
innisibly is tasted by the Nobility, and a contagion which intecteth the third
estate. The Governments of towns, places and Castles, are committed to mean
Gentlemen: the surety of the Inhabitants of a place of importance, is exposed
to the hazard of the means and riches of a Captain evil affected. The most
ignorant being rich, obtained the chiefest places within this Realm, me^ are
rather known by the goldennesse of their estates, then by their virtues,
knowledge, and wisdom, and have nothing but an officers gown to hide and
cover their ignorance. So the beauty of Justice is darkened, the elections of
benefices and offices violated, good customs perverted, virtue banished and
exiled, vice in authority, and rapin marches throughout the Realm with
Ensigns displayed.

The disorder in wars.
The insolency of horsemen, the violence of soldiers, who like mad men and
patrticides, have pilled, torn, murdered, violated, and sacked this country
of France: our Commonwealth have spoiled the villages with so barbarous
hostility, that most part of the lands are untilled, firtile places become
deserts, houses void, and the flat country unpeopled, and all things reduced
into a most fearful disorder.

The Partisans.
War is not only made among the people, by soldiers enrolled and pressed by
the kings co^missio^, but also by another sort of enemies, that have no less
troubled his subjects, then an army of Rutters, which are the partakers, such
as by importunity, gifts, and inventions of new tallages, have drawn the
treasures of this Realm into their coffers, and made the people ready to
beg, those are the deuisers of sibsidies and new Edicts, the executors of
extraordinary commissions, buyers and fellers of offices, vermin of men,
hatched by harpies, bred up in one night, who by their devises have fretted
this Realm, even to the very ashes of houses.

They march proudly incredite, with the Seargent at their heels, at their word
to execute the kings subjects, with summons in their hands, to constrain the
consciences of the good, and to violate the authority and religion of
sovereign Courts, by crosssing of pays, and interdictions of entries. Many
Edicts have been verified, and registered with these words, by commandments
diverse times reiterated in good and just Edicts, the commandments of the
sovereign Prince is not necessary.

Treasures evil employed.
That if such and so great novelties and oppressions, never seen nor heard of in
France, had been devised for the profit and commodity of his Majesty, the
complaints against them were neither just nor reasonable, but the soldiers
have been without masters, and not paid: the wages of officers lessened, and
the treasures spent and consumed. And yet they go about to devise new subsidies
and receipts of money, but upon whom? upon a poor countrieman, robbed, and
naked, and turned into his shirt, for so we may term the people of France.

And after this Orator had showed, that there rested no surer nor better
remedy against those disorders, then to require an account of those who by the
oppression and impouerishing of the subiectse have heaped up so much riches,
then to free himself from the practices and false perswations of certain
evil Councillors, religiously to execute, and violably to observe his
ordinances, and not to content himself only to see them published and
imprinted, without causing them to be practiced, by a prompt and continual
exercise, he concludes his learned and long Oration, by demanding the
conclusion of the estates, saying.

Sorrow for the death of the Queen mother.
ANd therefore most noble Prince, we humbly beseech you, that the eye of your
prudencie may always be open, for the defense of your poor people, and the
vnburthening and comfort thereof, and that your good resolutions, may in no
sort be altered nor changed. We hoped that by a long life, the Queen your
most wise and most honorable Lady and mother, should therein have been a
great furtherance unto us, by the proof and experience that France has had of
her so good and profitable Councels, but seeing her days are finished, and
that her dignity of a Queen and Princess, granted her not the privilege to
prolong her years, neither yet to promise her further respite, the will and
pleasure of God, with the necessity of a tomb must serve you for a
consolation and patience, and hope that her happy soul will make prayers in
heaven, that shall be more certain and profitable unto your Majesty and the
estate, then all the counsels in the world.

In the mean time, we will have our recourse unto the favor and good will of
the Queen your most dear spouse, in whom your subjects have beholden so much
shining light of devotion, piety, and christian virtues, that they expect by
her means, the comfort by them hoped for, with a confirmation of your good and
just intents, aided and assisted by those of the Catholicque Princes of your
blood.

The rest depends partly upon your chief Justice, and the Keeper of your
Seals, who being chosen for his deserts, and by the certain report of his
integrity, we hope will not permit that such ordinances which are made within
his time, should be violated and broken, as it were at the same instant.

Which doing, we will no more lament the holy reigns of ancient kings, we
shall not need to speak of the justice of Charles the great, Saint Lewis, nor
Philip Augustus, much less will we make account of the fatherly affection of
king Lewis the twelfth.

Our books shall only be filled with your wisdom, justice, clemency, and
love: the heavens shall open, to place upon your head a Crown of great
prosperity: God will give you the grace to see your posterity, which in valor
shall cause the name of Valois to increase a name, the only continuation
whereof, will procure the welfare and honor of France.

Further, the sweetness of so happy a season, and the enjoying of the fruits
by us hoped for and expected to proceed from the conclusion of this Parliament,
will confirm us in the service that we owe unto your Majesty, the which by
us is newly assured, by a solemn oath made in open assembly of all the
estates, and registered for a perpetual law, in all fidelity, to love,
honor, and obey your Majesty.

And because that time represents it self, wherein we may make proof of
the effects of our good wills, and that otherwise the want of means, commands
diverse of us with speed to depart from hence. I am expressly charged to beseech
your Majesty to grant us leave, to the end, that being in our Provinces,
some of us will be messengers of your most holy and laudable inspirations:
others by the authority of Magistracy which they bear, may there cause you
to be obeyed: and that all of us together with mutual minds and certain
concord, may withdraw ourselves out of a common peril, and yield you certain
testimony that we are and will continue, most faithful, most humble, and most
obedient subjects, until the last gasp of our lives.

The king, who for the space of fifteen days, had been solitary, without
resolving upon the bills by the three estates presented unto him, perceiving
that the estates could not attend nor stay the full conclusion thereof, without
great disco^moditie touching their own affairs, and that they besoght him to
have license to depart, he used certain persuasions rather then
commandments, to stay them for a time, until their bills should be fully
answered, or at the least, a certain number of each Order to be there, at
the publication of his aunsweres and ordinances.

All the Deputies that were advertised of the risings that began to be made
within their Provinces, and that upon a sudden all the Towns disposed
themselves to dance after Paris, besought him to depart. The king not desiring
to hold the^ against their wills, caused a publication to be made of certain
articles touching some of the principal points of the bills put up in
partliament, which were the rebating of the fourth part of the balages,
foreseeing very well, that in so great a raising of arms, his poor people
would be so extremely oppressed, that they could not pay all.

A dissolution of the estates the 16. of January, 1589. Attempts of the League
against the king.
And thus the estates being dissolved, a declaration was sent unto all the
Provinces, to assure them of his Majesty's good intention. The nineteenth of
January, there was published at Paris and in other places, a declaration from
the Princes Catholicque Towns and Communalties, united together with the three
estates of the Realm, for preservation of religion and the peoples liberty,
to whom they promised a discharge from a fourth part of the taxes, and of their
fruits and increase: although he one night well enough said, that the people
of France had suffered greater extortion under the league in three years, then
before they had done during the space of three civil wars, and under the
reign of the three last Kings.

Further, the thirtieth of the same month, the Presidents, Princes, Peers of
France, Prelates, Masters of requests, Councillors, Advocates, and Procurors
general, Registers, Porters, Notaries, Solicitors, and Procurours of the Court
of Parliament, to the number of three hundredth and six and twenty, made a
new oath of union, signed by each of them in particular, some of them having
thereto set their blood instead of Ink, the purpose and end whereof was, to
persecute the king by all means possible (without respect had to his dignity,
or any other consideration) for the execution of Blois. The decree of Sorbonne
before made, was also published, importing, that the people of France were
freed and absolved, from the oath of fidelity and obedience made to Henry the
third.

That the same people might lawfully and with good conscience, arm and unite
themselves, raise money, and make contributions, for preservation and defense
of the Romain Church, against councels replenished with all flagition, and the
force of the king or his adherents, whatsoever. In that (affirmed they) he had
violated public faith, to the prejudice of Catholicque religion, the Edict of
sacred union, and the natural and proper liberty of the three estates of the
Realm. The king first imployeth his pen before he draws his sword.
The king perceiving that the greater mildness he used in reducing these
errants into the right way, the more they took bridle in mouth, to run whither
soever their violent passions would transport them, scoffing at him, and
attributing that affection which he bore to reunite them to himself, rather to
a fear he had, of either retaining them as his enemies, or loosing them as
subjects, used his authority, publishing throghout all the Provinces, diverse
declarations of his intention, as well against the Duke de Maine, the Duke, and
Cheualier d'Aumale, heads of the rebellion, as likewise against the towns of
Parris, Amiens, Orleans, Abeuille, and other their adherents. He therefore
accused them of attempt against his person, of fellonie and rebellion: he
denounced those heads and members all disloyal, rebellious, attainted and
convicted of the crimes of fellonie, rebellion, and high treason, to their
chiefest head: and disgraded them, together with their posterity, of all
honors, if within the space of one month they rendered not themselves under his
obedience. The term set down, was the beginning of March: but seeing that
instead of repenting themselves, they committed so many the more outrages,
taking up arms on all sides, and that they practiced out of the land, seized
on his treasure, under color of Lieftenants general of the estate, confirmed
pattents and commissions under a new seal, oppressed by incredible violatio^s,
diverse provinces stripped into their shirts, many of his most faithful subjects
which would not adheare unto them, without entreating much more graciously
others, who had so greatly desired and labored the league. In brief, that
they had usurped all points and prerogatives of his royal Majesty, except the
name and title of king, which they reserved to an other opportunity. He then
resolved also for his part, to put in readiness an army to suppress these
insupportable attempters. And for performance of this, he dispatched letters
pattents for convocation and assembly of his Nobility and martial power. Not
long after, ensued an other Edict of the kings, by which he translated to the
town of Tours, such exercise of justice as was wont to be performed in his
Court of Parliament of Parris, inioyning them of that Court, to repair
incontinently to Tours, there to execute their offices. He made the like
transportatio^ of his chamber of accounts to the same place, and deprived
Parris, with the other towns, of all offices, charges, dignities, and
privileges, whom he would willingly have made afeard, and won unto himself,
before coming to arms. But all this was but a casting of oil into the fire.
Exployts of the king of Nauar, who came afterward to be king.
The king of N. recovered of a dangerous disease he had, a little after the
death of the Queen Mother, determined for testimony of his fidelity toward
the king, to cross (as far as in him lay) the diseignments of the leaguers,
hindering them from defacing any thing in those places, which he had means to
assure, as well for service of the king, as for the relief of those of the
religion. Thus therefore he received into his protection, those of S. Maixent
and Millezay, he safegarded against ye league, Chastelleraut, Loudu^, I Will
Mirebeau, Viuonne, and other places adjoining. Afterward he set forward even
into Berry, and took over the leaguers head the Town and Castle of Argenton.
And being returned to Chastelleraut, he writ in the beginning of March, ample
letters to the three estates of France, full of serious admonitions, that they
should give over the League, and aduertising them, that if they proceeded in
their evil counsels and determinations, he was minded, if the king so
commanded him, to take the field, with his friends and followers, hoping that
God would give him the grace to break many of their deseignments, and to cut
them off from their affairs and inventions. He took into his protection and
safeguard, all such towns and personages as would join with him against the
league, promising that in the towns he would suffer nothing to be innouated,
neither in policy or church affairs, except on such considerations as should
touch the liberty of every one: having learned (said he) for conclusion, that
the true and only mean of reuniting people to the service of God, and
establishing piety in an estate, is mildness, peace, good example, not war,
nor disorders, through which wickedness and vices spring up in the world. At
the same time, the Town and Castle of Angiers were assured to the king: but
the Duke de Mercoeur brought almost all Britain in subjection to the party
of the league, with which Roane, Thoulouse, and Lions, were now joined, and
Bourdeaux wanted not much of doing the like: but Marshal de Matignon was
faithful to the king, so that the leaguers and Jesuits, were constrained to
remove from thence. During these commotions, debatement was made of a truce
between the king and Nauar, to the end they might more commodiously make head
against the league, Debatement of truce between the two kings.
which augmented every week more and more. The K. minding to use Na. forces,
without which he could not do much of himself, offered and yielded into his
hand, Saumur for security of his passage over Loire: by means whereof, in
attending ratification of the truces, the king of N. caused all his troops to
pass over on this side of Loire, to join with the forces of Normandy, Maine,
and other places which attended him, with intention to approach the Leaguers,
and thus to ease them of the labor of coming any more to find him out in
Gascon and Xaintongne, as before they had don. Afterward the 18. of April, he
proclaimed wars against them, if they deferred any longer to lay aside arms.
But they showed themselves as little moved with this, as before by the kings
letters patternts, by which he translated the justice and jurisdiction of the
Great-maisters, Inquisitors, and Reformers general, which was wont to be held
in the Pallas at Parris, at the bench of the table of marble, to his Court of
Parliament not long since established at Tours. An enterprise on the kings
person by the league, frustrated by the king of Nauars presence.
About the end of the same month, he published an Edict, declaring that all the
mooueable and immoouerable goods of the Duke de Maine, of the Duke and
Cheualier d'Aumale, and of those which voluntarily dwelt and remained in the
Towns of Parris, Thoulouse, Orleans, Chartres, Amiens, Abeuille, Lions, Man's,
and of all other maintaining their party, forfaited and co^fiscated, minding
that the money rising of the sale thereof, should be employed in the charges of
the war. Notwithstanding all this above declared, the D. de Maine and his
confederates, having their army in readiness, made a selection of their
resolutest men, and marched into Vendosmois, with an intention to surprise the
K. in Tours, were he was weakly enough guarded: and besides this, they had
secret intelligence both in the court and town.

The king of Navarre being advertised that this army was in Vendosme, and in
the confines thereabout, determined to go to see them: and for this purpose,
departed the eight and twentieth day of April, with 400. Maistres, and a
thousand Harguebuziers on horseback, going ten long miles at one march. But
being in the way to have gone further forward, he received news that the
king called him back to his own succor, wherefore with all speed he turned
head, and came to lodge at Maille upon Loire, two miles from Tours, after he
had remained by the space of 24. hours on horseback. A peculiar order of
Cauallere.
The king presently hearing of this arriual, was much eased at heart: for it
was mightily seared, least the Duke de Maine having taken S. Ouyn near Amboise,
which he battered with two coluerins, would have come to ledge in the subburbs
of Tours: the which so falling out, the K. had bin in evident danger of his
person. On Sunday, being the last day of the month, the two kings viewed each
other, in the passage from Plessy Park to Tours, with mutual demonstration of
all contentment. Free resolution of the K. of Navarre.
The K. of Navarre this day showed a free and absolute resolution, which was
wont with him to be ordinary. For Marshall Hautmont being come to find him
out, and exhort him in the behalf of the king, that he would come to him,
incontinently he determined to go, laying aside all suspicion, and rejecting
diverse adnertisements which had been given him, for slacking of this enterview
thrice pleasing to the people, and profitable to the king. Truce between the
two Xings.
After that the two kings had for the space of some days communicated together,
Vauar returned over to Loire, and lodged himself in ye subburbs of Saint
Saphorin, afterward the truce accorded betwixt them, was published throughout
the town of Tours, after it had bin promulgated in the Court of Parliament, as
was also the second Edict or proclamation of war against the heads of the
league and their adherents: who in the beginning retired themselves toward
Vendosme: afterward judging ye the K. of N. was far off, about the 8. of May
they set even upon the subburbs of Tours, drawn thereunto by their
intelligence and fastened skirmish: their sudden arrival made an alarm in ye
twon, wherein there was great trouble at the first, and with all speed they sent
toward; the king of Navarre, who was somewhat remote, willing him to make
haste. Cheualier, d'Aumale, arriving there after the skirmish, lodged himself
near the Provost, hard by S. Simphorian, where in searching through the house,
three or four hours after, they found certain soldiers which they brought
unto him, al whom before his own eyes he caused to be stabbed. Acts and
Catholic carriage of the leaguers.
At the same instant were 40. or 50. women and maids found hidden in a cave, who
were all forced: as like wise they were in the rest of the subburbs, yea, and
even within the Church of S. Simphorian, some women and young maids fled thither,
as to a place of security, were violated in the presence of their husbands,
fathers, and mothers, who^ these Catholic leaguers caused to be assista^t to
so horrible spectacles, the more to outrage and oppress them. The day
following, upon the pauement of the Church were seen the beds, whereon the Vicar
protested to have seen the^ hale women and virgins. They broke open the chests
and defaced the windows of the temple, and stole away whatsoever there was, and
after they had beaten flatling with their swords, the Vicar and chaplain whom
they kept bound all night, they cut the cord that sustained the pixe, to see
whither it were silver and gilt or no, but finding that it was but brass, they
threw it in despite against the ground. In pilling and stealing they light upon
two chalices, whereof ye one was of silver, the other of copper: ye of copper
they left, saying in mockery, that it belonged to the league or union, and
made a conscience so much as to touch it, but that of silver, was denounced
royal, or appertaining to the king: heretical, and therefore consequently of
good price. The Church-boxe, wherein there was some silver, the Copes and or
naments of the Altar, with the Vicars robes and vestments, were also found
heretical, and in this nature were carried away.

This Knight took for his spoil, a very young virgin of an honest s^^^lie,
which was scarcely eleven years old, being found within a barn, whom he
forced, holding continually his poniard at her throat, by reason of her
resistance, sending her afterward to his officers, to be abused in the like
manner. The day following in the morning, these leaders perceiving that some
body would quickly come to vnnestle them, and that the kings succors
approached, made themselves ready to dislodge, and every man to pay his Host,
set fire on his lodging, so that all the whole subburbe had been brought to
dust and ashes, without the present succor that thereto was given.

Other stimulations of the leagues exploits, against Romain Catholic
religion, where of they termed themselves to be protectors.
Now seeing I am entered into this discourse, I will yet make a step or two out
of the way, and return afterward to the prosecusion of this my collection. It
is therefore to be observed, that after the taking up of arms, the league
showed no violence, but against the towns and boroughs of their own party,
wherein persons Ecclesiastical, noble, and upright men suspected to favor the
king never so little, were in all sorts offered violence: that is to say, at
Thoulouse they cruelly killed the President Duranti, and Dafis the kings
Advocate, both of them well affected to the Roman Church.

Those of the religion in Guyen and other places, had never more peace then
during these outrages of the League. And it was then a common proverb: that
the sheep then fed most securely, when the wolves were at wars amongst
themrelues. It is impossible to set down the sacriledges, violations,
blasphemies against God, mockery of all religion, but namely of the
Catholicque Roman, perpetrated in the leaguer Towns and in the country, by
their troops: their soldiers, whereof a part were Priests and Monks, all the
time of Lent, in contempt of the Popes ordinances, whom they call the holy
father, eat flesh, yea even in those places where they had abundance of fish.
Diverse of them constrained Curates and Vicars of Parishes, by putting a dagger
to their throats, to baptize (pardon me, if I use this sacred word in an act
so execrable) calves, sheep, lambs, pigges, goats, chickens, and capons, and
to give them the names of pikes, carpes, barnobles, soles, turbots, and
herrings. It was in diverse places and sundry Innes, that thus much was
performed, while Sorbonne and the Preachers, thundered out against their
souer^igne and lawful Prince, to ravish women and virgins within the Temples:
to murder the poor prisoners hard at the Altar: to run away with the
Challice, and to strip the Ecclesiastical Officials, was the essential form
of a good and zealous Leaguer: if any alleged that they were of the royal
party, among a number of examples, one shall suffice to discover the Lion (as
we usually say) by his paws. One of the most insolent of the league, named
Commeronde, had under him a Regiment of seven or eight hundredth men, and having
ouerrun, pilled, and forraged the whole countries of Aniou and County Laual,
in the end of April he lodged himself in the Borough of Arquenay,
appertaining to the Lord of Rambouillet, and distant three miles from Laual.
There was in the same place a Temple (which they call a Church) as well
furnished and set forth as any in all the country, having been of long time
enriched and endowed with many donatories, by the Lords of that place. The
Inhabitants had not laid apart nor shut up any one thing of their or naments,
seeing they could not be persuaded, that under these goodly titles of zealous
and united Catholics, so many erroneous offenses might be hatched: withal,
diverse of the religion had passed by that way before, which did not so much as
touch this Temple, nor athing that was therein.

But Commeronde, for his first warrelike exployt, burned the Gates of the
Church: afterward he entered thereinto with his people, which wholly pilled
and spoiled it, killed a poor man at the crucifix foot, because he complained,
that in the self same place they had ravished his wife in his own presence:
they eased their bellies within the holy water stock, and in every corner of
the Church: and of robes, wherein were wrought certain Aue Mary's, they made
garments for change, and setting forth of their queanes. For the top and
height of this exployt, they took the pixe of silver, wherein there was four
and twenty hosts: one amongst the rest apparelled him-himselfe in Priestlike
habit, caused eighteen or twenty soldiers to fall down upon their knees,
and having his hands yet full of blood and sacrilege, distributed these
hosts, throwing down upon the ground three or four others that remained,
which were trodden under foot. At their departure they sold the Copes, banner,
and relicques, to the Moonkes of Eurons: the Challices, lamps, boxes, and
cross of silver, to them of Vague: and not many days after, they did as much
at Thorigni. But expecting a particular History of the league, wherein shall
be found renewed, all kinds of cruel and infamous Tragedies, let us return
to the army of the league, and to the Parisians.

The reunion of the two Kings, made them see how it was time for the league to
run: for this cause the Council general of the union, addressed memorials,
letters, and aduertisements, both within and without the realm, of whatsoever
they thought expedient, to assure and protect this building of confusion. They
sent men and large instructions unto Rome, to justify their actions, to
demand a legate from the Pope, to promise publication of the Council of
Trent, to obtain and favor on all sides, through the intercession of the Pope
and his Cardinals.

One of their packets was surprised by the way, so that their mines by this
means were blown up: nevertheless their Deputies, who were the Commanders
of Diou, Council our Coqueley, the Abbot of Orbais, and the Deane of Rheimes,
went forward about the end of May. Other dispatches were sent to the leaguer
Towns, for raising contribution: for whole Cartlodes of silver was behoofull
for the disbursments of such young kings, to fill the coffers of others most
greedy, for payments of some men's debts, and for the purchase of other sums,
lands, and Lordships.

Exployts by the king against the league.
In the mean while, both within and round about the towns, were infinite
pillages, incoursions, thefts, and depredations performed: diverse of the royal
party were murdered here and there. In every place there was extreme
liberty given, and the fury seemed desperate, that was undertaken against the
kings name. There was no longer any question of a commotion in some small
circuit of a country, but a man might perceive the fire of this revolt, to
have taken hold in the four corners, and even in the midst and heart of
France: so furiously, as it is an horror to call it to mind. The king had from
the beginning of April, sent forces hither and thither, and some towns not
far from Parris, remained yet at his commandment. Genlis, which had done
homage to the leagne, was happily reduced to his obedience by the solicitation
of some noble Burgesses, and this (because it was but a little days iourny
from Parris toward Picardie) was afterward a thorn that mightily pricked the
leaguers. Duke Mo^tpensieur being in Norma^die with forces for the K. assisted
by the Lords of Halot, Creuecoeur, Baqueuille and Larchan, discomfited first
the Garrison of Fallaize, took three Captains, hewed in pieces the greater
part of the men, and dispearsed the rest. There he besieged Falaize, and
receiving news that County Brissac, accompanied with two or three hundredth
Gentlemen leaguers, some Priests: and five or six thousand men were coming to
succor, he left the siege to go and meet them. Count Brissac disconfited in
Normandy by the Duke Montpensier.
They were lodged in three villages, two of which he entered by force, killing
all those that stood out valiantly: the others never made offer of combat
afterward: Brissac himself fled away with all the Caualleriers. The number of
the leaguers then slain, were 3000. and more: amongst whom were many
Gentlemen: the Conquerours had about one thousand or 1200. prisoners, amongst
whom there were some thirty Gentlemen, and of the principallest. This was a
bad presagement for the League. In Beaussy by the Lord of Chastillon.
A month after, or thereabouts, that is to say, the 18. of May, the Lord of
Chastillon having passed Bagency with 200. horse, and as many harguebuziers,
understanding that some troops of the Duke d'Aumale marched along to charge on
the L. of Lorges, who scoured the highways, made forward toward Bonneual
with twenty Gentlemen, conducted by Fonquerolles, who encountered Arclenuille,
commander within Chastres for the league. He would have acknowledged them, but
they charged him, and slew five of six of his men even hard at his elbow: so
that galloping he retired, and gave the alarm to the troops of Picardie,
led by the Lords of Sauenze and Brosses, who had in their company about 500.
Gentlemen, being likewise followed by other Caualleries, to the number of 300.
and a company of harguebuziers both on horseback and a foot, Sauenze cast
before his harguebuziers, placed his troops of lanciers in wings, and without
shrinking one whit came forward. Chastillon having made a stand, placed his
infanterie, and made two strengths of his horse, returning on his left hand,
Charbonniere and Haranbure, with their companies of light horse: afterward he
received the charge, whereunto Sauenze ran bravely with a gallop of 30. paces
long: his harquebuziers on horseback, having given their volley near enough.
Chastillions foot received them, and (after the first discharge of their
shot) coupled with the horse ye came to charge, killing diverse horses with
wounds they made in their flancks with swords, without any losses on their own
part, more then of three soldiers. Sauenze, who skirtwise was opposed against
the light horse, made straight forward, charging Chastillon with such fury, as
his first ranckes were broken, he shocked and born down to the earth, with 8.
or ten Gentlemen, where there were but two or 3. lightly hurt, and 20. or 25.
of their horse slain: Chastillon and his men recovered themselves, and fought
courageously on foot. Surce Harambure, and Fonquerolles, charged so fiercely
Sauenze and his men, that they overthrew them, and broke their array in such a
sort, as they were not able to reunite themselves together again, but were put
to plain flight and pursued: more then 26. Gentlemen having been borne down
dead to the earth in the field. In the pursuit there was more then 60. slain,
al their harguebuziers yt were left behind ouerthrown, two Cornets won, and
forty Gentlemen taken, part of them being wounded, and amongst others,
Sauenze, who being conveyed to Baugency, when his friends and familiars seeing
him in danger of death, admonished him to ask pardon at Gods hands, to
confess and communicate himself, as also to crave mercy of the king, he
could never be brought the revnto, by any reason could be laid before him, but
died as a desperate man. He bore in his Cornet the Cross of Lorraine, with a
Spanish devise in letters of gold: Morir omas contento. Oh rather content to
die. There was in this skirmish some 25. or 30. soldiers, which in the end of
the fight were fallen into Chastillions hands, who desired to save them, and
yet they chose rather to be dispatched in the field, then to swear that they
should never bear arms against the king: all whose enemies at that instant
come forth of Picardie, were then ouerthrown. In the I Will of France by the Duke
of Longueuille, at the siege of Sentys.
At the same time, the town of Senlis besieged by the Parisians army, under the
conduct of the D. d'Aumale, having been furiously battered, sustained and
repelled a grievous assault. And as the defendants were minded to capitulate,
succor was brought unto them by the Duke of Longueuille, he being followed by
the L. of Boniuet, Humieres, la Noue, and others. Whereupon battle ensued, in
which the assaylants were defeated, about 1500. of them being slain upon the
field in their flight and pursuit, as well by the Conquerors as by the
Pesants. The league lost also therein, their artillery and all the baggage of
their army. Afterward the D. de Maine attempted to win this place by
practice, because it so highly imported him, and by certain treacherous
Canno^s, Priests, and Monks within the town, they entered in with 20. or
thirty Captains, at an instant set down, to cut off in the night a Corpse de
guard: and to further on their own behalf and escalado, his troops
approached verieneare, and some there were that came even to the ditch, but the
Corpse de guard having then been lately relieved, and keeping good watch, they
within durst not show themselves, and one without aduenturing to approach, had
his thigh broken with a musket shot: when the alarm being given, the
assaylants retired. This wounded man being taken, discovered the whole
practices. The entered Captains with the traitors, passed through the hands of
the executioner: and Senlis has ever since perseuered in the obedience of the
king. The king approaches near Paris with an armed power.
The king encouraged by so many prosperous beginnings, determined to go
forward: so that from the beginning of June, to the midst of July, the war
began to grow hot, and the principal intention of the king, was, to kill those
of Parris, assuring himself, that after he should once have tamed the great
head of the league, all the others would incontinently yield to the yoke, and
that he should recover again, which was marvelous strange and difficult for
him, to wit, the love and obedience of his subjects: who on the other part,
fearing him as much as they hated them, practiced also on every side to
maintain their league, and to remain in their insurrections. This implacable
war against him, was an occasion that in the chiefest towns, but especially in
Parris, they spoke not of this Prince, but as of the most execrable tyrant that
had ever been in the world. I and the Preachers solicited by certain heads
of the league, and for this effect, by them well paid with extraordinary
pensions, animated all in general, and each one in particular, to run upon him
and kill him, in what manner soever it were: promising unto the tirannicides, a
place in Paradise above the Angels. Furthermore, they hotly and with diverse
policies instigated a Moonke, of who^ we will presently speak, to perform a
noble service to the league. Thus therefore the King being approached Parris,
he planted himself near Parris, whereas the Duke de Maine returned in have from
about Tours, to oppose himself to the Duke of Longueuille, was mightily
hindered, perceiving himself to be cut off in so many respects, and by
enemies so puissant. His soldiers began to live at pleasure within the town,
the which the Parisians felt impatiently enough, but the meaner sort durst not
complain, and for the great ones, they put in practice the common proverb:
upon an evil game a good countenance must be set. The king took
incontinently Estampes. Exployts to the disadvantage of the League.
In the mean while, the Duke of Longueuille joining together the troops of
Champaigne, and gathering to head in the confines of Chastillon upon Seine, the
Switzers and Lansquenets which the Lord of Sancy conducted (who had raised war
against the Duke of Sauoy, in the territories of Geneue, and having there
stayed him) was marched into France. He made of all this power, a body of an
army of twenty thousand men, or thereabouts. Afterward he went to pass
the river of Seine at Poissy, and showed himself before the king, who laid
battery to Pontoise, whereupon the defendants yielded themselves the day
following, being the 25. of July, to a composition of 200000 Crowns, and a
delivery of the most seditious, to the end they might receive exemplare
chastisement. The K. afterward followed by Nauar, went to welcome the Switzers
army, ranged in battle, and would needs pass through all the squadrons, with
so great demonstration of contentment, joy, and entertainment to the heads, as
that all of them likewise made manifest unto him, the great affection they had
to do him service. Having all his forces together, which made a body of 45000.
men, he marched presently toward Parris, and with shot of cannon made himself
Master of S. Clouis bridge. Attempts by the heads of the League, against the
kings life.
The Duke de Maine and other heads of the league, with their most confident
friends, to the number of 46. within Parris began to renew their concels, and
seeing the king so near them, either to urge them to battle, or else
straightly to enclose them, and constrained the people to acknowledge him,
judged by that, in this progression of the kings affairs, their own went to
ruin, and that there was no other means left to stand out, being proclaimed
guilty of high treason against their chiefest head, then by executing some
notable villainy in procuring the death of the King, their Master, Benefactor,
their Prince and sovereign Lord. Some certain weeks before, a young Iacobine
Monk, called Friar Jacques Clement, borne (as men report) in a village called
Sorbonne near Seins, a man drowned in all wickedness, having passed through
the hands of certain confessors, and conferred with some Jesuits and others,
was for a kind of dexterity observed in him, found meet to strike so great a
stroke. The murder intended of long time.
He was urged and put forward therein, and in the end the Duke de Mayene, the
sister of Montpensieur and others, had conference with him in diverse places,
they requested him to persevere in this good determination, which they knew to
rise in him, by extraordinary inspiratio^s, to perform so renowned a feruice
to the holy union, the Catholicque Church, and his country. They promised him
Abbotships, Bishoppricks, and whatsoever he would desire. He remained for
certain days, one whiles with the Duches Montp. Who amongst the Parisia^s was
termed the holy widow: other whiles with his Prior, and sometimes with the
Jesuits. This Monk drunk in his own fury, and with so many alureme^ts,
entertainme^ts, promises, and protestations, of felicity temporal and eternal,
resolved with himself, and promised to kill the king. The people, who thought
nothing, nor knew not of their cruel practices, talked of yielding themselves,
and had greatly rebated their spleen and collor. Surce, Duke de Maine, and
those of this complot, caused the most zealous Sorbonnists and Jesuits to
preach, that they should yet have patience for seven or eight days, and they
should perceive some wonderful matter come to pass, that should make well
with the union. The Preachers of Roan, Orleans, and Amiens, preached the like
at the same time, and in semblable terms. The Moonke having taken order for
his complot, departed from Paris, and went toward S. Clou. So soon as he was
departed, the Duke de Maine caused more then two hundredth of the principallest
Citizens, and other rich men whom he knew to have friends and credit with the
kings party, to be taken prisoners for a gage, to the end to save his Moonke,
if after he had attempted or executed the fact, he were stayed or arrested.
The Monk being presented to speak to the king, the first day of August, saying
yt he had letters from ye President of Harlay, and credence on his part: the
king caused him to be called into his chamber, where there was no other but the
L. of Bellegarde, chief Gentleman of the same, and the Procuror general, whom
he procured to retire apart, more privately to give ear unto him, which
addressed himself as it seemed, with a countenance very simple and demure. It
is affirmed, that in the self same chamber, the Councels of the massacres in
the month of August, the year 1572. were surprised, wherein the king, that then
was D. of Aniou, was one of the chiefest. The Moonk perceiving himself alone,
and opportunity put into his hand, co^firming his countenance more and more,
drew out of one of sleeves a paper which he presented to the K. and out of ye
other a knife, with which violently he sheathed a thrust within ye kings small
ribs, he being attentive to read, and who perceiving himself wounded, plucked
ye knife out of the wound, wherewith he struck ye Monk above the eye, and
thervpo^ some Gentlemen came running in, who moved with the indignity of so
execrable a fact, could not contain, but killed the murderer with their
swords, who went to the place appointed for him, and was cannonized and adored
by the league: but on the contrary, detested of those ye cleaued to the
dignity royal and party of the religion. In the annagratisme of his name,
Friar Jacques Clement, were found these words in so many letters: C'est l'enfer
qui m'acree, which imports: It is hell ye created or brought me forth. For so
it seemed, that after this fact the furies themselves were come out of hell, to
ouerwhelme topsie turuie al France. The King being carried to his bed* the
Physicians and Surgions applied unto him his first dressing, and judged that
the wound was not mortal: by means whereof, the same day he procured writing and
advise to be given of this attempt, as also of the hope of his healing and
recovery, as well to the Governors of Provinces, as to Princes strangers,
his friends, and allies. But the sovereign King having otherwise disposed of
the life of this Prince, took him out of the world about 3. of the clock in the
morning the day following. A little before his departure, he spoke with a
moderate and confirmed mind, named the King of Navarre his good brother, lawful
successor to the Crown, exhorted his good subjects to obey him, to remain
united, and to refer the difference of religion, to the convocation of the
Estates Observations upon the life of king Hienry the third.
general of the Realm, who would think upon convenient remedies for the same,
to have a care of religion and piety, and to pray to God for him: upon these
words he gave up his ghost. Touching the insolences of the league within
Parris and elsewhere after the kings death, an other History shall declare the
same: for our intention is not to proceed any further in these collections. In
this Prince failed the Kings of the race of Valois, which had reigned in France
from the year 1515. to the year 1589. under their dominions, almost all the
wonders of former ages had been renewed. This last king was little bewailed of
his subjects, by reason of many faults he committed in his government and
administration. The occasion of them (without touching in any sort, either his
conscience, or affairs of instice and policy) was, that in his polliticke
government he could never well discern, except too late, his friends from his
enemies: and the desire he had to lead his life in pleasure, made him let
slip infinite exellent opportunities of providing for the good of France and
other countries. His security imboldened his enemies, both near and far of,
within and without the Realm, to innouate much, and in that he would not lay
to his hand when he ought to have done, he at last found the gate shut against
him, perceived himself driven out of his own house, and those whom many ways
he had too much supported, established in his place, who gave him right down
blows upon his head, whereof he should have bin wary in time. Men talk
diversely touching his departure, some judging that he left the world too soon,
in respect of France her good: others deeming the contrary. Howsoever it was,
his decease was to the whole Realm a beginning of particular calamities above
all the rest, as the History of king Henry the fourth, of the race of Bourbon,
will give testimony.

Here ends the troubles that happened in the reign of Henry the third.
This is to give the Reader to understand, that there is certain Titles gone
Henry the fourth, that should have bin Henry the third.

A BRIEF RECITAL OF THE MOST MEMORABLE THINGS which came to pass in France,
under the Reign of Henry the fourth, since his first coming to the Crown,
until the middle of the year, 1598.
The Frenchmens disposition after the death of Henry the 3.
ALthough there were great sorrow, grief, and lamentation made in the royal
army, for the death of king Henry the third: as much sign of joy and
gladness was there seen on the other side, among the leaguers throughout all the City of Paris for the same, in singing of songs, and making mocking times
thereupon. The Duke de Maine with his Court, and many others, which since the
execution of Blois, wore black scarfes in sign of sorrow, did heerevpon cast
them aside, and wore in stead of them, scarfes of hopeful green. Then was
there great feasting, masking, and other sportfull games made among them,
wherein and whereby, the murdered king was cursed and banned in most horrible
sort.

At that time the image and portrature of the traitorous Moonke which killed the
king, was by the commandment of the chief of the league, artificially framed
in Brass, and other paintings, wherewith they garnished both their houses and
Churches. Then was he cannonized, and among the supersticious prayed unto, as a
new made Martyr, whom they called by the name of Saint Jacques Clement. All such
as were known to be of any kin unto him, were greatly enriched with alms
gifts and public contributions. Councels of the league.
The Duke de Maine, which as yet durst not name himself king, caused that title
by proclamation to be given throughout all Paris, to the Cardinal of Bourbon,
being then prisoner, stamping money and gold, as the coin of king Charles the
tenth. The Duke disguising his usurpation by his new and rediculous title of
Lieftenant general to the Estate and Crown of France, and perceiving that the
declarations made by the lawful king, did shake in the beginning of his
proceedings, a great part of the league, published and sent abroad an Edict
dated the first day of August in his own name, and the general Council of
the holy union of Catholicques, established at Parris, who stayed there for the
assembling of the estates of the kingdom, to reunite (as he said) all
Christian Frenchmen in the defense and conservation of the Apostolicque,
Roman, and Catholicque Church, for the holding up of the royal estate,
expecting the liberty and presence of king Charles the tenth.

Orders given to the king for the affairs of the army
King Henry the fourth, which soon after the death of his predecessor, had
signified to the Princes and Lords in the army his full intent, understanding
that many of the Nobles made diverse bad attempts, caused the principal of them
to be assembled, before whom he called unto mind, the recommendations of the
oaths which the deceased king had caused him to make before them all, for the
tranquillity of the Realm after his hurt, perceiving himself to draw toward
his end. The first and chiefest point whereof, was to maintain the Frenchmen
in the liberty and exercise of the two religions: that is to say, the Roman
and the reformed Churches: until such time as by a good and general Council
it were otherwise determined. These promises by oath he renewed unto them
again, which appeased the controversies. And because he might not securely
stay at Paris, by reason of this sudden change, and the sicknesses which
afflicted the royal army, the king by advise went into Normandy, as well to
receive the succors which came from England, as also for the fortifying of
certain places and passages which was fit for his purpose. The league removed
on the other side, and then the Earl of Randan, one of the chiefest of them,
had surprised in Auuergne the City d'Issoire, about the tenth of August. The
Parliament of Bourdeaux published a decree the 19. of the same month, whereby
all those of their side, were enjoined to keep inuiolably the Edicts made by
the holy union, concerning the Apostolicque, Catholicque, and Roman Church,
and all the declarations by them made. Three days after that at Thoulouse,
tearing the picture of the deceased K. body in pieces, they ordained by an
act, made by the general consent of the leaguers, that every year upon the
first day of August, they should in making processions and public prayers,
acknowledge unto God the great benefits which as upon that day they received
by the fearful death of Henry the third: whereby the happy deliverance of
Parris ensued, with many other distressed Cities in the Realm: forbidding al
persons to acknowledge Henry of Bourbon king of Navarre to be king of France,
whom that Court thought a most unfit man to succeed in the same kingdom,
because (said the edict) of the notorious and manifest crimes expressed against
him, in that bull of excommunication, which was given out by Pope Sixtus the
fifth.

His genealogy.
The envy of which partial Parliament has constrained me once again to set
unto your sight in brief sort, the true genealogy of King Henry the fourth.

Lewis the ninth, surnamed the Saint, being the 44. king of France, came to
the Crown in the year 1227. and reigned till the year 1270. he had four
sons, two of the which, namely Peter and Robert, died without issue, and
before their father. The other twain that suruiued, was Philip, and Robert the
second of that name. Philip surnamed the Hardy, and third of that name,
successively left these following: from the father to the son: from brother
to brother: and the nearest of blood, to the nearest of blood: Philip the
fourth, called the Fair. Lewis the tenth, surnamed Hutin. Philip the fifth,
surnamed the Long. Charles the fourth, termed the fair. Philip de Valois,
John, Charles the fifth, surnamed the wise. Charles the sixth, called the
well-beloved. Charles the seventh: Lewis the eleventh: Charles the eight: all
descending from Saint Lewis in the right line. Charles the fifth, which makes
the second branch from the end of the first line, had two sons: Charles Duke
of Orleans, and John Earl of Angoulesme. Charles the eight, dying then without
children: Charles Duke of Orleans, successively came into the right line, so
that Lewis his son was found the first heir, who also reigned after Charles
the eight, who was surnamed father of the people, Lewis their dying without
issue male, the right of inheritance came into the branch of John Earl of
Angoulesme, so that the law set the Crown on the head of Francis the first,
the Earls only son. And from Francis, it came to his son Henry the
second, from whom succeeded orderly, Francis the second, Charles the ninth, and
Henry the third his children, one after the other, from brother to brother. In
this right line ended the last King of the race of Valois, who died without
children. The law then took hold on the second son of Saint Lewis, named
Robert, who was Earl of Clermont, and married with Beatrix, daughter to
d'Archambaut of Bourbon: by her he had one son named Lewis, from whom the
lands were made errigible, in Count, the year one thousand three hundredth
twenty seven. After this Lewis, succeeded Peter and James his sons. Peter
had one son named Charles, Duke of Bourbon, and Constable of France, who was
slain at the taking of Rome, in the year one thousand five hundredth twenty
seven. And in him, dying without issue male, ended the line masculine of this
branch. James his uncle, the son of Lewis, had then a son named John, who
espoused Catherine Countess of Vendosme of Castres, and Lady of Conde. This
John son of James, had three sons: James, Lewis and John. The first and
last, to wit, James and John, left no posterity. Lewis son of John had two
sons, Francis and Lewis, the younger has issue, the Duke de Montpensier, who
lives at this present. The Prince de la Rochesur-yon, the eldest of this
branch died without children. The eldest named Francis the son of Lewis,
which espoused Marie of Luxembourg, had three sons: Charles, Francis, and
Lewis. Charles the eldest, had by the Lady Frances of Alencon five sons:
Anthony, Francis, Charles, Lewis, and John. Anthony of Bourbon eldest son of
Charles, married Jane d'Albert Queen of Navarre, the year one thousand five
hundredth forty nine. The twelfth of December 1553. was borne of this marriage
in the ninth degree of the heirs male, after Saint Lewis, Henry of Bour^^n,
the only son of Anthony.

Now by the decease of Henry the third, the last king of the race of Valois,
descending by the masculine line, from Philip the eldest son of king Lewis the
Saint, the right of the Crown came unto Robert his youngest son, and from
him, consequently to Henry of Bourbon, the fourth of that name, king of France
and Navarre, who at this day reigns, and of whom we are specially to speak
in this Breuiarie.

That which the king did in his beginning.
This king having accompanied the corpse of the deceased king to his tomb, and
put it in safe keeping to the Master of Meulan, Gisors, and Clermont, divided
his forces into three armies: the first for himself, with the which he marched
unto Touraine: the other twain he committed to the Duke de Longueuille, and
to the Marshall d'Aumont, for Picardie and Champagne. Before he had taken the
way to Touraine with his troops, which were composed of twelve hundredth horse,
three thousand footmen, and two Regiments of Switzers, he purposed to take
his journey into Normandy, where the Pont de l'Arche was yielded unto him.
Then he came to Deep, won Caen unto his side, and constrained Neufchastel to
be rendered unto his hands, having disappoynted by his Lieftenants, the
succors which they had sent unto them.

And having made a show to besiege Roane, it caused the Duke de Maine being
called to the succor by Aumalle and Brissac, to set himself in the field, with
more then three thousand horse, and five thousand footmen, who promised to
the Parisians at that time, to make an end of all war: and to bring the king
their enemy unto them, bound both hand and foot.

The king understanding that this mighty army of his enemies increased every
day more and more, by the assistance of the low countries, of Picardie and
Lorruine, asked of the Duke de Longueuille, and of the Marshall d'Aumont, if
they should go and meet them.

A notable exployt at Arques against the League.
And then marching toward his enemies, they encamped at a certain Village
called Arques, about two leagues from the Town of Deep.

And within three days, he made such entrenchments for his troops, that the
bancke in the lowest place, was seven or eight foot high on the one side,
above the town where the artillery were placed, under the keeping of four
companies of Switzers.

The approach of the camp was espied by the Castle, whereupon was placed
certain pieces, that shot off with great advantage. Mean space, the Duke de
Maine was greatly busied, to think how he might take again, the Towns of
Gourney, Neufchastel, and Euison, at what time both he and his whole army,
was persuaded that they might take Arques at the first.

But the Duke found it at his coming far more troublesome then he imagined,
by reason of the new Trenches which the king had made on every side thereof,
for his commodity, by the which means he might the better and the more
easier overrun his enemies at all times.

A sore skirmige.
The two armies continued there, from the end of August, to the midst of
September. And upon the sixteenth of that month, two fierce and cruel
skirmiges was made, in the which the Leaguers lost a great number of their
approved soldiers, and nine or ten of their Captains.

This did truly presage and show unto them, what success they were like to
have in their attempts to come, whereof followed nothing else but shame and
sorrow to the leaguers.

Whose foolish hope was also made frustrate, which they had to chase the
king himself into England, or to kill him with all his followers, or else to
bring them in triumph prisoners to the City of Parris.

The fury of these skirmiges was at last converted to the playing of the
cannons, both on the one side and the other, which endured three or four days
together.

On the Thursday the three and twentieth of September, the Leaguers Army, or a
part thereof, containing a thousand horse, and about six, or eight thousand
foot, came to a place named la Maladerie: which was strengthened with eight
hundred small shot, four companies of Rutters and Lanceknights: sustained
moreover with three companies of light horsemen, three companies of great
ordenance, and with the forces of the Princes of Conde and Count. Furthermore
at the top of the Trench, stood the companies belonging to the Lords of
Chastillon, and Maligni: with a good number of the Nobility who were under the
Marshall of Birons charge. The Leaguers beginning then a bloody skirmage, it
was most valiantly held out by the kings troops, at what time in the first
assault Monsieur Sagonne, a principal man of the Leaugue, was slain, with
diverse of his horsemen, the rest were put to flight. But they coming with a
fresh supply, the kings wearied soldiers were forced to retire. There the
Switzers who was of the Regiment of Monsieur de Soleurre, under the Collonell
Galati, did stay and withstand the fury of the Leaguers, being aided by
certain harguebuziers which were lodged in places of advantage, and by the
Cannon which played upon the Leaguers. And while this second charge was
preparing, the Leaguers Lance-knights drew near unto the trenches, declaring
that they would yield themselves to the king. And after some speech on both
sides, though many French Gentlemen were of an other opinion, they were at last
received. But while the kings Majesty, with Monsieur de Biron, and their
troops of horsemen, fought here and there, these Lance-knights perceiving
clearly the great power of the Leaguers, The falsehood of the Leaguers
Lance-knights.
together with the Switzers, judged in themselves that the king was already
half vanquished: and upon this imagination, they began to turn their weapons
against him. Then receiving the words, they lighted upon the Marshall de
Birons troop, and beating away the most part of the soldiers there, they
took the Ensigns of the Switzers and Lance-knights belonging to the king:
then delivering this Trench to the Leaguers, it was suddenly repaired by them:
but they held it not very long. For the Duke de Montpensier being come thither
with his Cornet of Horse, and an other company of the vantgard of his men of
war: being also assisted by Monsieur de Chastillon, with a fresh supply of
five hundredth harguebuziers.

The Leaguers were constrained to depart both from Maladere and the Trench:
where the king speedily brought two great pieces of Ordenance, which he caused
to be shot off among the thickest of the Switzers his enemies: who with
certain of the horfmen made a retrait, in the which they were mightily
damnified by the great shot: nevertheless they never turned their faces to
look back, whereby they might see from whence their hurt came. This day the
Leaguers lost a great number of soldiers and men of war, among whom were
diverse of their chief Gentlemen, and many were taken prisoners.

The King lost also six or seven Gentlemen, with the Earl of Roussie, and a
few footmen. There were many hurt by the traitorous practice of the Leaguers
Lance-knights.

On Sunday the four and twentieth, the Leaguers army raised themselves about
midnight: and upon the Tuesday following, they came upon the other side of the
Town of Arques, and set semselues right against the place from whence they
were parted, assaying to batter it with cannon shot. But the king found the
leaguers so much work, by continual skirmiges, and hampered them in such
sort, that upon the eleventh day after their coming thither, they were feign
shamefully to withdraw themselves from the Town of Arques: upon the news which
they received, that the Earl de Soisson, the D. de Longueuille, and the
Marshal d'Aumont, were coming within twenty leagues of Arques with their
troops, to strengthen the king in his forces. While these affairs were in
hand, the leaguers to make the Parisians believe great things, and dream of
wonders, sent the Ensigns thither, which they had taken from the kings
Switzers and Lance-knights, as a token of the good success which they had
against his Majesty. Whereupon there was a certain pamphlet imprinted at
Parris, wherein it was published, that between Arques and Deep, where the
king of Navarre was besieged, the Duke de Maine had won from them, fourteen
Ensigns of the footmen, and eight Cornets of their horsemen were by him
slain.

These gross fables were set out, to feed the people with vain fancies, and to
pinch the purses of those that were ready to believe it, and that bare a good
desire to have it so. The king thought at the first, that this retrait was but
a policy wrought by the Duke de Maine, that bending himself to entercept his
succors before they came unto him, he might the easier subvert them, and
afterward return with more strength and fury then before. For this cause the
king resolved with himself to join the Earl of Soisson and the others
together. After the which, leaving the Marshall of Biron at Deep, his Majesty
with four hundredth horse met and joined with his succors, within five miles
of the leaguers army: who with them incontinent passed over the river of Sum.

The Duke de Maine was feign for his credits sake, to cover this his shameful
retrait with a quaint excuse. He therefore published abroad, that he was
constrained speedily to go down into Picardte to possess himself of those
Cities which he was bound (by the agreement made at Arras) to deliver to the
Spaniards. Upon this news the king determined to stay the return of the
leaguers, being persuaded that the Cities of Picardie would not be drawn to
consent in any wise to submit themselves under the Spanish troops. Having then
provided for his affairs in Normandy, and gathered together those succors
which the Queen of England had sent unto him: he departed out of those parts
the one and twentieth of October, with full purpose to awaken the Leaguers in
Picardie, and to constrain their chief commanders to avoid that country,
where by treason they had taken the Town of Fere, and after delivered it to
the Spaniards. This done, his Majesty by casie iourneyes drew near unto
Parris, and encamped himself within a league thereof, upon the last day of the
same month.

The same day, having known what trenches the enemies had made round about the
Subburbes, on that side where he was, by the advice of his warrelike Council,
they concluded to assail them on the morrow by break of day by three several
companies, and in three sundry places. The first company consisted of four
thousand Englishmen, two French Regiments, and one regiment of Switzers: who
were led by the Marshall de Biron, to assail that side of the subburbes called
Saint Victor and Marceau. The second company having two Regiments of Switzers,
four of Frenchmen, and four of strangers, were all under the conduct of the
Marshall d'Aumont: for that part of the Subburbes called Saint Jacques and Saint
Michael. The third company consisted of ten Regiments of Frenchmen, one
Regiment of Launce-knights, and one Regiment of Switzers, who were commanded by
the two Lords, Chastillon and la Noue. Each one of these troops were winged
with a good number of hardy Gentlemen on foot, well armed and appointed to
assist the rest of the footmen, if any cause of resistance were: and these set
upon that part of the subburbes called Saint German, Bussi, and Nesle.

These had at their tail, two cannons and two coluerins: the king commanded
over one of the troops, the Earl of Soisson, and the Duke de Longueuille over
the other twain. The first day of November, all these subburbes were assaulted
and taken in less then one hour, with the loss of seven or eight hundredth
men on the defendants side.

They lost beside fourteen of their Ensigns, and thirteen pieces of
artillery, small and great. The assaylants lost almost nothing at all, and if
the ordenance had been well mounted, the gates of Parris had been
battered down, ear the Citizens had known of any such exployt.

The king entered within the subburbes of Saint Jacques, about 8. of the clock
in the morning: and being advertised that the Duke de Maine was come forth of
Picardie, and with all his forces had entered into Parris, made a proof to
win the other part of the subburbes, which he only did to draw his foes to
the fight. Having then stayed four long hours in battle, and that none of
the leaguers would issue forth: he contented himself that he had given
knowledge to the Parisians, that at the least, means failed him not to
chastise them, but his desire was, to win them by gentleness to the
acknowledgement of their faults.

Therefore without more adoo, the king departed thence, and lodged about six
or seven miles off, at a place called Linats, which is a Town above Montleheri,
where his grace stayed one whole day, to see if his enemies had any desire to
cometo fight. But in stead thereof, the leaguers did the woorst they could to
the poor Parisians, robbing and murdering many Householders, whom they accused
to take part with the king, which they did without pitying either sex or age.

They massacred and drowned at that time, a great number of men and women, whom
(as I said) they accused to favor the kings forces, having no color at all of
any such thing.

The king took within eight days after, both the City and Castle of
Estampes, where he received a supplication in writing from the Queen Dowager,
wherein she desired justice for the cruel murder committed on the person of
the deceased king.

The which petition his Majesty sent to the Parliament at Tours, enioyning
them to cause process to be drawn against the offenders, to the end, that in
his own presence, they might soon after receive judgment. Moreover, the King
added, that for his part, notwithstanding the just suit prosecuted by the said
Queen, he would not fail to do the best that lay in him: whereupon, he vowed
again in the presence of all the Princes, Lords, and Gentlemen, which were
about his royal person, to employ his whole power and strength, until he had
inflicted that just vengeance which God had ordained him to take.

The Nobility also renewed their promise and protestations, never to leave off
arms, till they had revenged the vilde death of the deceased King. After this,
on the tenth of November, the King took his way to Beausse: and on the morrow,
he came to Ianuille: from thence arriving at Chasteaudun, he caused Vendosme
to be summoned, and to open the gates unto him: which is a City of his own
patrimony. There was in that Town one Benchard, which held it against the
king, having therein the command of twelve hundred men, Citizens and strangers:
and when they had chosen the fittest places for battery, in the morning by
break of day, the artillery began to play upon them. The impatient soldiers
did no sooner spy a breach in the wall of four foot wide, but presently
they ran and entered it, so that in less then half an hour, they were
masters of the Castle (into the which they made their first entry) and of the
City, which was greatly spoiled. Then was Benchard and a seditious Friar
take and put to death, who had been the chief of this rebellion.

Sedictous persons put to death.
The morrow after the taking in of this Town, the King caused all the soldiers
and men of war to be sent from thence, appointing that the inhabitaunts
should there again possess their own houses, without any further ransom.
Moreover he permitted that all their Clergy men should be placed in their
former charges and benefices, wherein afterward they lived more peaceably
(without comparison) then they did before under the League.

This example of justice and mercy, saved the lives of more then a thousand
men: For the people of four or five small Villages which stood there round
about, who had protested to loose their lives in defense of the holy Union,
hereuppon became more wise, and humbly submitted themselves (in less then
four or five days) to the Kings good and merciful hands.

The Town and Castle of Lauardin did first begin in those parts to show
themselves obedient: whereupon it followed, that the Towns of Montoir,
Montrichard, and the Castle of Loyer did the like: who willingly opened their
gates to the Marshall de Biron.

The Kings entrance into Tours.
The King approached near unto Tours, entered it the 21. of the same month:
and on the morrow, he was joyfully received by the Citizens and the whole Court
of Parliament, with all the honor and royalty that could be imagined. The
same day the Ambassador of Venice had Audience, who having presented his
letters, he made in the name of the whole estate of Venice, an Oration of joy
and gladness, for the happy coming of this King to the Crown of France:
with offer of their service and friendship to the King and Crown of France.

The King departed from Tours the five and twentieth of the same month, The
siege and yielding up of Man's
and on the seven and twentieth he came to a certain place near to the town
of Man's, which was besieged and battered the second day of December.

The Earl of Brissac, which was come as far as Bernard, with two Regiments,
for to succor the besieged Town of Man's, being astonished at the noise of
the great Ordenance which played upon the Town, retired with his troops
twelve miles backward. And having taken forty horse, and certain baggage
belonging to the kings Kutters, whom they met unawares, he went to publish at
Parris what a great victory he had obtained. Mean while, a great man of the
league called Bois-daufin, who had in Man's under his command, an hundredth
Gentlemen, and twenty Ensigns of footmen: requested parley, instead of
battle, and so made himself ready to the assault: but in few hours he
yielded the place. Albeit that within few days before, both he and his, made
as though they would rather die in fight at once, then they would give
entrance to the king. This being done, it was a strange thing to consider
what expenses they had put the poor people unto, of whom they had received
above fifty thousand Crowns, for the fortifying of the Town and Subburbes,
in which Subburbes they had burned more houses, then came to an hundredth
thousand thousand crowns, having also spoiled the country six times more: to
recompense all which wrongs, they endured three vollies of cannon shot, and so
yielded the Town.

The spoil whereof was hoped for by the kings soldiers, which by the wisdom
and prudence of his Majesty was spared and pardoned to the Inhabitants. The
rest of this month was spent in taking and compounding with many Cities,
Towns, and Castles: namely, Sable, Laual, Chasteau-gontier, Beaumont,
Toutesvoyes, and Alencon, chasing the leaguers out of the Provinces of
Vendosmots, Touraine, Aniou, and of Maine: where the Inhabitants perceived
(after they had submitted themselves to the king) namely those which had
confederated with the leaguers, that those whom they had before esteemed their
best friends, were indeed their woorst enemies. For after they had them once
under their power, and if there were but speech of the coming of an army,
presently the best shift they could make for the poor people, was to cause
their Towns, Villages, and possessions, to be burned and spoiled, from that
place round about: causing the Citizens to work and labor night and day, to
make rampires and intrenchments to defend them from their foes. Moreover at the
sight of the cannon, or the first shot coming from it, they fell to
agreement for themselves, that they might depart with their lives and goods,
leaving no other marks of their protection, then the Town half burnt to
ashes, the most part of their wives and daughters deflowred, and the necks of
the poor Inhabitants to the halter. The Duke de Maine toward the later end of
the year, sound means to make himself Master of Pontoise, only through the
friendship of many of the Inhabitants that held upon it side. About which time
the king met with the Earl of Brissac, being within the City of Falaise,
which be enforced to yield, where he took the Earl prisoner, at what time the
leaguers being then near enough, would not once come to his succor.

A few weeks before the leaguers Parliament being begun at Roane, they
continued their envy against the king their sovereign Lord, being not
ashamed to publish a most vile Edict, wherein they declared guilty of treason,
enemies to God, to the Estate and Crown of France, those that opposed
themselves against the league, surnamed the holy union: pronouncing them and
their successors disgraded, of all privileges of Nobility: their estates
void for ever, and unworthy to possess any office, benefit or dignity,
within the kingdom: confiscating also, all their lands and goods,
notwithstanding this Edict did not any whit impair the good affection of the
kings servants, not much advanced the affairs of the league.



Through every City which they held, they set seditious Preachers to seduce
the people, during the whole feast of Christmasse, thereby to inflame their
hearts against the king. On the other side, they caused an infinite number of
libels to be imprinted and thrown about, whereby they entertained those that
had least judgment, with a certain hope that they might be able long to
uphold themselves in this bottomless pit of confusion.

The Leaguers devices to maintain themselves.
The people of Parris, and of other Cities pertaining to the leaguers, were so
bewitched with these devices, that they thought no manner of taxes or imposts too
much, enduring patiently the outrages of soldiers, and a thousand other
calamities, to maintain them in their unjust wars against their sovereign:
yet notwithstanding their powers waxed every day more weaker then other, being
nothing able to hinder the kings exployts. Therefore the Duke de Maine, very
earnestly solicited the King of Spain to send some speedy succors, otherwise
the league should be constrained perforce to make composition with their
enemies. In the mean space, the king chased the leaguers by sieges and
assaults (in the month of January) quite out of base Normandy.

The parliament at Roane cried for war, to whom the Duke de Maine soon after
sent an answer, that he would give order for their affairs, using great
threatenings against his sovereign Lord and Master. The king contrariwise
having recovered the City of Honleur, which is a port of the sea, came to
raise the Duker siege, which fifteen days before, he held before the City
and sort of Meulan, distant from the said Town of Honfleu more then thirty
miles.

The king presenting himself, offered occasion of sight, which the Duke seemed
to accept, having at that time twice as many forces as the king.
Notwithstanding, supposing he had not advantage enough, he thought it best to
take up first the succor of fifteen hundredth lances, and about five hundredth
hurguebuziers, which the Duke of Parma had sent unto him.

Mean space, the king besieged Dreux, where he was advertised that the Duke
had joined with the forces of the low Countries, conducted by the Earl
d'Egmont, whereupon he offered battle. Those things were done in January and
February.

Preparation to battle.
In the beginning of March, the Duke with all his troops came toward the river
of Seine, thereby to pass over the bridge of Mante, which is about eight or
nine miles from Dreux. Whereof the king being advertised, provided for his
affairs, and the twelfth of the same month, he set himself in the way to go
against his enemies.

And on the morrow having set his battle in order, he made in the presence of
all his army, a most earnest prayer unto God, where each one according to his
conscience, framed his thoughts to the like purpose, according to the
ceremonies both of the one and the other religion. The Kings Army.
On the thirteenth day, the king mustered all his troops, upon a very fair
and large plain near unto the Town of Yury, where he had about two thousand
and five hundredth horse, among whom were two thousand Gentlemen bravely armed,
and very well appointed for the battle: he had there four Regiments of French
footmen, the regiments of the Gardes, of Brigneux, of Vignolles, and S. Iran:
moreover, four or five regiments of Switzers, with certain Ensigns of
Grisons.

The Leaguers army.
The army of the leaguers consisted of four thousand horse, and twelve
thousand footmen, Yury is a great village, having a bridge on the river of
Vrte, over the which the leaguers passed very speedily, supposing that the
royal army had been far from that place, but in short space the one
lighted on the other, by which means there was that day certain skirmiges,
where the leaguers had ever the worst. Many of the leaguers were there taken
prisoners, who confessed and gave us to understand, that their coming was
rather to follow on their way already begun, then to make trial of battle.

Now, for so much as the day was spent, both the armies repaired to their
lodgings. By the break of day following, which was the fourteenth of March,
the king by advise of his Council, determined how to order his battle. The
battle of Yurie, and the kings notable exploicts.
And after they had commended all their success unto God, he broke his fast:
and so about nine of the clock in the foorenoone, they were in the field
ready to give battle: and the king being at the head of his squadron, (of
which the first ranckes were composed of Princes, Earls, Knights, and
principal Gentlemen of the noblest families of France) began to make his
prayers unto God, with an exhortation, that all the other squadrons should do
the like.

Then passing along from the head of his army, he encouraged his people to
the fight. And returning to his place, without further delay he caused the
great artillery to be shot off, which gave nine dangerous vollies, to the
great hurt of the leaguers. Who after three or four other vollies given on
both sides, advanced forward five or six hundredth light horsemen, to give
charge against the Marshal d'Aumont, but he without stay, ran upon them, and
pierced the^ in such sort, that he might soon see their heels. In the mean
space, while they were thus busy, the squadron of the Rutters which were on
their right hand, in coming toward the artillery, lighted upon the Kings
light horsemen, advancing themselves against the^ very manfully, and being as
valiantly received, at last they were constrained to retire, without performing
any thing worthy of memory. The whilst, another squadron of launciers of
the low Countries, would have given a fresh charge to these light horsemen.

But the Barron of Biron advancing himself forward, having no mean to meet
the Vantgard, set presently upon the reareward: and in breaking their array,
was hurt in two places. The Duke de Montpensier ran before the rest, and gave
them a most brave charge, in the which, he himself was once unhorsed, but
being again mounted, he behaved himself in such valourous sort, that he
became Master of the place. The selfsame the Duke de Maines great squadron
consisting of eighteen hundredth horse, among whom were the Duke of Nemours,
and the knight of Aumale, with others of the Captains of the league: advanced
themselves to the battle, causing four hundredth Carbines to march upon their
left wing, who made a sallie of small shot, some five and twenty paces from
the kings squadron. This sallie being ended, the great squadron of the
leaguers, came on the forefront of the kings, where they saw his Highness
before his company, five long paces off, who furiously rushed among the
leaguers, which could not by any means with all their huge forest of
launciers, keep back the kings squadron. But his Majesty did in such war
like sorts assail them, that this great squadron was at last scattered, having
been fighting among the thickest of them, a good quarter of an hour. In the
end, this huge heap of enemies, who had thus the foundation of their strength
abated, were at last brought to hand-strokes, who beginning to shrink, in the
turning of a hand men might see their backs, which before showed such furious
faces, who took their flight by strange passges.

This joyful victory was at first intermixed with much sorrow in the royal
army, when they saw not the king return: but within a while after, they spied
him coming, all stained with the blood of his enemies, not having shed one
drop of his own, whom they described only by the great plume of white
feathers which he bore in his creast, and that which his Palfraye had on his
head. There was not so much sorrow among the leaguers for their loss, but
there was as much joy recovered on the kings party: having been so happily
returned from such an intermixture of blood and death.

But as he came from the chase of his enemies, with twelve or fifteen of his
followers, he chancst to meet betwixt two companies of the enemies Switzers,
three cornets of Wallons, accompanied with other that had joined with them,
whom his Majesty charged with such high courager that he won their colors,
they which carried them lying dead in the place, with many other of their
companions. The king then being arrived at the place from whence he parted,
all the army gave humble thanks to the Lord for his safety, crying with one
voice: God save the king.

His Majesty having set in order certain of his troops, and seeing his
enemies flying before him, he left the field surcharged with their dead: so
that there remained none alive, saving the Switzers, who being forsaken by
their horsemen, did notwithstanding stay without moving: and although the king
might well have ouerrun them, yet he received them to mercy: who having cast
down their weapons, were discharged and sent into their own countries. The
Frenchmen also which were mingled among them, had their lives saved.

This being done, the king accompanied with his horsemen and the troops of
Picardie, followed the league, which took their flight two ways. In the one
was the Duke of Nemours, Bassompierre, the Vicount of Tauannes, Rosne and
others, which took their way to Chartres. In the other, the Duke de Maine with
his most trustiest Captains drew toward Yury, to pass over the river. The
Leaguers artillery and all their baggage were left in the camp, and in the
highways near adjoining. The time which the king spent in receiving and
sending away of the Switzers, gave leisure unto them that fled, to put
themselves under covert: in such sort, that coming unto Yuri, they perceived
that the Duke de Maine was already entered, who never thinking on any new
charge, broke up the bridge before his own people were all come, which was the
cause of the death of a great number of his army, especially of the Rutters,
of whom a great sort were drowned. The others, to hinder those that followed
them, stopped up the streets of Yuri with dead and wounded horses, which stood
in stead of chains or inclosers, whereof followed a new loss: for all those
that sought to pass the deep stream, perished for the most part. The king
was counseled to pass the river at the sord of Anet, and although it were an
hour and an half loss of his way, yet he ouertooke a great number of those
that fled, which for their lives rested at his discretion Those that thought
to escape, putting themselves into the woods, fell into the Pesants hands,
which handled them in cruel sort. This pursuit continued even to the Town of
Mant, where neither the Duke de Maine, nor any of his, turned once their face
to see who pursued them. But if the Mantois had continued in their first
opinion, to keep the gates shut, all those that fled had been utterly
overthrown. But being in the end overcome by the D. de Maines earnest
entreaties, they gave them leave to enter the Town, upon condition that those
of his side, should pass by ten and ten in the night beyond the bridge,
which indeed wrought their safety. The king seeing his enemies overcome both
with shame and loss, rested himself near unto Mant, the which soon after the
Leaguers were departed thence, yielded themselves to the king, as also the
Town of Vernon and other City. To be brief, in this battle of Yuri, all the
footmen of the leaguers were ouerthrown.

Of the horsemen there were about fifteen hundredth slain and drowned: and
about four hundredth taken prisoners. Among the dead there was known to be
slain, the Earl of Egmont, who was Colonel of the troops sent by the Duke
of Parma: one of the Dukes of Brunswic, Chastegneray, beside those whose names
could not be found. We will make no mention here of those prisoners which
afterward abused the kings benignity and gracious favors, who might justly
have put them all to death. Who after their releasment took part against him.

More then twenty Cornets of horsemen was at that time won by the King:
among the which, was the white Cornet, the chief standard belonging to the
Spanish General, and to the Flemmings, the Cornets of the Rutters, and more
then threescore ensigns of footmen, beside the four and twenty Ensigns of
the Switzers, which were yielded presently after the slaughter. The king lost
the Lords of Clermont, d'Antragues, Captain of his Guards, the Lord Schomberg,
de Bongaulnay, de Crenay, Fesquieres, and 15. or 20. other Gentlemen, a few
soldiers, and few hurt.

The Duke de Maine and other Captains of the League, being frustrate of their
hope, and seeing their army thus spoiled, betook themselves to their
ordinary shifts, which was, to feed the Parisians with lies and fables,
publishing many books, wherein it was shown, that at the first assault given
at Dreux, the Inhabitants had slain more then five hundredth men of the kings
army, and grievously hurt a great number more, at what time also the Marshal
of Biron was slain: and how in an other encounter near unto Poissy, the league
had gotten a great victory. In which battle they had a long fight, and almost
equal loss. And that if the king were not already dead, he was very near
unto it.

The people being not satified with such false quoyne, and hearing every day
more then other, contrary reports, by certain men that had escaped from the
said bloody fight on the leaguers side, murmured greatly thereat, as people
that desired peace. The seditious preachers stopped the report of the Leaguers
loss, by all the means they might. And whilst the Duke de Maine and others,
(after certain meetings at Saint Dennis, because that the pauement of Paris
was too hot for them) took his way toward the Duke of Parma, to obtain
succor from him.

The Parliament of Roane, that according to their old custom, did bend
themselves against their king and gracious sovereign, did execute and put to
death the seventh of April, certain prisoners which were servants to the
king. And three days after, declared by an Edict, all those to be traitors
which were of the king of Nauarres camp (as they called him) and that would
not link themselves to king Charles the tenth (understanding by that name the
Cardinal of Bourbon) to join themselves to the league, and bear weapons in
the Duke de Maines army, using many threatenings in written papers, which they
set up at the corners of every lane, and afterward put them in print. And
whilst the leaguers applied these businesses, the king hoping by gentleness
to win the Parisians to obedience, continued still at Mant, without any further
hot following his victory. But the trumpets of sedition imputing this
mildness to the kings want of courage, persuaded with ye people, that he whom
they called their sworn and irreconcileably enemy, should be shortly brought to
such a hard exegent, that he would be glad either to grant them their own
request, or else that they should see him utterly overthrown. Breefly, their
great bragges and insolences, constrained the King to draw toward Paris in
this month of April. In few days after, Corbeil upon Seine was yielded unto
him, the town of Lagni upon Marne, and Melun. Then he assailed Sens in
Bourgongne, where he did nothing, only through their fault, of whom he
thought to have had better service. The Parisians had such confidence in the
promises of the leaguers, that they assured themselves, the king was not able
to hold out many weeks against their forces, insomuch that they respected not
the strengthening of their City, to repel the battery of any foe, or the
strength of any siege. In time of peace, that great and goodly City was daily
maintained and served with fresh provision, as well one week as an other, by
the infinite commodities that was brought thereunto both far and near, by the
help of the rivers of Seine, Marne, and Oise. Diverse particular persons, wisely
foreseeing a storm, made provision before hand for their families.

But the number of the Inhabitants in that little world was so mighty great,
that for one prudent housekeeper, there was found an hundredth that never
thought to provide against the time to come, or sought to shun a mischief
before it fell upon their pates: whereof followed the strange and woeful
desolations, which I will briefly present here unto you.

The five and twentieth day of April, the king returning toward Paris, took
and seized upon the bridge Charenton, and diverse other places thereabout, for
the commodity of this army, which consisted of twelve thousand foot, or
thereabout, and three thousand horses. The Parisians were six times as many, in
respect of the number of those that carried arms, who were under the command
of the Duke of Nemours, in the absence of the Lieftenant general his brother,
being assisted by the Cheualier d'Aumale, and certain other Captains of the
league. In the beginning of this siege, the affairs were horribly tossed. They
had in the City certain Preachers, The siege of Parris.
and among many more, were these following: Boucher, Pilletier, Guincestre,
Feuerdant, Guarin, Christin, little Fueillant, and others in diverse Churches,
which moved the people to endure all the miseries that might be imagined,
rather then to submit themselves to an heretical Prince (as they called him.)
These Preachers being poisoned with Spanish gold, and maintained by the
chief Ladies of the league, did so inuenome the people with subtle
persuasions against their lawful king and sovereign Lord, that they resolved
to perish miserably in the siege: propounding on the other side, questions to
the faculty of Sorbonne: that is to say, if it come so to pass, that the
Cardinal of Bourbon should die being prisoner, whom they called king Charles
the tenth: whether then they might receive Henry of Bourbon for their king, or
no: though he would reconcile himself to the Pope.

Also whether they that should seek to make peace with the said Henry, or that
permitted the same, might not give cause to be held and suspected, or counted
a favorer of heresies, if it were according to the law of God, if they might
fail therein, without mortal sin and pain of damnation. Contrariwise, if
it were a thing meritorious, to oppose themselves by all means against the said
Henry: and in case they should resist him unto death, if it might be called
martyrdom. The seventh of May, in the third general Congregation, made for
the decission of these articles in the great hal of the College of Sorbonne,
all the Doctors of that faculty in general, and each one in particular, which
were by oath called to this Council, concluded and resolved with one accord,
upon this that follows.

It is by the right of Ecclesiastical laws, forbidden and prohibited, that
Catholicques should receive an hereticque for their king, or a favorer of
heresy, and a notorious enemy of the Church: and more straightly forbidden to
receive one that was fallen away, and excommunicated from the holy mother
Church. That if it came to pass, that any one defamed with these faults, had
obtained by exterior judgment, absolution of these crimes, that he rested
notwithstanding, in an evident danger of dissimulation and perfidiousnesse,
and the utter ruin and subversion of the Catholicque religion: and the same
party ought nevertheless to be excluded and banished the realm, by right of
the same law.

And whosoever should bring again such a person into the realm, and either
aid or favor, or otherwise permit that he should come again, If he might
hinder it, and being bound to do it according to his charge, that person
should do open injury to the sacred cannon of the laws, and thereupon he
might be justly suspected of heresy, and reputed a pernicious person both to
the religion and Roman Church: and for this cause they might and ought to
proceed against him, without respect either of degree or pre-eminence. And for
as much as Henry of Bourbon is an hereticque, and a fauorour of heresy, a
notorious enemy to the Church, fallen away from the Roman faith, namely
excommunicate by our holy father, and that there would be evident danger of
dessimulation and parfidiousnesse, and ruin of the Catholicque religion. If
he should obtain outwardly his absolution, the Frenchmen are in conscience
bound to hinder him to the uttermost of their power, from coming to the
government of that most christian Realm, and not to make any condition of peace
with him, notwithstanding his foresaid absolution. Although every other
lawful successor of the Crown, should surrender up his right, and all those
that favor him, do offer injury to the holy cannons, are suspected of
heresy, pernicious to the Church, and as such, ought to be diligently
reprehended and punished. And like as they which give aid, or show favor in
any manner whatsoever to the said Henry, pretending title to the Realm, are
disturbers of religion, and dwell continually in deadly sin, so likewise
those that with all their might do oppose themselves against him, moved
thereunto by a religious zeal, does undoubtedly merit great praise both of
God and men. And as we may rightly judge of those, which by their false
opinions established the kingdom of Satan, to have eternal pain prepared
for them in hell: so may it be said with reason, that those here mentioned,
shall be rewarded in heaven, with eternal glory, that persist even unto
death against him: and as defendors of the faith, shall they bear in their
hands palms of martyrdom.

The Sorbonists cast oil into the fire of sedition, the chief of the leaguers
being aiders thereunto.
Now, although before this division, the Parisians were of full opinion to keep
the gates shut against the King, yet afterward they became far more obstinate:
and at the beginning assayed by often issuing forth, to indomage the kings
troops, who contented themselves, only to repulse them, hoping that the
extreme want of victuals, which they perceived to grow every day greater then
other, would at length constrain them to repent their folly.

But oner and above the deceits before mentioned, they were held in hand with
other subtilties, for the chief of the leaguers having purposely set spies in
every place, to mark the countenance and speeches of such as they held in
suspicion: that is to say, such persons as longed after peace, showing by their
words that the flower deluce, and the true Princes of France, were not expelled
out of their hearts.

So soon then as any one durst but speak of peace, accord, or communication
of agreement, without form or figure of law, they were presently killed in the
place, or drawn forth, and then thrown into the river: there were above
twenty several persons thus used, only for saying, that it were good and
necessary to make peace with the enemy.

On the other side, the Duke de Maine, being in the Duke of Parmas Court, writ
diverse letters to the borderers of Picardie, that shortly they should see a
puissant army sent for the deliverance of Paris. Afterward the Duke de Nemours
being the Popes Legate, the Ambassador of Spain, the Bishop of Vain
remedies sought by the Popish C^^^rgie.
Paris, the Archbishop of Lions, the Bishop of Plaisance, those of Renes,
Senlis, and others, Panigarole, the Bishop d'Aost, Bellermin, and Tycens,
lesuites, with many more of the Roman Clargie, caused solemn processions to
be made, double fastings, brotherhoods, visi^ations of Temples, vows and
supplications, and all to entertain and hold the people in a vain hope of
deliverance.

Likewise many Doctors, Priests, Curates, and Friars, girt weapons to their
sides, and made shows abroad with many fond ceremonies, which caused the people
both to laugh and weep. They traveled without ceasing, to the walls,
trenches and rampires of the Town. The Jesuits and other Monks, being well
stored with munition of victuals in their Colleges and Couents, kept watch
according to their turn. The Ladies of Nemours, of Maine, of Guise, of
Montpensier, and others, solicited the people on their side, with strong
persuasions, rather to perish by the famine, then to speak or seek for
agreement with the king. But the famine grew great: for the Leaguers Captains
having imbarqued their people and passengers without biscuit, they had no means
for the space of three or four months, but to stay for the Spanish succors,
to be assistant to the Parisians. All their provision of wheat and other
grain, which was brought in for public relief, was spent and consumed in the
first three weeks of the siege. Famine made war against the Parisians.
Those which had any reuertion left in their houses, did most closely lay it up
in secret places from being found.

The others, which put their confidence in the speeches of the chief Leaguers
and seditious Preachers, soon perished, or endured infinite sorrows.

The king kept them closed in on every side, being Master of Mant, Poissy,
Corbeil, Melun, and Montereau, holding the river of Sein by that means shut up
both above and below. Laigni and the fort of Gournay, kept also the river of
Marn stop from them. Cempiegne, Creil, Beaumont, and other of the kings holds,
stopped the passage of ye river of Oise. So that al provision yt should come by
water to ye Parisians, was hereby prevented: being also deprived of the plain
of the Isle of France, by the taking in of S. Dennis. Now upon intelligence
given to the Duke de Maine, that the extreme want of victualles would
constrain Parris very shortly to yield unto the king, answered, that the
taking thereof should be very prejudicial unto him, who would scatter his
army by that conquest, in such sort, that soon after, the league should make
a good match thereof.

But the kings mind or intent was not to possess Parris in such sort as his
enemies imagined. For although the same were in a manner impossible, by reason
of the small number of his people, yet would he not see and behold, much less
procure the ruin of his chief and capital City: although that many
therein, especially the chiefest, deserved for their offenses most grievous
punishment. He took much pity on the great number of people misled by evil
counsel, and hoped that their afflictions would give them warning, that if the
Dukes of Maine and of Parma coming to their succors, would hazard themselves
to a battle, their discomfiture would constrain the besieged to acknowledge
it.

But the misery of the Parisians was so great, that some of them were inforest
to yield, the other would rather endure an hundredth deaths by famine. So that
within twelve or fifteen weeks, there was an extreme desolation among them.
They eat up both their mooueables and their money. The soldiers had license to
be so bold, that they broke up their walls, and defiled the chastity of many
families. The principal men of the League rose up, and took to themselves the
relicques of their Churches. The anucient Iuels and the Crowns of the kings of
France, were put in the font. Those householders which were rich, were subtly
spoiled, the subburbes ruined, the City become full of sorrow and need: the
rents of the chamber of the City lay dead: the lands all about untilled and
desolate. An hundredth thousand persons died with hunger, with nakedness, with
poverty, in the streets, and in the Hospitals, without all mercy or relief,
in the space of three months.

The University was converted to a desert place, whereunto all the Pesants
resorted for lodging, and the Cloisters of the Colleges were converted into
stables for beasts. Within the great hall of the Palace, there was none found
but Leaguers and forgers of news. In the streets grass did grow
plenteously, and the shoppes for the most part were shut in continually. In
stead of Chariots and Coches, appeared on the one side certain troops of men
of war, who were more employed to fight with hunger, then with any other
enemy: on the other side, an horrible desolation. The besieged could by no
means come by victual, but through the mercy of the Kings Garrisons, which
he had set within Saint Dennis, in the Fort of Gourney, at Cheureuse, and at
Corbel.

The most part of the fury of this famine, fell upon the third estate: as for
the Clergy, who for the most part were well provided, they preached nothing
but patience. And the Prelates before mentioned, uttered still vilde things
against the king and his followers, and in all their sermons assured the poor
famished people, that the Spanish succors would come very speedily. On the one
side, those whom they called the sixteen: on the other, the, forty, with the
factious sort that wore long gowns, wrought in the wheel.

The Parliament, which continued as it were slaves, both to the Spaniard and to
the Guise, published an Edict the fifteenth day of June, wherein it was
prohibited unto all, of what estate, quallitie, dignity, and condition so ever
they were, not to speak of any composition with Henry of Bourbon, on pain of
death, but thereby were enjoined to oppose themselves against him, by all the
means they might, and not to spare any practice whatsoever: ye^; though it
were to the very spilling of their heart bloods. Moreover this court ordained,
that all the Inhabitants of the Town should be obedient to the Duke of
Nemours, Governor of the I Will of France, in all things which they should be
commanded to do on his behalf, and that this Edict should be read and
published throughout all the streets and lanes of Parris, to the end, that more
should pretend cause of ignorance.

But the people, who could not live by paper, nor the windy promises of the
Duke de Maine and his Preachers, after they had eaten dogs and cats, horses,
asses, mules, herbs, roots, and all that they could imagine to get in their
necessity, came in a shole to the Palace, requiring peace of the council
there assembled, where they made among them a certain tumult: but the
Captains who were before advertised of their coming, at last appeased The
Parifia^s desire peace and cannot obtain it.
them, the people being content, by the means of certain small comforts, for
the space of nine or ten days: but in the end there assembled to the same
place, a greater troop of people then before, every one provided with weapons,
boldly demanding that they might either have peace or bread. Then a certain
Captain of Parris named le Glois, ran forth unto them, to send them away
with fair words: but it is to be remembered, that famished bellies have no
ears. Whereupon they required him in the field with his own Oration, where
he was so beaten, that within a small time after, he departed the world.

The Cheualier d'Aumalle being followed by his adherents, went among the
multitude, causing all the gates of the Palace to be shut, and imprisoned a
great number of them, of whom there were some afterward hanged. The chief of
the leaguers perceiving that in the end, the discontented multitude would work
their confusion, if in time they did not prevent them: The chief of the league
seeks to de ceiue both the king and the people.
assembled themselves together with the principal of their Town, and after
many writings, notwithstanding the division of the Sorbonnists, and the act
made in the Leaguers Parliament, were resolved that the Bishop of Parris, and
the Archbishop of Lion, should go to seek out the king, to confer upon means
of pacification. This was done in the beginning of August: but before they
departed, they would have leave of the Legate, to the end they might not be
excommunicated by the Pope. Before they had obtained it, the Legate made a
consultation with Panigarde, Bellermin, and Terius, Rector to the Jesuits,
comprised in these articles: that is to say: If the Parisians did run into
excommunication, being constrained by famine to yield themselves to an
heretical Prince. If the Deputies going to such a Prince to seek his
conversion, or to better the condition of the Catholicque Church, were
comprised in the excommunication of the bull of Pope Sixtus the fifth. The
Doctors answered to these articles, no.

Deputies of the leaguers sent to the King, and his answer.
Then went the Deputies to seek the king at Saint Anthonies in the field, who
having heard the Bishops Oration, tending to a general peace, or particular to
Parris, if the Duke de Maine would not seek for a general, made this answer
(after he had shown how their Council had infolded them in contraduction,
asking peace for him which would not acknowledge him, save only for King of
Navarre) that it was his will and desire, to have peace, for the comfort of his
people, but not according to that which the Deputies held for expedient:
declaring that he loved the City of Paris, as his eldest daughter: and that
he would do more good for her, then she required at his hands, provided that
she would seek his favor, and not the Duke de Maines, or the King of Spaines.
That the Deputies proceeded very ill, and contrary to the duty of their
Ecclesiastical charges, in suffering the Parisians to die so miserably, while
they sought unto the Duke de Maine for a general peace: since upon that
voyage, though perhaps it would not be long, it might the while cost the lives
of twenty thousand persons, dying with mere hunger. Then did he dechipher
with a marvelous good grace, the ambitious practices of the king of Spain and
his people. The most wicked and horrible disloyalty of the chief of the
league, discovering the vanitities of their badde purpose: he drew his
discourse into diverse articles to the Bishop of Parris, the Archbishop of
Lions, who in their excuses, accused themselves more and more, before a most
noble company of Princes, Lords, and Gentlemen of France, who were attending
round about the King. Moreover he showed that the report of the Spanish
succoors for Parris, made him nothing dismayed: and caused them clearly to see
whereunto the Spanish forces tended: and that it was not for nothing that the
Prince of Parma took his way into France: staying but till he might bring his
purposes about, Parris and the kingdom being morsels too big for king Philips
mouth, the which he told unto them in a short and pithie speech, discovering
in diverse sorts, the blindness of the Spaniards in their attempt for France.
He allowed them eight days to think upon the yielding up of Paris, and the
articles of peace for the whole kingdom: adding, that his duty constrained
him in the end, to do justice upon those that were chief of the mutinies:
exhorting the Deputies to make a faithful report of that which he had
answered. The Bishop of Parris had before alleged in his Oration, the
constancy of the people of Sancerre, dispraising therein the victory gotten
by those of Gaunt, to extol the Parisians. But the king auswered that such
allegations were impertinent: for those of Sancerre were resolved to endure the
extremities of their siege, because their enemies would have deprived them
without mercy, both of their goods, liberties, religion, and their lives. But
contrariwise (said he) I will surrender to the Parisians, the life which
Mendoza the Spanish Ambassador does at this present take from them, by their
sore famine. As for the religion, all these Princes and Catholicque Lords shall
witness unto you, how I use it: nor will I constrain them against their
conscience, were it never so little, either in the exercise of religion, or
otherwise. Concerning goods and liberties, I give them to my subjects. So that
the comparison with those of Gaunt is not good. The Parisians have well shown
what hearts they have, having suffered me to possess their subburbs. I have
five thousand Gentlemen, that never feared those of Gaunt, The duke de Maines
wicked proceedings.
beside, I have God for me, and the justice of my cause.

After certain other discourses, witnessing the kings good conscience, and the
little fear he had of the leaguers forces, the Deputies took their way toward
the Duke de Maine, who sent them back again to his Majesty, with
declaration, that he desired nothing more then peace. At the same time he sent
letters to those of Parris, by one of his own Secretaries, even at the said
Deputies heels, aduertising his partakers, not to be discouraged for all the
answer which he sent to the king: and that he would sooner die then make
peace with him. These letters being intercepted, they were a great reproach to
the Duke, by reason of his inconstancy: but he made no other excuse, but only
that they were surprised.

As for the king, he endured both before and after that which the Parisians
uttered out of their rebellious mouths, that they had brought victuals for the
Duke of Nemours and others, which made them render him evil for good, nor made
he any strong war against his chief City, having an intent to preserve it
if he could.

But having understood that the Duke de Maine at his return from Bruxelles,
accompanied with Balagni and Sainpol, drew toward Parris with certain
troops. The king departed from his army with a small troop of horsemen,
without any carriages, seventeen leagues outright, to encounter with his foes,
and came but one hour too late to have met with them: The king goes to meet
his enemies.
who hearing of his coming, were speedily constrained to cast themselves into
the town of Laon. Then the D. with his troops made such haste, that at last
they came as far as Meaux, where he reported that he would fight with the
king: which occasioned him to repair to his army with a small troop of
horsemen only, whom he pursued as far as Meaux. But he found the Duke
enclosed betwixt two rivers, where he stayed for the Prince of Parma, at whose
arrival the battle was the second time published, advancing themselves to the
Town of Claye, and the Castle of Fresnes, about six leagues from Parris,
where they lodged about the end of the month of August.

The king supposing he should then have battle with them, after he had
recommended himself unto God, according to his custom in such affairs,
departed from Parris on the Wednesday, the nine and twentieth of that month,
assigning the Rende-vous to all his army, for the next morrow in the plain of
Bondi, which is at the end of the forest of Liu^i, the right way toward his
enemies.

On the Friday following, he chased their forriers from the Town of Chelles,
who began to mark out their lodgings, and gave a charge to a certain troop
of eight hundredth horsemen, whom he constrained to retire, even till they came
within their army. On the morrow being Saturday, by eleven of the clock,
the first of September, the Kings army were all in battle array. The Duke of
Parma got up upon an hill to behold them, and after he had thoroughly noted
them, he said to the Duke de Maine: that this was not the army of ten
thousand, which he told him might be ouerthrown so easily: for he saw by
estimation, more then five and twenty thousand, in the best manner provided
that ever he beheld. And indeed they consisted of eighteen thousand men on
foot, as well Frenchmen as strangers, and of five or six thousand horse,
among the which, he had four thousand Gentlemen of the chief houses in the
Realm. He had also six Princes, two Marshals of France, and many gallant
Captains. The leaguers being not disposed to fight, entrench themselves in a
strong place.
The Duke of Parma took then a resolution, the which saved himself and all
his army: which was, not to fight at al. And following this opinions, his
people changed their swords and lances into pickaxes, doing no other thing all
the evening long, and that Saturday night, but to entrench and fortify
themselves within a great Marsh, into the which they were all withdrawn. The
days following, they had diverse skirmiges made upon them, but they kept still
within their trenches.

And soon after, they besieged and battered with nine pieces, the Town of
Lagne upon Marne, which was a little weak town, and kept with two or three
hundredth men, which for a space valiantly defended themselves, but in the end,
they were ouerthrown by great multitude of the besiegers. This place was not
passing half a little mile from the Marsh, and hard at the back of the Spanish
army, by means whereof, the chief of the leaguers caused a bridge of boats
speedily to be made, wherewith they did as it were join the place. And the
eight of the same month by break of day, the most of their footmen passed
away by the same, causing nine pieces of Ordenance to be shot off: the river
being between them, the breach was made before the king could have knowledge
thereof, by reason that the wind was turned contrary, and the blustering so
great, that the sound of the cannons could not be heard in the royal army.

After the taking of this, the Dukes of Parma and of Maine, seeing the
weakness of the place, did dismantle it. And although the king to draw them
unto fight, fained as though he would assail Parris, and published a purpose
to scale it, being departed from them in the evening the tenth of this month,
with a good troop: notwithstanding they would not stir out of the Marsh.
Wherefore the king by advise of his Council dismissed his army, and fortified
the Towns which he held about Paris, chiefly those on the river of Seine,
sending a part of his troops into Touraine, Normandy, Champagne, and
Bourgongne, and kept notwithstanding a sufficient army to amaze his enemies.

Some have boldly written, that the king was then very ill counseled, and in
favor of the Prince of Parma, who in few days had been inforest to fight,
or to have fled: that it was not possible for so great an army as he had, to
continue long in a Marsh, where they should endure much harm. That Parris and
the league were now in safety. That the fault came through part of the
Nobility, induced thereunto by certain enemies to the religion and the kings
prosperities, who was forsaken at his need. Other some also being accustomed to
fish in troubled waters, would not it should be yet cleared: and others
pretended to serve the king as it seemed best unto them, and always to see one
confusion rise of another. The Duke of Parma comes to Paris and takes
Corbeil.
By means of which proceedings, the Dukes were encouraged to go out of the
Marshes, to enter triumphantly into Paris, whereof the Duke of Parma named
himself the deliverer. And to make his valor appear the greater, he
departed incontinent to besiege Corbeil, about half a days journey from
thence, upon the river of Seine. Captain Rigaud, commanding over certain
companies of footmen, behaved himself so valiantly, that he slew a great
number of the leaguers. As for the Duke of Parma, after the heating of his
troops, of whom many were slain: he lost much of his reputation. For it was
there where his army was so weakened, and during the time he rested in that
place, the king got together his troops, addressing them to new purposes,
which brought the league into greater encumbrances then before.

The king of Spaines Agents thought to fill his good City of Paris (so the
Spaniard called it in his letters) with Spanish companies and VVallons. But on
the one side, they had nothing to eat: and on the other, so soon as those of
Guise and other Captains of the league (moreover the sixteen and the forty of
Paris) saw themselves somewhat at large, they began to give the Duke of Parma
thanks for his good will, and entreated him to go with his people to Bruxelles
again. This request or secret commandment fell out very well for the Duke:
for on the one part, his army in all men's sight was seen daily to waste, and
himself did plainly behold, that he stood in the midst of an unconstant
multitude, and that it was not good for him to put confidence in faithless
people. The leaving of his forces there, to glut Paris even as Antwerp had bin,
was to turn all vpside down, and build a new and perilous matter for the
Spaniards: that the king watched to give them a shameful overthrow, if they
should separate themselves never so little.

Therefore he determined to get him gone with all speed possible, having
consumed a world of money, leaving the Leaguers Captains more altered with the
gold of Peru, then ever they were before. The Duke of Parma returned to
Bruxels, having done nothing, but grown unto shame and evil report with the
Leaguers.
Of all his forces he had great need: for the king ceased not to run upon
him, pursuing him to the very frontiers of Arroys, and diminishing his army
every day more and more, to signify unto the Spaniards, that France could not
be ruinated or taken but through their own folly.

Now, as soon as they were thus departed, Corbeil and other small towns which
they had taken, were again recovered by the kings troops: the which brought
the Parisians into new confusions. The D. of Parmas coming, served to no other
end but to fill their purses, and to entangle and bring all their affairs, to a
remediless end.

In diverse parts of the kingdom, as in Britain, Prouence, and Languedoc, the
League stirred and did many outrageous and wicked acts, working desolation to
the great prejudice of the kings subjects: but it little aduantaged the
Leaguers, whose armies consisted of such people, that sought no other thing but
disorders. Also they could neither grow nor continue, but by the confusion of
others, which they raised by their forces and bad purposes, for whereas they
fained that they would have the Spaniard to join with them, it was for no other
thing, but to draw into their hands his double Pistollets: in lieu whereof,
they would present him a new nothing betwixt two dishes. And if he showed
himself discontent, they would help to throw him out of those places which
he had usurped, as it came to pass soon after.

Dauphine gotten again for the King.
Francis de Bonne Lord of Diguireres, chased the leaguers out of the County of
Dauphine, and became Master of Grenoble, which is the seat of the Parliament
of the Province, constraining the Lord d'Arbigni, who commanded there, to
depart, before the Duke of Sauoy or any other of the League could come time
enough to succor them.

In Normandy the Duke de Montpensier won Honfleur, and enforced the Leaguers
to forsake the field. The Vicounte of Turenne came into Almaine to levy a band
of Rutters, and having gathered an army, Christian Prince of Anhalt, was made
chief commander thereof. On the other side, the new Pope being a partaker
with Spain, The Pope an ayder of the Leaguers.
promised to the league eight thousand footmen, and five hundredth horse, under
the conduct of his cousin Francis Sfondrate, and during these enterprises, the
Cheualier d'Aumale set upon the Town of Saint Dennis near Paris, supposing
he should win it. He was followed with many approved warriors.

The Lord of Vic which commanded in that place, showed good proof of his
skill and courage: for although the knight and his followers were entered
without loss, he ran upon them, and charged them so roughly, that the
knight and the most of his people lay dead upon the ground. The Cheualier
d'Aumale slain with all his company.
This knight was one of the principal Captains of the league, but in his
deeds so strange and desolute, that he could no longer support himself:
otherwise he was very hardy and valiant.

This was cause of great grief among the seditious, who had few men left,
that had more mischief in their heads then he. Many has reported, that his
body having been wrapped in a searcloth, and laid in a Chapel within the
great Church, rested their til they migh know what the kings pleasure was to
be done therewithal. Rattes and Mice found about a dead man.
On the morrow after, as they would have drawn forth the corpse to imbalme it,
the searecloth was found full of rattes and mice, in such number, that they had
much ado to drive them away, till such time they were feign to lay upon them
with hand-strokes, and tear them out from the wounds.

The king that on his part would not be idle, addressed himself to certain
enterprises, to give an alarm to the Parisians, that by this occasion be
might awake and cause them to remember themselves. They took such an alarm,
that they came to the gate of S. Honor, where they had knowledge given them,
that the kings troops would come and give them battle the 20. of January.
The Spaniards shifts to corrupt Paris.
All this vanished away, without any encounter or loss of the one side or on
the other. The Spanish Agents took this occasion to put the Parisians in
fear, for the advancement of their affairs: for they thrust certain
Regiments of Spaniards and Neopolitans into Parris and Meaux, staying till they
might convey thither, a far greater number, which the Duke of Parma was
gathering together with great diligence, under pretense to come with them to
the succor of Parris.

The packets and letters of the succors coming from Spain and Italy, served
for a very good remedy to the leaguers, thereby to content the Parisians. And
to comfort and encourage them the more, the new Pope assisted by many
Cardinals, did again excommunicate the king and his adherents. And sending a
monitorie bill, put it in the hands of his Nuncio, called Marcellin Landriano,
to be carried to the Cardinal of Plaisance his Legate at Parris. The succors
by him promised began to assemble. The Popes forces against France.
As for the king of Spain, following the particular intelligences which he had
with the Duke of Mercoeur, his army by sea came into the Castle of Britain,
and seized on the part of Blauet, greatly fortified since that time.

Monsieur de la Noue was sent to make head against the Spaniards. And while
they stayed for the succors of the low Countries, the Earl of Brissac made a
voyage toward the Duke of Parma, who brought money from them to pay the
Pentioners, thereby to entertain them in hope of continuation.

The siege and yielding up of Chartres to the king.
The King retired to Senlis, took his way to Brie, and stayed about four miles
stom Prouence, accompanied with the Duke of Neuers, each one thinking that he
would have besieged that Town, which is not strongly situated, he made such a
show, and in such sort, that the League sent thither speedily five or six
hundredth foot, and two hundredth horse. But because he came no nearer
thereunto, they verily thought he would have set either upon the Town of
Troys, or on Seni, staying only for the Marshal of Birons coming, who had
received at Deep certain barrels of powder and bullets which was sent from
England.

They continued firm in this opinion, till such time the King marched toward
Montereau. Heerevppon rose an other report, that the King went to Tours, for
the redressing of certain disorders: such as the leaguers blazed abroad, even
to the very slaundering of the Princes of the blood. But such thoughts did
greatly hurt the league. For the King holding himself close, ten or twelve
days with the Duke of Neuers, sent word to the Marshall de Biron (who was come
toward Mant, in his return from Normandy, after he had taken Caudebec,
Harfleur, Feschamp, and other Towns: in brief, when he brought all Prouence
under the kings obeisance, Horsmas le Haure, Roane, Pontoise, and two or three
other places) that he should cross to Beausse, as though he meant to join
with him. But that on a sudden he should turn toward Chartres, to recover
it before any succor should enter into it, for as much as the town had no
other garrison but the own Inhabitants, who were also divided, many bearing
good affection to the King, especially the Bishop: which thing the Marshall
performed so suddenly, that Chartres was environed round about, and besieged
the tenth of February.

A Captain of Orleans named la Croix, attempted to come to the succor of the
Town, with his Regiment of threescore Curates, and two hundredth harguebuziers.
But he was incontinent enclosed and overthrown in such sort, that of all his
followers there escaped but four, and himself which made the fifth, who with
the rest being very well mounted, had all their minds bent upon flight,
while their fellows throats were a cutting. The Lord de la Chastre, chief
Captain of the siege in Berry, was constrained the same time to raise his
siege from before Aubigni, and soon after his troops were ouerthrown by the
Lord of Chastillon, who came to the king at the siege of Chartres, who by his
valor and notable invention of a bridge, to go right upon the breach, was the
principal cause under God, that the place was won for the King.

In Poictou, the Barron de la Rochepose, the Lords of Preaux, of Parabere and
others, for the King fought oftentimes with the Leaguers. The Duke of Nemours
after certain sallies in and about Langres, put himself within Lions. As for
those of Chartres, they defended themselves most courageously, for the space of
two months and a half, without being succored by any: in the end whereof,
perceiving that the bridge which was made by the policy of the Lord de
Chastillon, to come unto blows with them, would be their ruin, they entered
into conditions of accord, the Friday before Easter, the which contained, that
if within eighteen days they were not assisted by the Duke de Maine (who was
then at Soissons, three small days journey from Chrartres) they would yield
themselves to the king.

Then they sent Deputies in post toward the Duke, who for provision, dispatched
a Master of his household, and two Masters of the camp, with ten or twelve
horse, to try if they could enter into the City, with charge to confime the
Townsmen in their obstinacy. But all the succors being taken on Friday the
ninteenth of April, about four of the clock in the after noone, the king
with his army entered into Chartres, where he stayed Saturday and Sunday
following. The morrow after his entrance, the Leaguers of the City, to the
number of six or seven hundredth, went forth of the Town with their armies:
and suddenly the Marshall de Biron entered, being followed with 1200.
harguebuziers, and about 300. horse, the garrison assigned to him, and the
government given again to the Lord de Sourdis, who before commanded over them.
They dislodged from thence, certain Ladies and Gentlewomen of the leaguers in
Coches and Chariots, which they caused to be safely conducted to Orleans. The
K. being Master of so fair and strong a place, levied certain moneys of the
Inhabitants, which had submitted themselves to his mercy.

Then having brought Aulneau and Dourdan to his obeisance, he returned to
Senlis.

Leaguers overthrown at Esperron.
At this time when Chartres was yielded up, the Leaguers army in Prouence,
consisting of a thousand Chieftaines, and of sixteen or eighteen hundredth
harguebuziers, as well Prouencieux, Spaniards, as Sauoyans, were othrowne at
Esperrond de Pallieres, by the Lords de la Valette and Diguieres, who did the
king excellent service. For the league lost at that time near hand four
hundredth Chieftaines, and fifteen hundredth shot, leaving a great number of
prisoners, fifteen tents, and an infinite company of horses and baggage, which
were equally divided among the victors: they lost among the rest, young Buous,
a brave and gallant Gentleman, twenty soldiers, and there were an hundredth
hurt.

At Poictou. also.
In Poictou certain weeks after, the Vicount de la Guierche, commanding over
certain Regiments of footmen and horsemen, and where he found near a
thousand natural borne Spaniards newly come from Britain, having an intent to
do some great exployt, they were charged to so good a purpose, and with such
high resolution, by the Barron de la Roche pose, and other of the kings chief
seruitors, that after they had given them a certain fight, la Guierche seeing
on the cold earth more then three hundredth Gentlemen, and his most assured
favorites, took his flight toward the next river, where finding the ferrie,
and thinking to go over easily, the throng was so great, that the ferrie-boate
and all the passengers suncke to the bottom. La Guierche was there drowned,
with a great number of others. There perished in the water and in the fight,
more then seven hundredth Spaniards. Some supposed this loss of the Leaguers to
be little less then that of Coutras, by reason of the great number of the
Nobility, which died therein. As for Guierche, he was but little lamented, in
respect of his ungodly life and disordered behavior.

Chasteauthierri yielded to the League.
The Duke de Maine having thus lost Chartres, followed his intelligence upon
the Town of Chasteauthierri, the which was yielded unto him with the Castle,
by the Pinarts, the father and the son, who were commanders of the same
place. The Spaniards sacked both the Town and Castle, spoiling in like sort
diverse Gentlemen's houses round about, never caring of whole part or religion
they were of. After this exployt, those of Guise being at Reims, made there a
new Archbishop, dispatching Ianin, sometime President of Diion, to go into
Spain, to the intent he might there look unto their affairs.

The kings Edict for upholding the two religions in his kingdom.
On the other side, the Princes and Roman Catholicque Lords, which were the
kings partakers, persuaded with him to frame himself to the exterior
profession of their religion, and by the Duke of Luxenburg, who had before made
a voyage unto Rome in their name, they practiced with the Pope to that end. On
the contrary side, the Protestant Lords beseeched the king to have them in
remembrance, who were so faithfully and constantly employed for him. Other of
his Council pressed upon him, to provide for his peaceable subjects, as well of
the one as the other religion. Also that he would prevent the new attempts of
the Pope and his adherents against France. And these solicitations begat two
Edicts, which were brought forth at Ma^te in the beginning of Iulie.

The one established the decrees of pacification made by Henry the third
deceased, upon the troubles of the Realm, repealing and abolishing that which
had been made in July 1585. and 1588. in favor of the league. The other
contained in form of letters pattents, an ample declaration of the kings
intent, to maintain in France the Roman Church and religion, which was
surnamed, Catholicque, Apostolicque, together with the rights and ancient
liberties of the Gallican Church.

An act made by the high court of Parliament at Chaalons, and at Tours, against
the Popes bulls, his Nuntio, and his legate in France.
It has been said before, that the new Pope called Gregory, had sent
Marcellin Landriano his Nuntio into France with monitarie bulls against the
king. The Court of Parliament of Paris sitting then at Chaalons in Champaigne,
having received and verified the two Edicts above mentioned, added at the last
making mention of the conservation of the liberties of the Gallican Church,
that she admitted the Attorney general to appeal touching the abuse of those
bulls published by the Popes pretended Nuntio, the thundering and execution of
the same, held him to be well relieved, giving him audience for the first day
that commission should be delivered unto him, to inform against this
pretended Nuntio and his adherents: which information being made and brought
throughout the Court and viewed, then they would decree that which should be
reason: moreover, that the same Attorney should have an act of protestation by
him made, to prove himself for the counsel to come. This Edict was given the
first day of July.

In the montth following, there was a second decree made, containing these
words: The Court has repealed, revoked, and disanuled, and by these presents
does repeal, revoke, and disanul, all those bulls of the legation of
Cardinal Caietan, and those other bulls brought from Rome the first of March,
proceedings, publications, excommunications, and thundrings, made by Marcillius
Landriano, the Popes aforesaid Nuutio, as false, scandalous, seditious, full of
corruption, and mad against the holy decrees, cannonicall constitutions,
approved councels, and against all the rights and liberties of the Gallican
Church. Have ordained, and by these presents do ordain, that if any have been
excommunicated by virtue of the aforesaid proceedings, they are absolved
thereof: and that the said bulls, and all the proceedings made by virtue of
them, shall be burned in the Marketplace of this City, by the hands of the
executioner.

Again it is ordained, that the said Landriano the Popes pretended Nuntio,
entering privily into this Realm without the kings leave or license, shall be
personally taken and conveyed to the kings prison in this City of Chaalons,
there to answer to all such things as shall be alleged against him. And if
his taking and apprehention cannot presently be, there shall be three days
liberty given for the same, according to the accustomed manner. And to him
that shall deliver him up to the law, shall be given ten thousand pound.

Straightly charging and forbidding all person and persons, of what estate,
quality, or condition soever they be, to keep, receive, succor, or harbor
the said pretended Nuntio on pain of death: And all Archbishoppes, Bishops,
and all other Ecclesiastical persons, to receive, nor publish, nor suffer to
be published, any sentences or proceedings, coming in the behalf of the
foresaid Nuntio, upon pain to be punished as in case of high treason.

Also it is declared, and we do declare, the Cardinals being at Rome,
Archbishops, and all all other Ecclesiastical persons, that have counseled
and signed the said bull and excommunication, and that have allowed that most
inhumane, most abominable, and most detestable parriside, traitorously
committed on the person of the foresaid deceased Lord Henry the third, the most
Christian and the most Catholicque king of France, worthily cast off from the
pocession of those benefices held by them within this Realm: Inioyning the
Attorney general to seize them into the kings hands, and there to establish
good and sufficient Commissioners, forbidding all other his subjects to carry
or send gold or silver to Rome, or to sue to the Pope for the obtaining of
benifices, until it shall be otherwise ordered by the king.

And the act of appeal shall be by the Attorney general, deferred until the
next Council, lawfully assembled by Pope Gregory the fourteenth, etc. The
Parliament at Tours proclaimed the same decree, adding moreover in theirs,
these words: We have proclaimed and do proclaim, Pope Gregorrie the 14. of
that name, an enemy to the common peace, to the union of the Romain Catholic
Church, to the King and to his royal estate, adherent to the conspiracy of
Spain, a favorer of rebels, guilty of the most cruel, most inhumane, and
most detestable Parriside, traitorously committed on the person of Henry the
third, of most famous, most Christian, and most Catholicque memory.

Certain months after, and about the end of the year the parliament of the
League at Paris, condemned and caused all those decrees to be burned, which
were given out against the Popes bulls, and the Ministers of that sea. As for
Landriano and the Legate, they were kept close and secret. Finally after they
had been well feed, they got safely out of France, through the kings merciful
favor, carrying away great booties, whereof they had small joy, because that
soon after their return they died.

The most part of the prisoners of Blois, who then with the Duke and Cardinal
of Guise, should have been done to death, escaped away, some after one sort
and some after another. But one of their principalll men remained still under
sure guard in the Castle of Tours: that is to say, the Duke of Guise, whom the
multitude of the Leaguers, and diverse Parisians did greatly desire, saying many
times, that if after the death of his father, and before the coming of his
uncle de Maine, he had been within Paris, that of a certain they had carried
him to Reimes, sacred and crowned king of France.

But his keepers held him sure enough from them, for the kings Councillors
would not, that the seditious should have so fit a subject to work upon, nor
such store of wood and oil to increase the flames of their sedition.

On the other side, the Duke de Maine having obtained his new title, to be
Lieftenant general of the estate and Crown of France, desired not that his
Nephewe should be at more liberty. Neither was the royal throne and seat
big enough for two to sit in, and he which was already settled, would not
come down, to suffer a younger then himself to ascend thereinto.

Diverse other of the principal men of the League, willing to counterchecke the
Duke de Maine, did all that possibly they could, to prefer his young Nephew:
but all in vain. When the Kings Council saw fit time to thwart the Dukes of
Maine and Nemours, which by diverse slights did daily rob the Crown, as also
diverse other strangers did, would notwithstanding set on them again, and
seek to destroy the one by the other: they caused their affaiers to be so
disposed for the keeping of this person, that the Duke of Guise, escaped the
fifteenth day of August, by a cord which was given him, The Duke of Guise
escapes out of prison.
wherewith sliding down out of one of the windows, he went quite away. There
was but small running after him, who having found all things ready for his
conueyance, took his way to the Lord de la Chastre, who kept him in a sure
place.

Those which judged not but superficially of these things, namely the Leaguers,
made bonfires for joy of this escape, supposing that this young Prince should
be so well provided for, that he should be made king for the holy union. But
the Lieftenant general his uncle, and certain others, pretending to bear
away the best part in that piece, were of an other mind. Noyon besieged and
taken by the king.
The King all this while slept not, having the self same month besieged Noyon,
a town in Picardie held by the league, and having ouerthrown by four
assaults, the succors which the League had sent them, slain the most resolute
men of war on their side, taken a great number of prisoners, put the rest to
flight, and constrained the besieged to yield.

The Duke de Maine with the Lords of Belin, Vitri, d'Alincourt and others, had
a great mind to set upon Mante, thinking to withdraw the king, and afterward
assayed to force the Switzers of Soleurre lodged at Houdan, but all in vain,
as also was their coming to Noyon. For the king being never moved with their
bragges, followed to the point of his purpose, even to the very noses of his
enemies, who daring not to come under his hands, he became Master of the
Town. And having brought upon the Leaguers and Spaniards great shame and
dishonor, he chased them even unto Han, provoking and enforcing them to
fight, but they could not hear on that side. Noyon was yielded and given up to
the King the seventeenth of August. About a month after, The Duke of Sauois
army overthrown at Pontcharra.
the Lord of Diquieres was overthrown in the plain of Pontcharra, near unto
the Castle of Bayars, standing in the valleye of Graisiuodan, with the Duke of
Sauois army, commanded by Amedio the Dukes bastard brother, accompanied with
Dom Oleuares a Spanish Captain, the Marquis of Treuic, and others.

There were slain upon that plain, more then two thousand and five hundredth
of the Dukes army, a great number were taken prisoners, being for the most
part Gentlemen of command. They won also above three hundredth horse,
eighteen colors bearing the red cross, a Cornet was there taken, and all
their baggage left behind.

The booty which was gotten, amounted to the sum of two hundredth thousand
Crowns, the most part thereof being in chains, rings, silver cups, and
coin both of gold and silver, the rest in horses and armor.

The next day, two thousand Romans and soldiers of Milaine, who with their
commander the Earl Galeotte of Belioyeuse, were saved within the Castle
d'Aualon, at length yielded themselves to the kings mercy. But the fury of
the soldiers could not be quieted, til they had slain six or seven hundredth of
them, the rest having white wands given in stead of Pasports, were sent into
Italy, there to make report of their unhappy fortune, having promised never
to bear arms against France any more.

This victory was the more excellent, for that on the kings side, after they
had searched their companies, there was found but one horseman, and two
footmen dead, and three or four hurt. The rest of this year was spent by the
Lord of Diguieres, in the fortifying of Grenoble, and in the refreshing of his
garrisons. After the taking of Noyon, the king caused a part of his troops to
go into Normandy, as well to same those of Roane, who showed themselves no
less obstinate then the Parisians, as also to provoke the Spaniards unto
battle, for he knew that incontinuent the leaguers would cry for aid: and
that if the Duke of Parma deferred their succor, that he should either soon
overthrow them, or quickly bring them to some reason. On the contrary, if the
Duke should come there, it would be a means to dispatch their affairs, hoping
that God would favor his just cause, against the ungodly and infamous
rebellion of his enemies. In the mean space, he gave order that Paris should
be enclosed on every side, keeping still his garrisons in the fort of Gournay
upon Marne, at Saint Dennis, Melun, Corbeil, and other places, as well by water
as by land, the great tributes and taxes which was gathered for the bringing of
victual to the Parisians, and the maintenance of their troops, did so glean
their money from them, piece by piece, that it brought the people to great
poverty.

The Leaguers then did that which was loooked for: for after the king The
second and the last coming of the Duke of Parma into France.
had set forward to Normandy, the king of Spain being solicited from diverse
parts, and of his own accord also, for the recovering of his money, sent the
Duke of Parma, who was diligently providing for the affairs of the low
countries, into Normandy, to relieve those of Roane, and to help them, upon
such occasions as should be presented. Those of Guise and other commanders of
the league, made continual suit to the said Duke to that effect. By this
means toward the end of the year, the Duke of Parma having committed the
government of the low Countries to the Earl of Mansfield, departed from
Bruxelles, and with four thousand foot, and three thousand horse, set forward
on his way, making small iournies, because he thought it the most necessary
for him, and that under the appearance of arms, he might attain to an higher
purpose: which was, to procure the states of the league to give the Crown of
France to the king of Spaines daughter, whom they had promised to wife unto one
of the chief of that party. The Dukes army was strengthened by the Italian
succors, conducted by Sfondrate Earl of Montemarcian, and three thousand
Switzers.

While all this preparation was made, the sixteen of Parris, the first authors
of the league among the people, who could not endure to see the Duke de Maine
despise them, and take state upon him, as he had done within a few months,
resolved to deprive him of his state, pretending to walk more watily in their
affairs, according to the king of Spaines intent, to whom they had Brisson
the^ President, l'Archir and Tardif counselors, hanged.
sold the City, thereby to cut off as it were with one blow, all the hope which
the king had in their subjection. They discovered among other, that Brisson the
President, Tardif, and Larcher, Councillors, were sorry that they had such
great part in the furious actions of the league, thinking how they might find
remedy for the same: upon this, supposing they had found that which they
looked for, and after certain counsel had on the matter, they went by their
authority, and apprehended the President and both the Councillors, committing
them to prison the fifteenth day of November, and on the morrow they caused
them to be hanged in Grieve street. In this sort perished these learned men,
especially Brisson, which plunged himself against his conscience, into this
pit of execrable felony, against his sovereign Lord, and the laws of the
Realm. Thus he received of those wicked men, which he had so unjustly and so
long supported in their heinous crimes, a fit reward for his inexecrable faults.

Four of the 16. hanged by the Duke of Parma.
The Duke de Maine, which practiced with the Duke of Parma, being advertised of
this tumult, went to join with his trustiest friends, made speed unto Parris,
and caused Louchart, Anroux, Hameline, and Emonnot, four of the sixteen to
be hanged, and caused the other twelve to be thrust out of office, and made
his Lieftenantship as sure as possibly he could: and to appease the people,
who were guilty of this mutiny, proclaimed the tenth of December, an Edict of
banishment unto all those which had been medlers in this new riot.

Strange felony committed by the Parliament, at Roane.
As the Duke of Parma took easy iourneies into Normandy, the Parliament of
Roane published the seventh of January, a cruel decree against their
sovereign Lord the King, containing these words: The Court does most expressly
forbid all persons, of what estate, dignity, or condition soever they be,
without all exceptions, to favor in any sort whatsoever, Henry of Bourbon or
any of his, but to withstand him incontinent, upon pain to be presently
hanged up. Also the same Court ordains, that absolution shall be obtained
for the said Attorney general, Nemine dempto, to inform against all those
that shall favor the said Henry of Bourbon and his adherents. That the oath
made by the holy Union the two and twentieth day of January, 1589. shall be
renewed from mouth to month, in the general assembly, which for that purpose
shall be held in the Abbey of Saint Oven within the same City. Further, it
inioyneth all the Inhabitants to keep, and inuiolably to observe the said
Edict, from point to point, according to the tenure and true meaning of the
same, upon pain of death, without any hope of grace or favor to be had
therein. Villars a notable Leaguer.
Moreuer, the same Court does expressly inioyne, all the Inhabitants to be
obedient to the Lord of Villars, Lieftenant general to our sovereign Lord
Henry of Lorraine (eldest son to the Duke de Maine) in this government, in all
things which shall be by him commanded, for the conservation of this City.

The Bishop d'Euereux, hanged.
A little before the siege of Roane, the King having in the month of September,
1591. taken Louuiers, chastised certain seditious persons, and sent the
Bishop d'Euereux, surnamed the holy, prisoner unto Tours (who was one of the
Arches and Pillars of the league) to the end he should there have the law, and
after be hanged: the which was done without the Cardinal of Bourbons knowledge:
least he should repriue him from the Gallows, he provided for all things
necessary to the siege, causing diverse engines to be made at Caen, at Pont de
l'Arche, at Ponteau de Mer, and in other places. The D. de Maines son having
encouraged the Citizens to persevere in their actions, for their relief,
Baquemare at that time their chief President, procured that all the
Inhabitants should swear before the Mayor, named Land, that they should
reveal all those, whom they knew either in word or deed, to favor the King
of Navarre, that they might be punished for example to others.

Villars was there entered, to strengthen them with six hundredth horse, and
twelve hundredth muskets, and gave such order for his affairs, that they
yielded him soon after, the Roiteler of Roane, without any respect to the
Lieftenant generals son: in so much, that when they commanded him any thing
which he thought not good to be done, his answer to the Duke de Maine was,
that being both of them companions and spoylers of the estate, he would not
obey him, whom he knew not for his Lord and Master. And the better to apply
himself, he caused all those to be chased out of Roane, that were by him
suspected, writing letters full of outrage to the King, who summoned his
subjects to an acknowledgement of their rebellion, placing artillery, and
using all acts of hostillitie against his sovereign Lord and King. Moreover he
caused a new search for victuals, he subborned Friars, Priests, and Preachers,
to poison the multitude by their seditious persuasions, brought his troops into
the field, indomaging the army as much as possibly he might, the which,
beside ye obstinate dealings of the besieged, had a shrewd fight, with the
extreme rigor of the sharp winter, with sickness and the want of food.
Notwithstanding all which, at the last the besieged were constrained to come to
composition. But understanding that the Dukes de Maine and of Parma were
coming with succors, and were withal, become Masters of Neufchastel, given
over by the Kings garrison, they held it till the 20. of March, the which army
of the Dukes came to Franqueuille, which is about half a days journey from
Roane.

The Leaguers army.
The Duke of Guise, la Chastre, and Vitri, led the vantgard: the Dukes of
Maine, of Parma, and Sfondrate, Nephew to Pope Gregory the fourteenth
deceased, co^ducted the maine battle: the rearward had for their leaders, the
D, of Aumale, the Earl of Chaligni, Boisdaufin, Balagni, and Sainpol.
Bassompierre, and Monsieurle Motte, were Captains over the Switzers and the
artillery. The Kings troops being over weak to match with this great army
of leaguers, left them to work their woorst, seeking opportunity to meet
with them at advantage, staying for the Kings coming, who with all speed
iournied toward Deep on necessary causes, the which broke the great intended
purposes of his enemies.

And the whilst the Marshall of Biron, caused seven pieces of artillery to be
conveyed to Bans, which is a town about one mile from Darnetal, where he set
himself in battle array, planting his cannons in their several places,
therewith to entertain the Duke of Parma, who came to lie in the valley on the
side thereof. The King stayed all that night within a Mill hard by Bans, who
continued in fight well near thirty hours, making continual skirmiges upon
the forwardest of his enemies.

The Duke of Parma, which made as though he would give battle, after some
excuses and delays drew this army on the side of Barnetal. But the more to
draw and entangle him, straight after his coming, the king had dismissed
his Nobility, in such sort, that they were all near enough to be heard, with
intent to bring an evil bargain both upon the Spaniards and Italians. The
rest of the month of March, and the most part of April, was spent in
continuing small skirmiges. In the end, on Tuesday the one and twentieth day of
April, about ten of the clock in the morning, the Dukes de Maine, of Guise,
and of Parma, put themselves into Roane, where they stayed but certain hours.
Villars would not have any partners, much less such Masters.

The Leaguers army had upon the same day of the Dukes entrance, taken
Caudebec near adjoining, from whence the garrison dislodged in the night
following, and left the town for the Duke of Parma, which was yielded unto
him: but he kept it not long. The king ouerrunneth his enemies and breaks
their Camp, chasing the rest out of Normandis.
For the king seeing his enemies had not victualled Roane, passed to Pont de
l'Arche le Mercredi, on the Wednesday, and advanced his army toward Fontain le
Bourg, and sent to all the neighbor owns, as Louiers, Mante, Mulean, Vernon,
and otherswhere the Garrisons were, that they should march toward him: the
which was speedily performed. Then grew his army to more then three thousand
horse of Frenchmen, and six thousand foot, in less then six days.

Then turned he his forces toward the Town d'Yuetot, where the Dukes of Maine
and of Guise were then lodged, who had no leisure to go to dinner, having news
brought that their vantgard was suddenly set upon, and wholly overthrown.
This constrained them by flight to save themselves two miles off, in the Duke
of Parmas quarter, leaving behind them all their baggage and silver vessels, a
good booty for the Lord de la Guich.

The first of May they were raised to an other lodging, and above six hundredth
of the leaguers slain, without any loss, except five soldiers, and about
eighteen or nineteen hurt. And having knowledge that the Leaguers intent was
not to fight, but to retire, they followed the^ the more close, shutting up all
their passages, as well to prevent the bringing of victuals, as their escape:
for which there was good reason. Upon the river their ships and vessels were
beaten, part whereof was taken, and part suncke by the Holanders. By land they
were enclosed, in their camp entrenched and fortified, yet would they not
issue forth, although the necessity of victuals was extreme great among
them, and that all warrelike order showed their insufficiency.

They were moreover entrenched within a wood, where also two thousand Spaniards
and VVallons were lodged, to intercept the kings passage, who nevertheless in
the sight of their enemy, broke through their trenches, where all this great
troop was overthrown, except some few which by their swiftness took the
groves, being more amazed, then desirous to revenge. The days following they
continued their chasing by skirmiges till the tenth of March, at what time the
king, after he knew where they pitched their camp, chose out such forces as
he thought necessary, and set upon them by five of the clock in the
morning, within a quarter which the leaguers supposed most strongest.

There was overthrown without any great resistance, twenty two Cornets of
horsemen. It is thought that it was there where the Duke of Parma had his arm
hurt with a musket shot, other say it was done in the former charge.

Howsoever it were, the Leaguers lost at the same time two thousand horse,
which by the victors were carried away with all their baggage: leaving slain
upon that place, more then two thousand and five hundredth men, and many taken
prisoners.

They retired toward Fescamp, where having within few days selt the force,
both of hunger and thirst, at last they fled shamefully toward Parris, and
from thence to Brie, at last they came to Artoys, wherwithin few months the
Duke of Parma with his troops melted like wax in the sun. Sfondrate saw
his people also confounded, Roane being brought to great extremity, bought of
Villars his Rotelier, the corn hourded up in his Garners, whereof he made a
marvelous mass of treasure, which he employed for a small space, till such
time as he was slain by the Spaniardes near unto D^rlans. Thus was France
the third time delivered out of the hands of herenemies.

Those of the house of Guise, and other chief Captains of the League, that
sought new troubles, being nothing sorry for the Duke of Parmas ill success,
set themselves with the Spanish Agents (to get into their hands new bags of
Spanish gold) in consultation touching the assembly of their estates, to the
end to elect a King or a Queen: to wit, the king of Spaines daughter, who was
to marry with one of the principal Leaguers.

And although the Duke de Maine wrought with the others in the same wheel, yet
had he a contrary intent. As for the most part of the Parliament of the
leaguers of Parris, and the third estate, they all desired peace and some end
of these troubles.

The Leaguers forces in diverse parts.
In many other parts of the Realm, and namely in Languedoc and Britain, the
Dukes of Ioyeuse and Mercoeur, two principal Leaguers, continued their war,
doing great damage to the Kings subjects. In July the Duke de Maine took
Ponteau de Mer, while the king practiced his entrance into Paris, which as
then found no good success, being broken off by the Marshall de B^rons death,
who was slain by a cannon shot at the siege of Espernon. On the other side,
the Duke of Nemours purposed the building of a little Monarchy at Lions, being
possessed by intelligence of the City and Castle of Vieru^, which were sold
unto him.

He attempted to do much more, by help of the forces coming from Sauoy, but
in vain at that time. The King was very watchful to prevent the entrance of
foreign forces, giving order within his Realm, for all his most urgent
affairs, distributing his troops here and there in places most convenient.

And for as much as his Nobility had been greatly hazarded at the siege of
Roane, and in the services following, he dismissed a great many, and retained
a certain number of the most deliberez. Others, which went far off, to
assail the League in diverse places, perished for the most part.

The Spaniards, which were very curious to recover their great losses, with
some memorable act, some certain months after the The spoil of Bayonne
attempted in vain by the Spaniards.
Duke of Parmas discomfiture, they attempted the taking of Bayonne, by the help
of a puissant army, which came unto them as well by water as by land. Long
time before this, the Governor of Fontaraby, had from his Masters
intelligence, that a Doctor of Physic called Blancpignon, had often received
letters in covert terms, to further the Spaniards affairs, consisting in the
surprising of the City, and the expulsing of all the kings officers and
servants in the same.

This Doctor conferred with a Spaniard, which had long time dwelt in that
Town: and those two brought their treason to such a point, that a fleet of
certain ships, and an army by land, were made ready for the executing of
their purpose. But God would that the Lacquey which was sent to Fontaraby, with
letters speaking of Physic and curing of the sick, was taken by the Lord de
la Hilliere, Governor of the town, who having with all speed apprehended the
Doctor and the Spaniard, in few hours prevented all their mischief.

But that which he had deliberated heerevppon, which was to give a strappado
to the enterprisers, could not be performed because of the obstinate
resolution of the Spanish prisoner, who would not write such letters as was of
him required, but rather chose to die, then to set pen to paper for the
intrapping of his countri-men: and heerevpon with the Doctor he was beheaded,
whereof followed the discipation of the Spanish army.

Amblize and the Leaguers of Lorraine, overthrown by the Duke of Bouillon.
In the month of October, the Duke of Bouillon Marshall of France, overthrew
before Beaumont, the Lord of d'Amblize high Marshall of Lorraine, and the Dukes
Lieftenant general, accompanied with two thousand foot, and eight hundredth
horse. Amblize was himself slain in the field, with more then seven hundredth
others, his artillery won, all his Cornets and Ensigns taken, and four
hundredth Launce-knights sent away unarmed. The Duke of Bouillon did this
valerous exployt, with four hundredth horse, and two harquebuziers. But this
was much to be noted, he lost not in all that fight any one man of account,
and being himself something hurt, he left the pursuit of his foes to his
Lieftenants, who being aided by a sallie of shot coming out of Beaumont, they
made a happy end of their prosperous beginning.

That also which came to pass in this month at the siege of Villemur, does
woorthily deserve to be written in this place, wherein I will only follow the
notes of Monsieur de la Grange, an excellent Historian, and most eloquent among
the exquisite wits of our time. The Duke of Ioyeuse (his brother which was
slain at Coutras) having about the end of the month of lune, done many
outrageous acts about Montauban, became Master of Monbequin, M^^bartier, and
Monbeton, from whence he assailed Bart, which was yielded upon composition,
after he had lost four score gallant soldiers. And against the faithful
promise which he made, he caused the most part of the poor yielding people
to be slain.

Then he battered and assailed the Castle of Mauzac, and having given them
three hundredth cannon shot, it was yielded upon composition. Saint Maurice
fort, being also yielded unto him, he besieged Villemer, with the Lord of
that place named Remiers, commanding over an hundredth and fifty soldiers, as
well Inhabitants as strangers, to whose aid the Lord of Themines, Seneshall
of Querci, a wise and valiant Gentleman, speedily brought six and forty men,
as well Curats as Harguebuziers, under the conduct of the Lord de Pedone. The
Duke d'Espernon and Themenes constrained Ioycuse to raise his siege, and to
forsake one of his great cannons. Thomenes his forces recovered again the
Castle of Maurac and other small holds.

The nineteenth of luly, those troops which Esper^^^ had left with Themenes,
were surprised in the night by Duke Ioyeuse, who slew four hundredth of them,
hurt a great number, and had it not been for the great discretion of Themines,
he had discomfited all the rest, and carriediwo of their coluerins to
Montaubon. While the Duke d'Espernon took his journey into Prenence, Ioyeuse
came again to the siege of Villemur the tenth of September. Reniers committed
the keeping of that place to the Barron of Mauzac, to Cha^bert, and to Chaize,
who were wise and warrelike Captains, while he gathered new succors at
Montauban, where at the same instant he found Mo^^f^^r de Desme with certain
forces, who without more ado put himself with his troops into Villemur.

Ioyeuse being counseled by two crafty Captains: to wit, Onoux and
Montherand, did batter them with eight cannons and two coluerins. The^^^nes
accompanied with six score Gentlemen, and two hundredth harguebuziers, marched
courageously to their succor, but in the midway, he caused his horsemen to
alight, giving order for the safe conueying of the horses into Montauban, and
then speedily he got within Villemur, unespied of Ioyeuse or any of his
company, who on the next day, being the 20. of September, gave them a furious
assault, the which was manfully withstood, to the loss of a great number of
the assaylants. Then on a sudden, Themenes commanded an alarm to be sounded,
by four trumpers which he had brough with him, and therewithal furiously
assailed Ioyeuse, and overthrew a Regiment of his footmen, newly come thither,
whom they of Thoulouse had sent with a supply of powder, bullets, pickaxes, and
a great number of Iron forkes.

The quallitie of these footmen that would have made so bloody an attempt, did
dispatch the execution, for these were all but boys and raw soldiers, as
unskillful in war, as they were accustomed to play the warriors in the
streets, and to kill all the world with table talk. In revenge whereof, the
leaguers garrison at S. Leophaire, took a booty of two hundredth and forty
oxen feeding in the fields.

Heerevpon the Marshall of Montmorencie Governor of Languedoc, sent a good
supply to the besieged, under the conduct of Lecques, and Chambaut. Having then
chased all the robbers and spoylers from Saint Leophaire, which had been there
harbored, upon the report which was made of the new forces that was come to
Duke Ioyeuse, they kept aloof for certain days, about what time Missalac
Governor of Auuergne, took his way toward them, which being by Ioyeuse
understood, he supposed it better to be packing, then to stay any longer. And
coming to assail the kings troops at Bellegard, he had a pleasant beginning,
but a heavy and sorrowful end of his attempt. For flying the field, here
tired with great loss. Nevertheless, being minded by a trick of ancient
war to astonish his enemies, he caused many great bo^fires to be kindled in
his Camp, as tokens of victory and gladness: wher^^ Themines and his
followers could not forbear laughing: for whilst they were doing thereof,
Charnbant at one instant overthrew a company of lance-knights, of whom there
was threescore slain in the same place. Missac came to Montauban, followed
with an hundredth Gentlemen, and a good number of harguebuziers, which by the
Counsel of the Barron of Mauzac and others, was fully resolved to give Duke
Ioyeuse battle: who reposing too much confidence in his forces, and the
ordinary reports made unto him by certain fair Gentlewomen which were his
fauourits, and near neighbors to those of Montaubon, lost both himself and
his followers: for his forces were found scattered at his most need. And the
Ladies did too late advertise him of Miss silacs departure, who led the
vantguard, Chambant the maine battle, and Lecques the reareward. The
nineteenth of October, these warriors being resolutely advanced forward to
the Town of Villemur, joined directly with the Regiments of Clouzel and
Montoison, the outermost of Duke Ioyeuse trenches, which was guarded with two
hundredth soldiers, and presently succored with four hundredth others:
nevertheless, they were beaten and driven to the next trench, and there were
they fought withal a good half hour, being conducted by the Duke himself,
who seeing the rest of the kings army come before him, and Themines issuing
out of the town at his back, was constrained to fly the field, and to retire
further off, to a place called Condommes, where his camp and artillery lay:
but this retrait fell out so ill for him, that his people seeing themselves
pursued by the victorious army, fled in great disorder, and tumbled themselves
headlong into the river of Tar. I he bridge which Ioyeuse had builded being cut
up, was almost ye cause of all their deaths, which forsook the land to pass
the water: Ioyeuse being overcome with despair in this distress, was heard to
vomit forth these words: Farewell my great canno^s. Ha. I renounce God. I run
this day a high fortune. And therwithal desperately be plunged himself horse
and all into the river Tar. There were two Gentlemen, the one called Courtete,
the other Bidon, that sought by all means to save him, but the river swallowed
him, as it were betwixt their hands. And thus did God, who is the true
executioner of divine justice, work the end of this cruel, proud, and
blasphemous young Duke, who was much lamented of the leaguers, for whom he had
done many great exployts. The kings horsemen having passed the forde, charged
those that were in the water: and pursuing the fugiriues, cut in pieces all
those that withstood them. At that time, for the space of a good harguebuze
shot in length, the heads of the fugitives was seen floting upon the river.
This vanquished army consisted of 600. horsemen, and 4000. foot, together
with 1400. lance-knights, which was a part of a greater number, that was raised
in Almanie by the Emperors commandment, as it appeared by the original of the
commissions, which were found after the discomfiture. By the confession of the
vanquished, they lost at that time about 3000. men, three cannons, and two
coluerins. They also had from them 22. Ensigns, and carried from thence 43.
prisoners. They on the kings side, lost only ten men, four of the which being
not very well known, were for want of heed slain by their own fellows. The town
of Villemur having endured 2000. cannon shot, saw themselves finally delivered,
having in all lost but 17. common soldiers. The body of Duke Ioyeuse was the
next day drawn out of the water, and carried into Villemur, there to be
interred.

The royal army consisting of five hundredth horsemen, and two thousand five
hundredth hargue buziers, beside those that were within the Town of Villemur,
withdrew themselves in good order into their Garrisons, after they had given
thanks unto God in all the Churches near adjoining, for so miraculous and
prosperous a victory.

Now, although the leaguers affairs were in great disorder, yet did not their
principal Captains cease, to make many reports before the people, wherewith
they besotted the most subtillest, assuring them, that shortly they would so
provide by the assembly of the estates at Parris, that they would proceed for
the election of a new king: adding, that as for him (whom in disdain they
called the Bearnois) that reigned partly by those named Catholics, was not to
be received or suffered any longer, and to this effect was their counsel
published, according to the affection of the new made Pope and the King of
Spain. The peoples complaint in open Parliament.
And whilst the Spanish king made payment of their pentions by a day assigned,
many of the Moonkes being of one opinion, left the Duke de Maines affairs,
perceiving that in the end, his pretended Lieftenantship would entangle and
bring them from the greatest to the least, into a pit of utter subuertion and
confusion, began to lift up their heads, and to seek after conditions of
peace. At length in the open Parliament of the Leaguers at Parris, they cast in
many bills of complaints: and the principal of the City cried out in such
sort, that an assembly of the Citizens was held in the beginning of November,
where they spoke so openly for the ending of their troubles, that the Duke de
Maine began to shake. But in the end, to strengthen his affairs, he came
into the lower house, desiring the assembly to commit the deciding of that
point to the estates conuocated for that month? And he added in the end of his
Oration these words, staying for the Estates: I pray them that have set things
so forward, that they would send to the king of Navarre, to entreat with him,
that he would depart upon this proposition: if he will not do it, I shall
have occasion to believe, that he is evil affectioned to our side, and well
pleased with those that are enemies to our religion.

Notwithstanding these threatenings, it was agreed upon in the said assembly,
that they should send toward the king, staying for the renewing of the Estates,
to the end agreement might be made, that traficque and merchandise might be
free, as well for Parris, as other Cities of the kingdom. The Duke that could
not resist their wills in this matter, fained to give his consent thereunto. In
midst of these matters, the Popes Legate strengthened by the principal
leaguers, and according to his intelligences with the Spaniards, whose
Pentioner he was, continued the troubles of France by his bulls: so that it
provoked the Parliament of Paris sitting at Chaalons, to proclaim an edict the
18. day of November, which was published every where among them, the which for
a remembrance to all posterities, I have here in this place set down at large.
An act of Parliament made at Cha alons against the Popes Bulls, and the
assembly of the Leaguers Estates.
Upon this which the kings Attorney general has declared to the Court, that
the rebellious and seditious, to execute their evil and wicked purposes, which
they have of a long time attempted, to deprive the lawful successors of this
kingdom from the Crown, not being content to fill this Realm with murders,
massacres, robberies, and spoils, but have abundantly brought in the most
cruel and pernicious Spaniardes, enemies to this Realm, perceiving the
Inhabitants of the rebellious Towns to begin, as from a long lethergie and
trance, to come again unto to themselves, and to enter again into the way of
obedience, wherein God and nature both bind them toward their lawful King,
thereby to kill and mortify all points of love and charity that should be
working in them, and to bring this Realm into greater trouble and division
then before, by proceeding to the election of a new king. And to give some
color to the same, they have published a certain writing in form of a bull,
giving power and authority to the Cardinal of Plaisance, to assist and
authorize the said pretended election, wherein the rebellious and seditious
sort discovered openly, that which till then they had kept close. All which
they did under pretense of religion, to cover their wicked and damnable
enterprise. This is a thing that all good Catholicque Frenchmen ought to detest
and abhor, as a matter directly contrary to the word of God, holy decrees,
Councels, and liberties of the Gallican or French Church: the which opens a
gappe to all ruin and subversion of all humane societies and policies,
instituted of God, namely in this renowned and flourishing Monarchy, the
overthrow of the ground of the law, wherein principally consists the true
order of the lawful succession of our kings. For the preservation whereof, all
good and true borne Frenchmen, ought to spend their lives, rather then to
suffer the same to be altered or violated, as the foundation on the which the
certainty and quiet of the estate is builded. The Court in allowing this
request, made by the kings Attorney general, has and does receive him,
complaining of the abuse committed in the obtaining of the said bull, the
contents, publication, and execution thereof, and all the rest that should
follow the same: and has and does hold him well relieved, and does order,
that Philip by the title of S. Onuphrius Cardinal of Plaisance, shall be
assigned in the same, to answer to the said appeal, and the decree made in
the City of Chaalons, by public proclamation shall have as full strength
and effect, as if it were done on his own person, or in his own house. And in
the mean while, the said Court does exhort all Prelates, Bishops, Princes,
Lords, Gentlemen, Officers, and all the kings subjects, of what estate,
condition, or quallitie soever they be, not to hearken to the poisoning
enchantments of such rebellious and seditious persons, but to continue the
duty of good and natural Frenchmen, and always keep and hold the love and
affection due to their king and country: and not to hold with the deceits of
such, which under pretense of religion, would spoil the estate, and bring in
barbarous Spaniards and other usurpers. Giving most straight charge and
commaundemen, unto all persons whatsoever, neither to receive nor keep in their
houses, or about them, the said bull, or to publish the same, neither to assist
or favor the said rebels, nor yet to assemble themselves to any Towns or
places, which might be appointed or chosen for the foresaid pretended election,
upon pain to the Nobility, to be disgraded of their honors, and to be
proclaimed infamous, both they and their posterity for ever. And to the
Clargie, to be deprived, thrust out of their possessions and benifices, and to
be punished together for this their offense, as traitors and disturbers of the
public quiet and royal prerogative of their country, without all hope to
obtain in such a case, any favor or pardon whatsoever. And the like pain we
pronounce to all towns that shall receive the said rebels and seditious
persons, for the making of the said assembly, or that does lodge, retain, or
succor them.

And the said Court does further ordain* that the place where the said
deliberation shall be kept, together with the Town where the said assembly
shall be made, shall be raced and destroyed from the top to the bottom,
without all hope to have it reedified or builded any more, for a perpetual
remembrance to all posterities, of their treason, disloyalty, and
unfaithfulness joining all persons to assault all those which shall repair to
the said City, to be present in that assembly. And there shall be
commission delivered to the said Attorney general, to inform against all such
as have been the authors and procurers of such monopolies and conspiracies made
against the estate, and that have favored or assisted them. And this present
Edict shall be published by sound of trumpet, and publicly proclaimed in all
places of this Town, and sent to all places of this precinct, there to be
red, published and registered, by the diligence of the substitudes belonging to
the Attorney general, whereof they shall certify the Court within one month,
on pain to loose their Offices for the contrary.

The leaguers despising the kings authority, flowted at the Edict of this
Parliament: and called the Deputies from all parts of the Provinces and
confederate Towns, to be present with the estates at Paris. As for the chief
and principal, each one had a several purpose, being desirous to be seated
in their Sovereigns chair, without having any mind to be servants or
fellows in this Anarchie maintained by them, with the help of the double
Pistolles of Spain. It came to pass in the month of November, that the Lord
of Vaugrenan commanding for the king within the Town of S. John Delaune, in
Bourgondie, overthrew seventeen companies of footmen hard by the Town of
Diion, won their colors, weapons, and other furniture. Amongst the packets
and coffers of the Barron de Tenisse, who was a great leaguer and chief
commander of these troops, were found certain instructions and commissions,
which were sent from the Duke de Nemours to the said Barron, to confer with
the Duke de Maine, to this end, that Nemours might be elected king by the
estates of Parris.

This young Prince aimed at no other thing but sovereignty: and being misled
by certain evil Councillors which he kept, planted at Lion and thereabout,
the foundations of his lofty purposes, for the accomplishing whereof, an
hundredth years would be far too little: but having builded upon sand, in
few months his edefices fell down, wherewith he was confounded.

Now as the leaguers were promised great things by their estates of Parris,
and the partakers of Spain, held it for a most certain troth, that the Duke
of Parma would return yet the third time, with puissant forces to do some
notable exployt, thereby to cover the shame of his two former voyages, and so
to assure the Crown of France to king Philip, or to the Princess his
daughter. The death of the Duke of Parma.
But death cut off the third of his life, together with his enterprises, the
second of December, 1592. Many men thought that this blow would rent those
patches wherewith the league was attired.

But the Duke de Maine being delivered of him of whom he stood in doubt,
supposed that now the time presented it self, wherein he might bring his long
desired purpose to effect, heerevpon he raised his Cornets of horse, and did
more mischief to Paris then before.

A little before these news came, he gave some ear to the conditions of
peace, which had been happy for him, if some evil counsel had not turned
his mind from the same. But the decease of him by whom he was over awed, caused
his humor to be changed, imagining that he should shortly have the title, to
be Lieftenant general to the King of Spain in the conquest of France.
Therefore one of his attempts was to create the Lord de Rosne one of is chief
familiars, Marshall of France, and Governor of the Isle of France, constraining
the Presidents and Counselors enclosed in Paris, to receive this Rosne into
two offices, which appertained to a Lord of a higher blood and estate.

The Parisians, which before spoke openly of peace and agreement, durst now
speak no more thereof, except in secret. In the feast of Christmas, the Duke
de Maine caused those decrees which were lately made at Chaalons against the
bull of the Popes Legate, to be openly burned upon the steps of his Palace,
the City being all in arms. Also the Dukes of Guise, of Maine, of Nemours,
of Sauoye, the Marquis of Pont, wrought diverse slights to be advanced in the
election.

The King of Spain by his Agents did as much on the other side, asuring
himself, that as he had made many of the Leaguers his Pentioners, so also
knew he well, that in time he should find opportunity to overthrow and
bring them all to destruction, one after another, and to make himself the
absolute and supreme Lord. During these practices, the king was fully resolved
to assemble the principal Peers of his Realm at Chartres, to provide and
think upon remedies against those evils, which now began to present it
self. The wars continued in diverse Provinces but slowly, except in Lorraine,
where the Marshal de Bouillon took by plain force, and by a marvelous
encounter, the strong Town of Dun upon Meuse, a little above Stenay, and
drove thence those of Lorraine.

The Duke de Maine publishes a proclamation against the king.
Now for the closing up of this year, in the same month of December, the Duke
de Maine published a great writing, entitled: A declaration for the uniting
again of all the Catholicques of the Realm. This was an invectiue against the
King, covered under color of religion, and a summoning of all those which
professed the Roman religion, to withdraw themselves from the obedience of
their lawful and sovereign Prince, and a conuocating of his partakers into
the City of Paris, on the seventeenth day of January next ensuing, that they
might determine together without passion (said he) and without respect of any
man's interest, such remedy as they should in their consciences think
requisite, for the preservation of the religion and the royal estate.

But while the Cardinal of Bourbon, (named by the League Charles the tenth)
was prisoner, they used other speeches: but after his death, they not daring to
deny, but that the Crown appertained to king Henry the fourth, used the color
of religion to blind the simple. And soon after by this means there arose
other changes, notwithstanding the king of Spain gave not over the prosecuting
of his enterprises in France. As for the war of Sauoy and Piedemont, we will
speak briefly about the end of the year following.

Against this declaration made by the Duke de Maine, The kings answer to the
Duke de Maines declaration.
the king published an other, wherein he discovered the deceits of his
rebellious subjects, namely of the chiefest sort, also the f^lonie committed by
the Duke de Maine, in assembling the estates of his kingdom, wherein he
manifestly usurped his royal authority, confuting his excuses and vain
color to the same: maintaining his right in claiming the Crown. And for the
state of religion, he declared that if without the conuocating of a Council,
there might be found far better and easier means to come unto that
instruction or admonition which they pretended to give him, to withdraw him
from the exercise of his religion, to that of the Romans: he was so far
from rejecting such a means, that to the contrary, he did desire and embrace
it with all his heart. As we suppose (said he) that we have sufficiently
witnessed by the permission which we have granted to the Princes Officers of
the Crown, and other Catholicque Lords which do follow us, to send their
Deputies to the Pope, for the more easy and speedy performance of the said
instruction or admonition. Beside, the K. does accuse the leaguers that they
had hindered the said instruction or admonition; He does largely discourse of
the duty of true Frenchmen, promises to receive the said instruction: and for
answer to the chief point of his adversaries declaration, he does on the
other side declare, that this pretended assembly of Parris, is enterprised
against the laws, the good and public quiet of the Realm: and that all
which shall be therein concluded, is mere abuse and of no effect or force.
He likewise pronounces the Duke de Maine, and all that should therein assist
him, guilty of treason in the highest degree. He does furthermore offer
pardon to the Cities, Communalties, and persons, which have been seduced by
the Captains of the League. And he does exhort them to acknowledge their
duty.

A declaratimade by the kings Council to the estates of the League.
The Princes and Catholicque Lords who were of the Kings Council, published the
same time a declaration, and sent it about the end of January to the estates
of the League. By the same they required that Deputies might be assigned on
both sides, to determine together of the most readiest means for the asswaging
of the troubles, and the preservation of the Roman Catholicque religion and
the state. The Duke de Maine and his adherents answered, that they were ready
to send their Deputies, so that they on the Kings side would with a good
conscience join themselves to the Catholic Roman Church, under which cloak
of reconciliation, they did carefully hide their furious actions and former
rebellion. The Popes Legate made on his part an exhortation to the Catholics,
fraught with reproach against the King, who was on every side defamed and evil
spoken off by his enemies.

All his discourse being imprinted, tended all to this point, to persuade all
Frenchmen, that the king being of long time cut off from the body of the
Church, had bin most justly pronounced incapable of the Crown. Soon after,
they did disanull those acts of Parliament that were made at Tours and at
Chaalons, against the monitaries of Landriano, and the assembly at Chartres,
which they called a conuenticle, they sung their Masters praises, damned the
Parliament of Chaalons which had condemned their bulls, magnified the estates
of the League, which wholly rejected so obstinate an hereticque, with full
purpose never to be subject unto him, declaring that in deed the Pope had so
commanded it to be.

In this assembly of Parris, appeared the Duke of Feria for the King of Spain,
who also made an Oration exhortarie to elect a new King: then presented he his
Masters letters tending to the same effect, with promise to aid and succor
the Leaguers by all means possible. For this had he great thanks given him
in the name of all the rest, by Cardinal Pelue Archbishop of Reimes, who was a
slave to the house of Guise. While the Spaniards and their Pentioners,
endeavored with all their power to continue France in her miseries, hoping by
means of these estates of the League, more and more to entangle the affairs
of the Realm: yea, to throw them headlong into such confusion, that in the
mean space they might have leisure to set forward their purposes against the
Low Countries, England, and France it self, the king was solicited from
diverse places, by Counselors both near about him, and far off, openly to
forsake the profession of the reformed religion, and to embrace from that time
forward, the Roman ceremonies. The sum of their solicitations was, that to
expulse the Spaniards, to recover Parris and the other of the leaguers towns,
he must be inforcst to take away from the chief of that side, the only color
of Papisme, by means whereof, they would continue their rebellions.

And while the king openly embraced his accustomed religion, those of the
contrary side (an hundredth times in greater number) might follow the house of
Guise, and other chief Leaguers, who by means of the Spaniardes and the Pope,
might well find means to maintain and augment the discentions, through all
the corners and in the midst of his kingdom, the which was well worth a
Mass: and that it were not good to let it be lost for a few ceremonies, nor
to be subject to so many censures, and to be couerted by every bace person
that would control the kings pleasures, and hinder his recreations after so
many troubles.

And for as much that such a voice was spredde abroad, by the notable
aduertisements of other Councillors, Civil and Ecclesiastical, it seemed to
them, that the king would incline thereunto, and the Deputies of the Princes
and Lords of his Council, communicating with those of the League, to prevent
the election of a new king, gave some hope thereof. On this report the
Frenchmen in diverse sorts suspended their judgments, according to their
several affections.

Those that desired to see a change, which came soon after, did carefully
keep the Protestants from coming near the king, to show him by word of
mouth or writing, reasons of divinity and policy, for which it was not
lawful or convenient to change his religion: on the other side, they did daily
drive this counsel into his ears, that he must needs espouse the Crown of
France to the Mass, and not otherwise.

These men followed this matter so much, that at last they procured diverse
learned Prelates to be assembled, which were the Popes subjects, in whose
presence the state of the reformed religion should be overthrown: heerevpon
diverse Archbishoppes, Bishops, and Doctors of Sorbonne, were appointed to
meet at Mant the fifteenth of July, without any mention made of the protestant
Ministers which were before clapped up.

The Leaguers devices against these solicitations.
The Deputies of the leaguers fearing this blow, devised a new shift to thwart
the kings affairs, and to set forward the Spaniards, they first complained of
these sudden changes, declaring that they could not put any trust therein:
also that it appertained to the Popes holiness, both first and last to have
his hand therein. That the king ought to show all submission to the sea of
Rome, and to attend for a declaration from thence, if he would be found meet
to govern the Realm of France. That understanding the Popes pleasure, they
would determine on all things that were reason. Moreover, they condemned the
voyage made by the Marquis of Pisani, whom the kings Catholicque Council had
sent toward the Pope, thinking it very ill that the king should give unto him
any charge at all, who would believe (these were their words) that they would
proceed in an other sort afterward, and with more respect to the Popes
dignity, and their duty toward his sea. They added moreover, that it was
impossible to determine any further with the kings Deputies, before that the
change of religion which the king was to make, was received and approved by
the Pope: of which matter they pretended to take further counsel as it was
requisite, for the only conservation of the Roman religion in France. They
left also in suspense, the surcease of arms, because of their other troubles.

Now while the Roman Clergy which were appointed to dispute of their
religion in the Kings presence, assembled together, and that the states of
Parris followed to confer of their affairs, where the principal leaguers,
especially the Duke de Maine, the Popes Legate, the Duke of Feria, a Spaniard
and others, still practiced for the bringing in of a new king, continually
standing upon this point, to maintain the wars in France upon expense of the
Indian gold: the Parliament of Paris assayed to hinder part of these
practices, and to drive the Spaniardes home again.

Means made by the Parliament of Paris against the League and the Spanyard.
By an act made the twentieth eight of June, they ordained that declarations
should be made the same day after dinner, by the President, the Master,
assisted with diverse Councillors, to the Duke of Maine in presence of other
Lords, to this effect: that no act might be made to set the Crown on the
heads of any foreign Prince or Princess: ordaining moreover, that the
ancient laws of the Realm, should be still kept inuiolate. That the decrees
given by the Court, for the declaration of a Cathoclique King, a Frenchman
borne, should be executed. That the Duke de Maine should be exhorted to
employ his authority of Lieftenanshippe, to provide that under color of
religion, the Crown should not fall into the hands of strangers, contrary
to the laws and statutes of the Realm. And to provide speedily for the
peoples quiet: declaring over and above, all manner of acts made or pretended
to be made, for the establishing of a foreign Prince or Princess, to be of
no strength, force, or effect, but to be as deeds prejudicial to the Salicque
laws, and other ancient laws and prerogatives of the Realm of France.

The Duke de Maine being extreme wrath at this Edict, grew to very hard words
with the President, who confuted all these houe speeches used by him, and
certain other of the leaguers which held with him.

At last, after much conference, commings, and goings, letters, and answers,
The K. changes his religion.
from the Deputy on each side, the supplications of those which desired that
the king would make profession of the Roman religion prevailed, in such sort,
that the king who since he withdrew himself from the Court of France, for
fifteen years before, had made open profession of the reformed religion,
contrary to the advice of his Ministers, went to see and hear Mass sung in
the Cathedral Church of Saint Dennis, the five and twentieth Sunday of July,
where he was received by the Archbishop of Bourges, and other Prelates, lates,
with certain peculiar ceremonies, peculier to this receiving, which was
incontinent published throughout the Realm, with diverse censures as well of
the Catholicque Nobility, as also of those of the religion, whereof not one
followed this example.

As for Courtiers, there were a very small number, or other particulars in
several parts of the Realm, which shook at this change, but men made not
thereof any account, for they were all speedily suspected. And as for such as
went about to gratulate the kings conversion (as they called it) their
recompense was only to be mocked, and soon after, the most part of them
perished in miserable sort. A general truce practiced.
The Duke de Maine and his greatest favorites, seeing their intended
enterprises prevented, by that which was now come to pass: and on the other
side, that the practices of the Spaniardes was still to maintain the fire of
discention, by means of the election of a new King, which should be married
to the Spanish kings daughter: to the end they might give some hope to have at
length a day for their turn, and to frustrate the Spaniards practices, began
in July to treat a general truce, and after much adoo made therein, the
articles were agreed upon the last of July. Notwithstanding this truce, the
chief of the league with their estates of Parris, gave not over the following
of their purposes. New devices made by the Leaguers to hinder the king.
And as they had before opposed themselves at Rome by the means of the Spanish
Ambassador, against the suite of the Marquis of Pisani, and the Cardinal of
Gondy, Deputies to the Kings Cathonique Council toward the Pope, before the
foresaid ceremony the five and twentieth of July: also they resolved to hinder
the king, of whom they spoke most odiously, from being received, and to
withstand him as much or more then before, by the Sermons of seditious
Preachers, by declarations to the contentment of their adherents, by secret
endeavors, and by practices at Rome, to overthrow, indomage, and make the D. of
Neuers voyage for the king unprofitable, whom he had sent to acknowledge his
duty to the Pope.

As for the Preachers belonging to the League, public and privately, before
and after the truce, their discourses at Paris and other places were, that the
Mass which they sung before the king, was but a deceit: that it was impossible
the King should be converted; that the Pope could not recatholize him: that it
was lawful for the people to rise against him and his officers: that it
appertained to the Sorbonnists, to judge whether the Pope oght to receive him
as king. And if peradventure he should do it, nevertheless he might be held
for an hereticque, and one excommunicate: that it was lawful for any
particular man to kill him that should say, he was reunited to the Catholicque
Roman Church. These and such other propositions, were made and spredde both
within Paris and other places.

In regard of the declarations made by these estates of the League, to keep
the favor of their partakers, to give a secret touch to the kings Counselors,
as if they were not right Catholics, and to bring the Realm into far greater
trouble then before, they in their assembly the eighteenth day of August, made
a declaration containing these words, among many others: With one consent and
advise we have decreed, established, and or dained, and by this present do
decree, establish, and ordain, that the holy and sacred general Council of
Trent, shall be received, published, and observed, purely and simply in all
places and jurisdictions of this Realm: as at this present in the general
body of the estates, we do receive and publish it. Their oath.
Moreover, the same estates devised the form of an oath in these terms: We
promise and swear, to continue united together for the defense and
preservation of the Catholicque, Apostolicque, and Roman religion, and to
bring (if it be possible) this kingdom so long time afflicted, to his ancient
dignity and renown: and never to consent, for any peril or cause whatsoever
shall come, that any thing shall be done for the advancement of heresy, or to
the prejudice of our religion: for defense whereof, we promise to he obedient
to the sacred decrees and ordinances of our holy father and the sacred sea of
Rome, without ever falling away from the same.

Their division upon the principal point.
But they were not united together in respect of the principal point, which
was, to acknowledge one king. The Parisians, and other towns that held for the
League, desired that the king of Spaines daughter might be married to the Duke
of Guise, and so being joined by matrimony, they might be crowned King and
Queen of France. The Duke de Maine, who was solicited to advance the house of
the Popes Legate, made show to agree to so great an honor done to his Nephew,
but having accorded upon the general, for his particular profit, he demanded
things impossible, or at least so difficult, that it might be well perceived,
that not esteeming the Popes or King Philips will, nor the consent of the
estates and chief of the League, he said as the Cardinal did in the
Conclaue: I chose myself. Impossible it was, that ever he should come to
advance his Nephewe to the Crown. Peter Barriere attempted to kill the king,
and is executed for the same.
These contentions produced the truce above mentioned, which the Duke of Maine
and his Councillors forged, to break a blow with the partakers of Spain,
and to draw new treasures into their purses. This wrought the confusion of
France on the one side: on the other, the Prelates and Sorbonnists, which with
the watchword received from Rome, had drawn the king to the Mass, imagined in
this sort, to fish for a golden world. But the leaguers thought to bring in new
troubles and pernicious practices: for in midst of these businesses, the six
and twentieth day of August, Peter Barriere, Alias Bar, borne at Orleans, was
committed prisoner at Meleun, where he finally confessed, that he was seduced
by a Capucin Friar at Lions, by the Curat and Vicar of a certain Parish in
Paris, and also by a Jesuit, closely to follow the king, and to murder him
with a two edged knife, the which was found about him. He had been intised to
this parriside, and was resolved to do it, chiefly about two months before:
and further, confessed that two Priests by him nominated, were also come from
Lions for the very same intent: and that he set himself the forwardest for
the execution thereof, to the end he might get the greatest honor thereby.
He was drawn through the streets of Meleun, where then the king was, they
cut off his right hand, holding the murdering knife therein, and after burned
the same. After this was done, they broke his arms, legs, and thigh bones,
and in that sort laid him upon a wheel, where he languished certain hours
till he died, then was his body consumed to ashes and thrown into the river,
his compleces or confederates so disguised themselves, that they could not be
found or taken.

The Duke of Nemours Tragedy.
At this time was the Duke of Nemours within Lion, from whence he would not
stir, to go to the estates of the league, although the Pope had given him
commandment: the other chief Captains thought it meet, and his friend and
servants desired him to go, he vouchsafed not so much as to send unto them,
knowing that the leaguers cast their eyes altogether upon the Duke of Guise,
and that the Duke de Maine his brother by the mothers side, crossed all his
purposes, and would work all means for his death. A certain bold Eryer of
Lion, perceiving well that this young Prince pretented to bring some new matter
to pass within the league, whereby at least he might have some great hand in
the government, by the advice of two or three Councillors who were of his
complecies, he compassed Lion with many fortresses which held on his side at
Toissai, Vienne, Montbrison, Chastillon, de Dombes, Belleuille, Tisi, Charlieu,
and other places. Quirieu forsaking him, he bought it with a great sum of
money, at the hands of the Lord of Saint Julian, which was Governor thereof.
This done, Lion was enclosed as well by water as by land.

The Lyonnois did not withstand neither his prodigallities nor his
Councillors, nor his men of war, which forraged the plain country,
receiving the guerdon of their revolt from the kings obedience. In the end,
acknowledging themselves, they rose up against the Duke of Nemours, assisted by
the counsel and presence of their Archbishop, sent by the Duke de Maine, and
the eighteenth of September they took hold of Nemours, who was seen three
times at deaths door, committing him to close prison, where he continued
certain months, and at last escaping by cunning means, spoiled of his
succors, chased from his Fortresses, he went and died far from France, in a
little Town of his own name Aneci, scituat in Sauoy, in the County of
Geneuois.

During this general truce, many matters were intended for the establishment
of the affairs of the kingdom. The king, which desired the agreement of his
subjects, and the abolishment of the pernicious league, assayed by fair means
to win the Duke de Maine, in making him offer of charge, and honorable
assurances of preferment. The Duke, which seemed yet to have two strings to his
bow, bargained, promised, refused, advanced, gathered, and stretched these
matters to the length: procuring under hand, that the decision of the
Sorbonnists in the year 1590. might take place: that is to say, that Henry of
Bourbon was declared unworthy of all right or pretense to the Crown, although
he made profession of the Roman religion. The Spanish Agents in France set
this matter forward, working with all their power, for the preferment of the
Duke of Neuers. On the other side, they induced both great and small to
continue their accustomed request, for the abolishing of one of the religions
in France: many other were of this opinion, that the king could not be
received, except he first promised expressly to drive away all those of the
reformed religion, or at least to abolish and put down their publicque
exercises. This counsel did hatch or breed infinite unjust matters in the rest
of the year, through diverse parts of France, where they of the religion could
obtain no true rest, but in promise and papers, being molested in effect with
all reproaches that might be imagined: whereunto they opposed themselves in
nothing but in peaceable complaints, and humble supplications. Notwithstanding
they obtained nothing, the devices of their enemies being such, that all their
forepassed and faithful services were disdained, and contrariwise, the most
part of the chief Captains and leaguers Towns received into favor,
cherished, and raised unto honor. Briefly, all the kings good and faithful
servants were cast into the lake of forgetfulness, and the enemies and
conspirators of the estates set as it were in a chair of triumph, before whom
justice was so shamefully abused, that the wronged cried vengeance from heaven,
to fall upon their detestable dealings.

There were also at this time other devices against the king.
There was also at this time, an other sort of Courtiers that greatly favored
the League, and yet notwithstanding fained to be favorers of the Commonweal
and quiet of the Realm: who daily spredde rude reports of the kings
insufficiency, saying that all means failed him, to make him be obeyed, that
his enemies were of two great a number, and too mighty for him, yea
invincible: that they would overthrow him in short time. That France under his
reign being scourged with so many wars, then falling into a new sickness
of desolations and shameful deceits, it could not but languish, and that it
would come to pass, after once it hung the wing, that she should remain a
pray for a greater Master. This was (by their account) the king of Spain, of
whom they made great bragges of his honor, reputation, and greatness. His
double Pistolles had so bewitched their thoughts, that they also supposed to
make the Frenchmen afraid with the very name of this Prince: remembering not at
all, that an hundredth years before, Philip Artch-Duke of Austrige, great
Grandfather to the king of Spain, made homage within the town of Arras, to
king Lewis the twelfth, in the person of his Chancellor, the Earls of
Flanders, Artois, and Charrolois, where on his bended knees, he called him his
sovereign Lord, swearing to become true servant unto the said king Lewis,
promising to be faithful all days of his life, and in his behalf to stand
against al other, to procure his welfare, to prevent his harms, and in all
things to behave himself toward him, as to his sovereign Lord and Master, of
which the Histories of these times do make true mention.

While yet this truce endured, the king deliberated to assemble at Mante,
certain of the chief Nobles of the Realm, to take counsel on diverse matters
at that time needful. The Deputies of the reformed Churches were there present
about the end of November, whom the king caused to be called together, the
twelfth day of the month following, and having given them audience, and heard
the great sorrow which they made upon the infinite contradictions of his
decrees, and their complaints of the grievous wrongs done unto them through all
his Provinces: he answered, that the change of religion, had not any whit
changed his affection from the^, that he would redress their greefes, and
make peace and concord among his subjects. He received their bills of
complaints to have them perused. But these affairs were drawn to such length,
that the distance of many years has buried all. And the Captains of the
league having plunged the Realm into new miseries, those of the religion
almost in all parts of the kingdom, continued as grievous under the cross as
before.

The war of Piedmont.
As for the wars on the other side of the mountains, their affairs fell out
in this sort: About the end of the year one thousand five hundredth nintietwo,
the Lord of Diguieres, being entered into Piedmont, had taken there for the
king, Briqueras, Cauours, and three or four other little towns, having
overthrown the Duke of Sauoy in diverse incounters, as he did also in
Prouence, and on the frontiers of Dauphine: he chased them out of all these
Provinces, and drove him to his own house, in such sort, that if he had been
strengthened in the year following, with men, money, and munition, he had
enforced the Duke to give over all that which he usurped from the Crown of
France.

But the Duke, who was not ignorant of the estate and affairs of France,
assayed to cover and hide the shame he had gotten in so many iournies, as in
the plain of Pontcharra, at Espernon de Pallieres, and otherwise in so many
incounters in Piedmont, where he had lost in two years, as also about Geneue,
many of his best approved good soldiers, and a great number of Captains,
having also consumed a marvelous heap of treasure and munition in these
continual wars. He did then through his father in laws favor, who
furnished him with a new mass of money, besiege, batter, assault, and take by
composition, the Towns of Briqueras and Cauours, being content to keep them
to himself, without seeking any further in Prouence, where his Garrisons could
not long remain without chase of the enemy, the Town of Berry only accepted.

Thus did the Frenchmen loose in small time, that which they had gotten in
Piedmont: whereof men do write in diverse sorts. In these sieges, the assailed
did their duties marvelous well, but being ouerwatcht by the multitude of the
assailants, and deprived of the principal commodities to withstand a siege,
destitute of succor, and the passages stopped, they were of necessity
constrained to yield: while the said L. of Diguieres was as it were bound hand
and foot in the country of Dauphine: and that many which should not have
forgotten his brave exployts, but stretch out their hands for the relieuing of
that distressed country, and to make head against the Spaniardes, even at
their very gates, forsook him in his need, thinking by their envious devises,
to eclips the glory of this great Captain and commander, crossing all his
purposes, that he could not recover himself long time after, having been
deprived of all necessary means to begin in which he did accomplish about four
years after, with no less courage and magnanimity then before. Thus have we
briefly run over that, which the whole History does more at large mention,
our intent being only in this breuiarie, to touch and pass over things as it
were in a word.

which under a continuing of truce, soght to establish their tyranny. He
prescribed a months liberty, as well to the chief of the leaguers, as to the
Clargie, cities, towns, and Communalties, yea to al men generally within ye
same, to acknowledge him their king, and submit themselves to his government,
as it was requisite, and in so doing, he would place them again each one in his
charge, benefices, lands, and privileges. The time once past, he would revoke
his grace and favor, accounting them to be rebels and guilty of high
treason for contempt of this kingly offer.

The report of this declaration, and the preparations which the king made to
chastise their stubborn opinions, amazed the very principal of the league, and
the most part of the rebellious towns and commons. The Duke de Maine, did now
beat his brains to avoid this danger, but having no forces, neither of his
own, nor from others, sufficient to remedy the same, these matters fell out
otherwise then he thought. The Lord of Villeroy sent his opinion plainly to
the Duke, in letters which were intercepted, and since that, imprinted,
describing in most fit terms, his own insufficiency and misery. Certain
Towns partaking with the Duke, sent to the king, craving truce for two months
more, but he refused to grant it.

The Leaguers towns forsake their rebellion.
This union then entangled by so many oaths, deceits, conspiracies, and
fellonies, were seen to fail and part asunder the most obstinate, beginning
now to conceive and foresee their final ruin, if they perseuered in their
former rebellion. The preuentials taking example by the rigorous government of
the Duke d'Espernon, against whom they had obstinately resisted, began to
abace their Pecockes plumes. Those of Meaux in Brie, a small journey from
Parris, yielded themselves to the king the eleventh day of January, by the
means of the Lord of Vitri their Governor, who having drawn great sums of
money out of the treasures of Spain, wherewith he builded a gorgious house,
forsook the league, and delivered the Town to the king, with all the
artillery which the Duke of Parma brought thither from the low Countries.

Moreover, the Inhabitants of Meaux, exhorted the Parisians by a pithie letter
to follow their example. They obtained of the king (as also Vitri did) even
whatsoever they would request. The Parisians began to look one upon
another, and the kings Attorney general in the Parliament, made a long Oration
in the open audience, whereof the whole sum was, that they should no longer
stay from acknowledging their king, except they would prepare themselves to
endure greater miseries then before, which would produce a general subuertion.
The Lord of Bellin, Governor of the City for the leaguers, was of the same
mind. To prevent this eminent destruction of the league, the Duke de Maine
through envy wrought such means, that Bellin was put out of office, and
driven out of Paris, what time himself drew into the City an army of
Spaniardes, Italians and Wallons, under the command of the Duke of Feria,
thinking to keep for the king of Spain his good City of Paris. But the
parliament more careful for that which was to come, ordained that the Duke de
Maine should be required by one of the Presidents, and six Councillors, to
provide for the quiet of the City within a month, in such sort, that a happy
peace might make an end of all these disorders, and that the king might be by
them acknowledged.

An act made by the Parliament of Paris against the Spaniards.
And during the time that they sought vain excuses, and strengthened the
garrisons, the Parliament made an act, the fourteenth day of this month,
containing these words. The Court with full consent has vowed and protested, to
oppose themselves against the evil and wicked purposes of the Spaniards, and
against such as would seek to bring aid, or protect them within the Realm of
France: ordaining that all garrisons strangers shall depart the City of
Parsis, and declaring their intent to hinder with all their might, that the
Lord of Billin should abandon or forsake the said city, nor any Bourgeous of
the same, but either he to stay with them, or he and they to depart
altogether. And we inioyne the provost of the Merchants, to warn all the
Citizens together, to take counsel on things necessary, and to join with the
same court, for the better execution of the said act. And that the said Court
shall forbear all other matters, till such time as the said act is put in
execution and received. Those of that body which had been before the greatest
sustainers of the league, were now the first that humbled themselves hereunto.
The Ambassador of the Spanish part, wrought at Rome an other occasion to
hinder the accord twixt the Pope and the king of France, who alleged that the
Kings penitence at S. Dennis, was not sufficient to obtain absolution of the
papal seat, sent the Duke of Neuers with great presents to be given to him
and his son. He parted from Rome the 15. of January, who met upon the way, the
Cardinal of Ioyeuse, and the Barron of Senescay, who were speedily traveling
toward the Pope in the Duke de Maines name. The shifts of the leaguers of Rome.
Their courtlike salutations was then forgotten, both on the one side and
other. The Cardinal had audience the 24. of this month, who demanded succors
for the league, and 200000. Crowns, otherwise all would be utterly lost. But
the Pope answered, that until then, the K. of Spain had furnished the league
both with men, money, and promised so to continue. As for the money which they
demanded, he excused himself by means of wars with the Turks. Six days
after, the Cardinal having by an other Oration shown the means how to
sustain the league, the Pope made answer, he could resolve on nothing, till
first he had taken advice with the king of Spain, for the most expedient
means to maintain the Catholicque religion in France.

Leaguers received into grace through the mercy of their gracious sovereign.
The Duke of Neuers was most royally received at Florence, at Venice, and at
Mantoue, from whence he came into France. Many memorable things came to pass
in the month of February. On the one side, the King constrained those of Milon
and the Castle of Thierri, to acknowledge him for their sovereign Lord: on the
other, he received into favor the City of Orleans, Lion, Roane, Poictiers,
Bourges, Haure de Grace, Ponteau de Mer, Vernueil at Perch, Pontoise, Riom in
Auuergne, Peronne, and Mondidier in Picardie, agreed that they of Amiens and
Abbeuille, should remain newters, (which shortly after acknowledged him)
because they would not open their gates to the Duke of Aumale, one of the
Captains of the league, nor to his troops.

The Bishop of Orleans for his better obtaining of the kings pardon for all the
City, procured that certain mutinous persons of the league should be whipped,
and the rest banished. As for the Duke de Maine, they took a packet of his
letters, that was sent to the king of Spain, containing a complaint of his
miseries.

He sent Zamet his Agent to the king, to undertake his affairs: but the kings
answer was, that he would not deal with the Duke of Maine, as with the
chief of a faction. That if he would crave pardon of his sovereign Lord, he
would receive him as his kinsman and allie. The leaguers towns made their
several entreats, and each one upon their declaration, obtained of the K. much
more favor then they looked for: as much may be said of all the rest in
particular, which in great numbers submitted themselves to the king, whom he
received in gracious sort, giving them for the most part, authority and
charge, and was himself most liberal unto many: while his faithful subjects
and servants of the religion, were most hardly used and spightfully entreated,
in diverse Provinces of the Realm.

Now rests the Principal City to be spoken of, that is, the fair City
of Parris, which was brought to the kings obeisance by means of the
intelligences which they had within, with the Lord of Billin their Governor,
the Earl of Brissac and others, the two and twentieth of March: The Duke de
Maine had trust up his baggage certain days before, to be packing to
Soissons. There was once resistance made at the New gate, by certain
Lance-knights, who were torn in pieces: and a Court of guard of the Leaguers
toward the Palace, whom the Citizens soon put to flight. The Neapolitans
made show as if they would proffer fight, refusing to agree, except it were by
the consent of the Duke of Feria, and Don Diego d'Euera their General.

They accepted soon after without resistance, whatsoever it pleased the king
to offer them, as unto their Captains: to wit, that all of them should enjoy
their arms, and so depart with bag and baggage out of the City, from
thence to have safe conduct out of the Realm, toward the borders of Picardie,
after they had promised the king never to bear arms in France against his
service.

Here was a thing worthy to be noted, that four thousand men on horse and
foot, entering armed into this little world of Parris, should put the league
to silence, keep so well the order prescribed unto them, and be so obedient,
that no soldier left his rank, to commit any outrage or violence.

That no Burgeous or Inhabitant was indomaged, nor so much as wronged in his
reputation, person, or goods: that all the people mingled themselves presently
with the men of war, and other that entered with the king, in such
familiarity, as if they had always dwelt together, filling the streets with
joyful applaudes and marvelous reioycings, even as if they had escaped the
hands of the hangman, to behold the face of their dear father, or best
beloved friend.

The Kings troops entered the City, about four of the clock in the
morning, and within two hours the shoppes were all set open, the City
appearing so peaceable, as if there had never been any change. The most pain
which the kings servants had, was to keep the people with fair entreaties,
who required no other thing, then to be meddling against the Spaniardes,
Neapolitans, and VVallons, who were in number nine hundredth men, or thereabout,
to be revenged on them, calling to mind the great injuries which they had
received by their means in times past.

All their Churches and Temples were filled soon after, with prayers and songs
of thansgiuing to God, according to the order and custom of the same City,
which was news most pleasing and agreeable to the Inhabitants. As much was
done in all other places of the kings obeisance, and namely in diverse parts out
of France. In short time after, Bastille was yielded, and he which commanded
there for the league, sent away with his soldiers. The Cardinal of Plaisance
the Popes Legate being sick at Paris, had his safe conduct to be gone, who died
soon after, and so likewise did the Cardinal of Pelue. This was the cause
that other dispearsed Leaguers and seditious Preachers fled away, some here,
some there, under the wings of the king of Spain, or toward the Duke de Maine,
who was gone to Soissons. The most part were confounded with despite and
sorrow. The other do as yet bite on the bridle in Spain and the low
Countries, and from one month to another follow their companies. There were
some found that hazarded themselves to enter into Parris, but it was to be
drawn to the gallows, where they received the guerdon due to their villainie.

The Parliament of Paris being established soon after this yielding published
a decree the thirtieth of March in these terms: The Court having the twelfth
day of January last, required the Duke de Maine to acknowledge the king, whom
God and the laws has given to this Realm, for the establishing of peace and
unity, whereto he would give no ear, through the devises of the Spaniards
and their adherents: and God having since of his infinite goodness, delivered
this City of Parris from the hands of strangers, and brought the same to
obedience of her true, natural, and lawful king: after solemn thansgiuing to
God for this blessed success, would employ the sovereign authority and
justice of this Realm, for the preservation of the Catholicque, Apostolicque,
and Roman religion, to see that under the false color and pretext of the
same, strangers do not possess the estate: Calling all Princes, Prelates,
Lords, Gentlemen, and other subjects, to the grace, favor, and clemency of
the king, and to a general reconciliation, and to repair that which the
liberty of the wars has altered or taken from the authority of the laws
foundation, of the royal estate, rights and honors of the Crown.

These things having been in deliberation, all the chambers assembled has
declared, and does declare, all acts, decrees, ordinances, and oaths, given,
made, or ready to be made, since the 29. of December, 1588. to the prejudice
of the authority given to our kings and laws of the Realm, to be set and
extorted by force and violence: and as such, we revoke, repeal, and disanull
them: ordaining, that they shall remain abolished and of no force: and
especially that, which has been made against the honor of the deceased king,
Henry the third: as well those in his life time, as since his death, to be
nothing: forbidding al persons to speak of his memory, otherwise then well or
honorably. And further, we ordain* that the detestable murder committed
upon his royal person, shall be informed and proceeded against
extraordinarily, against all such as shall be found guilty therein. And the
said Court has revoked, and does revoke, the power heretofore granted to the
Duke de Maine, under the title of the Lieftenant general of the estate and
Crown of France.

Forbidding al persons of what estate or condition soever they be, to
acknowledge him by that title, or to show him any obeisance, favor, comfort,
or aid, on pain to be punished as guilty of treason in the highest degree.
And on the same pain, inioyneth the said Duke de Maine, and other Princes of
the house of Lorraine, to acknowledge king Henry the fourth of that name, King
of France and Navarre, for their king and sovereign Lord, and to give unto
him such service and obedience, as to him is due. And that all other Princes,
Lords, Towns, Communalties, and particularities, shall give over the pretended
part of the League, whereof the Duke de Maine was made chief: and to render
unto the King all obedience and fidelity, on pain to have the said Princes,
Lords, and Gentlemen, to be disgraded of their Nobility, and to be declared
outlawes, both them and their posterity, with the confiscation of body and
goods, racing and destroying of their Towns, castles, and manners, which
shall be disobedient to the commandment and pleasure of the king.

And this Court has broken and repealed, and by this present do break and
repeal, all that which has been done, inacted, and ordained, by the
pretended Deputies of the assembly held in this City of Paris, under the name
of the general estates of this kingdom, as of no effect or force, being made
by private persons, who were for the most part, practisers with the factious
sort of the Realm, and partakers with the Spaniards, having no lawful power or
authority. Forbidding also the said pretended Deputies, from henceforth never
to take the like upon them again, and no more to make assemblies, either in
this City or any other, on pain to be punished as disturbers of the public
peace, and guilty of treason toward his Majesty. And we enjoin all these
pretended Deputies, which are at this present within the City of Paris, to
depart each one to his own house, there to live as subjects under the kings
laws, and to be sworn to their fidelity, before the judges and Magistrates
of those parts. It is also ordained, and by these presents were do ordain,
that all processions and solemnities tollerared during these troubles, all
occasions of them shall cease, and in stead of them, the two and twentieth day
of March shall be for ever solemnized, on the which day, general processions
shall be made after the accustomed manner, assisted by the said Court of
Parliament in their scarlet robes, in remembrance of the most happy deliverance
of this City on that day, from all her miseries, and the bringing thereof
under the kings obedience, with thanksgiving unto God for the same.

At the same time the king published a declaration, wherein all the shifts and
deceits of the Captains of the league were discovered, and his love and great
good will toward the Parisians, to whom he forgave all matters past, restored
all their customs and privileges, obtained new favors, and showed a most
fatherly affection toward them, which was most pleasing to the people, which
drew many other towns from the league, to humble themselves to his highness.

Three weeks after, the Rector of the University, the Deane, and the Doctors
of Sorbonne, the Deanes and Doctors of other faculties, in brief, all the
members, officers, and substitudes of the Universities, of their own mind
assembled, went all to humble themselves to the king, which was then in the
Chapel of Bourbon, where they all fell prostrate on the ground before him,
acknowledging him their only true and natural Prince, showing with a most
hearty affection, well witnessing their love, that they were ready to take
what oath it pleased him, to confirm them to his subjection: he received
them, and with great benignity sent them away. The months of April and May,
were spent in receiving and answering supplications, from the Towns and
Commons in diverse Provinces, and in drawing Lords, Gentlemen, Captains, and
other principal members of the league under the kings subjection, who pardoned
all, in such sort, that the League resembled Isopes Choffe.

War in Picardy against the league.
There remained some Towns in Picardie, which were sold through the means of
the most factious of that part. The king besieged Laon and certain other
Towns, which the Spaniards assayed to warrant and keep. But their succors
having been overthrown in diverse incounters, where they lost more then five
hundredth men, at last Laon yielded to the king, and so likewise the others,
Soissons and Fere excepted, which were possessed by the Duke of Maine and the
Spaniardes, who also at the same time became Masters of Chapelle, a little
Town in the Duchy of Thierasche. The Duke of Maine ran to Bruxelles for
fresh supplies. He received a good sum of money, but not sufficient to
withstand the kings prosperous proceeding, who then received into grace and
favor, the Duke of Guise and his brother, giving since to the said Duke the
government of Prouence. The Duke de Maine, who could do nothing in Picardie,
having left good garrisons within Soissons, he closely traveled into the
Duchy of Bourgondy, that he might assure those places to himself, which he
knew yet to hold for the league. Now let us turn again to Paris, where they
began a new war. The Jesuits having in former times stood against sundry
purposes of the University (whom they had set out in their colors, showing
that this sect is the most execreable of al others) by the help of such which
had to do with those people, for the executing of their great and most
unfortunate enterprises. And in the end, since the day of the Barricadoes had
imperiously commanded within Parris, used infinite practices to advance the
Spaniards in France, kindled the fire of sedition in all the principal towns
in the kingdom, defaming in their sermons and confessions, the memory of the
deceased king, and the Majesty of him now reigning, whose fame was by them
spotted in the vildest manner they could devise: and finally had endeavored to
kill the king by the means of Barriere, who was executed at Meleun, as he
deposed a little before his death.

These considerations were cause that the first resolution taken by the
University of Paris, since the Cities reduction, was to require the banishing
of the Jesuits. To this effect a supplication was presented to the Court of
Parliament, who having a certain time despised the authority thereof, in the
end constrained by an act made the seventh of July, containing that the
indightment which was to be given against them, should be heard the Monday
following, in a publicque audience to be judged in open field, they did that
day entertain their Advocates and men of law in the great chamber before the
audience were ready, who did declare, that to defend the cause on their
behalf, he was constrained to say many hard things against diverse that were
known to be the kings true servant, and for this occasion, they requested
that the cause might be pleaded within doors.

This device was made, to hinder the people from the clear knowledge of the
corrupt and pernicious purposes of the Jesuits, pretending to make all Europe
subject to the Spaniards: but for as much as they had obtained their request,
this invention had no such success as they looked for. For all their pleadings
which were done close within doors, was afterward openly published in print,
where the Advocates of the university, men learned and deeply affectioned to
the Roman Church, did particularly represent and discover to the full, the
horrible, wicked, and insupportable malice of that sect. But the deciding of
the matter was suspended: Gods providence reserving the same to an othertime,
which came sooner then many looked for.

The Spaniards being desirous to continue the fire of discention in France,
instantly solicited the Duke de Mercoeur, Wars in Britain.
one of the chief of the league, and an usurper of a part of the Duchy of
Britain, always to continue war. His sister Loyse of Vaudemont, king Henry
the thirds widow, did all she might to make his peace. Certain troubles
happening in the mean time, broke all that was done. The Spaniards, which were
Masters of Blauet, a Fortress almost invincible, had builded during the
Summer of the year 1594. a strong Fort near unto Croysil, to stoppe^ he
entrance to the port of Breast: which would have been better for them, if they
had made another right against it, and on the other side of the haven.

Sir John Norris. Captain Forbisher.
To hinder them, came the Marshall d'Aumont, and S. John Norris, General of the
Englishmen, to whom was sent a supply by sea, under the conduct of Captain
Forbisher, they soon became Masters of Quimpercorencin, and of the Town and
Castle of Morlay. Soon after, they assailed the Spaniards new fort, and slew
four hundredth soldiers that kept it, not without loss of their own men,
among other the said Forbisher. The king on the other side, deliberating to
make war out of his own realm against the Spaniards, agreed with the States of
Holland and their confederates, to begin in the Duchy of Luxembourg, where
the Marshall of Bouillon, who married one of the daughters of the deceased
Prince of Orange, and Earl Philip of Nassau, assayed to enter in the month of
October, where they found all the passages shut up, and Earl Charles of
Mansfield making head against them, especially on the troops of Holland. The
king on the other side, sought to ouerrunne the frontiers of Picardie, and gave
the estates of Artois and Hainaut to understand, that if they favored him so
little, to suffer the Spanish forces to molest Cambray and the countries
adjoining, that he would then make war upon them incontinent.

This message being sent in writing from Amiens, by a Trumpetter, about the
midst of December, the estates knew not what to say unto it, and before they
would make answer, they opened the matter unto the Archduke Ernest, the king
of Spaines Lieftenant in the low Countries, whom they entreated that the war
might not continue, perceiving the desolations that were like to follow
therevppon, and that which had already afflicted them: but this Prince, who
deceased shortly after, could neither do any thing for himself, nor in their
behalf.

The seven and twentieth of December, as the king was returning from Picardie
to Parris, ready booted and spurd within a chamber at Louure, having about him
his cousins, the Prince of County, the Earl of Soissons, the Earl of Saint
Paul, and thirty or forty other Lords and Gentlemen of his Court: there came
also in, the Lords of Ragne and Montigni, who had not as yet taken their leave
of his Majesty. And even as he was receiving them, John Chastill attempteth
to kill the king, hurts him in the mouth, and is for the same put to death.
and in Princely manner kissing them for his farewell, a young stripling named
John Chastill, of a small stature, and about eighteen or nineteen years of
age, a Drapers son of Parris, who was slid into the chamber among the preace,
drew near unto the king, before he was almost perceived of any body, and
suddenly would have smote him in the body with a knife which he had in his
hand, but by reason that his Ma. was very ready to take up the Lords which
were on their knees before him, in his stooping he struck him in the face, on
the upper iaw on the right side, therewithal cutting out one of his teeth.
Presently this miserable catiue was taken, and after he would have excused the
deed, incontinent upon examination, he confessed the whole truth voluntarily
and without compulcion. The king commanded the Captain of his guard, that had
taken him, after that he had thrown his knife to the ground, to let him go:
saying that he freely forgave him. But afterward understanding that he was a
scholar to the Jesuits, he said: And must it needs be, that the Jesuits
should be confounded by my mouth?

This Parriside being brought unto the Bishops prison, freely declared the
circumstance of his evil intent, discovering many of the Jesuits secret
practices. Among many other things, he remembered that he heard the fathers of
that holy society say, that it was lawful to kill the king, that he was
excommunicate out of the Church, that he was not to be obeyed, nor to be
taken for their king, until such time as he was allowed by the Pope. The Court
of Parliament co^demning this Chastil of treason in the highest degree, caused
him honorably to be brought naked in his shirt, before the principal gate of
the Cathedral Church in Parris, holding in his hand a taper of wax lighted,
of two pound weight, and there on his knees to confess and declare, that most
wickedly and traitorously he had attempted this most inhumane, and most
traitorous parriside, having hurt the king with a knife in the face. That by
false and damnable instructions, he had maintained by argument, that it was
lawful to kill these kings, and that king Henry the fourth at that present
reigning, was not of the Church, till such time he was allowed by the Pope, of
all which he repented himself, asking forgiveness of God, of the King, and
of the laws: which done, he was conveyed unto the place of execution,
carrying in his hand the murdering knife, wherewith he intended to murder
the king, the which was there first cut off, his flesh pulled off with hot
burning pincers, hoth from his arms and thighs: after that, his body was
drawn and halde in pieces with four horses, and his quarters cast into the
fire, and consumed to ashes, and the ashes scattered in the wind. Moreover, by
the same act of Parliament, it was forbidden to all persons, of what estate,
condition, or quallitie soever they were, on pain to be punished as traitors,
to say or publish in any place whatsoever, the aforesaid slander, to wit,
that the king was not of the Church, till he had the Popes allowance or
approbation, or that it was lawful to kill the kings. By which they Henry 3.
Henry 4.
understood, kings that were not authorized by the Pope. In what reputation were
the Jesuits before the first Parliament in France.
The Court having declared the said reports to be scandelous, seditious,
contrary to the word of God, and condemned as false and heretical, by all
holy decrees. Ordaining also, that all the Priests and Scholars of Clermont
College, and all other of the same society of Jesus, to be held and reputed
as corrupters of youth, disturbers of the public peace, enemies to the king
and the estate, to avoid within three days after the proclamation of the said
Edict, out of Parris, and all other places and Towns where their Colleges
are, and within fifteen days after, out of the kingdom, on pain that being
found or taken after the said time prefixed, to be punished as guilty of the
said crime of treason. That their goods, mooueable and immooueable, shall be
forfeited and employed as the said Court shall give order. Forbidding moreover,
from thencefoorth, all the kings subjects to send their children to any
Colleges of that society, out of the kingdom to be their instructed or
trained up, on the same pain to be punished as guilty of high treason.
This Edict was pronounced to John Chastel, executed on thursday the 29. of
December.

Chastel, some of the Deputies of the Court which were sent to search the
Jesuits Colleges, having seized upon many papers, found among them certain
written books, made by a Jesuit Priest, named John Guignard, since the
general pardon given by the King to the people of Parris: there was written in
these books, many vilde matters, both against Henry the third deceased, as
against Henry the fourth now living, containing nothing but traitorous
practices: among the rest these words were found. The king was born at Bern for
which cause they call him Bernois.
That the Bernois being now converted to the Catholic faith, was more gently
used then he deserved, that if they would inuest him with the royal Crown,
they should do it in some well reformed covent, where he might do penance for
all the evils which he has done in France: that thanks might be also given
to God, for that he had given him grace to acknowledge his wickedness before
his death. That if he might not be deposed without war, they ought to war
against him, and to kill him, if he did not otherwise. That the Crown of
France ought to be transferred to an other family then that of Bourbon. That
James Clement did an heroical act, in murdering Henry the third. The Court
having seen such writings, sent for Guignard before them, who avouched all he
had written, by means whereof he was found guilty, and condemned to be hanged
to death, which thing was executed the seventh of January. Peter Chastel
father to John, and John Gueret, Schoolemaister or Tutor to the young traitor,
were the same time banished: the father for a certain time out of Parris, the
tutor for ever out of the realm: and not to return on pain of death.
Moreover, the father was condemned to pay for a fine 2000. Crowns, and
commadement given, that his house should he pulled down to the ground, and a
stone pillar set in the place where it did stand, with an inscription of the
cause wherefore it was thus raced. The court at that time did again look over
Peter Barrieres judgments, wherein the wicked counsel of Varade, a notable
Jesuit, was more thoroughly marked, who had principally and more then any
other, induced Barriere to kill the K. whom he called tyrant. It was also
testified, that two Switzers passing by Besancon, a few days before
Chastelles deed was attempted, did meet two men attired like Jesuits, who
said one to the other, for shortly the king of Navarre shall be either slain
or hurt: which deed they esteemed most meritorious in the kingdom of heaven.

It was also noted, that a Iubelie had bin published at Rome, which the kings
enemies called a piece of ordenance to confound the Bernois, as if it had been
a good work: the same was also understood by the Spaniards, lately arrived in
Britain to succor the rebels. This was also hoped for by the Jesuits, namely
by those that were at Paris, some of whom, as their Colleges were environed
about with watchmen, incontinent after the king was hurt, cried at their gates
to their companions in these words: Surge, frater: agitur de religione. There
were also found among these Jesuits, many Anagrames against the king, and
certain rimes made in their Chases: whereof the argument was, to suffer death
constantly, and to assail the tyrants. Again, there was it found, that the
Masters of the Colleges of Clermont, deprived and forbad the Scholars, at
any time to pray for the king, since the yielding of Parris to his Majesty:
saying, that all such as went to hear his Mass, were excommunicate. Moreover,
it was proved and justified against an other Jesuit, a Scotchman, named
Alexander Haius, that he taught the people publicly, that they might
dissemble and obey the King for a time, and oftentimes faintly speaking these
words: Iesuita est omnis homo. This Jesuit was also charged that he had
oftentimes used these speeches, that if the king did at any time pass before
their College, that he would fall out of the window upon him, to the end he
might break his neck. On these accusations his inditements being drawn, and
that his words were found to be spoken before the yielding of Parris, the
Court did only banish him out of the Realm of France for ever. It appeared
also by other informations sent from Bourges, made the seventh of January,
that one named Francis Iacobe, a Scholar of the Jesuits at Bourges, vanted
that he would kill the King, but that he thought he was dead already, thinking
that an other had done the deed. In consideration of these matters aforesaid,
and other proves testified by the History of these times, the Jesuits were
banished out of Paris and other towns of the Realm, but not out of all. They
sought to excuse themselves by diverse writings, wherein they accused themselves
in greater measure, well expressing the envy and poisoned minds which they
carried to the realm of France, which shall be well preserved from all their
attempts, if any justice do reign there.

Open war proclaimed against the King of Spain.
The seventeenth of January, the King published his declaration of the making of
open wars against the Spaniards, by reason of his attempts made against his
country of France, the Cambernisces, and against his royal person. Two months
after, the King of Spain answered the king of France, whom in his letlers he
called the Prince of Bearn, against whom also he demanded open war. A little
before, the Archduke of Ernest wrote to the Estates of Artois and of Hainaut,
to encourage them to arms: the like he did to the Commons, that they might
wrathfully bend their force against the Frenchmen. The D. of Lorraine having
taken truce with the K. permitted his troops to do him service, under the
conduct of the Barron of Ausonuill, the L. of Tremblecourt, and of S. George,
who had levied about 8000. foot, and 1200. horse. The leaguers of Soissons
ouerthrown.
Mean space, the garrison of Soissons, conducted by the Barron of Conan,
Lieftenant of Ponsenac, Governor of the City, and by Belfont chief and
principal Captain to the D. de Maine, being advanced as far as Crispe in
Valoyes, they were repulsed, pursued, charged, and ouerthrown in the plain of
Villiers Cote-rets, by the Lords of Cadancourt, Beine, Moussie, and Edonuiel,
who slew in the field 50. of the principal of the leaguers troops, the most
valiantest that were in France.

And hurt threescore so grievously, that in short time after, the most of them
died, they took away above fourscore good horses, much of their munition and
other booties, with a great number of prisoners. Among those that were slain,
were found two principal Captains, their Ancient, and the Marshall of the
field: there were taken the Cornet of Belfont, and thirteen Captains, so that
there escaped but twenty persons of all the troup that went into the Town of
Soissons: this was a new blood shed among the leaguers.

At the same time, the Marshall of Bouillon took near unto Vuirtun, in the
Duchy of Luxembourg, The Spanish army overthrown by the Marshall of
Bouillon, in the Duchy of Luxembourg.
eleven Cornets of horsemen of the Earl of Mansfields army, whom he charged
upon their dislodgement with such resolution, that they were all overcome in
little space: two hundredth and fifty were there slain, the rest forsaking
their armor, horses, and other furniture, saved themselves within a forest
near unto Vuirton. Wars in Franche-Countie.
On the other side, Tremblecourt and Saint George, invaded Franch-Countie, in
Bourgongne, took Vezou, Ionuille and other places, spoiled diverse parts: and
in these beginnings of troubles the country was greatly spoiled, and many
Bourgongnians slain. The Constable of Chastille Governor of Mylan, ran over
them with diverse Spanish companies, and Neapolitans, recovered again the
places lost, constraining the Lorraines to scatter themselves: in requital
whereof, the Inhabitants of Beaune having about the beginning of February,
valerously sacked the leaguers garrisons, which had made themselves ready to
cut al their throats, opened their gates to the Marshall of Biron, which being
done, he laid siege before the Castle, which in six weeks endured three
thousand cannon shot, and finally it was yielded by composition. The taking of
Beaune dismayed the Duke of Maine, who ever since, did nothing (as it were) but
fight with one hand, saw himself at the end of his last hopes, dismayed of
the one, and detested by the other. Autun, Nuis, and lastly Dyon, followed the
example of Beaune, and yielded themselves to the king: which coming to pass
in Bourgongne at the beginning of June, they charged near S. Sein, certain
troops of horsemen belonging to the Constable of Chastille, whom he inforest
to fly. Diverse memorable exployts, done here and there
A little before this, Vienne in Dauphine, sold to the Duke of Nemours by
Maugrion, shook of the yoke of this great leaguer, and was brought under the
kings authority, who whilst he stayed for the leuying of money from diverse
places of Franch-Countie, and iourneyes of small importance, he lost in
Picardie, Chastelet, Dourlans, and Cambray, Towns of great strength, which
were taken in the months of June, July, and August, to the great grief of
these good Lords, and by the fault of some that might have remedied it, if they
had would: but they were not willing to see their country in peace. The loss
of men and munition was great in these overthrows. The Spanish soldiers bore
away great booties. The Earl of Fuentes and his Captains, won as great
honor, as Balagne and others did dishonor. The Marshall of Bouillon, the
Marshall of Villars, sought to succor Dourlans, but being charged with a
far greater number of enemies, Villars was slain with certain of his
Captains, and many of his soldiers, diverse carried prisoners into Arras, from
whence they were ransomed. Beside these losses, a little before, the Lord of
Humieres of Picardie, and a faithful servant to the king, was slain in
recovering the Town of Han, with twenty Gentlemen, and an hundredth soldiers.
In revenge whereof, the Spanish garrison which was within the Town, to the
number of seven or eight hundredth men, were cruelly slain each mothers son.
The Marshall of Bouillon behaved himself most valiantly in this exployt. A
few weeks before, to wit, about the end of May, this said Lord parted from
Stenai, to succor those of Ferte upon Cher, in the Duchy of Luxembourg, which
was besieged by Verdugo and Burlot, Captains to the King of Spain, of whom he
slew five hundredth of the very best of their troops, constraining them to
raise their siege, and to retire to Vuirton. Such were the chances of war
during this season in Picardie, in the Duchy and County of Bourgondy, and the
country of Luxembourg, all which were greeuoussy afflicted in diverse sorts.
Britain was also upon the point to become wholly for the Spaniard. But ambition
striving with covetousness in Duke Mercoeur, the affairs there, went always
doubtfully. In the end, the king of Spain was made frustrate of all his hopes
in those parts.

The Duke of Maine obtaines pardon of the king.
The Duke of Maine seeing the Spaniards take other course then was accustomed,
his forces slain, his credit cracked, and his destruction at the door, though
late, at last he sought by Mediators the kings favor, which he obtained in the
month of October. But he could not so easily have it, till he had renounced the
vain title of Lieftenant general of the estate and Crown of France, and
except such liberallities as it pleased his Majesty to bestow upon him. Each
one said, that he having committed so many heinous acts against the Crown and
his sovereign Lord, that he was unworthy too be esteemed the kings
subject, but to receive punishment according to his deserts, blaming the kings
too much gentleness therein: to whom might be applied, that which was of old
time spoken of by Charillans, who being greatly praised for his courtesy
equally showed to all, was thus answered by Archidamidas the Spartane, that
such a Prince deserved small praise, that showed himself favorable to wicked
persons. But such matters pertaines to other discourses, and not to be
entreated of, in so brief a collection as this is. Upon this received grace,
the Duke de Maine wrought the yielding up of Soisson, Pierfont, and other
places to the King. Now among all the chief leaguers, there only remained the
Duke of Aumale, who had not time enough to make his peace with the King. The
Duke of Aumale executed in his picture.
Things fell out so contrary on his side, that law was prosecuted against him
in the Parliament of Parris, which found him guilty of treason in the highest
degree, so that his image or likeness being made, it was drawn in pieces with
four horses, and his goods and lands confiscate to the King. It has been said
that his fair house at Annet, was judged to be raced to the ground, and the
woods all about the same cut down, in detestation of the said Dukes treasons.
But this article was not executed. This Duke of Aumale went since that, toward
Albert. Cardinal of Austridge, came into the low Countries to succeed in his
brothers charge, who was Archduke of Ernest, of who^ he was honorably
received, and royal entertained, so that he might say with the renowned
Greek: I was lost, if I had not been lost: and since, he has made sore wars
against the Frenchmen. Certain members of the league, as some of the sixteen
of Parris, diverse principal Councillors and Agents of that side, together
with some Preachers and seditious writers, durst not show themselves, knowing
law to be proceeded against them. Th. Town of Fere besieged.
While the Cardinal of Austrige made his voyage from Spain into Italy, to
become Governor to the low Countries, taking with him Philip of Nassau, Prince
of Orange, who had a long time been kept prisoner among the Spaniards, the
King besieged Fere, the only place possessed by his enemies in Picardie,
before the taking of Capelle, Chastelot, Cambray, and Dourlans: he set there
all the succors that could enter in, where a great number of Spaniardes were
slain: then gave he leave to the most part of his horsemen to refresh
themselves, because the Earl of Fuentes, having set garrisons in the Towns for
a new conquest, was retired into Hainaut.

The king being willing more and more to plant quietness in his realm, made
an edict the same time, whereby all persons that were fled, might return
again to their lands and houses, where their passed faults should never be
sought after, but wholly forgiven, those only excepted, that were confederates
in the murder of the deceased king. In midst of these matters, Ossat and
Perron the Kings Agents toward the Pope, demanded and obtained a bull of
absolution, having aforehand made all the submissions, obeysances, and
accustomed reuerences, promising that the King had performed the penance, and
accomplished the conditions to him prescribed. This bull was committed to
Alexander d'Elbene, to be carried into France, to bring thereby in the kings
behalf, confirmation and approbation of all that which had been done by his
Agents: one of the which, namely Ossat, for recompense of his services, won a
Cardinals Hat: Perron (being but a Ministers son, in the Lord of Bearns land,
became by his worthy services Bishop of Eureux, a Courtly Poet, and a new
Divine) was sent with good hope, to see that he should continue as he had
begun: that is to say, to oppose himself against those of the religion, and
to draw by his example, all other that he might, by their praaching and
writing, to maintain the vocation and doctrine of their Ministers, and the
public articles of the inreprehencible perfection of the Roman Church. He
was careful to keep promise, understanding that the Pope had an eye over him.

The estates of Picardie.
In the month of November, the King assembled within Amiens, all the estates of
Picardie, of Boulongne, Vermandois, and Thierafche, to take counsel for the
affairs of Prouence. Certain Captains were there beheaded, having been by
their covetousness, cause of all the losses before mentioned. The siege of Fere
continued, those within it being more restrained, yet nevertheless resolved to
hold the same, to the uttermost points of extremity.

Peronne, Amiens, and other places that held for the King, began again in
January their former courses against the enemies country, still killing and
sleying certain Spaniards and Wallons. The king was at this time in great
care, touching the country of Prouence: by reason that a man of great
authority, named Casaux, commanded within Marseille, who made means to the
Spanish king, that this goodly Town might be sold unto him. Charles Door of
Geneua, was now approaching with certain galleys for the Spaniardes. The Duke
of Guise drew also near with certain troops, but knowing well Casaux evil
will toward him, retired to the port of Thoulon, where a far off he thought
on such affairs, whereof proceeded the death of the said Casaux, who was
suddenly stabbed as he was going forth of his own lodging, to run toward
one of the gates, which they were ready to open to the Frenchmen, the
sixteenth of February. The Duke of Guise his troops being mingled among the
rest in the City, was cause that all the Spaniardes with their adherents
ran their ways. Marseille brought to the kings subjection.
Thus was Marseille delivered out of their hands, and brought to the kings
subjection, together with all other villages thereabout, that might any way
annoy them.

The arrival of the Cardinal of Austriche in Flanders, caused the King to
summon the Nobility of Picardie and Normandy, to be present in the Town of
Guise, there to be ready according as need required. There he forbad by an
express proclamation, the transporting of gold or silver, coined or otherwise,
out of his realm. In the beginning of March, the Cardinal gave such order,
that the besieged within the Town of Fere, were succored with some munition.
And for his first exployt against The Cardinal of Austriche releeueth Fere,
wins Carl^ and Ardres, with maine force.
France in the beginning of April, did so dispose of his army, (at that time
most mighty) so dexteriously and secretly, that in few days he besieged,
assailed, and with plain force won the town and Castle of Calais: in spite of
all the kings forces, and the resistance of the besieged, there died in the
taking thereof, a great number of the Nobility of France, especially in the
Castle, whereinto they had sent a good supply. Fere yielded to the king by
composition.
The Cardinal following this new won victory, besieged the strong Town of
Ardres in the beginning of May: who for all that ever they could do within the
Town, he became Master thereof, the 23. of the same month: seven days
before, Fere was yielded to the K. upon composition. The Seen shall of
Montenemart leaguer, and Aluaris Osoro a Spaniard, endured with their
soldiers, all the extremity that could be thought or imagined, even till they
saw the water two or three foot high within the Town, before they would yield
or give over, after they had sustained a thousand greefes, the space of five
months. The composition was honorable, and for the profit of the besieged, who
went forth with their colors spredde, their drums sounding, their weapons
and baggage: drawing forth with them a double cannon, marked with the arms of
France. They went forth the 22. of this month, and retired to Cambrises. The
rest of this Summer was spent in small exployts in the country. About the end
of the month of August, the Marshall of Biron, followed with certain troops
on foot and on horseback, passed the river of Sone, and the first day of
September he entered within Artois, repaired the Castle of Ambercourt,
constrained diverse villages to redeem themselves with a great sum of money.
And being accompanied with five Cornets, charged the Marquess of Vuarambon
Governor of Artois (who by reason of his forces: to wit, five to six hundredth
horse in battle, thought to have got the glory) slew those which durst stay,
put the rest to flight, took the Marquess prisoner, of whom he had forty
thousand Crowns for his ransom, gave a great alarm to all the country,
after ward chased the Earl of S. Paul, seized and spoiled the Town, and
diverse other places. The Pesants which would have spoiled the Towers and
Steeples of the Churches, were rudely handled, in respect of those that stayed
in their houses, who felt only the smart of this tempesteous war, by
contributions for the provision of victuals. All this was done in eight days.
The Cardinal intending to take the Marquess, sent the D. of Arschot in his
place, who while he entered into Arras, had the Frenchmen on the other side,
who by a harguebuze shot from the Town, set fire on a little village. And for
that it was full of good booties, the Marshall would not they should loose
their pray, and therefore conducted them to the frontiers of Picardie. Thus
being discharged the 21. of the same month, they entered the borders of
Banpaulme, spoiling Hebutere, Benuiller, Courcelles, and other places, robbing
the Pesants of their goods, that durst not strive against them. The Duke of
Arschot incampped near to Arras, within a cannon shot, and being carefully
entrenched, he deliberated to hazard nothing, knowing that he was to deal
with a hardy Knight, and one of the most resolute warriors in Europe. The
Frenchmen set fire on all places round about, and getting more booties then
before, returned with easy iourneyes toward Bethune and Theroenne, from whence
they brought many prisoners and cattle, then they retired and camped in the
plain of Azincourt, without any resistance at all, in this second voyage,
which continued ten days. The Duke of Arschot supplied with eight hundredth
footmen, joining with the Colonel of Burlots Regiment, departed from Arras
the fifth day of October, and encamped at S. Paul, where the Marshall of Biron
leaving them, entered seven days after with his horsemen into Artois: who with
his footmen stayed at Moucy S. Esoy. The thirteenth day he removed to
Confirmation of aliance between the King, the Queen of England, and the low
countries.
Donay, then having spoiled the country, he retired into Picardie, within
four or five days after. The Duke of Arschot, having taken again the Castle
of Ambercourt, discharged his Army, setting his companies into Garrisons.
Certain weeks before, the Marshall of Bouillon, had been sent for into
Holland, to confirm (as he did at Hay) the aliance sworn between the King,
the Queen of England, and the united Provinces. The like was done in England,
about the end of September. The Spaniards in Britain, defied Duke Mercoeur,
seeing him to continue truce with the Prouences of Poictou, Aniou, and Maine,
began to fortify themselves at Blauit, more then before, and in other small
Towns which they held. Whilst the Kings Troops were in Picardie, he made
his entry into Roane, the 20. day of October, where he was received with such
pomp, that the expense thereof, was esteemed to amount above the value of
four hundred thousand Crowns, at the Townsmens charges. Throughout all
France, nothing was spoken of so much, as how means might be found to defend
themselves against the Spaniards, and to be revenged of the manifold injuries,
which the Realm had endured under the League. But the Duke of Austrich, on his
side, was not all this while idle, but suffering the rigor of winter to pass
(which was wonderful wette, having had many great floods of waters, whereof
followed much hurt, especially at the bridge at Paris, which one night fell
down, at the latter end of the year: at which time it was the death of three
huundred persons, drowned in the water, and by the fall of the buildings) made
himself ready for the spring. The King being still desirous of the peace of his
Kingdom, about the end of Su^me^, gave order to have all the Nobility of the
Realm, assembled together in a general Council, which he determined to hold
at Roane, at the beginning of November, at that time there to be present, to
provide for the public benefit of the country of France. In opening this
matter, he first made them an Oration, the which, to cut off briefly, we will
incert within this Page following. If I would (said he) claim the title of an
Orater, I should have learned some eloquent and long Oration, and have studied
how to pronounce it, with all pleasing gravity. But my Lords, my desire aymeth
at two more glorious titles, which is, that I might be called the Restorer,
and Deliverer of this decayed estate: for which cause, I have assembled all you
this day. You know what belongs to your own care, so do I of mine: for since
it pleased God to call me to the Crown, I found France, not only near hand
ruined, but almost utterly lost from the Frenchmen: I vow, by Gods grace, by
the prayers, by the good counsel of my faithful Subjects, that make
profession of Arms, by the sword of my true Nobility (from which I do not
distinguish my Princes) because the faith of a Gentleman, is our fairest
tytles: by my pains and labor I have kept it from loss. Let us save our
selves therefore from ruin. Participate my dear subjects with me in this
second glory, as you have done in the first. I have not called you, as my
predecessors were wont to do, to confirm my own will. I have caused you to be
assembled, to receive your counsels, to believe them, to follow them:
briefly, to put my self wholely into your hands. Envy can win little from
kings, from gray beardes, from conquerors. But the love and good will which I
bear to my subjects, and the extreme desire that I have to obtain these two
goodly titles, makes all things seem to me easy and honorable. My Lord
Chancellor shall make hereafter, my mind further known. I cannot close up
this collection, with a more worthy speech then this: my intent being thereto
joined, having come to the end of this year, 1596. which was the mark I
only shot at. That which has come to pass since that time, in the years
following, shall be showed in other books, if God permit.

FINIS.
A TRVE DISCOVRSE CONCERNING THE delivery of Britain, in the year 1598.
What? Shall this Duke of Mercoeur for ever retain the mouth of the River of
Loire, with one part of Britain against a king of France, a victorious king,
acknowledged to be the greatest Captain in the world? Shall we continually
behold this chanel, this sincke, this puddle and heap of all the thieves and
murderers, firmly united with this insolent, cruel, and infected nation of
Chastille, occupy one of the Provinces of the estate, one of the flowers of
this mighty and proud Crown, and make their neighbors, together with all
the highest part of this long river that divides the Gauls, tributaries? All
the rest of France has been almost these two years quiet, united and
conjoined for her own preservation, against al foreign usurpation: yea, it is
longer since our holy father powered forth his blessings upon this most
Christian kingdom. This Summer has God sent us the most notable victory and
gallant triumph that has been seen this five hundredth years, where the King
forced one of the strongest pieces in the world, in the full view of the
Spanish army. All Christendom is brought in admiration with such a conquest,
and the glory of the French armies is now more glorious then ever it was:
which notwithstanding this Spartacus, relying upon the imaginary succors of
Spain, dare tarry us. Let us therefore with all speed make head against him:
let us abate this presumption, this rashness, this insolency. Let us go and
set at liberty the poor Inhabitants of Nantes, who stretch forth their hands
to their king, and long only for his coming: from whom this Viceroy of
Britain shall hardly defend himself within, whilst we do courageously
assault him without. Let us give him to understand, that nothing is able to
withstand the thunder of the French Arsenall, and that the brauest Rauelines do
stoop to our cannons. Let us root out the Spaniard out of Britain, which
our ancesters never united to the Crown, for us to dismember it again.

Let us consider, that in all Martial discourses, Amiens was not to be won:
yet the incomparable virtue of our king: his great courage, and the incredible
travels of the French, have forced nature: exceeded all hope: and surmounted
all possibility: and contrariwise, that in all millitarie reason, Nantes might
be beaten flat in six weeks. The country forces, the strength of the
neighbor Provinces, together with all Guyenne, which begin already too
march: the army royal that is on the way: the cannons and munition that
comes every way: the benefit of the sea and rivers able to furnish all
necessaries: the Nauall armies which replenishing all Loire, shall cut off all
hope of succor: the valor of our soldiers: the experience of our Captains:
and the advantage of our last years happy conquest, may put us in full
assurance, that this Cateline, shall be made an example of his Majesty's: who
has hitherto showed such testimony of his clemency. And in deed, in this
man we may behold such strange ingratitude, that God cannot suffer it to
pass unpunished.

For the late king (whom God pardon) having so highly honored his family, as
thereat to choose his wife, and heaped up goods, honors, great titles, and
extreme expenses upon his brethren in law, and sisters in law: especially
upon this model of ingratitude, to whom he procured one of the richest
marriages in the Realm: for whose sake he wrested the government of Britain
from a Prince of the blood, to give him: yet has he become such a notable
traitor to his Benefactor, that in lieu of spending his life at his feet, he
has procured a mighty and most important Province to revolt from him: and
stopped up the mouth of the river of Loire, whereupon the late king was forced
to transport the seat of his enemies.

He was the author of the rebellion of Poictiers, and immediately has called
the Castillians to share in his conquests, whom he has settled in Blauet as a
Spanish Colonie, to hold us in continual check, until we may have rooted
them out, together with all those that brought them in and cherished them, and
have put themselves in our protection and safeguard, which notwithstanding they
shall find to be but weak against the strength of France, even of the warlike
France, which now we will make more terrible then ever it was.

Our own emulation to do well, who in sixty three, in so few days recovered
New-hauen, shall no doubt very shortly drive the^ out of Nantes and Blauet.
Every man will be willing to declare his zeal to his country: his valor in
the presence of his Prince, and his indignation against the traitors of France:
who destitute of all pretense, excommunicate by the Pope, by the Archbishop of
Tours, and the faculty of Sorbonne, as rebels to their king, condemned by God
and man, are yet so shameless, as to denounce us heretics for driving the red scarfes out of Britain. Alas poor wretches, your policies are too well
known: which whilst they were yet in force, could not hinder us, but that we
made the Flower de Luce in every place victorious: and now that these sleights
are grown into contempt even with little children, can you repose any hope in
them against us, who both by Gods word and the exhortation of our holy father,
are commanded to obey our sovereign, to serve our country, and to root out
all strangers, as also your selves, ye wretches, who have called them in, and
do persuade your selves to be able to maintain them, under a vain hope, that
if his Majesty goes into Britain, the Spaniards shall in the mean time
swallow up all our frontiers of Picardie, and so force us to retire? But so
far as I can perceive, you have but small knowledge of the miserable estate,
whereinto your Protectors affairs in the low Countries are brought. This
Summer he has lost 8. good pieces: an undoubted argument of his weakness.
Artois is in a wonderful amaze at this great exployt at Amiens. His garrisons
are in such necessity, that either they must utterly ransom his subjects, or
live upon roots. The Cardinal has not to defray the expenses of his own
house. King Philips banckroutship has made him loose his settings over from
Genes to Antwerp, who was seeing his countries that cost him so dear, lost
without remission, offers them as a dowry with his daughter, that so in all
Histories the loss of them may be recorded in the name of an other then
himself.

Well, this Summer we will make a journey to visit them: In the mean time,
leaving our frontiers, able not only to defend, but also to offend, let us go
straight into Britain to punish the rebellion, ingratitude, and malice of
him, who seeing Amiens surprised by the Spaniards, and all France in alarm, in
lieu of concluding the truce which before he demanded, took the field, in
purpose to detain in the Provinces a great number of soldiers, who before
were taking horse to come to his Majesty.

O Spanish soul! could thou more evidently declare, thy treason and
disloyalty against the country that has warmed thee, enriched, and increased
thee in honor and dignity: but by seeking all means to divert and impeach
this great and so necessary a conquest? Had thou had any remainder of good
will toward France, thou would as then have made demonstration thereof:
neither did thou want most gallant examples.

Now would every man have embraced thee, and unto thee attributed a share in
the glory of this triumph: but in liew thereof, thou haste labored to keep
down such as sought to shun this shipwreck: thou did insult upon the
afflictions of France: and yet, blind as thou art, after this great prosperity
which thou could not hinder: thou dare obstinately stand in thy
usurpation, expecting some cursed adventure, to publish thy inuestiture of
Britain. For, what else could thou hope for any time these two years?
What? can thou think, that so great a Prince finishing the course of his
years, and shunning the Jesuits knife, would still leave Nantes and part of
Britain in the hands of such a man as thou art? Thou art not so deuoyde of
sense: and therefore of necessite thou must yet hope upon one Barriere, or one
Chastel. No other reason has vpholden thy obstinacy these two years, but the
winning of time.

But in these imaginations thou shall find thy overthrow, doubt it not: for God
who has used this son of S. Lewis to reestablish the scattered estate, will in
his power preserve him, and daily increasing his victory, both speedily and
severely chastise thy pernicious effects and cursed hope. Thy K. Philip plunged
in the pleasures of his Escurial, shall not defend thee from the furious
batteries, which within this mo^th his Ma. will lay to thee on every side.
Believe me, thou will curse this great monarcke of Chastille, of whom thou
do yet make such account, and upon whom thou buildest the felicity of thy
whole life: being so doultish, as to think that he that was not able to keep
his conquest of Amiens (a town in a manner inespugnable) can hinder the taking
of Nantes. Thou do not consider, th^^ thy treasures will serve our soldiers
for lathers, or rather wings to scale the walls of that fair town, wherein we
shall find the keys of all the rest, which will follow their capital, who
without whose wealth, together with the great imposts there leuyed, would
nevertheless fall without any assault. In taking of Nantes, we do undoubtedly
take all the rest of Britain, and withal, cure our Gangreua, which
neglected, might in time subvert the whole realm. To what purpose should we
quench the most part of the fire that burns the house, if we still leave
enough to kindle and take hold of the rest. By little and little, tyrants are
established by killing or murdering the most courageous, and setting foot upon
the throat of the rest. Nine years ago, did Nantes reject the flower de luce.
Now let us accord prescription, and quite cleanse this so great and important a
Prouence, which king Charles the 8. preferred before all the low countries and
the County of Bourgondy: to the end the Ocean might bound our Empire, and the
heavens our valor. I do therefore abjure you, ye brave Frenchmen, even by the
glory of your ancestors, who have crossed the seas and pierced the mountains,
to seek after wars in the midst of Asia and Africa. I abjure you by your own
virtue, by your honorable wounds, and by your garla^ds of baies yet green,
with the conquest of Amiens, Yea, I abjure you by the incomparable valor of
your Prince, who has overcome all that resolved to atte^d him, to com to this
last enterprise, which shall finish our intestine wars, with such fervent zeal,
passion and courage, that we may exalt the name of France, above all that is
most haughty, or of greatest eminency in this world. Hitherto our slacknesse
has had some reasons: every year has had her necessary employments: but this
year, a fatal year to Britain: having already set hand to the enterprise,
what a shame will it be, not to finish it, or to suffer our selves to be
overcome with the only apprehension of the labor? What glory and credit shall
we so purchase to this Viceroy of Britain? and what Spanish Rodomontades will
he make thereof? Into what despair shall we bring this Province, and all her
borderers, who for these two years, seeing others in peace, have tasted the
discommodities of wars? What will our confederates say? What may Italy and
Germany think, when they see the palm trees of our victories wither so soon?
What a dangerous example shall we set to those that seek to trouble the
realm: if he that was never acounted a soldier: a man nursed up in the shadow
and in all riot: a man never assaulted by any Monarke: that never stood out a
siege: and that lost Rhenes within 8. days after he had taken it: stop, I wot
not by what mishap, the course and enterprise of so great a king, together with
the resolution of all France. Sir, you have over long borne with the
insolency, rashness, and outrages of this presumptious Salmonee, who within
your realm plays the sovereign, holding a Parliament and the estates, and
threatens you with the Castillian armies: as if you had not at all times
chased them before you, causing them, for the shunning of the fight, to cross
the deep rivers, and taking Amiens even before their faces. Now Sir, ye want
but this one travel, for the perfecting of your conquest, of the whole
inheritance of S. Lewis. All other enterprises you shall find a thousand times
more easy, when you have the strength of al these great Provinces peaceable at
your back. And contrariwise, so long Sir, as any one place in France may
claim it self your enemy, and foster rebellion, your estate cannot be
assured. Whom by disobeying you, men shall be driven to depart the realm,
and to beg some miserable pention among the treasurers of Castille, few will
delight in such extreme resolutions: but if they have a shelter at hand, even
in the bowels of France, where silver and all other commodities do abound, it
will yield great incourageme^t to such as believe, that in case their enterprise
should fail, yet they should escape by getting into Britain, and at the last,
be comprised in an edict. Sir, you are entered the ninth year of your reign:
the whole course of your life, have been no other but triumphs, garlands, and
trophies, brought from your enemies. It is now time for you to finish your
great work, about the reestablishment of the sovereign power, and the
restoration of the French Monarchy. Time requires that we should now behold
your justice flourishing throughout the realm, and the greatest fortresses
open their gates to the smallest of your commandments. This done Sir, all
things shall be possible for you. Cast your eye on every side: consider the
Chastillons Provinces: every thing is ready for your conquest: they do grove
under the intolerable burden of his tyranny, which works them into all
manner of desperatio^^ but your only name with their assurance, that one day by
the felicity of your victorious sword, you shall deliver them, incourageth them
to live. Yet knowing Sir, that the good of your subjects must be preferred
before theirs: their eye is still upon Britain, as hoping that that business
once finished, your Majesty shall favorably look upon them: also that after
those great heroes of antiquity, you will deliver the afflicted from the yoke
of this cruel Philip, the common enemy of all Christ endo^^^: unto whom your
valiant mind (if ever there were any) contrary to the opinion of many, wishes
a long life of eighty years: to the end, that contrary to his conceits, he
may see you Sir, after the pacifying of your own kingdom, and the conquest of
Artois and Flanders, the domaines of your Crown, bring the firebrands of war
into the midst of Spain: and with the profit of three great battles, deliver
Portugal, Aragon, and your Navarre, from the insolency and barbarous cruelty
of this Castillian nation, from whom al wise men may well perceive that you
have wrested the Monarchy of Europe, which the conquest of France, that you
only have hindered, did undoubtedly yield them.

FINIS.

