THE ALCARON of the Barefote Friars. that is to say, an heap or number of the
blasphemous and trifling doctrines of the wounded Idol Saint Frances taken out
of the book of his rules, called in latin, Liber conformitatum.

A. 1550.





versicle. Frances is in heaven.

Answer. Who doubts of that?

Anthem. All the world.

The preface.
THIS is to admonish the gentle reader that if before this time thou haste not
red this book, and come there unto as an ignorant person that thou beware of
giving any credit or faith unto any of the blasphemous lies and Miracles
contained herin, which are not possible to be true they are so directly again
the most precious and holy word of god. And first thou shall understand yt
there is a book in latin entitled and named Liber Couform^tatum. That is to say
the book of the rules of the barefote Friars, containing a wago^ or cartful of
fables and blasphemous doctrines against Christ and true religion, out of the
which these few things herafter mentioned in this treatise is excerpted and
gathered.

and even at the first in ye prayer that ye Friars make to Frances, thou may
se how horrible idolatry they commit in attributing to Frances that only
aperteineth to christ, which is the remission of sins and the reward of
everlasting lif. They apply also all the Figures of the old Testament to
aperteine to Frances and so they shadow and hide Christ, and auance Frances
far above christ. Of this it follows that Christ is but a Figure of Frances
(as the Turk thinks) and that figured Fra^ces is al in all, whereof springs
this heresy that Frances is the very true Messiah, mediator advocate and
patron yt they call upon, and of him they ask everlasting life. who has hard
greter blasphemy, and what is this but ye falsifieng and denieng of the
scriptures of god spoken of his son Jesus christ, which says Ihon. x. I give
them everlasting life. Whatsoever ye ask the father in my name he will give it
you, i Iho^. ii We have an advocate with the father which is Jesus christ the
just. etc. i. Ti. ii. There is but one mediator between god and man even Jesus
christ. etc. Wherefore christian reader when thou have well considered these
things, weigh them as earnest matters, and god grant that we may so weigh
them in heart and mind that we may detest and abhor such abhominacions and to
cleave fast to Christ. Amen.

YET here rests to be told what should move me now at this time (Friars being
banished from hence and their wicked doings and doctrines worthily condemned)
to publishe and imprint this treatise: certainly two things, first for that it
was first gathered and set forth in high Dutche by. D. M. Luther and after by
an other great learned man translated out of dutche into latin, and likewise
imprinted and set fourth after that Friars were banished in Germany. And the
same cause that I think moved them, does now likewise cause me to imprint
the same, which is this, after ye light and knowledge of gods holy word had, there
is little perrel to bring forth false and erroneous doctrines, for that so sone
as they come unto ye light thereof they are espied and judged, like as in the
dark though a man be very well furnished of weapons hable to defend himself
from his enemy, yet for lack of light he loses the right use of them, for
that he may miss his enemy and hurt his friend, and having light and his
weapons also, he defends himself, and saves his friend and vanquisheth his
enemy. So now that God has given us the light of the knowledge of his most
holy and sacred word, and has endued us with the weapons and armor of his
holy spirit, we need not fear the Deuel our enemy nor his doctrines, but
may boldly look upon him in the day light and overcome and confound him and al
his: and this as a special and principal thing shall we herby have great cause
to rejoice and praise god for, in yt of his great merci he has delivered us
from ye blindness and bondage of those papistical Caterpillars, and that we may
now laugh to scorn such folish and filthy doctrine, as in the time of ignorance
we believed and worshipped for truth.

An other cause is this, that I se a great nu^bre which rather delight in lies
and vanities, and therewith to pas their time, then with the lively and most
fuitful word of God And for such: I thought this a mete book, that by the lies
her in contained they may confound and condemn their own ignorance which at
this Day by lies is and has been established, and that thereby they may be
ocasioned to desire further knolege and come to the light of gods most holy
word which every christen man ought most joyfully and gladly to embrace

The book speaks.
Read me as I am, and other wise take me not
And to tell the what I am, loathe I am god wot
But what I am in deed now shall thou know
This I am I tell the, the truth for to show
I am the rule of the barefote Friars,
Which learn of me, to be shameless liers
For all that is in me, of lies are grounded.
Therefore in England I am confounded.
I am such a book, plainly the to tell
As of Friars is believed before the Gospel,
And al such hipocrites as Friars are in deed
Believe me better then they do their creed.
I am old, and came not in of late,
I am no new doctrine whereof diverse prate,
I was first written with S. Frances hand,
And confirmed by ye pope for evermore to stand
I am that book, which plainly does expres
Not only the rule of blessed Saint Frances
But also the miracles of a number of Friars,
With blasphemous tales, both sundry and diverse.
Take me as I am, and so judge me I yt pray,
If thou judge me euel, the^ thy judgment I say
Is upright, and worthy to be commended,
Blame me hardly, for I have offended.
In the beginning of the book, an Image of the wounded Idol Fraunces being set
out, the Freers make their prayer thereunto, in this sort.

Francisce Jesus typice. etc. O Frances, the very figure of Jesus christ
And the only leder and rule of ye friars obserua^t
Deliver we beseech the, blessed father most highest
The souls of thy servants, that to the are attendaunt.
From everlasting death and pains infernal,
And grant us ye life and joys that are eternal
First leaf.
THe question is of Frances mekenes, and where God has placed him.

Answer. He sits in the first and chefest degree in heaven, and has his
seat and abiding in the highest place.

The ii. lefe
Frances only observed the letter of the gospel and swarued not one jot or
title, It folo^th that ^other ^iers were ^unded ^the doc^ne of the ^uell.
and only he and his brethren has their rule grounded on the gospel after a
spiritual manner.

The same leaf
When S. Frances was sick a brother of his desired license ye he might read
him some what for his recreation. To whom Frances answered, that it should not
need, for he had sufficient knowledge and said I know poor Christ crucified.

The same leaf
O how often times our Lord Jesus appeared unto the blessed father. S Frances,
and not only of him but also of the blessed Virgin Mary, of Ihon Baptist Ihon
Evangelist and of the holy apostles Peter and Paul, and of the Archangell
Michael, and of diverse other angels he was visited.

The Same leaf.
While S Frances prayed ferue^tly to our Lady that she would obtein comfort for
her of her little child Jesus, the blessed and pure virgin, was incontinently
present and caught him in her arms and kissed him, holding him from the
beginning of the night until it was day and granted him his peticion

The.iii. leaf
Christ calls Frances his Chauncelour, Thesauror, his Ba^ner bearer, and his
counsaillor.

The same leaf.
In whom at any time has apered the print of the wounds of Christ? Truly in
none but in holy Frances, as affirms the church of Rome, and commands all the faithful so to believe etc And also pope Benedict ordained a holy day to be
kept for the worshipping of those impressions.

The same leaf.
In the hands and feet of Frances were Nails, as it were of sinowes and
flesh, the which nails were on the heddes hard and gross, they were long
and stretched ^arre both through his hands and fete, and turned again as it
were clinched, so that a finger might have been laid between the clinching as
the right worshipful Bonauenture bishop of Albanence and Cardinal of Rome in
the third part of his Legend, does affirm by the credible report of them
which saw them, felt them and by their oath confirmed it so to be. Therefore
it came neither by nature nor yet by imaginacio^, neither could nature preserve
it in such manner without Putrificacion, if by any Art it had been
devised, for by the space of.ij. years out of those wounds issued blod The
church does not report this to be done by our Lady, but our lord Jesus Christ
was the only worker thereof by his godli will, might and power, and none but
himself, which in the similitude of a Seraphin printed in Frances, his blessed
wounds. Wherefore he that is mighty has done great things in Frances. Luc. i.
For he has set wondres upon him. Psalm xlv. And blessed Frances may say, as
Daniel the prophet said. The high god has wrought upon me wondres and miracles.

The iiii lefe
Blessed Frances has great glory in heaven, for he sits in the high seat
of Lucifer. And if according to the mind of the Master of the sentence. ii.
did i and viii. all the ^ai^ctes after their degrees, are placed among the
celestial creatures, then is Frances placed among the Seraphins which may well
be, for while he lived he seemed to be a burning Seraphin like unto Christ, both
bodily and ghostly. And that Fra^ces was a burning Seraphin, was sufficiciently
declared by the burning and fiery Chariot, wherein being transfigured, he
apered to certain of his brethern

Also Freer Mass being by. S Frances suddenly rapt and taken from the yerth,
felt such an heat coming from Frances, that he seemed to be in the middle of a
burning Furnace.

The Same leaf.
Lucifer was of the highest order in heaven, therefore it follows that he was of
the order of Seraphins, and coseque^tly his seat was above al other ordres in
heaven. Wherefore in the place of proud Lucifer is set meke S. Frances, which
by divine teuel^cion was showed to Freer Pac^^cus and Freer Leonard of Ausio
Who t^^ the De^ this? for^ ^er his ^he never me in he^ nor neue^ shall.
And ye deuel by ye mouth of a certain priest called M. zatese of Raue^na told
James of Bonony that was resident in Heaven and sat in lucifers seat. And
the same deuel said that Fra^ces was christ's Banner bearer, and therefore goes
next to the king Christ, and hereof comes it that no order is nerer Christ
then S. Frances order, for next to the king of kings stands blessed S
Frances. And the aforesaid deuel affirms, that after our Lady, Ihon Bap. and
ye apostles, blessed Fra^ces and his order does go before al other saints.

The Same leaf
Christ made Frances like to him self. First in life most verteous, and after
by printing in him his wounds, wherefore it is said of Frances, Eccle. xlix.
There is none found like him, for he has observed the law of the highest.

Which words to be true the holiness, virtue and redolent fame of blessed
Frances declare.

He was also a man of a sincere life, and from the pleasures of the body
utterly segregate.

The Same leaf.
What manner of person, how and to what purpose, God made Frances, is
declared. Gene. i. and. ii. where is written, let us make man that is to say,
FRANCES, unto our image and similitude, and he shall govern the fishes of ye
sea. etc And let us make him a helper like to him self, that is a company of
poor.

The.v. leaf
All the virtue of saints as well of the Old Testament as of the new are
conjoined and united in Frances.

The same lefe
Jesus put Frances next him self as his Standard bearer, as affirms the
right worshipful Raufe bishop of Erphord, who by this vision was made a
barefore Friar, and ii. citizens of Venice with him.

Also Frances in all things was like to the son of god, and the holy ghost
sanctified Frances as witnesses ye cedule which Freer O blasphemy.
Lion saw come from heaven and rested upon the hedde of Frances wherein was
written. This is the grace of God.

The same leaf.
Our blessed Lady prayed unto the father that Frances might be sent into the
world. Also our Lady at the prayer of Frances obtained the great pardon that
is in the church of Saint Marie of Porciuncle wherein is clean remission and
forgiveness of sins.

The same leaf.
Peter and Paul meting Fra^ces in the church of Rome. embraced and kissed him.

The same leaf.
Whosoever calls and trusts in the help of Frances, shall not be oppressed of
the deuel.

The viii leaf
It is undoubtedly to be believed, that as well the saie^ges of the prophets as
also the doings of saints, were all prefigured in Frances.

The same leaf.
Frances is like to Adam, Abel, Enos, Enoch, Noe, Abraham Isac, Jacob, Joseph,
Moses Aaron, Phinees, Iosue, Samson Iephte, Gedeon, Samuel, Hely, Elizeus,
Ionadab, Esai, Jeremy Job, Thoby, Ezechiel, Daniel, Micheas, Peter, Ihon
Baptist. Ihon Evangelist, James, Bartholomew, Paul, and in conclusion all the
saints,

The ix leaf.
Esaias figured Frances in the sixth Chapter, which heard two Seraphins
saying, Holy. Holy, Holy, And Ezechiel Chapi. iii. which heard a voice of
great russhi^g saying, blessed be the glory of the lord. Also he figured
Abraham, which said, I am worm and dust.

The x. lefe
Frances is like to Ely and Elizeus which raised the dead to life again.

The Same leaf.
In whatsoever necessity. S. Frances be called upon, Christ has bound him
self to hear the caller.

The Same leaf
The dove sent from Noe out of the Arc, signified the order of the barefote
Friars.

the same leaf.
Also the figure of Joseph when Phaaro took him his ring to put upon his hand.
Christ gave to none of his saints the ring of ye express figure and print of
his blessed wounds, but only to Fraunces.

Also Gene xl. the vine which brought forth iij. branches, signified.iij.
ordres, that is to say. ye Minorites, or barefote Friars, the black Friars,
and the penitent brethren and sistern.

Also Iosue which was Moses minister Figured Frances, for there has none
served and ministered to Christ as Frances has done.

Also Frances was like unto Elias, which being transfigured appeared to his
brethren in a fiery Chariot

The.iii. children in the burning Furnace, and the fourth that was like the
son of god, betokened the four ordres, Basilii, Augustine Friars,
Benedictes, and Graye Friars, which were the fourth, that is to say, like unto
the son of God in life, for they are Figured and Marked with the wounds

The Angel which sat upon the cloud like unto the son of of man me^cioned
in the Apocalips Apoca. xiij.
was Frances, as witnesses the vision which Saint Siluestre saw.

The xi. leaf
The Turks by the order of Saint Frances shall be converted.

The xii. leaf
Blessed Frances may be called a Rock, for he was the Son of Peter Barnard,
and Peter, and Rock, is al one.

The xiii. leaf.
The order of the gray Freers shall remain till the day of Judgment for so
was yt declared by reuelacio^ to S. Frances.

The Same leaf.
This saying: I will be his father and he shall be my Son, is not to be
understand only of the son of god, but of those saints which shall be about
the end of the world, that is to say of Frances and Dominyke, noble and
ignoble, which signified ij. ordres to come, as did Caleb and Iosue, Manasses
and Ephraim, Moses and Aaron, Ihon and Christ, Ely and Elizeus, Paul and
Barna^as, the two spies yt went into Jericho, the two disciples that were sent
to lose the Ass. etc.

The xiiii leaf
The coming of Frances into ye world was known unto ye deuelles, as it is
expressed in ye lege^d The deuel being asked of the holiness of Saint Frances, A
substancial witness.
said that the Hour that Blessed Saint Frances was borne, there was such an
horrible and exceeding trouble in hell, ye he thought the last day had been
come. And then perceauing that the last day was not come, they said among them
selves, certeynly there is some borne which shall destroy hell and us. And
then by the great Deuell Prince of darkness there were sent out certain deuelles
into all the world to know who it was, and they found ye Frances was borne
that same hour, and said, for a truth yt was he that should be their
confusion and destruction.

The Same leaf.
The name of Frances is diuulged thorowout all the world. Frances is known and
declared to all the creatures of the earth, of what kind so ever they be, that
is to say, of the Sea, the Fire, the Air, and the Earth.

The xvii. leaf.
Frances was a Patriarch, Prophet, Apostle, Martyr. Doctor, Confessor, Vyrgyn,
Angel, and nerer to Christ then all other Saints, as this present work
declares,

The Same leaf.
Blessed Frances was ordained of god, as affirms holy church, for pope
Gregory the ix. entered him in the register or book of Saynctes.

The xviii. leaf.
The bowelles of Charity were showed in Frances, for with weeping eyes he
beheld the cross of Christ, and iij. times, the Cross bowed down unto him
saying, Frances, go and repair my house.

The Same leaf.
The Deuell witnesses that by the mouth of a certain woman yt was declared yt
Christ made intercession to his father to grant A De^lish resti^^ny.
toward the end of the world, that Frances might bear his cross for the
remission of the sins of the people. etc.

The Same leaf.
When S. Frances desired of Christ a great Pardon for the sins of the people,
Christ bade him ask what he would and yt should be granted to him, for he
was ordained to be the light of the Gentyles.

The xix. leaf.
Freer Lion saw Christ crucified going before, and Frances when he stood,
standing with him, and when he went, going with him, and talkyng with him.

The xxi. leaf.
On Christmas even, Saint Frances turned the great river of Tyber that passes
by Rome into Oil.

The xxiiii. leaf
Abbas Ioachim and diverse other saw Frances wounded, according to the saying
of Christ Ihon. viij. Abraham saw my days and reioysed.

The Same lefe.
Mastres Picha, the mother of blessed. S Frances was conceived with him after
the manner of another Elizabeth, and she did not only rejoice as Elizabeth did,
but also she named him Iho^ at his baptism. If S. Frances were like to ye
son of Mary our Lord Jesus Christ, then of force he must be as good as Iho^
baptist And certeynly he was more the^ Ihon baptist, for Ihon baptist was but a
preacher of penance, but Frances both preached yt and did institute yt. Also
Ihon baptist was the forrunner of Christ by preaching, but S. Frances was both
his preacher and banner bearer, wherein he exceded Ihon. Also Frances is before
Ihon for he converted more then Ihon did, and has trauayled in mo places, that
is to say through out all the world. Ihon preached but ij. years and a little
more, Frances preached xliij. years. Ihon received his aucthorite but of the
Lord: But Frances received yt both of the Lord and of the Pope, which is
more. Ihon what manner of person he should be was declared of an Angel to his
father, and by the holy ghost was made known to the Prophets. But Frances was
declared by the Prophets, by our Lord Jesus Christ, and by an Angel in the
likeness of a pilgrim, both to his Father and Mother and whole household. S. Ihon
prophesied both in his Mothers belie and abroad. Blessed Frances prophesied
in ye belie, that is to say in prison being taken at peruse, of his
deliverance. S. Ihon was ye friend of ye spouse, but Frances was made like
unto Christ him self. Ihon to the world was very holy: But Frances excelled
in holiness, and therefore before all other Christ prynted in him the mark of
his wounds. S. Ihon is exalted into the order of the Seraphins, But S. Frances
is exalted into the same order and is set in ye highest seat where Lucifer did
sit.

But was there any other that were glad of ye birth of S. Frances? Ye truly.
Who were they? forsooth that were Enoch and Helias, which appeared unto a
certain freer of the order of Benedict of ye parties beyond ye seas, and they
asked him, what order art thou of? He answered of Fra^ces order. And they
said then Frances comes, and they made great reioisyng, and led the same Freer
with them throughout all paradise showing him all things. And yt is no marvel
that they so reioysed in Frances, for like always ioyeth in their like. Also
the souls in purgatory reioysed at his birth, and specially all those which
were of ye iij. orders, for they were delivered from their peynes and did fly
up into heaven. Also the dead reioysed, for by his merits they were raised,

The xxviii. leaf.
As Simeon embraced Christ being a Child in his arms, so a certain pilgrym
which was an Angel came to the door of Frances fathers house, and instantly
besought the servants of the household ye he might embrace the Child. This
he ^^eth of ^minike, these ^e the ^thors ^hese ii. ^es.
etc. And the Angel said, In this street are borne ij. Children, this Frances
here, and another. This shall be the governor of the better, and the other of
the worsse.

As the blessed virgyn Mary at the peticion of the wise men that came from the
East to visit Christ, delivered him to them, even so the mother of blessed S.
Frances at the peticion of the pilgrym delivered her Son unto him.

The Same leaf.
S. Frances did specially delight in the blessed virgin Mary, S. Michaell, Ihon
baptist. Peter and Paul.

The xxix. leaf.
Frances healed all manner of diseases, Yea and that was more, by the only
laiyng on of his hands he cleansed lepers. And he converted the Souldyan of
Babylon.

The Same leaf.
By the merits and inuocacio^ of S. Frances, Christ raised many from death to
life.

The xxx. leaf.
Frances being in Prison, when his other Prison fellows were sad and heavy, then
would he be wondrous merry and glad, inso much that they imputed his so much
mirth to be folyshnes, of the which being by one reproved, he answered with a
lowed voice, what think thou of me? Even at this time am I worshipped
throughout all the world.

The xxxviii. leaf.
Frances said unto his brethren, my brethren, my brethren, God called me by the
way of symplicite and humilite, and ye way he declared to me to be the true
way for me and those that will believe and follow me to walk in. And therefore
I will not have you to name any other rule to me, then that which the Lord of
his great mercy declared and gave unto me. And the Lord said unto me that he
would Have me a little fool in this world. etc.

The Same leaf.
Freer Pacifique was sodeynlye rapt and taken up into Heaven, but whether in
the body or out of the body, god knows, and he saw in Heaven many seats,
among which he saw one very notable, garnyshed with precious stones. And he
heard a voice saying unto him, this seat was Lucifers seat, and in his seat
shall sit meke Frances,

The xxxix. leaf.
Frances is better then the Apostles, which left but their ships and few
other things, but yet they left not of the garments from their backs.
Blessed Frances for a truth for sooke not only all earthly goods and riches,
but also the clothes from his back, and even his very breeches he cast from
him, and naked he offered him self both body and mind to be crucified, which
we read not that ever any saint else did: wherefore he may well say to
Christ, I have left all and followed thee.

The Same leaf.
Blessed Frances observed the Gospel to the uttermost, as they sing of him,
Frances has not offended one tyttle, point or jot of the Gospel.

The same leaf.
Worldly men desyer high, fair, large and plesaunt houses, but S. Fra^ces
would have none such, but commanded that the substance of the houses for the
Where do the ^reers observe this?
Brethren and Sistern should not be made of stones or of carved woork, but of
wyckers or Osyers covered with a little straw and claye myngled together, and that
they should be little and low cotages.

The xlii. leaf.
Fances being in prayer, the Deuell said unto him, Frances. Frances, Frances?
Frances answered and asked him what he would, This saying, if y^ were said, was
not the Deuelles saying.
he being in subieccion said, There is no sinner in the world which if he
convert, that needs to fight with him self: but surely whosoever by hard
penance kylleth him self, shall never find mercy.

The Same leaf.
Frances and his fellow as they went into Apulia found a great pursse with
money, he knowing that the Deuell had done yt for a bayte, at the instance of
his companyon that yt might be given to the poor, he took the pursse, and he
no sooner touched yt but the Deuell issued therout in the lykenes of a Serpent
and carried the pursse with him.

Another brother going by the way found a penny and took yt up and put yt in
his mouth to give yt to the poor, and straight way his tongue and members were
made lame and dombe by the Deuell, But when he had spyt out the penny and done
penance, he was restored, both to his speech and other members.

The Same leaf.
Frances often times did se the Deuell, not only in a dissimuled manner, but to
fear and grieve him he showed him self plainly and clearly in his own form
and fassion. Freer Giles asked of S. Frances if the Deuell were so terrible
that a man might not behold him a pater noster while? S. Frauces answered,
that no man was hable to behold the deuell half a Pater noster while, but he
should dye immediately.

The xliii. leaf.
The deuell appeared unto Frances saying, know thou not that sleep is a great
norisshyng to the body? And immediately Frances pulled of his cote and his
breeches and going out of his Cell ran naked into the wilderness, when yt was
frost and snow, and all to tare his flesh with the thorns of the wood.

The Same leaf.
S. Frances being occupied in prayer upon the mount of Aluerne, the Deuell
would have thrown him down headlyng, by reason the stones whereon he kneled
were lose and holowe: but Fra^ces caught one of ye lose stones in his hand as
he was falling and the same cloue as fast to ye rest as wax does to a man's
fyngers, whereby Frances stayed himself and ouercam ye deuell, If ye seek them
may hap ye may find them.
which stones are to se this present day.

The xlvi. leaf.
S. Frantes hearing in the Gospel that the disciples should carry no money in
their Pursses, neither should they Have ij. cotes etc. being replenished with
the holy Ghoost, streyt way he cast away his Shoes, and his staff, and put on
an old threde bare cote made after the manner of the Cross, and instead of a
Girdle he put about him a cord. And thus the life and rule of blessed S.
Frances was taken of the Apostles.

The names of the xii. Apostles of Saint Frances which were in life, word
and miracles. wondrous notable.
Pet^r Cathany. Ihon of the Chapel. Philip Long. Freer Bather. Freer Gyles.
Bernhard of Cleue. Angel Cam^^^. Ihon of Saint Constance. Bernhard of the v.
Valleys. Freer Morice. Freer Saba^yne. Freer Syluester.
This order was instituted the xvj. day of April Anno M.CC.VII.
Freer Giles was rapt and taken up into heaven, as was Saynct Paul. Freer
Siluester talked with God as one friend talks with another. Freer Morice
lived only by raw herbs. And as Judas was removed from the dignite of the
Apostleship, so was Ihon of the Chapel removed from them, and afterward being
infected with a leprosy, for pain and shame he hanged him self: in whose
place came Wylliam an Englishman.

The xlvii. leaf.
Frances was buried in Assisio, There w^ never no^ such, ^ herin ar^ many
dec^ued.
but his body could never be found to be showed to the people.

The Same leaf.
S. Frances opened the Mass book, and at the first openyng he happened upon
this sentence by the will of the Lord: If thou will be perfect go sell all
that thou have and follow me. He opened the book the second time and found, ye
shall carry nothing with you in the way etc. And the third time he opened yt,
and found, he that will follow me, must deny him self etc. Then said Frances
to Bernhard and Peter, that is the rule of our life.

The Same leaf.
Frances and Bernhard stood under a porche stark naked having nothing upon
them when yt was fervently cold, and a certain woman took them for rybaldes
and thieves.

The xlviii. leaf.
Freer Bernhard stood by the space of viij. days beholding divine consolations.

The Same leaf.
Freer Bernhard saw one of his Brethren ride upon a great palfrey, and he
cried mightily after him, saying, that Horse is to high and to great, our
rule teaches not to ride of such Horses. Blessed Bernhard was the whele of
Charitee.

The Same leaf.
Brother Giles seeing Bernhard he said, Sursum corda. that is, lift up your
hertes, And Bernhard answered Habemus ad Dominum. that is, we lift them up
unto the Lord.

The Same leaf.
Freer Bernhard after his death, was made white and his flesh soft and looked
as though he laughed, and he seemed to be much fayrer being ded then he was
living.

The xlix. leaf.
One of S. Frances brethren being suddenly rapt up into Paradyce, saw S.
Frances clothed in a clothyng garnished all with beutifull sterres, and the
pryntes of the wounds shone as ye most bryghtest sterres, and was seen through
all the cite.

The Same leaf.
Freer Lion not fyndyng S. Frances in his cell, went out and saw him assendyng
into heaven so high that he could skant reach his fete, which he embraced and
with all reverence kyssed saying, God be merciful unto me wretched sinner, and
by the merits of this holy man, Grant that I may find mercy.

The Same leaf.
S. Frances told the foresaid Lion before of the impression of his wounds,
saying, that shortly God in the mount of Aluerne would work in him such a
Miracle as he never before wrought in any creature, which should be to the
great wonder of all the world. This Freer Lion being in the mountain when our
Lord marked S. Frances with his five wounds, S. Frances was content to grant
him to touch them, and with his hands he touched those most reverent
wounds, out of the which issued so much virtue, that he seemed to him self to
be taken out of the world.

The Same leaf.
S. Frances used all ways to put a certain thing in his wounds to keep them
from bledyng, but upon Maundy thursdaye at night and all good Friday he would
put nothing in them, but suffered them to blede, for the love of Christ which
ye day was crucified, yt he might suffer with him.

The Same leaf.
Blessed Frances commanded the stone whereon Christ stood when he apered unto
him, to conne Water, Wine, Oil, and Balsa^um, for iiij. things said he that
Christ promised should apperteyn unto his order. The first, whosoever loved
religion should end well. ii. Whosoever persecuted Religion should be plagued.
iii. He that observes not religion should be confounded. But not ^ryers
reli^ion.
iiii. That religion should endure to the end of the world.

The Same leaf
Freer Lion after S. Frances death was wou^derfull desirous to se him, and to
obtayn his request he gave him self to prayer and fasting, to whom S. Fran.
appeared very ^ocound and merry, having wings and feathers to fly, and sharp
talentes (as yt were gilted) like an Egle. Then Freer Lion asked him wherefore
he did fly in that manner. He answered, among many other gifts which the lord
has given me, one is that I should be the only advocate and helper of all my
verteous and devout brethren, and as yt were flyeng among their tribulacions
and aduersites ye more spedely to help them, and the souls of those good
brethren to bring into everlasting glory: And I carry the sharp talentes and
nails of the deuell* to correct with most hard peynes and grievous ponishment
the naughty brethren and she persecutors of our order.

The l. leaf.
A certain Child being daily vexed with the falling syknes coming to Freer
Lion did pryuely cut of a piece of his cote and hanged yt about his neck and
straight he was delivered of his disease, but by chance yt so happened that
the same piece was cut from his neck, and being again vexed with his disease he
came to Freer Lion, and he hanged a piece of his cote about his neck, and the
disease departed from him for ever.

The Same leaf.
The countess of Angulary liyng at the point of death, hard the voice of a
certain lady saying, do thou believe in holy Freer Lion? Then commyt thy self
to him. ^blasphe^
The woman being specheles, in her heart commended her self to Freer Lion and
immediately she received her health.

The Same leaf.
Frances reveled to Freer Mass many heavenly things. It fortuned that Freer
Massey was going before S. Frances, and asked him which way they should go.
S. Frances answered, the same way which the Lord shows us. And Massey said,
how shall we know that way? And Frances answered: by the miracle that I
will do in the. Look wha a goodly miracle her i^.
And then he commanded Massey by the virtue of obedyence that he should turn
him self round and never cease (as children are wont to do) till he commanded
him to cease. Which thing doing for the desynes of his head at last he fell
to ye ground. Then Sayn^t Frances commanded him that he should not rise, and
asked him to what part his face was, and he said toward Senas. Then said S.
Frances, let us go to Senas, for so is the will of God.

A little after.
Such works were done by blessed Frances while he lived, that if an Angel
had done them. they could not have been more merueylous.

The Same leaf.
Freer Frances and Massey went a beggyng together, and because Freer Massey was
fair and Frances hard favored, therefore Freer Massey had the best almo^e and
greatest lofes.

The li. leaf.
Blessed Saint Frances went behind the altar to pray, where by the
visitacion of God he received into his soul such feruency of heat, and was
so inflamed with the desyer of pouertye, that he thought that out of his Eien
and mouth when he gaped, there issued great flames. And coming into his fellow
with his burning mouth, he said, A A A brother Massey, and this he spoke with
great feruency iij. times, and he pulled Massey by the Neck, and his mouth
for the great feruency of the Spirit was drawn awrye, and he cried
contynually A A A Brother Massey, and he lifted Massey from the ground and
with a blast of his mouth he lifted Massey from the earth, and he blew him
before him a great spear length. Freer Massey was astonyed at the marvelous
feruoure of the Blessed Father, but he thought that he received such great
swetnes and consolacion as to his remembrance he never received before.
Afterward going to Rome, Blessed Frances was of the holy Apostles Peter and
Paul swetely embraced.

The Same leaf.
Peter and Paul being required by Frances, obtained of Christ the confirmacion
of the rule of the Barefoote Freers.

The Same leaf.
A great multitude of birds were gathered together to hear the prechyng of
blessed Frances.

The Same leaf.
Freer Corrade said that Ruffinus was tempted often of the deuell that he
should not follow ye steps of blessed Frances, for Frances was an ydeot and a
fool.

The Same leaf.
The Deuell tempted Freer Ruffyne saying: Thou art dampened and Frances is
dampened, and whosoever follows him shall be deceived. Which thing when Ruffine
had told Blessed Frances, Frances said If the Deuell appear unto the again and
say any thing to the, say thou unto him, Open thy mouth and I will shyte in
yt. O swe^ Frances.
Afterward when Ruffinus prayed again, Se^ how like Christ the deuelf is.
the deuell appeared unto him in the lyknes of Christ saying: Freer Ruffine, did
not I bid the that thou should not believe the Son of Peter Bernharde, why
do thou thus ponyshe thy self? And ymmediatly Freer Ruffine said unto him,
A sweet ^peche.
Open thy Mouth and I will shyte in yt. Then the Deuell being angered, departed
from him in a great furye.

The lii. leaf
On a certain day, blessed Frances commanded Freer Ruffine to go preach at
Assisio such things as the Holy Ghost should move him unto. Freer Ruffine
said, I am an ydeot and unlearned, I beseech the my LORD Pardon me. Blessed
Frances said, Because thou have not straight way obeyed, therefore by the
virtue of obedyence I command the that thou strype thy self naked all save
thy breches and get the to Assisio to some church there and so preach to the
people

Afterward when Saint Fra^ces, perceived that Freer Ruffins was gone, and
considered with him self that his penance was to grievous, he likewise striped
him self naked and went and heard Freer Ruffine preach But the inhabitants
of Assisio seeing those ii naked, said, these me do so much penance that they
become mad.

The Same leaf.
They thought them selves most blessed and happy that might touch the Hemmes
of the Garments of Frances and Ruffine.

The same lefe
On a time when Friar Ruffine went about the city of Assisio begging bread,
behold, a certain deuel cried saying, that pore Friar S. Ruffine, which
trotteth in ye mire, his holiness and prayers burn and torment me.

The same leaf
Also Friar Ruffine was the first that espied the printes of the wounds in
blessed S. Before he ^rmed contra^ of Friar ^n ^refore a ^ ought have a ^od
me^ory.
Frances, by washing of his breches which was excedingly araied with the blood
that ran out of the right side of the wound of S Frances.

The second time he espied it by scratchi^g of s. Frances side, where by chance
his Fingers was in the wound before he was ware and Sayncte Frances being in
great anguishe cried with a loud voice, God forgive the Ruffine, wherefore have
thou done this?

The same leaf.
Friar James saw the soul of blessed. Saynct Frances, assend into heaven as a
bright sterre over a fair cloud,

The same leaf.
There lay in the house of our Lady, certain Friars which hard and saw a
great nombre of larkes, gathered together, singinge upon the rofe of the
Church at the death of Frances, Sancta Maria. etc.

The xl. leaf
Freer Ihon was so simple that whatsoever he saw Saint Frances do, that he
would do also, as when Saint Frances swept the church he would also help him
and when Frances did spit he would also spit, and when Frances made curtesy, he
would also make curtesy. And when he was by Frances rebuked for so doing, he
answethat he had promised to do all all things which. S. Frances did.

The Same leaf.
A certain Doctor in divinity preachiug before S. Clare and her Sisters, it
fortuned that Freer Giles coming in, said unto him, thou doctor hold thy
peace for I will preach: which immediately held his peace, and Friar Giles
taught most swetely. The^ blessed. S. Clare reioising in the spirit said, This
day is the will of blessed Saint Frances fulfilled.

The Same leaf.
Freer Giles said, that among al virtues he loved chastity. And when a certain
brother said, is not Charity greater? He answered And what is chaster the^
charity? And often he would sing. O holy Chastity what art thou? A goodly ^le
song.
what art thou? thou art such and somuche as Fools know not how much,

The Same leaf.
A black Friar being tempted by our lady, went to Friar Giles for counsel.
Freer Giles seeing this in spirit ran and met him and with his Staff he
bette the ground iii. Here (...) touch t^ Black F^^ers.
times saying, A virgin before the birth, A virgin in the birthe, And a virgin
after the birth, and at every stroke that he gave on the grouud, there spro^g
up a lily, and the Friar was delivered of his temptation.

The Same leaf.
Freer Giles knowing ye. s. Jews which was king of France came too Peruse
clothed in a pilgrims wede, to se him, and he running to mete him, each so
e^braced other, that they both fell down, and in spirit, but not in word the
one spoke to the other, and each departed frrom other with wonderful
consolacion.

The lv. lefe
Freer Giles affirmed that he was iiii. times borne. first of his mother, scond
of baptism, thirdly at the entrance into his order,

And fourthly, when god so often times appeared unto him, and he was rapt and
taken up into heaven. And in this birth as he said, he lost all his faith, by
the reason of those heavenly visions which are of faith.

The same leaf
The deuel appeared unto him so terribly, that for fear he lost his speech,
and when the deuel began to come upon him and to destroy him, not being hable
to rise he drew as well as he could to the vessel of holy water which with
faith he threw, and forthwith he was delivered of his torments.

The same leaf
Freer Giles saw ye soul of a certain holy person among a great sort of the
souls of Friars, assend out of Purgatory into heaven

The same leaf.
For the holiness of Friar Giles, Christ granted that all the souls which
were in purgatory should assend with him into paradise, among the which was
Freer Lolle, even then in torme^ting, which by the merits of Freer Giles was
delivered.

The Same leaf.
Freer Giles was once rapt and taken up into the third heaven.

The doctrine of Friar Giles
There is nothing whereby yt thou can please god better, then to ha^g thy self
by the throat, which is thus to be interpreted, (...) do. (...).
the man that is hanged is not in heaven, and yet is he lifted up from the
earth and always looks downward, so must we humble our selves.

The same leaf
Freer Giles said unto a certain person, if thou will enter into religion, then
quickly kill thy parents, that is to say thy Father and mother, but not with
the material sword, but spiritually, for he that hates not father and mother
cannot be christ's disciple.

The same leaf
To enter into religion, is to find the infinite treasure of the kingdom of
heaven.

The lvi. leaf
Peine upon peine, is to study mekenes and humility,

The.lvii. leaf
Freer Giles said to. s. Frances that he liked not the pis^eres or Antes,
because they were to much careful in gathering of their victualles, but he
liked the birds excedingly well, for they horded not up.

The.lviii. leaf.
Holy religious persons are like holy wolves, ^ holy comparison
for they never go abroad but for great necessitee.

The lix. leaf
From the beginning of the world even til this time, there was never a better
nor a more profitable ^ Order of Religion invented, then the order of the
barefote Friars.

The lx. leaf.
Freer Giles being asked what he thought of blessed Frances, he being inflamed
with fervor of the spirit, in hearing the name of Frances said, that there is
no man that ought to name blessid Frances, but for joy he should lick his
lips. Yet said Friar Giles he lacked one thing, and that was a strong body,
for if he had had so strong a body as I have, I think all the world had not
ben able to have followed him.

The Same leaf.
Freer Co^rade of offida when he was but xiiii years of age entered into
religion, and when he was set to study he refused it, and entered into ye
kitchen dressing meat and destributing yt almose by the space of.x. years There
came daily unto him a fair bird and sat upon his sholder, and at a certain
time as he went i^to ye wood the bird did fly before him singing most
swetely, of the which swetnes he received incredible comfort. Maundy thurseday
drawing nere, Freer ^onrade besought the lord that he would take the bird
those iij. days into his keeping, because that in those iii. days he would
receive no consolation or confort, but sorrow and heuines, in the honor of good
Friday: which thing came to pass, for the bird hid her self, until Easter
dayin the morning, which morning he came more fairer the^ ever he did before,
and song more plesanter and sweter, and as it is said, he spoke to him
wonderful things and he saw him fly into heaven as straight as a threde.

Verily I believe it was the Holy Ghost, ^oly ^o
or at the least ye angel Gabriel, Also a certain wolf came unto Corrad and
caught him by the neeke as he had been a lamb and carried him into the house of
the bare foot Friars. The which thing the brethren seeing, meruailed, and for
great devotion began excedingly to weep perceiving the holiness of their
brother.

The same brother in the Feast of the Purificatio^ besought our our lady that
she would give him some of the swetnes and consolation that she gave to Simeon,
and imediatly he was heard, For our Lady apered in a great light with her
most precious child, and turned him into the arms of Freer Conrade, which
devoutly taking him printed Christ's lips in his lips, and setting his
breast to his, was wonderfully delighted in the kisses, and replenished with
charity.

The Same leaf.
The soul of a certain Friar apered unto Friar Conrade, and declared unto him
that for certain sins that he had committed he was in purgatory, and
therefore besought him that he would say a certain of pater nosters for him.
And when he had said an hundred pater nosters, the Soul of the same brother
returned and gave thanks on gods behalf to Friar Conrade, saying that he
was delivered from peines an went even then into glory.

The Same leaf.
Freer Conrade was a great preacher, and he reised five dead persons, A sure
witness.
as the deuell affirms.

The lxi. lefe
Friar Simon of Collaze reised a dead person to life, he healed a sick horse,
Sheep that could not stand he made hole. He restored old women to their
hearing, iii. persons that were crooked he made straight, and healed x that had
the dropsy,

The Same leaf.
A certain Physician of Spolet, being like could not help him self, A medicine
for phisicians.
till he had upon him the garment of Saint Frances order, and then he received
his health.

The lxii leaf
Freer Simon of Assissio, never learned his Grammar, and yet by the help of god
he spoke so mistically that his words seemed supernatural. And being on a time
rapt and taken up he seemed so far unlike himself by the mean of wonderful
aparicions and visions that he saw, that a Freer putt a burning cole upon his
bare foot and he never felt it.

The Same lefe
Freer Roll of Bruforce on a time preached in the wood, and ye chattering of
the birds excedi^gly troubled him, and he turned to the^, and commanded the^
that they should depart and come no more in that wood, (A merueilous saying)
and unmediatly they departed and never returned again.

The Same leaf.
Freer Leonard one of. Saint Frances fellows led S Frances Ass and as he
thought S. Frances was riding upon his Ass, which said to him self, behold
how Frances rydeth and must have a foot man to lead his Ass. And immedyatly
Frances knew his thought. Then Freer Leonard kneled down at blessed Frances
fete, and with tears besought him of forgeuenes.

The Same leaf.
A certain Nouesse called Freer Iunyper was so simple and devout. yt he went
often times into the wyldernes to gather wood to make a fire to warm the
brethren with, and he used to carry an aule with him to sow the (...) of his
brethren, but the war^^^^ of his house was fat. Thesayd Noueys on a time
stryped him self naked and came from Fulgin^ passing by ye street spelu^ through
the cytee of Assisio even into the house of ye barefoot Freers. And when he was
excedyngly reproved of the general minister for so doing, he said, that he had
taken this penance upon him, because he would be commanded in like manner
naked to return. Also another time he entered into Viterbe, Good^ye and gaye
^^yracles.
and as he entered the gate of the city, he put his breches about his head,
and his cote he bound up like a fardell about his neck, and so naked he went
thorough the city, where he suffered many shameful rebukes and naked he entered
into the house of the Friars, where all the brethren cried out upon him, but
(...) little regarded their rebukes (...) holy a man was this Nouey^

The Same leaf.
Theforsayd Noueys was of a certain gentleman excedyngly well enterteigned and
laid in a goodly bed. A shy^ knave.
But he fyled the bed, and departed in the morning without taking any leave, or
byddyng them farewell.

The Same man took his journey to Rome, which being known to the Romans,
they came forth to enterteine and welcome him. But he stood plaiyng with the
Children till they were gone. And afterward he went into the city alone. The
Romans some of them thought he did yt of a contempt or disdeyn that he bare
unto them and other some thought he did yt of folyshnes.

The Same leaf.
A certain Freer being sick desired to eat of a swynes fete, Then theforsayd
Noueys called Freer Iunyper took a sword and entered into the myddest of the
herd of swyne and stroke of the fete of one of them, and dressed them for
his forsayde brother. When the master of the swyne knew that a Freer had done
it, he spak many opprobrious words of S. Frances and his brethren. But Freer
Juniper metyng with the master of ye swyne gave unto him such soft and sweet
words, that he gave the whole swyne for a pictance to the brethren.

The lxiii. leaf.
A certain poor man asked an almose of Freer Juniper, to whom he said, I
(...) not give mine habit, but if thou take yt from me, I will not be greu^^
with the. Which thing the poor man did.

The Same leaf.
The Deuelles excedyngly feared this Freer Iunyper, for he going by a certain
town the deuell fled vii. mile from him, and being asked why he did so? He
answered, that he could not abide the pacyence of that foolish Freer Juniper.
Wherefore S. Frances, when the Deuelles would not at his co^maundment depart
out of men, he would say to the deuell, except thou depart the sooner, I will
cause Freer Iunyper to come to the, and then the Deuell fearyng the presence of
Freer Iunyper, and the virtue and holiness of Saint Frances departed.

The Same leaf.
S. Frances perceauyng the great holiness of Freer Iunyper, said unto his
brethren, I would to God I had a whole wood of such Iunyper.

The Same leaf.
Freer Innyper kept silence vj. days after this manner. The first day in the
honor of the father, The second in the honor of the son, The third in the
honor of the holy ghost, the fourth in the honor of the blessed virgyn Mary,
and so he observed syle^ce every day in the reverence and honor of one saint
or another.

The Same leaf.
Freer Iunyper had a certain brother to his disciple, which was so pacie^t*
that if he had been skorged all the day long, he would say nothing. And when
Freer Juniper did bid him weep, then he would weep, and when he bade him laugh,
then would he laugh, When Freer Iunyper heard of his death, he said, I have no
more goods in this world, and he brake all the vessels in the House,
saiynge, that the whole world by his death was destroyed. And that if yt should
not be horrible to his brethren, he would cause the head of his disciple to be
divided in ii. pieces, the one part to be made a dyshe for them to eat their
meat in, and of theother part a cup for them to drynk in.

The Same leaf.
Freer Iunyper said, I would after my death that there might issue such stenche
out of my body that no man should be hable to come nygh yt, This is a saint in
deed.
and that finally they would throw me into a dyche that there I might remain
abhominably alone for dogs to devour. This blessed man, when death came
would have Saint Clare with him.

The Same leaf.
Freer Andrew of Anany. at a certain time had a lust to eat of little birds
roasted, and when they were made ready and set before him, he would not consent
to his lust, but making the sign of the cross on the birds, he commanded
them to depart, which ymediatly revived and flew away.

The Same lefe.
Freer Ambrose of Massa, if he fortuned to offend any person by a word, he
would take a cord and tie yt about his neck and mekely ask forgeuenes, and in
the most dilige^test manner would wash the dyshes. He raised vj. from death to
life, and he delivered one from the danger of a wolf.

The Same leaf.
Freer Morice ware next his body a Habergeon and lived with raw herbs. He
would eat no flesh upon Christmas day if yt fell on the friday. Then said
Saint Frances to him, I would that the very Walls should eat flesh that
day if yt were possible.

The lxiiii. leaf
Brother Reignold besought Christ that he would declare unto him into what
order he should e^ter for the salvation of his soul. And our lord Jesus Christ
answered, that he should go into the order of the Barefoote friars.

The Same leaf.
Freer Benedict of Aret, received into the order of the Barfoote Friars the
Emperor of Constantinople, and king of Jerusalem called Ihon.

The Same leaf.
Thefore said Friar, had a great devotion to Saint Danyell, whose Sepulcher
is in Babylon, and dragons keep yt, which Sepulcher he desired greatly to se,
but what for the length of the journey and for fear of the dragons he could
not come at yt. Then appeared unto him a honge and great dragon and caught him
up in his tail, and carried him to Daniels Sepulcher, the Sepulcher being
opened, he gat a finger of S. Daniel, which with great devotion he brought with
him. And forth with he was of the same dragon taken up and set there again from
whence he came. Wherefore yt is to be believed that yt was the Angel of the Lord.

The Same man also, as another Jonas in a tempest was thrown into the Sea, and
straight way he was taken up in a little cloud and carried into paradyse. Whom
when Enoch and Ely saw, they asked him who he was, and he Answered I am a
Freer of Saynct Frances Order, then they made great joy, and led him about
showing him all things that were in Paradise, and then afterward he was
brought again of the same little cloud to the Sea, whom when the men saw, they
excedyngly wondered.

Tesame man healed a woman that had a fistula on all her body.

The Same leaf.
Freer Wylliam of Radcofe, enteryng into a certain hermytage kneled down and
prayed, the deuell likewise kneled down hard by him and stroke him on the
cheke, which when he had suffered a good while, at the last the Freer put out
his hand thynkyng to have caught the Deuell at his next stroke. But the Deuell
fleyng, so stroke and hurt Freer Wylliams hand that there rose v. great
Blysters which swelled very much and were so grievous that a great time after
he was not hable to do any thing with that hand,

The Same leaf.
Ihon of Aluerne, when he was an infant, every Monday, Wednesday and Frydaye
would suck but once, And would eat nothing else. And in his meditacion of
Christ's passion he would so beat him self, that what with tears and blood
yt seemed that there ran Ryuers of blood out of his body. And he did use to
hang nettels about his neck and body to ponyshe him self withal. And when a
certain person said, then shall he be a good Barefoot Friar, hearing that
word, being inspired of the LORD He entered into that Order, and he kept the
vestry and song in the Queer. In the time of great frost and Snow he went
naked, saving that he ware a payer of breches, sometime he ware a habergeon,
and some time a cote of swynes leder, and some time a cote of Horse hear
knotty, and he ware next his flesh a hoope of iron. By the space of xxx.
years he drank water. In Lent he did eat every day no other thing then
asmany raw herbs as he could hold between his ij. fyngers. In iii. years he
never sat, neither slepyng nor wakyng, except yt were at the table, in the
chapter house, or in the Queer. God daily came to him by the space of iij.
months and gave him the understanding of all scripture. In the city of
Florence he preached in the myddest of the street on a fair day, but within a
little while yt reyned, but yt neither touched him, the pulpit nor the audience,
to the great wonder and marvel of the people. He was visited of all the
Saints, and our blessed Lady stood by him a whole day in the same form and
manner as she was here upon the earth. Saint Frances with his wou^des appeared
unto him and stood a great while by him and said, Ask of me what peticion
soever thou wylt, and I will grant yt the. Then he desired that he might
touch and kiss his wounds, which S. Frances granted him, and he was
wou^derfully comforted. Also as he was syngyng on S. Lawrence day of his
broylyng, suddenly saynct Laurence appeared unto him as he was broylyng and
beheld him with a pitiful look. And when he song Salve Regina he appeared
again saying, that gredyron is my great comfort. Once as he was saying Mass
he desired to se Christ in the same manner and form that he was crucified in:
Then appeared Christ beholding him with his eyes of compassion. On a time he
being in the wyldernes besought Christ that he would appear unto him. Then
appeared Christ unto him iii. or iiij. times showing him his back but said
nothing: But ye good brother seized not weeping until such time as Christ
turned his face to him and stretched out his hands as the Priest does when he
is at Mass. Then he fell down at the fete of Christ, which he put forth for
him to kiss, which he washed with the tears of his eyes, like an other Mary
Magdalene, and at the last Chist offered him his hands to kiss. And Freer
Ihon rising came to the breast of Christ, and embraced him, and Christ kissed
him, but after yt he preached most profound divinity, his heart burned an.C.
times more, then if it had been in a burning Furnace, and for extreme heat he
was forced to cry out and make exclamations. He was once rapte of God above al
creatures, and his soul was swalowed up in the depenes of divinity, and was
buried in the Sea of infinite knowledge of the godhed, insomuch that nothing
created, nothing made, nor imagined, nothing thought, nor comprehended, which
either heart could think, or tongue could speak, but it was known and reveled
unto him, so that his soul was overwhelmed, as is a drop of wine in the sea,
and he saw nothing, but god in all things and above all things, and without
al things, and there he saw iii. persons in one godhed. etc and thus being
in his meditacion, and in wailing and weping he came to the everlasting glory.

The Same lefe
The Same Friar received once within the Octauas of the Assu^ption of our Lady,
such a swetnes and confort, that because he would not be hard of his brethren
he went into a wood to power out the great joys that was in his heart and as
he cried out for great great joy he thought upon the words of consecration,
Hoc est corpus meum. And immediately he saw in a great Light Christ with the
blessed Virgin his mother, and being replenished with Wonderful Joy he
returned and went to Mass, and when he had said the preface, and Qui pridie.
and came to the words of consecration, often times he said Hoc est, Hoc est,
but he was not able to express any more. Wherefore the Wardeyne of the Frires,
and another of his Brethren began to help him, but he sodeinly saying Corpus
meum. imediatly apered to him our Lord Jesus Christ shewinge him his great
humility, which offered him self to be incarnate, and causes himself daily to
come into ye hands of the priest. When he beheld the presence of the Lord,
his heart melted as wax, and fell back ward, but he was stayed of the Wardeine
and his brethren, and as one dead, they carried him into the Vestry, and his
body was as cold as Yse, and so he lay as one departed from the morninge
until it was none, so that he could not make an end of Mass

These things, did he declare unto a certain brother in whom he put great
confidence.

At another time as he was ministering at Mass Christ apered to him with a
goodly fair Bearde, clothed in a precious Red Garmente and he was certified
that god was so pleased for that mass ye he would remit ye sins of all the
world, but specially those which were recommended O most detestable blasphemy.
in the same Mass.

The.lxvi. lefe
Freer Ihon saying Mass for the dead, eue^ when he was lifting up the
sacrament which he offered unto god the father for the souls of them that were
deceased he saw an infinite noumbre of souls coming out of purgatory, as it
had been a noumbre of sparks, that fly out of a burning furnace, and so
assended into heaven through the merits of Christ which is daily offered up
in sacrifice, both for the quycke and dead,

The Same leaf.
The Same Friar in the mount of Aluerne praiyng, saw all the air and yerth full
of deuelles, Which took his staff and bett them, and they fled from the
mountain.

The Same leaf
This Friar in the feast of the purification of our Lady being vexed with the
Ague, deceassed on Sayncte Lawrence even.

The Same leaf.
Freer James Barletan to whom Christ appering in the Wilderness, declared
the remission of sins which for ever he had obtained, In sign and token
whereof Christ put the said Friars hands between his hands, for whose
reverence, the Friar washed not his hands of long time, and so long he felt of
his hands a Merueilous sweet savor

But at a certain time two other Friars meting with him desired him to eat
with them, and he forgetting him self washed his hands, and after that he
never smelled the sweet savor, for the which, he wept and lamented all the
days of his life.

The.lxvi. leaf
Friar Gerharde being a great Preacher, once on Saint Frances day he preached
very much in the praise and commendacion of s. Frances A certain citize^
hearing him so much speak of S. Fra^ces. was angry in his mind, therefore
departed out of ye church and went home to lay him down to sleep, which was
sodeinly rapt and carried into heaven, where he saw christ our Lady, and the
other saints which went in processio^ wise about heaven: but when he saw not
S. Frances, he said unto the Angel that brought him thither, where is Frances
and al his brethren of whom Freer Gerhard talks somuche. The angel
answered, Look and thou shall se blessed Frances, and what state he has. And
he looked, and behold Christ lifted up his right arm, and out of the wound of
his side came fourth Friar Frances bearing the Baner of Christ's cross and
after him followed a great number of his brethren and sistren. And immediately
the citizen, was restored to his own house, and he declared all these things
to Friar Gerhard, and he gave his goods to the brethren and I was made a
barefote Friar.

The same lefe
A great number of fishes as well great as small heard the preaching of Friar
Anthony, every one of them holdyng up their heddes a little above the water, the
greater Fishes stood in the depest places, and the small, where the water was
most shalowest, and the mean Fisshes drue very nere to Friar Anthony. And when
he preached, certain Fisshes put furthe their voices* and other opened their
mouths, and bowed down their heddes, Afterward the Fisshes of Freer Anthony
were lice^ced to depart, which being wonderful joyful and full of play
departed.

The lxvii. leaf
The Same Friar preached before the pope and his Cardinals and there were
present Grecians, Italians, Frenchemenne, Dutchemen, Englishmenne and diverse
other nations. And the Friar him self was a Spanyarde and every person there
understood him, as though he had preched to Spaniardes. Then they said one to
another, is not this manne a Spaniard, and how comes it then to pass that
each of us hears our own natural tounges?

The pope being astonyed answered, verily this is the Arc of the testament.

The same leaf
The Same Friar on a time preached in a meadow, and christ being willing to
declare the holiness of him to ye people, sodeinly reised a great tempest, and
when ye people would have departed, Friar Antony spoke unto them saying: I say
unto you on ye behalf of our lord Jesus Christ, yt never a one of you shall
receive any hurt. And when the Hail and rain sell so sore that for the
greatness thereof they were compassed as it had been with a wall, yet nere unto
the Audience came neither reine nor Hail

This miracle is graue^ in a stone at the entering of the church of the greater
Biturcence, as I received it of a certain Freer.

The same leaf.
A certain person named Bonel would not believe that an host consecrated was the
body of christ, and he said that his Ass did eat hosts: which thing blessed
friar Anthony hearing, he went to mass and brought the consecrated host and
showed it to the Ass. And straight wai the Ass kneled down and bowed his head
and worshipped it, An Ass worsh^peth ^he bread ^or christ's body
Which when Bonell saw, he was ^^^diatly made catholic.

The same leaf.
A certain Gentil woman brought in great love with his preaching, ^olowed him
and looked not to her household, For the which her Husband blamed her. Then she
went up into the top of her House, where She heard Friar Anthony preach.
even as well as though she had been in the church. And when her husband asked
her what she made somuche there She said, I hear the preaching of blessed
Anthony, He said she was mad, and would not believe until such time as he
went up himself and heard him, the which Miracle made him ever (...) go to the
preachinge of blessed Anthony.

The same leaf.
When friar Anthony preached on a time of wine that was sent to him and his
brethren, a certain woman sodeinly moved ran home thinking to bring him better
wine then any was brought before, and she made so great haste that she
forgate to stop the vessel and she brought the Spicket in her hand, And when
she stood before him with the wine, she looked to her hand and espied ye
spicket, immediatley She ran home and found all the Celler full of Wine: but
trusting in ye merits of blessed Anthony, she put the spiker in to the
vessel, and suddenly the vessel was so full of wine yt it ra^ne over.

The Same leaf.
A certain man as he was confessing his sins to blessed Anthony, so lamented
that he could not for weping speak one word, wherefore Freer Anthony
commanded him to write his sins and so he did, but by the merits of blessed
Friar Anthony and his earneste and hearty contricion he found the writing all
wiped out.

The.lxviii. leaf.
Certain heriticques desired Friar Anthony to diner, and they said unto him,
the Gospel commands, that thou should eat of all such things as are
set before the, and they set before him a foul great tode, which blessed
Anthony seeing, he made over the toade the sign of the cross it was converted
into a Roasted Capon.

The lxix. leaf
Friar Peter often times fasted S Mighelles even. And on a time S. Michaell
appeared unto him saying, freer Peter thou have faithfully labored for me, and
have put thy self to great peines. Behold therefore, I am come to confort the,
and ask of me what peticio^ thou will. To whom Friar Peter said, this I
desire the that thou will obtain for me the remission of al my sins. And S
Mighell said, Ask some other peticion, for that I will easily get the. The^
Friar Peter desiring nothing else, said unto. S. Michael and I for the faith and
trust that thou haste in me will procure many thanks to be given the. This
communication between them, dured a great part of the night.

The Same leaf.
Freer Peter desired that he might know by revelation which either of our
Lady, S. Ihon Euaungeliste, or S. Frances did sorrow most for the passion and
suffering of Jesus Christ, And when he had wept long, our Lady. S. Ihon and s
Fra^. wearing most precious garments, apered unto him but yet blessed Fra^ces
was better appareiled then Saynct Ihon.

Then said Saynct Ihon, be not afraied Friar Peter, behold we are come hither
to conforte the, and to declare un to the thy doubt. Wherefore thou shall
understand, that next after our Lady and me, Blessed Frances above all other
most sorowed the death of Jesus Christ. And when Freer Peter asked of the
Apostle wherefore he had not on so fair a vestiment as had S. Frances. he
answered that S. Fra^ces went vyler here in earth, therefore is he now most
precyously clothed in heaven. Then S. Ihon gave unto Freer Peter a goodly
garment, which when he would have put upon him, he fell down as one astonnyed
and cried, Freer Conrade, Freer Conrade come, and help me and thou shall se
wonders, and ymmediatly Freer Conrade came unto him, and he declared to him all
things.

The lxx. leaf.
Freer Suffian when he was sick would receive no medecyn of any Carnal
Physician, for he had deserved to be comforted of our Lady. And our Lady came
unto him with iii. Virgynes, which brought in their hands iii. boxes. And our
blessed Lady took a spone and gave unto him a sponfull of the heavenly
electuary: which when he had tasted he felt so much comfort and swetnes, that
he thought yt not possible for his Soul to remain any longer in his body, and
he said unto our Lady, no more most sweet Mother, no more, for I am not hable
to susteyn so much swetnes. Yet she once again reachyng him of the same
electuary emptyed clean the first box. Then our Lady took the second: when
the sick Freer perceived that, he cried and said, O Blessed Mother of God, if
my soul be utterly melted with the swetnes of the first box, how is yt
possible that I shall be hable to e^dure to taste of ye second? Then said the
blessed Vyrgyn to him. My Son thou shall taste a little of this second box
also. And so sone as he had tasted thereof, he was illumined with such a
Heavenly brightness, that he saw clearly in the book of life the names of all
them that shall be saved till the day of Judgment. And when he dyed, he said.
O in Pace, O inidipsum, O dormiam, O requiescam, etc.

The Same leaf.
Freer Ihon had so much honestye, that his brethren who perfightly know his
conversation took him to be a woman.

The Same leaf.
Christ app^red unto Freer Ihon and laid unto him, My Son Freer Ihon, Ask
of me what thou will. And he said, My Lord I know not what to say, I beseech
the to forgive me all my sins. And I beseech the also to grant me my
purgatory in this world. And a voice answered, I will do yt: and chose the
whether thou will be one day in purgatory or vj. days ponyshed in this
world, and he chose vij. days in this world.

The lxxii. leaf.
Freer Frances saying Mass found in the Chalice a great spyder, which he
would not cast out, but drunk yt up with the blood. Afterward rubbyng his
shynbone and clawynge where he felt yt ytche, the same spyder came out of his
leg with out doing him any hurt,

The Same leaf.
Freer Sigismonde after his death apered unto a certain woman saying: Go to a
Freer that is called Restang, and bid him that he bring my Body into this wood.
The woman did not his message, wherefore the next night he appeared again unto
her saying, that if she would not do his message, he would vex her from
place to place. But yet she did yt not. The third night he likewise appeared
unto her and caused her to be skorged very sore. The woman being taught and
feared by strypes did her message unto the Freer, but the Freer would not
remove his body. The fourth ty me he appeared unto the woman saying, Go thy
ways and command Restang that he deliver the my body to be removed, and for
a token say this unto him, that once he offended in perjury, of which offense
he never confessed him self, and command him now to confess yt, else he
shall go to hell. When the Freer heard this, first he confessed his perjury
and before all men detested and defied the Deuell, and declared the holiness of
Sigismond. Then heard he a voice from Heaven saying, Freer Sigismond will lie
in the wood and will be buried under the shadow of the Baye and Myrre trees. A
certain Freer of a great devotion gate away one of his fyngers and one of his
tethe. Wherefore once again he appeared to the woman saying: Go thy ways again
to Freer Restang and say unto him that he has not carried my whole body into
the wood, for there lacks one tothe and one finger. Which with all diligence
he sought for and with all reverence and great reioysyng carried and joined yt
to the rest of the body.

The lxxiii. leaf.
Freer Gerhard on a time when he and his brethren had nothing to eat, obtained
by prayer a dyshe of heavenly meat, where withal they were wonderful
plentefully refreshed, and the meat was so excedyngly well seasoned, that they
said they never in all their life did eat meat so well dreassed.

The Same leaf.
Freer Matthew of Marcilia had a cancker in his preuy member, and suddenly as he
put into yt a piece of Freer Gerhardes cote, he was made whole. He healed a
wonderful number of Cattle and other vnreasonabe Beasts.

The Same leaf.
Freer Antony being dead did sweat excedyngly, somuche that his very garment
was wett. And there appeared syttyng upon his body a goodly young man which
recited all his life, and then departed away.

The lxxv. leaf.
Freer Drodro was so holy that one Angel served him at Mass, and another
Angel made ready his horse to ride.

The Same leaf.
Freer Walter was unjustly deposed from the bishopric of of pictauyan by pope
Clement the v. Where (...) thou ar^e Peter, an^ the Pope can not ^rre?
Wherefore after his death he cited the pope to appear before the high judge, and
the same time that was appointed, the pope dyed suddenly.

The lxxvi. leaf.
Freer Jews was of the lignage of Kings, and yet he made him self a Barefoot
Freer (and the Son of blessed poor Saint Frances crucified) whose master was
Poncius Carnobell a man sufficiently learned, and he did learn in vii. years
his Grammar, Logique, Astronomy and holy divinity. He was so fair that women
said they never saw a fayrer, and they were never satisfied with the sight of
his face. A certain person brought unto him virgynes and maids, which he
abiected from him as rybaldes. And he would sharply reprove and rebuke the
brethren when they looked upon any women, and for fear and reverence of him
they durst do no dishonest thing. He would not once look upon his sister the
queen of Arragon, and he despised all honors and salutacions. A certain fair
Lady hearing of his great chastity, thought she would prove whether he were so
chaste as he was reported, and she came into the Church and excedyng earnestly
beheld him, but he not once moved. He continued all night in prayer and weeping.
And there came to him the deuell in the lykenes of a black Catt, which with the
sign of the cross he drive away. He called lice the precious iewelles of
poor men. Every day he confessed him self and said Mass. He slept upon the
earth in token of great humilite. When he heard talkyng of any devout matter,
he would weep straight way. A certain woman of Tholose having a blody flyxe by
the space of xiiij. years, said within her self, O if I might touch but the
hemme of Freer Jews garment I should be safe, the which came so to pass.
etc. He did many other miracles which here I omyt. At whose sepulcher the wax
candelles being put out, were again with a light from Heaven lightened. He
raised from death to life vi. persons and more, and he did many other things.

The lxxvii. leaf.
Freer Roger gave one of his brethren in penance for speaking of an idle word,
to say the whole Psalm of Miserere, Credo in deum, Pater noster, Salve
regina. He said yt he knew a man that was an infinite number of times rapt and
taken up into the highest heaven, O diligent Deuell how thou aduauncest pride
that once again might be placed above God.
and was united with god, and he received so great swetnes from God, that he
thought he was constreyned to cry, Domine recede a me, etc. Lord go from me.
And the signs of this great feruoure was much seen in his face. In a certain
vision he saw Jesus and said unto him, Domine quis es? Lord who art thou?
Jesus annswered, Ego sum qui sum, I am that I am, and Jesus said also, welcome
my son, and he blessed him saying, thy sins are forgeuen the. He was once
taken up into Paradise and there he saw God talkyng with all the saints one
after another. And a certain saynct said unto Freer Roger, of what order art
thou? and he answered a Barefoote Freer: then he gave unto him a consecrated
host, and commanded him that he should go preach unto certain Freers which
were weak in Christ, and so he did.

The lxxviii. leaf.
Freer Roger inquired of Freer Bertrand of certain Brethren whether they were
saved. Freer Bertrand answered, what ask thou me of the brethren, I certefy
the that all that dye in the Order and Rule of Blessed Frances are saved.

The Same leaf.
When he was dead he appeared unto a certain Woman, which confessed all her
sins to him, and he gave her absolucion.

The Same leaf.
In Brabant lies buried Freer Peter, which was seen of a child that could
skant speak, at the celebracion of his Mass eat Christ in the form and
manner of a little Child.

The lxxix. leaf
Freer Benedyct which is buried in Erffort, was our Ladies butler.

The Same leaf.
Freer Conrade lies buried in the prouynce of Austriche in the new city,
which was the very father and chief worker of miracles: but because he was not
buried with our brethren, the Minister commanded him that he should work no
more miracles. To the which commandment he obeyed, and since that time he
never wrought any mor miracles.

The Same lefe.
Christ appeared with a terrible countenance to a certain Prior, saying unto
him, Thou Prior of what Order art thou? and he answered, of the Order of S.
Benedict, and Christ said unto blessed Benedict, says this man true? And
Benedict answered, he is a destroyer of my order and of his fellows that are
with him. Then Christ commanded that he should be hanged upon the Hasty,
judgment like the law merciall
Elm in the cloister.

The Same leaf.
Freer Agnell, received into the order of the Barefoot Freers certain
Englishmennes children, and he sent x. pound sterlyng to Rome to bye them the
decretalles to study in, to put away idle times. He was buried in Oxford in a
Chest of wood, whose body when the brethren would have removed into a
Sepulcher which they had prepared for him, they found his Chest full of clear
Oil smellyng like Balsamu^, and his flesh being resolved, the bones did swyme
upon the oil.

The lxxx. leaf.
In this leaf are recited diverse Freers which wrote good works, One go^
work.
and among other is named Freer Arlot of Prato, who was the first that wrote
the concordaunce of the Bible.

The lxxxii. leaf.
This is the most excellentest Order of all other Orders, for in this Order
has been the most notable and excellent personages, as Pope Gregory the nynth
called Vgo, whom S. Frances did prophesy before that he should be Pope, and
did always write him the most worshipfullest father of all the world. Also
Pope Martyn desired to be buried in our habit. Pope Alexander the fourth was a
Barefoot Freer, and granted to the order many Bulls and Priuilegies. Also S.
Frances appeared with his wounds unto the King of Constantinople and willed him
Frances ^used all hese to ^nne as ^d Iero^am.
if he would be saved yt he should make him self a Barefoote Freer. and he did
so. The queen of Sauoy did were our habit. And so did a great nombre of
Emperors Kings, queen's and noble personages which were to long here to
reherce. For there is not a noble house in Christendom, but some one of them
has been a Barefoote Freer according to the saying of the scripture. Even
kings has walked in thy most Esaias. 49.
plesaunt gardeyn.

The Same leaf.
In blessed Frances is fulfilled that was spoken to Abraham. If there be any
that can nombre the dust of the earth etc. Wherefore the deuell said before to a
certain woman, the Order of the Barefoote Freers, The deu^ and wom^ help sayn^
Frances ^ witnesses at a pyn^che.
though yt be little, yet shall yt be multiplied above all other Orders. In
India there are many houses of this Order.

The lxxxiiii. leaf.
Blessed S. Clare was first a Sister of the Order of the Minorites, otherwise
called Barefoote Freers, which contynually did weep and lament the passion of
Christ, so long that at the last the Deuell appeared unto her saying that she
should lose the light of her Eyes. To whom when she had said, that they cannot
lose their sight that follows the light of life: the Deuell fled away. Often
times she spoke with God and did many miracles. Pope Alexander the fourth being
syck she visited him, and he offered her his fete to kiss.

The Same leaf.
Freer Iunyper is Christ's Iester.

The lxx^viii. leaf
Freer Hely said unto blessed Fances, here are certain brethren that here say
thou wylt make a new rule, and they fearyng that thou wylt make yt to straight
and sharp, say that thou shall make it for thy self and not for them. Which
when he heard, blessed Frances turned his face toward heaven and spoke thus
unto Christ, Lord, said not I well unto the, that they ought to believe me.
Then all they heard the voice of Christ aunsweryng in the air, Frances, there
is nothing in thy rule that is thine, but all that is there, is mine, and I
will that the rule be observed to the letter, to the letter, to the letter,
without any gloss, without any gloss, which words prove that our rule is
instituted of Christ. Then blessed Frances turned him to his brethren and said,
now ye have heard, now ye have heard, now ye have heard,

The Same leaf.
The rule of the Freer Minors, otherwise called Barefoot Freers, was made of
blessed S. Frances standing and being resydent and fasting in the mount, Christ
reuelyng yt unto him. Wherefore he compares his rule with the law of Moses that
was given in Mount Synay, and the law (as they call yt) of the gospel that was
publisshed by Christ in the mounteyn. No man ought to doubt but this Rule is
Christ's, because Christ affirmed yt so to be before so great a number of
brethren.

The lxxxix. leaf.
The Apostles were not learned. Therefore it is not needful that the Frances
Freers should be learned, for they are as the Apostles.

The Same leaf.
The rule of the Minorites or Barefoote Freers begins thus. The rule and
life of the Barefoote Freers is this, the obseruacyon of the Gospel of our
Lord Jesus Christ. And in the end of the title is this added. This is the holy
Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ which we promise to observe and keep. There is
no rule that begins as does this rule, nor is so termed as ye may perceive,
for there is none so Gospel like as is this blessed rule, Also this rule is the
life of the Apostles, and consequently of our Lord Jesus Christ, for as he had
xij. Apostles, so has this rule xij. chapiters, and as Christ had lxxii.
disciples, so in this rule of S. Frances is lxxii. verses.

The C.i. leaf
What manner of thing Frances rule was, S. Frances him self shows, saying, yt
is the book of life, the hope of health, the marow of the Gospel, the keye of
Paradise, the state of perfeccion, and the covenant of everlasting life.

The Same leaf.
Frances said unto Christ, whereof live my brethren which dwell in the
wyldernes? Christ said unto him, I will feed them as I did feed the Children
of Israel in wyldernes.

The Same leaf.
Frances being vexed with the offenses of his brethren, said unto Christ. Lord
I recommend unto the my famely which thou gave me. And forth with the Lord
said unto him, thou noddy and ydeot, tell me, wherefore do thou thus vex thy
self when any brother does go out of religion? Answer me, who planted and
ordained this religion, was yt not of my plantyng? I have appointed the for a
sign unto them, ye the works which I work in the, they may also work in
the. If one forsake thine order, I will send the another, if he be not borne I
will cause him to be borne, and put the case that there remained but iij.
brethren, yet should yt be my religion, which I will never forsake. Which
words when Saynct Frances heard, he was excedyngly comforted.

The Same leaf.
Guncer a Monk of Barrauia, there appeared unto him, a very fair woman saying,
take me to thy wife, and he answered I will not take the for I am a Monk. She
answered, I am S. Frances rule, take me and thou shall be saved. By the which
reuelacion he was made a Barefoote Freer.

Here I omye many things. The C.v. leaf.
A certain person was very desirous to serve God, and Christ being glad to here
the prayers of good men appeared unto him in a barefoot Freers cote saying, he
that will serve me, must serve me in this manner, and so he vanyshed away. But
he never saw any barefoote Freer, and therefore he made him self a Monk,
howbeyt on a time when he espied ii. barfoote Freers going by the way,
forthwith he forsook that religion and becam a Barefoot Freer.

The Same leaf.
A certain Freer said unto Freer Giles being both of one house, Freer Giles I
can tell the good news, then said Freer Giles, I pray the tell them. And he
said, this night I was carried into hell, and I found not one of out brethren
there. Where the deuell were they then?
Then answered Freer Giles criyng for joy and saying. I believe the well. I
believe the well, I believe the well.

The Same leaf.
A naughty Freer being dead was of the Deuelles carried to hell. which S.
Frances seeing, said unto the Deuell, bring him hither to me, for I will not
that he shall be carried into hell in my habit, and he pulled of the hood from
his garment, and then the Deuelles carried him into hell. This vision was seen
of a certain brother which ymmedyatly came and found the Freer dead and his
hood pulled from his cote, whereby he was certefied of his dammpnacion.

The Same leaf.
The Deuell carried a certain dysobedyent Freer both body and soul into hell
in the sight of all the brethren.

The Same leaf.
A certain Freer saw this vision. All the saints passing by the high altar
made low curtesy before the sacrament. After them followed very fair Angels
bearyng chayres which they did set on the uppermost step of the altar. After
them followed Christ and our Lady, and next after came S. Frances and his
brethren. After them were led ii. Freers, their hoodes pulled over their faces
and their hands bound behind them: after whom followed ii. mules laden with
great books. When Christ and our Lady were set in the seats prepared for them
before the altar. Then Saynct Frances after he had done his reverence first to
Christ and then to our Lady he sat him down on the right hand. Then were the
ii captyues brought before Christ, who said unto blessed Frances, Frances,
these me^ were of thy Order, therefore Judge thou them. And blessed Frances
before them all said to the first Freer, what Order art thou of? And he
answered, of thine blessed Frances. Then saynct Frances asked him, whose were
all these books? He answered, mine. Then blessed Frances said. have thou
done as these books taught the? He answered no. And blessed Frances said, in
having these books thou wast a proprietary for thou had them against the
rule, and those things which God commanded the in them, thou have not done:
Therefore I (said blessed Frances) on the behalf of God the Father, and of
our Lord Jesus Christ his Son, and the holy Ghost, and the blessed Virgyn,
and all the holy company of heaven, and mine, do curse and condemn the into
everlasting fire. And ymediatly the earth opened and swalowed up him. the
books and mules. And in like manner he used the other Freer, Then all the
Saynctes with great devotion began to sing, Te deum laudamus.

The C. vi. leaf
Christ said unto Freer Conrade, In thy Order are certain which willyngly and
effecteously observe the rule, and they ymediatly fly into everlasting life.
There be other that be wyllyng, but do yt not effecteously, and they shall be
purged in purgatory. There be some which neither are wyllyng, nor yet do yt in
effect, and of them take thou no care, for they are none of mine says the
Lord, as yt is written, verily, verily I say unto you, I know you not.

The Same leaf.
The wardeyn of the house of the Barefoote Freers in Paris commanded a Freer
that was dyeng ii. things, one that ymediatly he should go to Paradise The
second, that after he was dead, he should return assom^ as was possible again,
and declare unto him how many souls departed the world the same tim^ that he
deceassed, and how man^ went to Paradise, how many t^ purgatory and how many
to hell After three days the same Free^ gloriously returned again to the
wardayn, and being asked why he tarried so long, he answered that he was purged
in purgatory. And being asked wherefore, he answered, because I could sing
well, when my other brethren did not sing well, I would some time a little smyle
and mock them. And you shall understand that the same time that I departed,
there were five thousand souls deceassed, of the which one went to Paradyse,
iii. to purgatory, of the which I was one, and the rest went all to hell.

The Same leaf.
Another Freer, because he did not bow him self at Gloria patri, suffered this
pain in purgatory. He was set upon a high pillar, that was straight and narow
above, which stood in the mids of a great sea, and an hundred times in the
day, and asmany times in the night he bowed him self. so long till the number
of bowynges which he had omytted was fulfilled: And he said that the same
bowyng was to him wo^derous peynfull, for he thought ever that he should have
fallen into the botome of the sea.

The C. vii. leaf.
Our blessed Lady appeared unto a certain Barefoote Freer with saynct Peter and
a great nombre of other saints, saying, let us go to Antioche, for the soul
of a brother of thine order, which to morrow about the third hour of the day
shall depart from the body, and we will receive him. I omyt many such as
this is, and truly the blessed virgin and the deuell were wonderfully troubled
with Friars.

The C. xii. leaf.
S. Frances called a wolf his brother, for there was a certain mad and
outrageous wolf did hurt many in the city, but Saynct Frances making a
cross over him said, brother wolf, thou shall promise me that thou will never
devour more, and I will promise the that the citezens shall norishe and feed
the. And the wolf bowyng his head made a plain sign and promise, that he would
so do. And blessed Frances said to the wolf, give me thy faith. Then the wolf
reached out his right fore foot and gentely laid yt in S. Frances hand. Then S.
Frances said, brother wolf, I command the in the name of our lord Jesus
Christ that thou come now with me. And he went with him. Then all the citezens
and women merueyled. Afterward s. Fra^ces preaching said unto ye people, my
brother wolf which stands here present before you has promised you his faith
and peace, if so he that you will promise him to give him every day sufficient
food, and for brother wolf I will be suertye. Then all with one voice promised
to give him sufficient food. Then S. Frances before them all said to the
wolf, and thou brother wolf shall promise to keep coueuaunt with them. I
metuell ^he wolf ^^d not a ^reers cote ^at he ^yght have ^ne saved (...) his
(...).
And the wolf making low curtesy declared plainly by euydent signs, that he
would keep promise and again lifted up his right foot. Then all with one voice
showted up to heaven. The wolf lived ii. years never hurtyng any person, and
daily came to the gate of the city for his meat and so departed. A marvelous
thing yt was, for in all this time there was never dog that so much as
barked at him.

The C. xiii. leaf.
S. Frances as he was preaching, a woman began to play on a tymberell, and
Frances commanded her to peace, but she would not, Then S. Frances said, thou
deuell, take that is thine. And ymmediatly ye wretched woman was carried of the
deuell into the air and was nener seen after.

The Same leaf.
A certain Bishop preaching did excedyngly commend and extol S. Frances
allegyng this sentence Psalm. C. xlvii. that God sent not such a person as
Frances was to no nation etc. After the Sermon S. Frances bowyng down to the
fete of the Bishop said unto him, My Lord Bishop, truly I say unto you
there was never man in this world that did me somuche honor as this day you
have done.

The Same leaf
A fair woman came to s. Frances temptyng him. And straight way he stryped
him self stark naked and laid him down upon the burning coals and said unto
her, this is my bed, come lie with me. Then the woman departed. The Same he did
with another woman in the C. xiiii. leaf.

The C. xiiii. leaf.
S. Frances saluted the birds of the air, and he called them brethren and
commanded them to hear the word of the Lord. Then the birds assembled
them selves in great flocks and came to his preaching, and they stretched out
their necks and opened their throtes and were very attentife to his doctrine.
And after the Sermon S. Frances went thorough the mids of them, and then he
gave them license to depart, and they fled away with a great cry and noyes
deuydyng them selves into the iiij. parts of the world, signifyeng that S.
Frances Rule should be publisshed thorougout all the world.

The C. xix. leaf.
Blessed Frances commanded a certain Freer being of a noble stock, that he
should go preach naked. The Freer answered and said. Father, what benefit
shall I have thereby? S. Fra^ces answered. I will assure the of everlasting
life. Then he with great joy went forth and preached naked.

The C. xx. leaf.
A certain Freer being dead came to heaven gates and knocked. Then the porter
said unto him, what art thou that so knockest? He answered, I am a Barefoot
Freer. Then said he unto him, tarry a little until I have spoken with S.
Frances. Whom when S. Frances with all his brethren saw, he said unto the
porter, let him in, for he is one of my brethren. And truly the prynt of the
wounds of S. Fra^ces shone as (a podyng in a lantern) bright as v. of the
fairest sterres in the element.

The Same leaf.
S. Frances being in the wood desired certain thefes to come and eat with him
to thentent he might bring them to penance, saying, brethren thefes, come and
eat with us, for we are brethren, and he converted them.

The C. xxii. leaf.
A certain Freer delivered unto the deuell a writing signed with his own
blood, because he should convey a woman unto him: But thorough the merits of
the blessed Mass yt came so to pass that the deuell let fall ye writing in
the chalyce of remyssion and pardon of sins.

The same leaf.
Blessed S. Frances being tempted of a woman, he stryped him self naked and
ran into the snow and made him a wife and Children of snow.

The C. xivii. leaf.
When S. Frances came from Saynct James he was syck, and desired to eat of a
little bird, and ymedyatly an Angel appeared unto him in the lykenes of a
horsman and brought with him a bird ready dressed saying, Thou servant of
God, take that the Lord has sent unto the, of the which when he had eaten,
he was made whole.

The Lxlix. leaf.
Freer Peter doing many miracles when he was dead, S. Fra^ces said unto him,
Freer Peter, thou wast all the days of thy life obedyent to me, and so I will
have the to be now thou art dead and therefore now I will not that you shall do
any more miracles. which afterward never did more miracles. Consider here I
beseech the (says the book) gentle reader how dear and precious glorious
Frances was with Christ, whose commaundment the dead obeyed etc. The hears of
S. Frances being cast against a stone wall threw yt down. Christ did nothing
but he did yt, and he did more then Christ did. The nails of S. Frances did
put away te^ptacions, with his spyttle he restored a maid to her sight, the
water that he washed his hands and fete in, raised the dead to life again.
The space of viij. days a greshopper stood with him in our Ladies rome, or as
our Ladies deputye, and being called again he flew upon his head, and then being
lycenced to depart, he went away. A nyghtyngale song a whole day with him by
turn, that is to say S. Frances one verse and the nightyngale another. Like as
Adam not obeiyng god, all creatures began to rebel: So S. Frances obeiyng and
fullfillyng the commandments of God, all creatures began to do him service,
according to the scriptures, Thou did put all things under his
governance, and thou have set him over all thy works, and he may truly say ye
words of the gospel. All things are given me of my father. And moreover,
whatsoever saint Frances had delyght or pleasure in, the same pleased the lord
God.

The Same leaf.
S. Frances on a time being in fervent prayer for the sins of the people, an
Angel appeared unto him saying, Christ and our blessed Lady with a great
company of Angels are in ye church lookyng for the etc. Who coming into the
Church: for fear and reverence fell on his face. Then said Christ unto him,
Frances thou and thy Brethren are wonderful careful for the souls of
faithful people, therefore ask what thou wylt for their comfort and yt shall be
granted the, for thou art ordained to be the light of the gentiles. And he
lay as one rapt into the godhead, and at the last coming to him self he
said, Our father most holiest I wretched sinner beseech the, forasmuch as yt
pleases the to owe such favor to mankind, that thou will grant indulgence
and remission of all and synguler the sins as well general as special of
all such people as shall come into this place etc. And I most humbly beseech
our Lady and thy Blessed Mother the special aduocatryce for mankind, that
somuche as she may to help me in this my peticion and to make intercession
unto thy most devout and excellent majesty. And our blessed Lady with most
heavenly humylite forthwith inclined to the prayers and peticio^ of blessed
Frances, and ymediatly made suplicacion to her Son saying, Most high and
almighty God, I most humbly beseech thy godhead that so much as thy majesty may
to inclyne and grant to the prayer and petycion of thy sernaunt Frances. And
the divine majesty of God spoke saying, It is very great that thou have
desired but thou art worthy brother S. Frances to have greater, and thou shall
have greater, and I do admyt and grant thy peticion. But I will have the to go
unto my vycar to whom I have given power to bind and lose etc. And ask of him
on my behalf this indulgence and Pardon.

Twelve of S. Frances brethren being in their Celles heard all these things,
but being stricken with fear they durst not enter into the church. And anon
Christ with a great multitude of Angels departed into Heaven. In the morning
S. Frances commanded his brethren that they should speak nothing of these
things. Then went he unto Pope Honorius and declared unto him this vision, and
he obtained the grant of this pardon and so departed. When Frances was
departing, ye Pope said, O Simple person whether go thou? What caryest thou
with the for a testimony of this pardon. Then blessed Frances answered, thy
word is enough and sufficient for me, if yt be the work of God, he can
manifest and declare his own work, and I desire none other instrument but
only that our Lady be the paper, and Christ the notary, and all the Angels
witnesses. And in his journey he told Freer Massey his fellow the vision, and
said, brother Massey I say to the on gods behalf that the pardon which is
granted to me of the Pope is confirmed in heaven. The Cardinals hearing of
this grant, reproved and rebuked the Pope for grauntyng to Frances so great
pardon saying, thou wylt bring the indulgence of blessed Peter and Paul to
nothing. The lord Pope answered we have given and granted it to him, yt is
not expedye^t to destroy that is made. But forasmuch as Frances neither of God
nor yet of the Pope had appointed any determynate day when this pardon should
begi^, he was again wonderfully troubled and prayed that he might se ye vision
once again, and that he might be certefyed of Christ. Wherefore on a time in the
month of Ia^uarij about mydnight when Blessed Frances was in prayer, the
deuell came unto him and said, Frances why wylt thou dye before thy time? why
do you occupye thy self on this fassion? know thou not that sleep is more
meter for the? Thou art young and sleep shall be thy health, and I have often
told the how thou should otherwise do thy penance for sins, and not so
straight and sore as thou do To what purpose do thou beat thy self thus?
And blessed Frances ymedyatly put of all his clothes and his breches and
striped him self stark naked, and he went out of his Cel and passed thorough a
great rough hedge and entered into a great wyldernes which was very thorny, so
yt his body was all bloody: then said he to him self, yt is a great deal
better that I should thus knowledge ye passion of our Lord Jesus Christ, then
obey unto deceitful flatterynges. And suddenly there was in the wyldernes a
great light, which appeared to be wo^derous full of gelyfloures and Roses. and
there was an innumerable company of Angels which said with one voice,
Blessed Frances come hither quyckly, The Savior and his Mother are in the
Church and tarry for the. Then blessed Frances saw him self newly appareled,
but how or which way yt came to pass he could not tell. And there appeared
unto him a way covered all with sylke, by the which he went to the Church. And
blessed Frances took out of the rosary, xij. red roses and xij. white, and he
came forth with to the Church, and upon the altar there he laid the roses.
Then he saw our Lord Jesus Christ standing, and our blessed Lady his Mother
on his right hand with a great multitude of Angels. And blessed Fra^ces spoke
saying: Our most holiest Father which art the orderer and governor of heaven
and earth, I beseech the of thy great mercy that thou will vouchesafe to ordeyn
and appoint the day that the pardon which thou have granted shall take
effect and that thy blessed Mother the aduocatryce of mankind will assist
herunto. To whom Christ answered, I will that yt be the same day in the
which blessed Peter was delivered from his bonds, beginning at the first
euensong of the same day and continue to the euensong the next day following,
includyng the night, and that whosoever comes thither that day contryre and
confessed shall be pardoned and forgeuen of all ye sins that he has done from
the day of his baptism to the day of his entrance into the Church of our
Lady Porcyuncule, how grievous or great so ever their sins be. And blessed
Frances said, Most holiest Father, how may this be known to mankind that
they may believe? And our Lord said, that shall God prospere and help thorough
his Favor and Grace. Notwithstanding thou shall go unto Rome to my Vyker
whom I have ordained and appointed and to whom I have given power to bind
and lose, and will him to publishe and declare this pardon with as much
expedicio^ as he shall thynk mete. Then said blessed Frances, but how shall
thy Vyker credyt me, paraduenture he will not believe me wretched sinner. The
Lord said to him, blessed Frances, take with the certain of thy brethren for
witnesses thewhich hear all these things, and also take with the these red and
white roses which you gathered est in the month of Ianuarij when thou wast
ponishing of thy body in the wyldernes. All these things were heard by Freer
Peter of Cathany, Angel of Reato, Ruffine Sophy, Freer Massey, etc. Then
blessed saynct Frances took of the roses that he brought iij. red and iij.
white, in the honor of the most holy and indivisible trinite, and to the
praise of god and our blessed Lady. And then the Angels song with loud and
great voice, Te deum.

In the morning blessed Frances took his fellows, saying to them, let us go
to Rome, and he commanded them to keep all these things secret. And when he
entered into Rome, he took his way toward ye Church of Saynct John Lateranence,
and there he found Pope Honorius the successor of Innocent, and the Viker of
our Lord Jesus Christ. To whom S. Frances on the behalf of our Lord declared
all the things aforsayde, and of the same bare wytnes theforsayd brethren and
the roses above mentioned. And Pope Honorius beholding in the month of
Ianuarij roses so fresh, and having so quyck a savor and color, said, this
is suerly a great miracle, and must come rather of God then of man, and we
know that their testimony is true. Then the Pope commanded that Frances and
his fellows should have wherewith to refreshe them selves. The next day after,
blessed Frances came again to the pope saying: Most worthy Vyker of Christ,
fulfill about the matter aforsayd, the will of the king of heaven and his
Mother. And being asked again in the presence of the Cardinals what he
desired. And when he answered the foresaid pardon to be at Lammas or the day
that saint Peter was losed out of his bo^des. The Pope answered, Frances, that
which thou desire is very great, but forasmuch as the king of heaven at the
instaunce of the most blessed Virgyn his Mother has heard thy peticion, we
will write to the Bysshopes of Assisio, Perusino, Tuderino, Spolitano,
Fulginati, Nucerino and Eugubino, that they shall assemble together at the
Church of Portiuncule the first day of August, and there they shall declare
the pardon in such wise as thou shall desire to have yt. And so blessed Frances
and his fellows receiving ye Popes letters and departed. And blessed Frances
said unto the Bysshopes, which of you will publishe and declare this pardon.
When the Bisshopes were all assembled at the day appointed, blessed Frances
said unto them, if yt please you, though I be unworthy I will say somewhat in
the presence of this people and declare unto them the pardon granted by the
commaundme^t of the king of heaven, obtained at the instance of the blessed
Virgyn and Mother of Christ, and you are commanded by the Pope to affirm
the same with me. Then blessed Frances preached so swetely and so comfortably,
that he seemed rather to have been an Angeil then a mortal man. Then he
declared the pardon that yt auayled from the Euensong the first day of August
until the Euensong on the second day of the same month as well by night as by
day, yearly for ever. The Bysshopes hearing blessed Fra^ces say for ever,
they were angry and much offended, saying to Frances, The Pope has not
commanded us herin to follow thy mind, for his pleasoure is but for x. year.
And therefore every Bishop by him self declared unto the people that they must
understand the words of Frances of this pardon to endure for x. years and no
longer.

Here I omyt much folyshnes which I am weary to write.
The C.lxix. leaf
Blessed Frances said, after us shall come Freers that will buyld them great
houses, A true prophet.
wherein noble men shall inhabit etc. But Frances would have his house made of
none other then clay and wykers.

The C.lxxv. leaf.
Freer Massey purposyug to try the humilite and mekenes of blessed Frances,
said unto him, what art thou? what art thou? what art thou? what art thou?
Blessed Fra^ces answered, what meanest thou, and Freer Massey said, for all
the world seems to run after the, and all desyer to se, hear and obey the.
Thou art no fair man Thou have neither great co^ning nor wisdom. Thou art no
noble man. How comes yt then that all the world does thus follow the?
Blessed Frances hearing this, reioysyng wonderfully in spirit, and holdyng up
his face to heaven, stood still a great space his mind being directed to God,
and coming to him self again, he made low curtesey and with a fervent
spirit gave praises and thanks to God, and turned him self to Freer Massey
and said, will thou know what I am? wylt thou know what I am? and wylt thou
well understand what I am, and why all the world follows me? God has
ordained the fools of this world to confound the wise, and I am a wretched
sinner. Then Freer Massey knew that blessed Frances was grounded in very
humilitee.

The L. lxxvi. leaf.
Blessed Frances said unto his Brethren, that they should not Judge any thing
to be impossible that was commanded them in their rule: For if he had
commanded them to do things above their strength, yet holy obedyence never
lacked strength. Once a certain Freer dysobeiyng his governor, he commanded
him to put of all his clothes and his very breches and so to stand naked before
him, which the Freer did. Then he commanded him to dyg a grave or a pyt, which
also he did. Then he commanded him to go into ye grave, (...) odly (...) of
the ^iche the ^reers lear^ed to bury their Brethren quyck.
and so he did. And blessed Frances covered him with earth even up to the hard
beard, and said unto him, Art thou not dead? Brother, art thou not dead? And
he answered he was dead. Then said blessed Frances, arise, if thou be dead in
deed thou must obey thy gouernoure at a beck, and grudge at nothing.

The same leaf.
Two young men besought S. Frances to admyt them into the order: but he myndyng
to prove first their obedyence, led them into a garden saying unto them,
come, let us set coals or colewortes, and as ye se me set them, so look that
you do. Then blessed Frances set the rotes upward and the leaves douneward. One
of them did in all things like unto blessed Frances, (...) rea^ to live
madness with other Freers.
but the other did not so, but said to blessed Frances, the coals should not
be so let, but rather contrary, that is to say the rotes dounewarde, and the
leaves upward. To whom blessed Frances, said, my Son, I will that thou do
as I do: when he would not do so because yt seemed folyshnes to him, blessed
Frances said unto him, Brother I se that thou art the chefest master, go thy
ways for thou art not mete for my order.

Here an end, for I will trouble you no longer with this stuff, though the
book out of which this is taken co^teyneth much more.
EX FRVCTISVS EORVM COGNOSCETIS EOS

R. G. Excudebat. 1550.


Cum Priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.


