ARTICLES AGREED ON IN THE NATIONAL SYNOD of the Reformed Churches of FRANCE,
Held at Charenton near Paris, in the Month of September, 1623.

Which the same ordains to be inuiolaby kept in all the CHVRCHES and
UNIVERSITIES of that REALM.

AT OXFORD, Printed by JOHN LICHFIELD, and JAMES SHORT, Printers to the famous
UNIVERSITY. 1623.

CHAP. I. Of Predestination, Election, and Reprobation.
The I. Article.
FOrasmuch as all men sinned in Adam, and made themselves culpable of
Malediction and everlasting death: God had done no wrong to any man, though he
should have left all mankind in Sin and Malediction, and condemned them for
the said Sin, according to the words of the Apostle, Romans 3.19.22. The whole
world is culpable before God: All have sinned, and are wholly destitute of the
glory of God. And Romans 6.23. The wages of Sin is death.

II.
But herein is the love of God manifested, that he has sent his only Son
into the world, to the end that whosoever believes in him, should not perish
but have everlasting life. 1. John 4.9. and John 3.16.

III.
Now to bring men to Faith, God graciously sends forth messengers of these
glad tidings to whom he will, and when he will: by whose ministry men are
called to Repentance, and Faith in Jesus Christ crucified. For how shall they
believe in him, of whom they have not heard? and how shall they hear without a
Preacher? and how shall they Preach, except they be sent? Romans 10 14.15.

IIII.
They which believe not this Gospel, the wrath of God abides on them: but they
which receive it, and embrace the Savior Jesus with a true and lively Faith,
are delivered by him from the wrath of God, and from perdition, and are made
partakers of life everlasting.

V.
The cause and blame of this incredulity, as likewise of all other sins, is
not any wise in God, but in man: but Faith in Jesus Christ and salvation
thereby, is the free gift of God, as it is written. Ephesians. 2.8. You are saved
by Grace through Faith, and that not of your selves, it is the gift of God.
Again, Phil. 1.29. It has been freely given unto you, to believe in Christ.

VI.
And whereas God in his appointed time gives Faith to some and gives it not
unto others, that proceeds from his eternal Decree. For unto God are his
ways known from everlasting. Acts 15.18. And he does all things according to
the counsel of his own will. Ephesians. 1.11. According to which Decree, he
softeneth by Grace the hearts of the Elect, how hard soever they be; and bows
them to believe: but in just judgment leaves them which are not Elected in
their malice and hardness. And herein especially is discovered the profound,
merciful, and alike just distinction betwixt men that were equally lost: or
the Decree of Election and Reprobation reueiled in the word of God; which as
the perverse, impure, and presumptuous wrest unto their own perdition; so it
yields unspeakable comfort to holy and religious souls.

VII.
Election is the vnchangeble purpose of God, whereby according to the most free
good pleasure of his will, amongst all mankind fallen by its own fault from
its first integrity into sin and perdition, he has of mere grace chosen
in Christ Jesus to salvation before the beginning of the world, a certain
number of men, not better, nor more worthy then others, but such as together
with them lay weltring in one and the self same misery. The which Jesus
Christ, God has also from all eternity made the Mediator and head of all the
Elect, and the ground as it were and foundation of their salvation: And
accordingly has decreed to give them to Christ for to save them; and to call
them, and draw them effectually by his word and spirit, to the communion of
him: or, has decreed to give them true faith in him, to justify, to
sanctify, and having mightily kept them in the communion of his Son, finally
to glorify them for the demonstration of his mercy, and for the praise of the
riches of the glory of his grace, as it is written, Ephesians. 1.4.5. God has
chosen us in Christ before the foundation of the world, to the end we should be
holy and unblameable before him in love, having Predestined us, for to adopt
us to himself by Jesus Christ according to the good pleasure of his will, to
the praise of the glory of his grace, by which he has made us acceptable in
his well-beloved. And Romans 8.29. Whom he has Predestined, those he has also
called, and whom he has called, those he has also justified, and whom he has
justified, those he has also glorified.

VIII.
This Election is not of diverse sorts, but one only and the fame of all that
shall be saved in the old and new Testament: forasmuch as the Scripture
mentions but one good pleasure, purpose, and counsel of the will of God,
whereby he has Elected us from all Eternity, as unto Grace, so unto Glory;
as to Salvation, so to the way of Salvation, which he has prepared to the
intent we should walk in it.

IX.
Neither was this Election made in respect of Faith foreseen, or the obedience
of Faith, holiness, or any other good quality or disposition, as a cause or
condition required beforehand in the man that should be Elected: but rather it
was, to give Faith, and the obedience of Faith, holiness, etc. And therefore
Election is the fountain of all saving good, whence flow Faith, holiness, and
the rest of saving graces, in a word, life everlasting it self, as the fruits
and effects thereof, according to the words of the Apostle, Ephesians 1.4. He
has chosen us, (not because we were, ^ut) to the end we should be holy and
unblameable before him in love.

X.
The cause of this free Election is only the good pleasure of God, which
consists not in this, that he has chosen for the condition of salvation
certain qualities or actions of men, among all those which are possible: but
in this, that he has taken to himself for a peculiar heritage some certain
persons out of the common multitude of sinners, as it is written, Romans
9.11.12.13. Before the children were yet borne, and or ere they had done either
good or evil, etc. it was said unto her (to weete Rebecca:) The elder shall
serve the younger; as it is written: I have loved Jacob, and hated Esau. And
Acts 13.48. All they which were ordained to eternal life, believed.

XI.
And as God himself is most wise, unchangeable, knowing all things, and
almighty: so the Election which he has once made, cannot be either
interrupted, or changed, or revoked, or annulled; nor the Elect either
rejected, or their number diminished.

XII.
The Elect are in their due times ascertained of this their eternal and
unchangeable election to salvation, albeit by degrees, and in a different
measure; and that not by any curious sounding of the secrets and depths of God,
but by observing in themselves with a spiritual joy, and an holy kind of
gladness, the infallible fruits of Election, pointed out in the word of God:
Such as are, a true Faith in Jesus Christ, a filial fear of God, sorrow
according to God, hunger and thirste after righteousness, etc.

XIII.
From the assurance and inward apprehension of this Election, the children of
God take occasion daily more and more to humble themselves before God, to adore
the bottomless depth of his mercies, to purify themselves, and also most
ardently to love him on their parts, who so exceedingly first loved them: So
far are they from waxing more idle, or carnally negligent and catelesse of
keeping Gods Commandments, through this doctrine of Election and the
meditation thereof; which indeed by the just judgment of God comes usually
to pass in those, who either rashly presuming on, or idly and wantonly prating
of the Grace of Election, will not walk in the ways of the Elect.

XIIII.
Now as this doctrine of Divine Election, according to the most wise counsel
of God, has been preached by the Prophets, Jesus Christ himself, and the
Apostles, as well under the old, as under the new Testament, and afterward
recorded in the holy Scriptures: So ought it also even at this day be proposed
in the Church of God, (whereunto it was specially appointed) with the spirit of
discretion, religiously and holily, in time and place, omitting all curious
search of the ways of the Lord: All only to the glory of Gods holy Name, and
the lively consolation of his people.

XV.
Moreover the holy Scripture does further set forth and recommend this
eternal and free grace of our Election, when besides, it witnesses, how that
all men are not chosen, but that there are some Non-Elect, or such as in the
eternal Election of God were passed over and left out, to weete, they, whom
God according to his most free, most just, unblameable, and unchangeable good
pleasure decreed to leave in the common misery, whereinto, through their own
fault, they had plunged themselves, and not to give them saving grace, nor the
grace of Conversion; but having abandoned them in their own ways, and through
just judgment, finally to condemn and punish them eternally, not only
because of their infidelity, but also for all their other sins, to the
manifestation of his own justice. And this, lo, is the Decree of Reprobation,
which makes not in any wise God the author of Sin (the bare thought whereof
were blasphemy) but shows him to be a dreadful, unblameable, and rust Judge,
and auenger of sin.

XVI.
Those, which as yet feel not in themselves effectually a lively Faith in
Jesus Christ, or an assured confidence of heart, peace of conscience, an
earnest care of filial obedience, and a glorying in God through Jesus Christ,
and yet notwithstanding use the means whereby God has promised to effect
these things in us: They (I say) ought not to be dishartened when they hear of
Reprobation, nor to range themselves among the Reprobate; but rather they ought
to go forward carefully in the use of these means, and fervently desire and
long after the hour of more abundant grace, and expect it with all reverence
and humility. Muchlesse ought such be terrified with the doctrine of
Reprobation, who though they desire to turn seriously to God, and to please
him only, and to be delivered from this body of death, yet for all that,
cannot as yet make such progress in the way of godliness and faith, as they
feign would: Seeing God who is merciful has promised that he will not quench
the smoking flax, nor bruise the broken reed. But worthily and of good reason
may this doctrine be terrible to those, who casting God and the Savior Jesus
Christ behind their backs, have wholly enthralled themselves to the cares of
this world, and the lusts of the flesh; as long as they so continue, and turn
not unto God.

XVII.
In regard we are to judge of Gods will by his word, which testifies that
the children of the faithful are holy, not verily by nature, but by the
benefit of the covenant of grace, wherein they are comprised with their father
and mother: Those Parents which fear God, ought not to doubt of the Election
and salvation of their children, whom God calls out of this life in their
infancy.

XVIII.
If any one murmr against this Grace of free Election, and against the
severity of just Reprobation, we oppose him with the words of the Apostle,
Romans 9.20. O man! who art thou, that contestest with God? and with those of our
Savior, Matthew. 20.15. Is it not lawful for me to dee what I will with mine
own goods? But for our selves, who religiously adore these mysteries, we cry
out with the Apostle, Romans 11.33.34.35.36. O the depth of the riches, and of
the wisdom, and of the knowledge of God! how his judgments are
incomprehensible, and his ways impossible to be found? For who is he, that
has known the thought of the Lord, or who has been his counselor? or who
has first given unto him, and it shall be repayed him again? For of him, and
by him, and for him are all things. To him be glory for evermore, Amen.

A reiection of Errors. The true doctrine of Election and Reprobation being
expounded, the Synod rejects the errors of those.
I.
WHo teach, that the will of God to save those that will believe and persevere
in Faith, and in the obedience of Faith, is the whole and entire Decree of
Election to Salvation, and that there is nothing else revealed in the word of
God touching this Decree. For these men deceive the simple, and manifestly
contradict the holy Scripture: which testify, not only that God will save
those which will believe; but also that from all Eternity he has chosen
certain persons, to give to them in his appointed time, rather then to others,
Faith in Jesus Christ, and perseverance, as it is written, John 17.6. I have
manifested thy Name to the men which thou have given me. Again, Acts 13.48.
All they that were ordained to life Everlasting, believed. And Ephesians 1.4.
He has chosen us before the foundation of the world, to the end we should be
holy.

II.
Who teach, that the Election of God to Eternal life is of diverse sorts, the
one general and indefinite, the other particular and definite. And this latter
again either Incomplete, Revocable, not Peremptory, but conditional; or
complete, irrevocable, Peremptory, and absolute. Also that Election to faith
is one, and Election to Salvation another; so as there may be an Election to
justifying Faith without a peremptory Election to Salvation. For this is
nothing else but an invention of man's brain, forged without the Scriptures,
which corrupts the doctrine of Election, and breaks asunder the golden chain
of our Salvation, To. 8.29. Who^ God has predestined, those he has also
called; and whom he has called, those he has also justified; and whom he has
justified, those he has also glorified.

III.
Who teach, that the good pleasure and purpose of God, whereof the Scriptures
make mention in the doctrine of Election, consists not in this, that God has
chosen certain persons, rather then others; but in this, that of all possible
conditions (among which also are the works of the Law) or out of the number of
all things, God has chosen the act of Faith, though mean in it self, and
the imperfect obedience of Faith, for the condition of Salvation, and that of
Grace he would vouchsafe to accept it for perfect obedience, and judge it
worthy to be rewarded with everlasting life. For by this dangerous error the
good pleasure of God, and the merit of Jesus Christ is eneruated, and men are
turned through unprofitable questions from the truth of free Justification,
and from the simplicity of the Scriptures: And that sentence of the Apostle
accused of falsehood, 2. Tim. 1.9. God has called us by an holy calling, not
according to works, but according to his own purpose, and grace, which was
given to us in Jesus Christ before all times.

IIII.
Who teach, That in Election to Faith this condition is formerly required, that
a man use well the light of Nature, and be a good or honest man, humble, and
disposed to eternal life; as if Election did after a sort depend on these
things. For this savors of Pelagius his opinion, and too too openly taxes the
Aposte of falsehood, when he says, Ephesians. 2.3.4.5.6.7.8.9. We all heretofore
lived in the lusts of the flesh, fulfilling the desires of the flesh, and of
our own thoughts, and were by nature children of wrath, as well as others. But
God who is rich in mercy, through his great love, wherewith he loved us even
at the time, when we were dead in our trespasses, has quickened us together
with Christ, by the Grace of whom ye are saved; and has raised us up together,
and has made us sit together in heavenly places in Jesus Christ, to the end he
might show in the ages to come the abundantly excellent riches of his Grace, by
his kindness toward us in Jesus Christ. For ye are saved through Grace by
Faith, and that not of your selves, it is the gift of God. Not by works, to
the intent none should glorify himself.

V.
Who teach, That the Incomplete and not peremptory Election of particular
persons to Salvation, supposes a foresight of Faith, Connersion, Holiness,
and Godliness, begun, or continued for a time; but that the complete and
peremptory Election supposes a foresight of the final perseverance of Faith,
Conversion, Holiness, and Godliness. And that herein lies that free and
Evangelical dignity, in respect whereof, he which is Elect is more worthy
then he which is not Elect: And by consequent, that Faith and the obedience of
Faith, Holiness, Godliness, and perseverance, are not fruits or effects of an
unchangeable election to glory; but conditions and causes, without which no
Election can be made; the which conditions or causes are formerly required and
foreseen, as if they were already fulfilled in them that are to be completely
Elected. Which doctrine utterly crosteth the whole Scripture, which in diverse
places beats both into our ears and hearts such and the like sentences Romans
9.12. Election is not by works, but by him which calls. Acts 13.48. All
they which were ordained to eternal life, believed. Ephesians. 1.4. He has
Elected us in himself, to the end, we should be holy. John 15.16. You have not
chosen me, but I have chosen you. Romans 11.6. If it be by grace, then it it no
more by works. 1. John 4.10. Herein is love, not that we loved God, but that
he loved us, and has sent his Son.

VI.
Who teach, That every Election to Salvation is not unchangeable, but that some
Elect notwithstanding whatsoever decree of God, may and do perish
everlastingly. By which gross error, they make God mutable, and overthrow the
consolation of the saithfull, touching the steadfastness of their Election, and
contradict the holy Scriptures, which teach, Mat. 24.24. That the Elect cannot
be seduced. Ioh 6.39. That Christ loses not those, that are given unto him of
his Father. Romans 8.29. That those whom God has Predestined, called,
justified, those he does also glorify.

VII.
Who teach, That during this life, there is no fruit, nor sense, nor certainty
of an unchangeable Election to glory; except is be such, as may be grounded on
a condition mutable and contingent. For besides that it is an absurdity to
call that a certainty which is uncertain, it is also repugnant to the
experience of the Saints, who rejoice with the Apostle, at the sense and
seeling of their Election, while they celebrate this blessing of God; who with
the Disciples Rejoice (according to Jesus Christ his admonition) that their
names are written in heaven, Luke 10.20. Briefly who oppose the sense of their
Election to the fiery darts of the devils temptations, demanding, who shall
bring in any accusation against the Elect of God? Romans 8.32.

VIII.
Who teach, That God did not of his own mere and just will, decree to leave
any one in the fall of Adam, and the common estate of sin and condemnation,
or to pass by them in the communication of grace necessary to faith and
conversion. For this remains firm, Romans 9.18. He has mercy, on whom he will
have mercy, and hardens whom he will. Again, Mat. 13.11. To you it is given
to know the secrets of the kingdom of heaven: but to them it is not given.
Again, Mat. 11.25.26. I thank thee O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, that
thou have hid those things from the wise and understanding, and have reuetled
them to little children: It is so O Father, forasmuch as such was thy good
pleasure.

IX.
Who teach, That the cause wherefore God sends the Gospel to one Nation rather
then to another, is not only and merely the good pleasure of God: but because
one Nation is better and more worthy then another, unto which the Gospel is not
communicated. For Moses gaine-sayeth it, speaking thus to the people of Israel:
Deuteronomy. 10.14.15. Behold the heavens, and the heaven of heavens belong unto the
Lord thy God: the earth also and all that is in it: But the Lord has taken
pleasure in thy fathers only, for to love them; and has chosen their
posterity after them, to wit, you, from among all people, as appears this
day. And Jesus Christ, Mat. 11.21. Woe unto thee Corazin, vvoe unto thee
Bethsaida: For if in Tire and Sidon those mighty works had been done, which
have been done in the midst of you, they had long since repented in sackcloth
and ashes.

CHAP. II. Of the death of Jesus Christ, and man's Redemption thereby.
The I. Article.
GOd is not only most merciful, but also most just. And his justice requires
(according as he has revealed himself in his word) that our sins committed
against his infinite Majesty should be punished, not only with temporal, but
also with eternal pains, both in body and soul; the which pains we cannot
escape, unless there be satisfaction made to the justice of God.

II.
Now because it was not in our power to make satisfaction of our selves, nor to
deliver our selves from the wrath of God: God through his unmeasurable mercy
gave us his only Son for a pledge; who was made Sin, and a Curse upon the
Cross, for us, or in our steed; that so he might satisfy for us.

III.
This death of the Son of God, is the only and most perfect sacrifice and
satisfaction for sins, of an infinite price and value; which abundantly
suffices to expiate the sins of the whole world.

IV.
And this death is therefore of so great worth and value both because the
person that suffered it, is not only true man, and perfectly holy, but also
the only Son of God, of the same eternal and infinite essence with the
Father and the Holy Ghost; such as our Savior ought to be: And secondly,
because his death was joined with the sense and feeling of the wrath and curse
of God, which we by our sins had deserved.

V.
Furthermore the promise of the Gospel is, that whosoever belieueth in Jesus
Christ crucified, should not perish, but have everlasting life: which promise
ought to be propounded and declared indifferently to all Nations and persons,
unto whom God according to his good pleasure sends the Gospel; and that with
commandment of Repentance and Faith.

VI.
And whereas many that are called by the Gospel, repent not, neither believe
in Jesus Christ, but perish in Infidelity; This comes not to pass through any
defect or insufficiency of the sacrifice of Jesus Christ offered upon the
Cross, but through their own fault.

VII.
But for as much as some there are, who truly believe, and are delivered and
saved from sin and perdition by the death of Jesus Christ, this benefit
proceeds from the mere Grace of God; which he owes not to any, and which was
given them from all eternity in Jesus Christ.

VIII.
For such was the most free counsel, and most favorable will and Intention of
God the Father, that the wholesome and quickening efficacy of the most precious
death of his Son should be extended to all the Elect, for to give them alone
Justifying faith, and thereby to bring them infallibly to Salvation: That is,
it was Gods will, that Jesus Christ by the blood of the Cross, whereby he
confirmed the new Covenant, should redeem effectually all those, and no other,
from among every people, nation, and language; who from all eternity were
elected to Salvation, and were given unto him of his Father: that he should
give them Faith, which, as all other gifts also of the Holy Ghost, he purchased
for them by his death: that he should purge them by his blond from all sins,
Original, and Actual, committed either before or after Faith received: that
he should keep them faithfully to the end; and finally that he should make
them appear before him glorious without spot or blemish.

IX.
This counsel proceeding from the eternal love of God toward the Elect, has
mightily been accomplished ever since the beginning of the world to this
present time, the gates of Hell having opposed it all in vain; and shall be
accomplished also in the times to come: yea in such sort, as the Elect in their
due time shall be gathered into one, and there shall be still a Church of
believers founded on the blood of Jesus Christ; the which shall constantly love
this her Savior, who as a Bridegroom for his Spouse, laid down his life on
the Cross for her; the which also shall persevere in serving him, and shall
celebrate and magnify him both here and ever hereafter.

A Reiection of Errors. The true doctrine being Expounded, the Synod rejects
the errors of those,
I.
Who teach, that God the Father destined his Son to the death of the Cross,
without any certain and definite purpose to save any one by name; so as the
necessity, profit, and dignity or worth of the Impetration made by the death
of Jesus Christ might be safe, and perfect in all parts, complete, full, and
entire, albeit the redemption thereby obtained, had never been actually applied
to any one particular. For this doctrine is injurious to the wisdom of God the
Father, and to the merit of Jesus Christ, and contrary to the Scripture. For
see what our Savior says, Ioh. 10.15.27. I lay down my life for my sheep,
and I know them. And the Prophet Esaias says of the Savior, Esaias 53.10. After
that he shall have laid down his life for an oblation for sin, he shall see
those of (his) posterity, he shall prolong his days, and the good pleasure of
the Lord shall prosper in his hand: Briefly, it clean overthrowes also that
Article of our Creed, whereby we believe the Church.

II.
Who teach, that the scope or end of Jesus Christ his death was not
effectually to ratify the new covenant of grace by his blood, but only to
purchase to his father a naked right, whereby he might again contract with men
some covenant, whatsoever it should be, whether of grace, or of works. Which
is repugnant to the Scripture, which teaches, Heb. 7.22. That Jesus Christ was
made the pledge and mediator of a more excellent, to wit, the new Testament.
Again Heb. 9.15.17. A testament is then only of force when the parties are
dead.

III.
Who teach, that Jesus Christ by his satisfaction, has not assuredly merited
for any one Salvation it self, and faith, whereby that satisfaction of Jesus
Christ might be applied effectually to salvation: but that he has only
purchased to the Father a power, or plenary will to treat anew with men, and
to prescribe them new conditions, such as he would, the fulfilling whereof was
to depend on man's free will, and therefore that it might have come to pass,
that either all men, or none at all should fulfill them. For these think too
basely of the death of Jesus Christ, not at all acknowledging the principal
fruit or benefit purchased thereby, and setch from hell again the error of
Pelagius.

IIII.
Who teach, that this new covenant of Grace, which God the Father has
co^tracted with men by the interventio^ of the death of Jesus Christ,
consists not in this, that we are justified before God, and saved by faith,
in as much as it apprehends the merit of Jesus Christ: but in this, that the
exaction of the perfect obedience of the Law, being abolished, God accounts
faith it self and the imperfect obedience of faith, for a perfect obedience of
the law, and of mere grace esteems it worthy to be rewarded with eternal
life. For these contradict the Scripture, Romans 3.23.24. Being justified freely
by his grace, by the redemption which is in Jesus Christ, whom from all
eternity God ordained for a propitiation by faith in his blood. And with
profane Socinus they bring in a new and strange justification of man before
God, contrary to the common consent and judgment of the whole Church.

V.
Who teach, that all men are admitted into the state of reconciliation, and to
the grace of the covenant, so as not any one is subject to condemnation, or
shall be condemned for original sin, but that all are generally exempted
from the guilt of the said sin. For this opinion is repugnant to the Scripture,
which affirms, Ephesians. 2.3. that we are by nature children of wrath.

VI.
Who use the distinction of Impetration, and Application, thereby to instill
into the simple and ignorant, this opinion; that God for his part, would
equally bestow upon all men the benefits purchased by the death of Jesus
Christ. And whereas some rather then others, are made partakers of remission of
sins and life everlasting, that this difference depends on their own
freewill, applying it self to that grace which is offered indifferently; but
that it depends not upon any singular gift of mercy that works effectually in
them, rather then in others, for to apply themselves thereunto: For seeming to
propose this Distinction in a good sense, they go about to drench the people
with the pernicious poison of Pelagianisme.

VII.
Who teach; that Jesus Christ neither could, neither ought, neither did die for
them whom God loved before most tenderly, and had elected to eternal life; in
as much as such had no need of the death of Jesus Christ. For they contradict
the Apostle, who says, Gal. 2.20. Christ loved me, and gave himself for me.
Romans 8.33. Who shall bring in any accusation against the elect of God? It is
God which justifies. Who shall condemn? It is Christ which is dead, (to weet)
for them: also they contradict our Savior, who says; Ioh. 10.15. I lay down
my life for my sheep. Again, Ioh. 15.12.13. This is my commandment, that ye
love one another, as I have loved you. None has greater love then this, (to
weet) when one lays down his life for his friends.

CHAP. III. Of the Corruption of man, his Conversion to God, and the manner
thereof.
The first Article.
MAn in the beginning was created after the image of God, and adorned in his
understanding with the true and saving knowledge of his creator, and of
spiritual things, with righteousness in his heart and will, with purity in
all his affections; yea he was perfectly and entirely holy: but turning
himself from God, through the instigation of the Devil, and by his own free
will, he deprived himself of these excellent gifts, and contrariwise insteede
thereof, drew on himself, blindness, horrible darkness, vanity, and
perversitie of judgment in his understanding; malice, rebellion, and hardness
in his heart and will, and therewithal, impuritie in all his affections.

II.
Now, such as man was after the fall, such children begat he, to wit, himself
corrupted, children corrupted, corruption, by the just judgment of God, being
derived from Adam unto all his posterity, excepting Jesus Christ alone, and
that not by imitation (as heretofore the Pelagians would have it) but by
propagation of a corrupted nature.

III.
Whence it comes to pass, that all men are conceived in Sin, and borne
children of wrath, unprofitable to all saving good, inclined to evil, dead in
sin, and servants of sin. And without the Grace of the regenerating spirit,
they neither will, nor can return to God, nor correct their depraved nature,
nor dispose themselves toward the amendment of it.

IIII.
True it is, that after the fall there remained in man some light of nature, by
mean; whereof he still retains some knowledge of God, and of natural
things, he discerns betwixt honesty and dishonestie, and seems to have a
little regard and care of virtue and outward discipline. But so far is it,
that by this light of nature he can come to the saving knowledge of God, and
convert himself to Him, that even in things natural and civil he uses it
not aright, but rather, as little as it is, abuses and defiles it diverse
ways, and withholds it in unrighteousness, and so becomes inexcusable
before God.

V.
Look how it is with the light of Nature, just so it fares with the
Decalogue, which God gave particularly to the Jews. For it discovers indeed
the grievousnesse of sin, and more and more convinces man; but forasmuch as
it affords no remedy, nor gives any ability to get out of that misery, and
so being weak through the flesh, leaves the transgressour in the Curse, it is
impossible, that by it, man should obtain saving grace.

VI.
Wherefore, what neither the Light of Nature, nor the Law could do, that God
effects by the power of the Holy Spirit, by means of the Word, or the
ministry of Reconciliation, that is, by the Gospel of the Messiah, whereby
it pleased God to save believers as well under the Old, as the New Testament.

VII.
God manifested this secret of his Will to fewer persons under the Old
Testament, but since under the New Testament the difference of Nations is taken
away, he now manifests it unto more. The reason of which dispensation we
ought not to attribute to the dignity or worth of one Nation above another, or
because it makes better use of the Light of Nature, but to the good pleasure
of God, which is most free, and to his undeserved love. And therefore they on
whom so great Grace has been showed, above and contrary to all desert, ought
to recognize it in humility of heart with thanksgiving. And the rest, unto whom
this Grace has not yet been showed, they ought to adore with the Apostle the
severity and justice of Gods judgments, but not curiously to sound them.

VIII.
Furthermore, as many as are called by the Gospel, are called in good earnest.
For God shows in good earnest and most truly (and sincerely) by his word what
is pleasing unto him, namely that they which are called should come unto him:
also he promises in good earnest, to all that come, and believe in him, rest
unto their souls, and life everlasting.

IX.
And whereas many that are called by the ministry of the Gospel, come not, nor
are converted, the fault is not in the Gospel, nor in Jesus Christ offered by
the Gospel, nor in God, who by the Gospel calls them, and withal bestows
many gifts upon them: but in those themselves which are called; whereof some
through their own carelessness receive not the word of life; others receive it
indeed, but not within their hearts, and therefore after some light joy of a
temporal faith, they fall back again; others through the thorns of cares,
and through the pleasures of this world choke the seed of the word, and bring
forth no fruit, according as our Savior teaches in the parable of the seed.
Mat. 13.

X.
But whereas others being called by the ministry of the Gospel do come, and
are converted, that is not to be attributed unto the man, as if he by his own
free will made himself differ from others, which are also furnished with like,
or (at least) with sufficient grace, to believe and be converted; (as the
proud heresy of Pelagius mainetaineth.) But unto God, who as he has elected
his from all eternity in Christ, so he calls them effectually in their due
times, gives them faith and repentance, and having delivered them from the
power of darkness, transports them into the kingdom of his Son, to the end
that they should declare the virtues of him, who has called them from
darkness to his marveilous light; and that they should glory, not in
themselves, but in the Lord, as the Apostolic writings witness in diverse and
sundry places.

XI.
Moreover, when God executes this his good pleasure in the Elect, or, when he
converts them, he does not only procure, that the Gospel be outwardly
preached, neither only mightily enlightens their understandings by the Holy
Spirit, to make them understand and discern aright the things of the spirit
of God: but by the efficacy of the same spirit of regeneration, he pierces
into the inmost parts of man, he opens the heart, that was shut, he softens the
heart, that was hard, he circumciseth the foreskinne of the heart, sheds new
qualities in the will, and causes it, of dead, to become living; of evil,
good; of not-willing, willing; of stubborn, obedient; he works in it, and
strengthens it, to the end, that, as a good tree, it may bring forth good fruit.

XII.
This, lo, is that Regeneration so much spoken of in Scripture, that
Renovation, that new Creation, that raising from the dead, and Vivification,
which God works in us without Without any cooperation of ours.
us. And it is not effected by the doctrine alone, beating on the care, nor by
moral persuasion, induced by perswasiue reasons, nor by any such kind of
operation, whereby, after God has done his part, it still remains in the
power of man to be regenerated, or not to be; to be, or not to be converted.
No, it is an operation wholly supernatural, most effectual, and withal most
sweet, admirable, secret, and ineffable, which according to the Scripture (that
was inspired by the Author of this operation) in respect of efficacy, is
nothing inferior to creation, or the resurrection from the dead: so as all
they, in whose hearts God works after this admirable fashion, are certainly,
infallibly, and effectually regenerated, and do actually believe. And then
indeed the will being now renewed, is not only impelled and moved of God, but
being moved of God, it works also it self: and therefore one may well say,
that, Man himself believes and repents, by means of the Grace, which he
has received.

XIII.
The faithful, during this life, cannot fully comprehend the manner of this
operation; and yet in the mean time rest well contented, inasmuch as they know
and feel, that by this Grace of God, they do from their hearts believe and
love their Savior.

XIIII.
So then, Faith is the gift of God, not because it is offered by God to man's
free will: but because it is in deed and in effect conferred, inspired, and
infused into man. Again, not because God gives only a power to believe, and
then afterward expects, that man's Will consent thereunto or believe indeed:
but because he which works both to will, and to do, yea which works all in
all, effects in man both a will to believe, and belief it self.

XV.
God owes not this Grace to any. For what may He owe to him, that can give
nothing first, that it might be repaide him again? yea what can He owe to him,
that has nothing of his own but sin, and leasing? Wherefore he that
receives this Grace, ought, yea and does also yield eternal thanks to God for
it: he that receives it not, either he has no regard of these spiritual
things, and pleases himself in that which is his own: or retchlesse as he
is, boasts in vain of having that which he has not. Now concerning those
which outwardly make profession of the faith, and amend their lives, we must
both judge and speak the best, according to the example of the Apostle; for
what is in their hearts is to us unknown. And for others which are not yet
called, we are to pray unto God, who calls things that are not, as if they
were: but in no hand may we svvel with pride against them, as if we our
selves had made our selves to differ.

XVI.
Now, as by the fall, man ceased not to be man, endued with will and
understanding, and sin that overspread all mankind, abolished not the nature
of mankind, but depraved it only, and killed it spiritually: So this divine
Grace of Regeneration works not in men, as in logs, or stocks of trees,
neither does it take away the will and its properties, nor force or constrain
it against its own liking, but spiritually enliueneth, heals, corrects and
boweth it, no less sweetly, then mightily, to the end that where formerly the
rebellion and resistance of the flesh did wholly domineere, now the prompt and
sincere obedience of the spirit may begin there to reign; in which very point,
the true and spiritual reestablishment and freedom of our will consists. And
were it not that this admirable Worker of all good, did ply us in manner
aforesaid, there were no hope left unto man, that he should raise himself out
of the fall by free will, by which, when he stood upright, he threw himself
headlong into perdition.

XVII.
Also, as the almighty operation of God, whereby he produces and sustaineth
this our natural life, excludes not, but rather requires the use of the
means, by which God according to his infinite wisdom, and goodness, is
pleased to display this his power: even so, the foresaid supernatural
operation of God, by which he regenerateth us, excludes not, nor any way
overthrows the use of the Gospel, which the all wise God has ordained, to
be the seed of Regeneration, and the food of the soul. Wherefore as the
Apostles, and Doctors, which followed them, did piously instruct the people
concerning this Grace of God, to his glory, and to the abasing of all (humane)
pride, and yet in the mean while neglected not to hold them still, by their
holy admonitions of the Gospel, to the exercise of the word, Sacraments, and
discipline: So, God forefend, that they which teach and learn in the Church,
should presume to tempt God, by separating those things, which He according to
his good pleasure, would have most straightly joined together. For Grace is
conferred by admonitions, and the more readily we do our duty the more
evident is the benefit of God working in us, and then does his business
proceed most happyly. To which God, all the glory both of the means, and of
their fruit, and saving efficacy, is due for ever and ever. Amen.

A Reiection of Errors. The true doctrine being expounded, the Synod
rejects the Errors of those,
I.
Who teach, that it cannot be said properly, that original Sin is of it
self sufficient to condemn all mankind, or to merit both temporal and
eternal punishment. For they contradict the Apostle, who says, Romans 5.12. By
one man alone sin entered into the world, and by sin death: and so death
came upon all men, inasmuch as all have sinned. And verse 16. The guilt is of
one offense alone to condemnation. Again, Romans 6.23. The wages of sin is
death.

II.
Who teach, that spiritual gifts, or good habitudes and virtues (such as are,
goodness, holiness, righteousness,) could have no place in man's will, when
he was first created; and by consequent that they could not be lost in the
fall. For this directly thwarteth the description of the image of God, which
the Apostle makes, Ephesians. 4.24. Where he describes it by righteousness and
holiness, which virtues certainly have their seats in the will.

III.
Who teach, that spiritual gifts were not separated from the will of man in
the spiritual death, since that in it self was never corrupted, but hindered
only by darkness of the vnaerstanding, and unruliness of the affections, which
hindrances being removed, the will is able to make use of its liberty, which
to it is natural; that is, it is of it self able either to will and choose,
or not to will and choose any good proposed unto it. This is new and erroneous,
tending to nothing but to exalt the power of free will, contrary to the saying
of the Prophet. Jeremy 17.9. The heart is wily, and desperately evil above all
things. And that of the Apostle, Ephesians. 2.3. Among whom (children of In the
French it is by mistake of the Printer, children of Religion.
Rebellion) we all conversed once in the lusts of the flesh, fulfilling the
desires of the flesh, and of our thoughts.

IIII.
Who teach, that a man not regenerate, is not totally and properly in Sin, or
destitute of all power concerning spiritual good; but that he can hunger and
thirst after righteousness and life, and can offer unto God the sacrifice of a
contrite and broken spirit, such as may be acceptable unto him. For these
things contrary the plain testimonies of Scripture. Ephe. 2.1.5. Ye were dead
in your trespasses and sins. And, Genesis 6.4. and 8.21. Every imagination of
the thoughts of the heart of men is nothing else but evil at all times. Add
hereto, that to hunger and thirst after life, and to be delivered from misery;
and to offer unto God the sacrifice of a broken spirit, is proper to the
regenerate. Psalm. 51.19. And of those that are called happy. Mat. 5.6.

V.
Who teach, that a corrupt and natural man may so well use common Grace
(whereby they understand the light of Nature or the gifts which remain (in
him) after the fall) that by the good usage thereof, he may by degrees and
little by little obtain greater grace, to wit, Evangelicall and saving grace,
yea and salvation it self: And that by this means, God for his part shows
himself ready to reveal Jesus Christ to all, forasmuch as he affords unto
all, sufficiently and efficaciously, the means necessary to the Revelation of
Jesus Christ, and to faith and repentance. For that this is false, besides the
experience of al times, the Scripture witnesses: Psalm. 147.19.20. He declares
his words to Jacob, and his statutes and ordinances to Israel, he has not
done so to all nations, and therefore they know not his ordinances. Act. 14.16.
In times past God suffered all nations to walk in their own ways. Act.
16.6.7. It was forbidden them, (to wit, Paul and his companions) by the holy
Ghost to preach the word in Asia; coming therefore to Mysia they assayed to
go into Bithynia, but the spirit (of Jesus) permitted them not.

VI.
Who teach, that in the true conversion of a man, it cannot be, that God
should pour into his will new qualities, habits, or gifts: Therefore the
faith, by which we are first converted, and from which we are named faithful,
is not a quality or gift infused by God, but only a bare action of man; And
that it cannot otherwise be called a gift, then in regard alone of the power
which a man has to attain thereunto. For these things contradict the holy
Scriptures, which testify, That God sheddes in our hearts new qualities of
faith, obedience, and the feeling of his love. Ier. 34.33. I will put my law
within them, and will write it in their heart. Es. 44.3. I will pour forth
waters upon him that is a thirst, and rivers upon the dry ground: I will pour
forth my spirit upon thy posterity. Romans 5.5. The love of God is shedd in our
hearts by the holy spirit, which is given unto us. They are also repugnant to
the perpetual practice of the Church, that prays on this manner: Ierem.
31.18. Convert me O Lord, and I shall be converted.

VII.
Who teach, that the Grace whereby we are converted unto God, is nothing else
but a sweet persuasion; or (as others expound it) that the most noble manner of
working in the conversion of a man, and the most agreeable to the nature of
man, is that which is effected by persuasions: And that nothing hinders, but
that the Grace which they term Moral (that is to say, which is wrought by
perswasiue reasons) may make a carnal man spiritual; yea that God makes the
will to consent no otherwise, save only by this kind of persuasion: and that
herein consists the whole efficacy of the divine operation, whereby he su
mounteth the operation of Satan, inasmuch as God promises eternal good, Satan
only temporal. For this is pure Pelagianisme, and contrary to all Scripture,
the which beside this kind of operation in the conversion of a man,
acknowledges another over and above, to wit, that of the Holy Spirit, much
more effectual and divine; as in the 36. chap. of Ezechiel, ver. 26. I will
give you a new heart, and will give a new spirit in the midst of you: and will
take away the heart of stone, and will give an heart of flesh, etc.

VIII.
Who teach, that in the regeneration of a man, God imployeth not his almighty
power in such sort, as that he mightily and infallibly benas the will to
believe and to be converted, but that notwithstanding all the operations of
Grace, which God uses to the conversion of man, man may resist God and the
holy Spirit, even then, when God purposes and would regenerate him: and that
oftentimes man resists in deed and effect, so as he utterly hinders his
own regeneration: yea that it rests in his power to be, or not to be
regenerated. For this is nothing else but to take away from God the efficacy
of his Grace in our Conversion, and to subject the action of God almighty to
the will of man; and that contrary to the Apostles, who teach: Ephesians. 1.19.
That we believe according to the efficacy of the power of his might. And 2 Thessalonians. 1.11. That God fulfilleth in us, all the good pleasure of his goodness,
and the work of faith Mightily. Again 2. Pet. 1.3. That his Divine power has
given us all whatsoever appertains to life and godliness.

IX.
Who teach, that Grace and Freewill are causes, that work each their several
part, and both concur together in the first point of conversion: and that
Grace as a cause has no precedence in order before the efficiencie or motion
of the will, id est, that God does not effectually aid man's will to be
converted, before the will of man move and determinate it self. For the
Ancient Church condemned this doctrine in the Pelagians long ago, by the
Apostle, Romans 9.16. It is neither of him that wills, nor of him that runs,
but of God who shows mercy, and, 1. Cor. 4.7. Who puts a difference betwixt
thee and another? and what have thou, that thou have not received? Again,
Phil. 2.13. It is God, which produces in us with efficacy both to will and to
perform, according to his good pleasure.

CHAP. IIII. Of the perseverance of the Saints.
The first Article.
THose whom God according to his purpose and decree, calls to the communion of
his Son our Lord Jesus Christ, and regenerates by his holy Spirit, he
delivers from the dominion and thraldom of Sin; but not altogether from the
flesh, and body of Sin, during this life.

II.
Whence it is, that we see daily so many sins of Infirmity, and that the best
works of the Saints have their blemishes. Which continually furnishes them
with matter, of humbling themselves before God, of having recourse to Jesus
Christ crucified, of mortifying the flesh more and more by the Spirit of
prayer, and by holy exercises of piety, of sighing after (and vehemently
desiring) full perfection, until being disimpestred of this body of sin,
they reign in heaven with the Lamb of God.

III.
By reason of these relics of sin dwelling in us, and the temptation of Satan
and the world, those which are converted, could not persist in this grace, if
they were left to their own strength: But God is faithful, who mercifully
confirms them in the grace, which he has once given them, and mightily
conserues them to the end.

IIII.
Now albeit this power of God fortifying and conserving the truly faithful in
his Grace, be too great to be overcome of the flesh, yet they that are
co^verted, are not always so conducted and moved by God, but that they may by
their own fault turn aside in some particular actions from the conduct of
Grace, and be seduced by the lusts of the flesh to obey them. Wherefore it
behooves, they watch always and pray that they be not ledd into temptation;
which if they do not, they not only may be carried away of the flesh, the
world, and of Satan into sins, yea grievous and fearful finnes, but some
times they are so carried away by the just permission of God: As the doleful
falls of David, Peter, and other holy persons mentioned in the Scripture do
sufficiently prove.

V.
Meane-while, by such sins they grievously offend God, make themselves guilty
of death, grieve the holy spirit, interrupt the course of the exercise of
faith, most fearfully wound their consciences, loose for a while the sense of
Grace, until Gods fatherly visage shine upon them a new, when by earnest
repentance, they return again into the right way.

VI.
For God, who is rich in mercy, according to the unchangeable purpose of
Election, withdrawes not utterly the Holy Spirit from those that are his, no,
not in their grievous falls, nor suffers them to fall so far, as to loose the
grace of adoption, and the state of justification, or to commit the sin unto
death (or that against the Holy Ghost) and so being utterly forsaken of him, to
cast themselves headlong into everlasting perdition.

VII.
For in these falls God first conserues in them this his immortal seed whereby
they are regenerated, that it be not lost, or wholly rejected. Then he renewes
them truly and effectually by his Word and Spirit, to the end, that they
repent, and be grieved at heart and according to God, for their sins: that with
a contrite and broken heart they desire and obtain remission in the blood of
the Mediator by says, that they feel again the grace of God reconciled unto
them: that they adore his mercies and faithfulness, that for the future, they
more carefully work out their salvation with fear and trembling.

VIII.
So then it is not by their merits, nor strength, but by the free mercy of God,
that they do not wholly loose faith and grace, nor continue and perish finally
in their falls: which not only might easily come to pass, but would also
doubtless in respect of themselves: but in respect of God, it cannot possibly
be, forasmuch as his counsel cannot change, nor his promise fail, nor the
calling according to purpose be revoked, nor the merit, intercession and
preservation of Jesus Christ be annulled, nor the seal of the holy spirit be
made vain or abolished.

IX.
Touching this preservation of the Elect unto salvation, and the perseverance
of the truly faithful in faith, the faithful themselves may be, and are
assured according to the measure of faith, whereby they believe for most
certain that they are and ever shall continue true and lively members of the
church, and that they have the remission of all their sins, and life
everlasting.

X.
And therefore this certainety grows not from any particular revelation over
and above and beside the word, but proceeds from faith in Gods promises, which
he has most abundantly revealed in his word for our consolation: and from the
testimony of the holy spirit who bears witness with our spirit that we are the
children of God, and heirs. Romans 8.16.17. Finally, from an earnest and holy
study of a good conscience and of good works. And if the elect of God were
destitute in the present world of this solid consolation, that they shall
obtain the victory, and of this infallible earnest of eternal glory; they
were then of all men most miserable.

XI.
Mean while the scripture testifies, that the faithful during this life are
to fight against diverse doubts of the flesh, and that then when they are
afflicted with grievous temptations, they do not always feel in themselves
this full consolation of faith, and this certainety of perseverance: but God the
father of all consolation suffers the^ not to be tempted beyond their strength,
but with the temptation, gives such an issue that they are able to abide it.
1. Cor. 10.13. And by the holy spirit does again awaken in them the certainety
of perseverance.

XII.
Now so far is it, that this certainety of perseverance should make the
truly faithful proud, and plunge them into carnal security, that rather it
is the true root of humility, of filial reverence, of true piety, of
patience in all conflicts and combats, of ardent prayers, of constancy under
the cross, and in the confession of the truth, and (lastly) of solid joy in
God: so that the consideration of this benefit is to them a spur to incite
them unto a serious and continual exercise of thankfulness and good works, as
appears by the testimonies of the Scripture, and by the examples of the
Saints.

XIII.
Also when the assurance of perseverance begins to reviue in them that are
raised from some fall, it begets not in them a carelessness or neglect of
piety, but rather a far greater care heedfully to observe the ways of the
Lord, which are therefore prepared that walking therein they may retain the
certainty of their perseverance, for fear least abusing his fatherly kindness,
Gods favorable countenance (the contemplation whereof is sweeter to the
faithful then life, and the privation more bitter then death) turn not again
from them, and so they fall into more grievous afflictions of mind.

XIIII.
And as it has pleased God to begin in us by his Grace this his work, by the
preaching of the Gospel; even so he preserues, continues, and accomplishes it,
by the hearing, reading, exhortations, threatenings, and promises of the same
Gospel, as also by the use of the Sacraments.

XV.
This doctrine of the perseverance of the truly faithful and holy, and of the
certainty thereof, which God has most abundantly revealed in his word, to the
glory of his own name, and to the consolation of godly souls, and which he
imprints in the hearts of the faithful, is such; That the flesh truly
comprehends it not, Satan hates it, the world laughes at it, the ignorant and
hypocrites abuse it, and the erroneous fight against it: But yet so it is, That
the Spouse of lesus Christ has always most ardently loved it, and mainetained
it constantly, as a treasure of inestimable value: which God also will see that
it shall continue to do, against whom no counsel nor force can prevail. To
which God alone the Father Son and holy Ghost be honor and glory forever and
ever. Amen.

A reiection of Errors.
The true doctrine being thus expounded, the Synod rejects the errors of
those.
I.
Who teach, that the persenerance of the truly faithful, is not an effect of
election, or a gift of God purchased by the death of Jesus Christ; But that it
is a condition of the new covenant, which man before his election and
peremptory Justification (as they call it) ought to accomplish by his own free
will. For the holy scripture testifies, That it comes from election, and
that it is given the Elect by virtue of the death, resurrection, and
intercession of Jesus Christ, Romans 11.7. The Election has obtained it, and the
rest are hardened. Again, Romans 8.31.32.33.34. He which spared not his own Son,
but delivered him up for us all, how shall he not give us also all things with
him? Who will bring in any accusation against the elect of God? It is God that
^^stifies, who shall condemn? It is Christ that is dead, and that more is,
which is raised again, who also is at the right hand of God, and who himself
makes request for us. Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? Shall
oppression, or anguish, or persecution, or famine, (...) nakedness, or peril,
or sword? Nay, in all these things we are more then conquerours by him that has
loved us, etc.

II.
Who teach, that God indeed provides the faithful man of sufficient strength to
persevere, and that he is ready to preserve it in him, if he does his duty:
Nevertheless that all things being put which are necessary for perseverance in
faith, and the which God will employ for the preservation of it; It still
depends on the freedom of man's will to persevere or not to persevere. For
this sentence contains in it manifest Pelagianisme, and whiles it goes about
to make men free, it makes them sacrilegious, contrary to the perpetual
consent of the doctrine of the Gospel, which takes away from man all matter of
boasting, and attributes the praise of this benefit to the divine grace alone:
And contrary to the Apostle testifying. 1. Cor. 1.8. That God also will
establish us even until the end, that we may be unblameable in the day of our
Lord Jesus Christ.

III.
Who teach, that the truly faithful and regenerat, not only may fall wholly and
finally from justifying faith, and from grace and salvation, but that
oftentimes they do indeed fall, and perish everlastingly. For this opinion
annulleth not only the grace of justification and regeneration, but also the
perpetual preservation of Jesus Christ: Contrary to the express words of the
Apostle S. Paul, Romans 5.9.10. If Christ dyed for us then when we were but
sinners, much rather then, being now justified in his blood, shall we be saved
from the wrath by him: And contrary to the Apostle S. John, 1. Ioh. 3.9.
Whosoever is borne of God does no sin, For the seed of Him, remains in him,
and he cannot sin, because he is borne of God: Also contrary to the words of
Jesus Christ, Ioh. 10.28.29. And I give them eternal life, and they shall never
perish: Also none shall snatch them out of my hand; my Father, who has given
them unto me, is greater then all, and no man is able to snatch them out of the
hands of my Father.

IIII.
Who teach, That the truly faithful and regenerate may sin the sin unto
death, that is to say, the sin against the holy Ghost. Forasmuch as the Apostle
S. John, chap. 5. of his first, after he had in the 16. and 17. verses, made
mention of those, who sin unto death, and forbidden to pray for them, presently
adds in the 18. verse; We know that whosoever is borne of God sins not, (to
wit, this kind of sin) But he that is borne of God keeps himself, and the
Evil one touches him not.

V.
Who teach, that in this life one can have no certainty of perseverance for the
time to come, without special revelation. For by this doctrine the faithful
are deprived of the most solid consolation, which they can have during this
life, and the doubtfulnesse and wavering opinions of the Roman Church are
brought in again. But the holy Scripture draws every where this certainety,
not from any special and extraordinary revelation; but from the proper marks
of the children of God, and from his most sure promises: above all, the Apostle
S. Paul, Romans 8.38. No creature shall be able to separate us from the love of
God, which he has showed us in Jesus Christ our Lord and 1. Ioh. 3.24. He
which keeps his commandments, abides in him, and He in him: and hereby know
we that he abides in us, to weet, by the spirit which he has given unto us.

VI.
Who teach, that the doctrine touching the certainety of perseverance and
salvation is naturally and of it self a coushion of the flesh, and hurtful to
piety, good manners, prayers, and other holy exercises: but on the contrary,
that it is a laudable thing to doubt. For such men declare that they are
ignorant of the efficacy of divine grace, and of the operation of the holy
Spirit dwelling in the Elect, and contradict the Apostle S. John, who in
express words says the quite contrary, 1. Ioh. 3. ver. 2 dearly beloved we
are now the children of God, but what we shall be does not yet appear: but
we know that after that he shall have appeared, we shall be like unto him, for
we shall see him as he is. Further more they are convinced by the examples of
the Saints, as well in the Old, as New Testament; who albeit they were assured
of their perseverance and salvation, did notwithstanding continue the daily use
of prayers and other exercises of piety.

VII.
Who teach, that there is no difference between a temporal faith, and that
which justifies and saves, save only in continuance. For Jesus Christ
himself, Mat. 13.20. Luke 8.13! and in the verses following, does manifestly
o^serue three other differences between those that believe for a time, and
those that are truly faithful, when he says; that those for^ ^^ceiue the
seed into stony ground; these into good ground, or into a good heart; that
those have no root; these have a firm root; that those bear no fruit; these
bring forth their fruit in diverse and sundry measures constantly and
continuingly.

VIII.
Who teach, That it is no absurdity, that the first regeneration being extinct,
a man should be borne again the second, yea often times. For by this doctrine,
they deny the incorruptibility of the seed of God, whereby we are borne
again; contrary to the testimony of the Apostle S. Peter. 1 Pet. 1.23. being
borne a new not of corruptible seed, but of incorruptible.

IX.
Who teach, that Jesus Christ prayed no where for the infallible perseverance
of the faithful, in faith. For they contradict Jesus Christ himself, who
says, Luke 22.32. I have prayed for thee (Peter) that thy faith fail not. And
the Gospel of S. John, which witnesses: Ioh. 17.11. That Jesus Christ prayed
not only for the Apostles, but also for all those that should believe through
their word: Holy Father keep them in thy name, and verse 15, I pray not that
thou would take them out of the world, but that thou would keep them
from evil.

FINIS.

