NEWS Lately come on the last day of February 1591. from diverse parts of
France, Sauoy, and Tripoli in Soria.

Truly translated out of the French and Italian Copies, as they were sent to
right Honorable persons.

printer's device of John Wolf (

LONDON Printed by John Wolf, and are to be sold at his shop, over against the
great South door of S. Paul. 1591.

depiction of St. George slaying the dragon

News lately come on the last day of February 1591. From diverse parts of
France, Sauoy, and Tripoly in Soria. Truly translated out of the French and
Italian coppies, as they were sent to right Honorable persons.
THE King accompanied with his own forces, and the Marshall Birons having a
long time lain about Chartres, hoping in the end to reduce the City to his
devotion, and perceiving it a very hard thing to obtain the same by main
force, unless it were by surprise, by reason of the strength of the same both by
Art and nature, though there were very few Soldiers or none in it, except the
Citizens and Townes-men thereof:

About the foureteenth of February last, he divided himself from the Marshall
Biron, and feigned to give over the siedge, and to go toward Dreur, having
first given out that he would go to besiege that town, and went but two or
three miles from Chartres. The Marshall Biron, seeming the next day to leave
the siege, and to follow the King, as if he dispaired to do any good there,
which those of Chartres perceiving, they presently with such Soldiers as they
had, resolved themselves to make a saly, and to set upon the reareward of
the Marshall as he was marching toward Dreur, which accordingly they did, and
issuing out of the Town most bravely charged the Marshalls hinder troops, the
Marshall at first seemed to make head against them, but soon after began to
retire himself, and to give his ennemies place, and they nothing misdoubting
of any such Stratagem, followed him amain, continually skirmishing until they
came about two miles from the Town. In the mean time, the King lying there
abouts in ambush, when he saw his time, entered between the Town and the men
thereof that followed the Marshall, and so courageously charged them behind,
and the Marshall then turning face toward them again, that in less then an
hour that they fought, they slew them all, except thirty Cuirasses which very
hardly escaped.

The King following the victory, entered presently one of the Subburbes of
Chartres, the Towns men seeing this, began to make a motion of peace with
him, and offered to deliver him the town and fifty thousand crowns, upon
condition, that he would remove his forces, and place no Garrison therein,
which the King refused to do, and thereupon prepared to batter the Town in two
places, having resolved not to leave it until he have gotten it. And it is
verily believed that he is in it already, which if he be, we are greatly bound
to give God thanks for it, for as much as those of Paris will greatly be
hindered by the same, for that they had most of their victuals from those
quarters thereabouts.

The Lord Deguidieres deputy Lieutenant for the king in the province of
Dalphinate has of late so hotely pursued the Dukes of Sauoyes forces that he
entered his city of Ciamberie (chief parliament town of Sauoy) and sacked and
spoiled the same, and then laden with the rich pray thereof, left it,
forasmuch as he had not forces sufficient with him to keep and munite the
same, and so withdrew him self home again without any loss.

The said Lord Deguidieres returning home from Ciamberie into Dalphinate met
with the Duke of Nemours and his forces (who knowing the absence of the
governor thought to have surprised some towns) and so charged him that he
slew most of his Cauallarie and made him retire toward Lions, (whereof the Duke
is governor) whither the Lord Deguidieres did so stoutly follow him, that
those of Lions fearing least he would entrench him self in their Suburb
called Guillottiere, adjoining to the gate of Rodan, and is a very fair,
long, and rich Suburb, set fire to the same, and have clean burnt it up: but
he withdrew him self into his own government, where he has so honorably
behaved himself, that he has in a manner reduced the whole Province to the
obedience and devotion of the King, and is such a terror to his enemies, that
none dare stir.

The King of Spain had commanded certain Cornets of horsemen of Naples, to
come down from thence to the Duke of Sauoy, that with them he might infest and
trouble those of Dalphinate, in as much as they were horses of more swiftness
and speed then he has any, but the Lord Deguidieres having met with them,
has altogether defeated them, that very few or none has escaped him.

Those of Geneua have lately taken a forte called the forte of Saint Catherin,
not very far from Geneua, which the Duke has not long since caused to be
built only to vere them, and they have razed the same, and have gone spoiling,
wasting and burning so far as Nantua, which is two days journey from Geneua.

Those of Air in Prouence, with all the country there aboutes are in a mutiny
and tumult against the Duke of Sauoy (to whom they had voluntarily given them
selves) forasmuch as he went about to build a Cirtadel in Air, which they by no
means will suffer.

The city of Marseille which with the greater part of the country of
Prouence (through the fair promises and instigations of the King of Spain)
had accepted the Duke of Sauoy to be their Protector, and in sign of that,
advanced the standard of the holy League (which is a crucifixe) has of late
upon the tumult of Air revolted from him, and erected the Arms of France, and
does publish that it holds and will hold for the king of France.

Certain Iacopin Friars of the city of Terracon, situate upon the river of
Rodanum, together with some evil minded Citizens thereof, had practiced to give
the city to the Duke of Sauoy, of whom they had received many fair and large
promises: and having agreed both of the means and time, the governor of the
city having had some inteligence thereof, and discovered their whole
platform, one night before their treason should have been effected, caused
the Iacopins and all their accomplices to be taken and laid in sundry prisons,
and that very night sent certain of his companies out of the town there to
lie in an ambush, until such time as they should hear three strokes of a Bell,
which was the watchword between the Iacopins and the Duke of Sauoys
Lieutenant. All this being thus appointed, the Dukes forces came to the city,
who so soon as they were near the gate, at which they should have been let
in: the Bell was stricken three times, where presently the Ambush that was laid
without the town assaulted them, and those of the city which stood prepared
to receive them, opened the gates and sailied out upon them, where in less
then half an hour the Dukes men being so surprised in the midst were every
man slain, and their Captain so sore hurt, that he dyed two days after, so
was the city reserved for the King, for whom it holds still.

The Duke of Sauoye is of late fallen into a consumption, and lies very sick
at Nizza, so that his Physicians do despair of his recovery.

The Lord Chatillion has of late had the Lord de la Chastres in chase, and
has so nearely pursued him that he has driven him to Chasteauneuf, where he
does straightly besiege him, and is in hope to have him, if he may have
ordinance to batter the Town.

By letters from Aleppo, and Tripoly in Soria the twenty ninth of December, and
the second of January last, it is written to diverse of Venice, that in the
confines of Palestina were newly start up two religious men, who under color
of a reformation in religion, and certain plausible orders which they would
have observed, name them selves Prophes sent by God to illuminate the
Maumetists, and to bring them out of darkness to eternal light, who had so many
followers that it was wondrous to tell, and that one of them was gone with ten
thousand men to help the Persians in his wars against the great Turk, and
the other kept still about Palestina, and daily conquered great countries, and
increased in forces and number of men, to the great terror of the Turks.

FINIS.

