A DECLARATION MADE BY THE REFORMED CHVRCHES OF FRANCE AND THE PRINCIPALITY OF
BEARN.

Concerning their unjust persecution by the Enemies of the Estate and of their
Religion. Together with their lawful and necessary defense.

Acording to the French Copy printed in Rochell.

M. DC. XXI.

A DECLARATION made by the Reformed Churches of France and the Principality of
Bearn.
Concerning their unjust persecution by the enemies of the Estate and of their
Religion. Together with their lawful and necessary defense.
WE the Deputies in the General Assembly of the Reformed Churches of France
and the Principality of Bearn, persecuted by the enemies of the Estate and of
their Religion, who abuse the Kings mind and conscience, seeing that to our
great grief we are constrained by the violence of oppression to have recourse
unto natural and lawful means (by a necessary defense) to preserve the
liberty of our consciences and the safety of our lives against these our
implacable enemies: We protest in the name of the said Churches before God and
men, inuiolably to remain under the subjection of our King, acknowledging that
he is given us of God to be our sovereign Lord. And that all the world may
take notice that as this obedience, next unto the worship of God, is the only
aim of our intention, sufficiently manifested by our former fidelity engraven
in the pillars of our Estate, and in the crowns of our late Kings, raised up
again by our predecessors and our selves, notwithstanding the endeavors of our
enemies factions: also the hatred and persecution which we now endure, is
raised up for no other cause by our enemies, but for this holy and just action;
whereunto they know we are inseparably bound, by the rules of our Religion, by
the example of our progenitors, and the right of our own conservation.

First of all then we beseech the King and all true French men, as also all
Kings, Princes and Potentates, friends and confederates of the Crown, and
generally all men who are touched with the zeal of Gods glory, with
commiseration of innocence trodden under foot, and with grief for the
miseries which at this day threaten France: to inform themselves here of our
just complaints, that in them they may see the perfidiousnesse of our enemies
and their cruelty, and which (whether we will or no) they pull out of our
bosom, and bind us to publish for the justification of our innocence, and to
let all such as love justice and truth see, that the refuge of our defense
whereunto we are brought, is both necessary and just; our enemies being thrust
forward by no other motive to kindle the fire in this kingdom, then to put out
the light of our Religion, and to overthrow the most sure resistance which in
the Estate may be opposed to foreign enterprises. But because by their wonted
subtilties they have here followed the common course which tends to violence
and cruelty, making to themselves a way by false accusations to the oppression
of a just cause. And for a pretense to invade us, they have proclaimed us
rebels and seditious; and to spread every where this accusation, they employ
the Edicts and declarations of the King and of the Parliaments, yea and the
mouth of Ambassadors in foreign parts. To the end that the simplicity of
those who are least informed either of the hatred, or of the power, or of the
craft of our enemies, might not receive some sinister impression of us;
touching the duty of obedience and fidelity toward our King and country: we
will show here that all the pretenses and injurious crimes wherewith they
charge us, are merely artificial disguisings borrowed as a veil to cover the
outrages done to innocence. For as to inflame the hatred of Kings and the
fury of the people against the Gospel, they have heretofore accused the first
Christians, and our fathers in these last times of like crimes, namely that
they transgressed against the decrees Act. 17. 7.
of Caesar, moved sedition among the people, and did overthrow the royalty of
Princes. Under these supposed accusations they have caused them to suffer every
where the violence of the sword, the burning of fire, the cruelty of
massacres, the futie of wars, and the horror of all sorts of exquisite
torments. It is true, that as our fathers were more weak and naked, or exposed
to a more easy slaughter, Religion then was directly charged with these
crimes, and then they have persecuted and made open war upon them for their
professions sake. But now by a subtlety fitted to their intentions, our
enemies have altered the method. They enterprise war upon the persons, to
break in upon Relgion. And because that after so many perfidious and cruel
practices, the arm of God having raised us up, as out of our fathers ashes,
and by the miraculous prosperity of the late King (conducted by our sidelitie
upon the throne of this monarchy) the breaches of the Estate being repaired,
that there might be established a firm peace, an Edict was granted us for the
liberty of our consciences, and places of safety to preserve our goods and
lives against the violence which the former evils made us fear for the time to
come: truly it were now too an apparent violating of peace, and they should too
manifestly declare themselves enemies of the quiet of France, if openly this
Edict made in favor of us, should be revoked, and it they should make war upon
us for Religion. It were also to engage too many persons in one self same
cause. For these causes to cover their proiected purpose of the ruin of this
Estate through ours, to arm the King against us, and to destroy us with
greater ease then other wise they could possibly do. They have proclaimed us
rebels and offenders, they have endeavored to make this cause more particular;
they call the war they make upon us a chastisement of seditious persons. But
when we shall have here made plain to the eyes of all the world the purpose of
those who are authors of these troubles and confusions; the long oppression we
have hitherto endured with all patience; the evidences of our right in the
course we have held in our complaints, and most humble suites made to our King,
now laid against us as a crime: Lastly ye open persecution which at this
instant they inflict upon us by the armies already raised against us in all the
parts of this kingdom where they think we are able any way to resist, We hope
that we shall clear our innocence from these slanders, shall approve our just
and necessary defense, which we undertake, waiting for the help and blessing of
the Almighty. And finally we shall obtain favor and assistance from all such
as love his glory and the truth: and the succor and help of whosoever they
be that desire the conservation of this poor kingdom.

Since the most sure stay o^ the Edict for our safety, established The intent
of our enemies, and the means to attain thereto
by the mighty hand of the late King, fell by the stroke of his death; the
enemies of our Religion and of the public peace, lifting up themselves with
more hope of going forward and of bringing their purposes to pass, turned all
their endeavors to overthrow this foundation of the tranquillity of the State,
knowing that the surest way to bring again the confusion of troubles and of
the forepassed wars, was to destroy the Edict which had destroyed them. But
not being able to promise to themselves that the good inclinations of the King,
and the wisdom of his Mother then Regent, and all well affected Frenchmen
interess^d in the peace of the kingdom, would consent, or could suffer an open
breach of the Edict, they sought to gain by peece-meale that which they could
not obtain in the whole sum: and by fleights and more secret practices to
cause things to fall into the gulf, whereinto now they have thrown them.

The first groundworke of their plot did bewray it self with astonishment and
just apprehension of all of us, when in the coronation of the King they made
him take this oath: I will truly endeavor to my power to exclude from my
jurisdiction and lands under my subjection, all heretics so denounced by the
Church. As if he took his Crown under this condition and under this law, that
he should root us out when he could do it. The blood of that great Henry
cries yet for vengeance for the furious and abominable murderer, who
protested and affirmed that the only reason why he murdered him, was because
he was a favorer of heretics, that he suffered them in his kingdom, that he
put them not to the sword: and here they have caused his son and successor, to
promise that he shall employ all his power to root us out. By this powerful
and effectual reason they did ingraue in the Kings heart from his most tender
years the necessity of hating and destroying us; and besides the horror of
the example of his Father cruelly slain for maintaining peace with those who
are called heretics, they take of him a solemn promise to reign and sit upon
his throne under this condition to persecute those whom his father conserved
and kept. For who is ignorant that under the name of heretics, they mean us?
That we are proclaimed and styled such by the Roman Church? And therefore if
the King be bound to the observation of this oath according to their intention,
what may we not then fear? Wherefore upon former experience ought we not to
fear again the unhappy bloodsheds which such impressions and imposed
necessities upon the consciences of Kings, have caused us to feel?

The like project of our enemies has yet openly manifested it self, when
endeavoring to make a fundamental law to pass, and an universal principle of
conscience, that we ought not to be suffered in France; they obtained in the
last Estates held at Paris, that the houses of the Clergy and Nobility should
expressly demand by their roles the execution of this oath of the King, as also
the reception and publication thereof by the Council of Trent. A Council
which has bin heretofore rejected publicly by those Estates which were held
when the most bloody and violent troubles have bin stirred up against us in
this kingdom. A Council which will not endure that Kings should reign, if
they permit life and liberty in their dominions to those who are called
heretics.

But the most apparent and most sensible proceeding of the project of our
malignant enemies, is principally furthered by the seditious sermons of the
preaching Jesuits and other Monks, who, some years since, by an unbridled
license and a manifest conspiracy, contrary to the Edicts and their
authority, did take upon them to calumniate us in their pulpits, and to make
us odious, preaching fury and sedition, nourishing the people in hatred of us,
instructing them to have us in ex^cration, and inspiring in their minds wars
and murders, do dispose and prepare them upon all occasions to annoy us. Hence
it is that we continually feel so many violatings of the Edicts of peace, so
many br^aches which are made in upon our safety, so many outrages against our
liberty. Notwithstanding we may yet boldly affirm, that our patience might
have overcome and as it were smothered the greatest part of these evils, or at
least we might have conceived some good hope that in the end some remedies
would have bin provided for us by the bounty of the King and the wisdom of
his most faithful Counselors, if the Jesuits were not exalted to the height
of power whereunto they are come. For it does evidently appear, that by all
sorts of violent means they have hitherto procured the rooting out of our
Religion, and the overthrow of this Monarchy. Principally since their power
has grown to the proportion of their evil will, and that they see all
obstacles which heretofore were opposed against their hardy enterprise to be
now broken down or to yield underneath their power: what other expectation is
reserved for us, but to feel the danger wherinto so long a time they have
proiected to plunge us? The miserable face of Christendom at this day almost
rent in pieces with wars and horrible confusions, does manifest sufficiently
to all the world what power their wicked and artificial inductions have to
stir up a war of Religion, almost universal. And who can presume that
France alone (which they have made so often to feel so mournful wounds by
their treacherous hands) being at this day in their power, and as it were under
their absolute government, should escape the common accident which they have
caused to fall upon those Estates where their credit and the diversity of
Religion have given them pretense and matter to cause trouble. There is no man
so unacquainted with their desseines, who has not heretofore foreseen or
foretold, that the misery and ruin of France drew near when the counsels of
Jesuits should prevail. And now when on the one side we see them in such high
esteem, and on the other side France brought to the misery of civil wars:
is any one so blind that he confesses it not, to be the work of their hand?
who would seek any other cause or beginning thereof? The fear of falling into
these evils, has caused us to hear many aduertisements from the wisest and
best affected French men, which so long time have withstood it with all their
power. The force of the Parliament of Paris has often opposed its authority
against their enterprises. And the remarkable documents which the judgment
thereof has spread throughout France soon after the death of the late King,
touching the danger and pernicious consequences to the Estate, if they attained
to greater credit, did guide the wisdom of the Kings Mother to restrain
their ouerboldnes in the Court and in the managing of affairs. And they could
never obtain their desires during her regencie, and the authority which she
had in the government of the Estate.

But as all things fit their ^urnes who seek occasion of What power the
Jesuits have now in France.
proceeding, having found in the government following a more favorable
support, as they are ready to vent the use of their ministry, helped by the
opportunity, and propt with that hand, they have scaled that pinnacle of
power, whereon we see them now mounted. Then we saw the boldest Jesuit of the
whole Society brought into the Louure, and with a rashness beyond example
plac^ himself within the house of the Kings sacred Majesty, that so at all
hours and moments he might have the governing of him in his own power. And
ever since it has appeared in the government of the State, what power the
Jesuits have gotten over the Kings affections. By two notable proofs soon
after this Jesuits introduction, it might easily be perceived, that
thenceforth nothing should be impossible to those of his Society, whatsoever
they would undertake for themselves or against us. The necessity of this
discourse requires that we represent them.

All France may well remember, that three days after this Jesuit had got the
Kings ear, they caused his Council to cancel the Act of Parliament, by the
which the opening of their College in Paris was interdicted them, until such
time as they had publikly renounced their principles of the ruin of States and
killing of Kings. And to show that all opposition to their violence should
thenceforth be vain, by an Order from the Council (by them set up in every
quarter of Paris in sign of triumph) they caused the Decrees of the
University (which had somewhat resisted them) to be annulled. With like
facility, and at the same time, they obtained an Act in favor of the Bishops
of Bearn the 25 of June 1617. for the restoring of all Ecclesiastical goods of
that Country, which by a solemn establishment decreed by the Sovereign and
Parliament, were ordained for the maintenance of our Pastors, College,
Garrisons, Officers, and other charges of the country. 15 years together the
Bishops had followed this suite with all possible instance. The late King
sundry times solicited from Rome in their behalf, knowing well the consequences
of such a change, bound also by his oath to innouate nothing (beside the
liberty of Exercise given to the Roman Catholics, with restitution of so much
Ecclesiastical goods as was needful for them, granted by Edict, and executed
in the year 1599) had always refused it them. The Queen mother of the King,
for like considerations, and because of the same oath taken by her Majesty now
reigning, for the maintenance of the ancient establishment (confirmed over and
above by twelve several Patents and Declarations obtained against the instance
that the Bishops made on the contrary) would not meddle with it. The project of
our enemies could not be better advanced then by a blow of this nature. For
they knew that the execution of this Restitution would draw after it (as, alas,
it is come to pass) the subversion of the country, and the utter ruin of our
Religion in the same, with hope that with the sparkles they should kindle
there, they might set all France on fire. Wherefore they drew the King by his
conscience, and by urging his oath, touching the rooting out of all Religion
contrary to his, to make that Decree by prerogative: which for this cause
(though given rashly, without the advice of the principal Officers of the
Crown and State in a business of such consequence, and against the course of
Law upon the only pursuit of the Bishops, without hearing the Deputies of the
country) would never be called in, notwithstanding all the remonstrances and
supplications that could since be presented, which have not been otherwise
answered, then that the authority and conscience of the King stood engaged in
it. Thence we gathered a woeful experience of the Kings inclination in those
affairs that most concern his State and our safety. Seeing that this Jesuit
held all his affections bound with respects of Religion, and that devotion unto
which his Majesty out of an inbred goodness is naturally given, was as a
spring unto his conscience, by the which he inclines his whole will to what
pleases him best. He has made himself the Counsel of the Kings conscience
(to use his own phrase): and in this Counsel can he propound other Maxims
then those of Rome? that may be all reduced to this head of the subversion of
this State and our ruin. He gives him for a law the determination of the
Council of Constance; That faith is not to be kept with heretics. That
whatsoever Edicts he has made or sworn, bind him not. That therefore he may,
nay that he ought to br^ake them. And the better to induce him, he reads him
no other Lecture then the oath of his Coronation. Propounds him no greater
merit to be rewarded with Paradise, then the rooting out of Heretics. Incites
him to seek that way a more glorious renown, then ever S. Lewis got by
warring with the Infidels. These and such like are the counsels of conscience
of this Jesuit. By the which his Majesty setting aside all other
considerations of his government, has let himself be carried away, and has
often said, It is better to lose his Estate then his soul. Taught (it seems)
to hold it for a Maxim, that there are occasions of saving his soul with the
loss of his kingdom. Now from the possession of the Kings will, enclosed thus
within the hand of the Jesuits, they have drawn to themselves by a necessary
consequence, the whole government of the State. Which they have compassed the
easier, by reason that all the sage and old Counselors and Officers that
served the late King, and France, in the establishment and maintenance of the
prosperity and greatness which it was raised to under his reign, being now
(as we see) put from all managing of affairs; they to whom the Kings abundant
savor gives all authority in the government, do willingly consent, that the
directing of the Counsel be committed to the Popes Sollicitors, Cardinals and
Bishops. And such as yet remain, or as are newly brought in, some nurtured
with the leven of old Spanish factions and affections, others won with the
aduantageous liberalities of the new, or with Romish honors (whereof the
Jesuits are the chief brokers) concur all together in one and the same
consent, touching the subversion of whatsoever the late King had established,
but chiefly for so much as concerns us. And these allurements have been of
such efficacy, that he from whom the best expected an vnvariable affection to
peace and good government, in hope of a Church-dignitie, has devoted himself
to be an instrument of the first breach, through which, persecution has rushed
in upon us. On the other side, the high and inferious Courts, and all
Magistrates of the kingdom are filled with such persons as are wholly subjected
to them, either by superstition, or by interest of fortune. The people have no
other affections then such as they suggest unto them by their sermons or by
their private confessions.

The power then of our enemies being such, we have How hardly we are dealt
withal
also, to our damage, felt the effects of it by a contrary usage to that that
we found under the late King. For since they have got this authority (we might
very well say, since their reign) there is no more favor nor access at Court
for those of our Religion. Many to whom their fathers services and their own
had thitherto preserved them the honor of some places near the King, have
been put by them. The greater part are constrained to rid themselves of them,
under this command, Change your Religion, or leave your Office. It is told them
that the King cannot with a good eye see the Huguenots about his person. In the
Privy Council our greatest opposites are our Judges; and they whom we
petition, are our sworn enemies. We are shut out of Offices in all Courts
higher or lower, against the freedom of the Statutes. If any one that is now
in place turns of our Religion, presently the Attourneys General or their
substitutes oppose his sitting. The Courts contest with him, and repulse him.
And how many are there in the Court of Parliament at Paris and elsewhere, who
are detained from coming to us by the oppression of this liberty? But when
should we have reckoned up all the kinds of injuries done unto us? The
seditious insolences daily committed to hinder the free exercise of our
Religion in those places where we are tolerated. The attempts and enterprises
against such places as have bin given us in custody for our security. The
secret practices to debauch the Governors of them, as it is newly confirmed in
the Governors of Clermont, Ledeue and Argenton. The refusal of providing for
the restitution of those places. The riots and outrages that those of our
Religion suffer in city and country by the fury of the people, provoked by
their Preachers. The rauages and firing of our Churches and Churchyards. The
inhumanities exercised in digging up our dead, and hindering their burial. The
violence offered sick-folkes consciences, even in the agony of death, thereby
to force them to renounce their Religion. The cruelty exercised on our poor
and sick, who are cast out of Hospitals. The unjust force practiced in robbing
us of our children to bring them up in the Roman Religion, against their
fathers intent and last will. To be short, all manner of wrongs and violences
are done us, against the Kings authority, and publik peace and tranquillity.

In all these mischiefs we have no other recourse then to our complaints,
which we continually direct to the Magistrates, either of the Provinces or of
the high Courts. But there, alas, in stead of remedies we find poison. For not
only they send us back, and do us no right; but the injustice wherewith they
aggrauate the former injury, augments their boldness that did us the wrong,
encouraged by their impunitie, and by the law that they gather from the Judges
themselves.

Our last refuge is to the Kings justice and Officers of State, whither (forced
by the hard usage we find every Our proceeding by complaint, which now is
imputed unto us as a crime.
where) we fly as to our sanctuary: and there our enemies oppose our access
with their utmost violence. They perceive that the Kings protection would
defend us against all their injuries. They know that our course by complaints,
which nature opens unto every one, would shroud us under the covert of his
justice, where both our rest and the public tranquillity should be preserved.
And therefore we find their conspiracy to be the more malicious. For not
only they stop his Majesty's ear, and bar us from all passage thereunto;
but when we offer to approach it by our most humble petitions and requests,
they lay for us by a more then devilish subriltie, the snare of their
calumny, to make us fall into the blame of a pretended disobedience. They
turn our complaints into crimes: they term us seditious and rebels. This is
the accusation for the which they pursue us criminally. This is the accusation,
for the which they now persecute us. We here call heaven and earth to witness
between our enemies and us, desiring that the procedure of our complaints to
his Majesty, which we will here truly and fully lay open, being known to all,
men may judge of our innocence, and of the calumny of their accusation; and
finally of the unjust war and persecution which our adversaries under this
pretext have raised against us.

For the maintaining of the Edict of peace and reparation of the breaches
thereof, the late King did establish according to his equity an order among
us, by the which we might from time to time with his permission and grant
assemble our selves by Deputies out of all the Provinces, to tender him our
complaints of all such grieuances as might be done us, and receive from his
bounty reasonable answers, and such as should be necessary for the keeping of
his Edicts. According to this order, feeling a more urgent necessity then
ever, we addressed our selves unto his Majesty by our Deputies general in the
year 1619, and it pleased his Majesty to grant us, according to our most
humble request, a Brief, by the which we were permitted to assemble ourselves
in the City of Loudun the 25 of September. The Assembly of Loudun,
Where being met together out of all the Provinces of the kingdom and
Sovereignty of Bearn, our bills of complaints being drawn, we presented them
in all humility to his Majesty, beseeching him that by a favorable answer to
the principal articles and most important grieuances they might carry back
into all the Provinces, by the testimonials of his good will toward our
protection, some assurance to his subjects of the Religion, against so many
threats and fears as do apparently inuiron them. There would never be an end,
if we should here display the several heads of all those complaints. We will
only touch some of them, to show their importance, and the necessity of
obtaining speedy justice upon them.

We complain that Leytoure a place of surety has bin wrested out of our
hands. That two of our Religion provided of offices of Counselors in the
Court of Parliament of Paris, could not obtain their admission in three whole
years pursuit. That the exercise of our Religion being ba(...)shed Clermont
of Lodeue a place of surety, upon the reestablishing of the same sued by us,
the execution of an order from the Kings Counsel was opposed vi and armis.
That our Churches have been burned or demolished at Bourg in Bresse, at Moulins
in Bourbonnois, and at Lauall near Guise. That at Beaux in Province Monsieur
de Vere Captain of the Castle, after many threats and outrages, to prohibit
and hinder those of the Religion from their exercise, did at last drive them
out violently by force of arms the eight of February 1620. That justice could
not be obtained for the excessive outrages done to some of the Religion at
Baugenci, and for ringing the Allarum bell against them; and that the Offenders
that threw two men out of a garret, and ran one of them through with a sword,
have bin heard as witnesses to the informations made by the Lieutenant General
in the jurisdiction of Orleans; and that though the cause was referred to the
Parliament of Paris, yet notwithstanding the Attorney General in the same
has let the suite fall. That our Pastors have bin violently expelled the
Cities of Bourges and la Chasteigneraye. That diverse persons professing our
Religion at Chaalons upon Saonne, have bin chased and banished thence, as also
out of the Duchy of Barrois. That the places granted us for the exercise of
our Religion near the Cities of Lions, Dijon and Langres, were barred us. That
in those places where the inhabitants have actually enjoyed the said exercise
ever since the years 1596. 1597. and therefore have full liberty by the Edict,
are there molested, as at la Chasteigneraye, at la Chastre, at S. Cyprian, la
Herle, Velus, Maussac, Langon, Bourg de Conde in Normandy, at Agiene in
Viuarets, at S. Marcelin in Forest, at la Chaulme in Xaintogne by formal
opposition of the Officers, at Florence Picusque, at Montfort and Puget by the
Consuls, near the Town of Perigueux, at Montignac Charente by order from the
Seneschal of Angoumois upon forfeiture of a thousand franks. That the education
of children has bin taken away from their fathers of our Religion, to instruct
them in a contrary, as from the Master of Accounts at Paris, and by order of
the Court of Parliament at Roane in the cause of one Couurechef. That many
children of the Religion, have bin stolen away by Monks. As at Ambrun the son
of a citizen, at Millaud the son of Monsieur Valette, at Leytoure a boy of
ten years old, named Francis Aram, by the Jesuit Regour the fourth of January
1620. That our graves have bin inhumanely violated, or the burials hindered in
diverse places, as at Aix in Province, at Gordes, at Mirabeau, at Ongle, at
Xaintes, at S. Georges of Oleron, and in many places of Guienne and other parts
with cruelty and barbarism. That our poor sick have bin cast out of
Hospitals, or their consciences forced, as during the last contagion at Paris,
in the Hospital of Saint Jews, where many were violented, and all access
denied our Ministers and Elders to comfort them. That the Parliaments, to the
prejudice of the Courts established, have attributed to themselves the
knowledge of our causes, as the Parliament of Bourdeaux diverse times, and
particularly in the business of the inhabitants of Mas d'Agenois, who thereby
have suffered exceeding great vexations, whereof many of them are dead in
prison. But chiefly in criminal causes, as the Parliament of Thoulouse, which
having condemned John de Nasses Register of Montauban to make honorable amends,
would not give way unto an Order from the Council for the referring of it to
the Court of Castres. And again, the Parliament of Bourdeaux in the cause of
the inhabitants of Tartas, who in the surprise of the Castle having bin cruelly
used, outraged and expelled, have bin pursued and ill handled in the said
Parliament, which upon the recrimination of the mutinous and seditious retained
the knowledge of the cause to the prejudice of the Court of Nerac. In the
Parliament of Aix, many of ours have bin detained prisoners many years, though
their causes were referred to the Court of Grenoble, and there retained
according to the Edict. We desired moreover that the alteration made in the
Cities of Montault, Vareilles, Tarasson, Montgaillard in the County of Foix,
(where nothing should be innouated, according to the Brief of 1598.) might be
repaired. That it would please the King to grant us the Brief for the custody
of places of surety, with the delivery of the government of the places in
Dauphine. To call in the Decree for the restoring of the Ecclesiastical goods
of Bearn. That the Town of Priuas might be put again into the hands of the
inhabitants, and justice done them of the riots, violences, and outrages
committed against them. Besides an infinite number of other grieuances public
and private, too long to rehearse. In all the which we found our enemies
strength so great, that all justice has bin denied us therein, and all the
answer we could get was an absolute command to break up our Assembly.

But when as the importunity of the mischief and the necessity of remedy
forced us to have often recourse unto his Majesty. Then our Adversaries began
to style our suite and humble petition reiterated, by the name of rebellion,
that so they might not only take from us all hope of justice, but also make us
odious. And to open a door for war and persecution, they obtained a
commination of crime to be proclaimed against us (as if it were a crime to
complain) threatening aloud our perseverance with the Kings sword, and causing
bursall Edicts to be extraordinarily confirmed in Courts of Parliament for
preparatiues for war against us. The King nevertheless out of his natural
goodness and great inclination to justice, Promises made at Loudun, with
permission to meet again within six months in case of ^^performance.
putting by the violence of our enemies, promised us by the Prince his
Highness and Monsieur de Luynes now Constable, who gave their word to the
Lords Lesdiguieres and Chastillon for our better assurance, that within six
months after the day of our separation, the city of Leytoure should be
restored unto us, and the Counselors received into the Parliament of Paris.
The Brief for the custody of places of suretic, and the government of those
of Dauphine should be delivered up unto us. And the overplus of our complaints
favorably answered, and the answers truly executed; and that within seven
months after the day of our separation, the Deputies of Bearn should have
audience upon that that they had to show unto his Majesty. And in case these
promises were not performed within the time, it should be lawful for us to
meet again, to re-demand justice of his Majesty upon our grieuances. Now
because that upon the condition of these promises, upon the assurance with the
which they were set forth unto us, and upon the true intent promised in the
performance of the same, depends the maine justification of our procedure
following, for the which we are unjustly declared faulty, and dealt withal by
the rigor of arms; let all the world see here upon what ground we build our
sincerity and plain meaning, and what right we had to reassemble our selves.
For confirmation of the promise made us to this purpose, we were showed that it
was the very first thing the King on his word promised to his subjects of the
Religion, since he came to the Crown. The Lord Constable, added that his
coming in between, would be worth Briefes unto us, and happily more. The King
himself out of his own mouth confirmed it since at Fontainebleau to the
Deputies that certified the King of our separation, in presence of the Lord
Duke de Lesdiguieres, who had assured us as much before. Had it now bin lawful
for us to desire or imagine any better license then the Kings sacred word, the
first that ever he gave us? Paper and ink can add no weight nor authority to
a Kings word. And certainly we should have held our selves unworthy of our
Kings favor, and injurious to his authority, if we had required greater
assurance for this permission then his own word. Thus our Assembly broke up
the 13 of April, 1620. after an Act drawn among us of our obedience,
containing all conditions and promises aforesaid, with order given to those of
Rochell for the calling of another Congregation, if need should be, in such a
place as they should think most convenient. The Deputies, after they had
withdrawn themselves, and given account in the Provinces, were continued, or
others joined to them, to meet together again, in case of vnperformance of
things granted according to the condition of the promises. This was done in all
the Provinces openly, to his Majesty's knowledge and the Lords of his Council.
It was not misliked. The King made no declaration to the contrary. And yet this
is most certain, that if there were any enterprise or attempt against the Kings
authority, it was the nomination of the Deputies. But as that was acknowledged
lawful by permitting it, because of the condition: so also our Deputies
General suing the performance of things promised, did nor stick to add
always this remonstrance to the Lords of the Council; Do us justice, and save
us the labor of another meeting. The Prince his Highness being diverse times
present in Parliament to confirm the Kings command for the admission of the
Counselors, showed unto them the permission we had to reassemble our selves,
which they themselves occasioned by their refusal.

Now the prefixed time of six months for the performance of promises expiring,
the 13. of October, without The execution of the order of restitution in Bearn
anticipated, and an alteration made in the country of the surety and liberty
in Religion.
any effect, the King being gone into Guyenne in September, was solicited by
our enemies to enjoin those of Bearn to execute the order of Restitution, and
to confirm it in the Parliament of Pau. The term agreed upon for their
remonstrances, which his Majesty promised to hear from the mouth of their
Deputies, extended to the 13. of November: which caused the Parliament of Pau.
upon the Kings command, to order that the Deputies should make their
remonstrances to his Majesty, within the time agreed upon (confirmed again by
a letter dated the 21 of September from his Majesty to the said Parliament)
otherwise the time being expired, the order of Restitution should be confirmed.
His Majesty not contented with this Decree, before the remonstrances of those
of the country were heard, was put on by our enemies to go himself thither.
And although the Parliament by a second Decree of confirmation, had prevented
his Majesty's coming; yet through the induction of our enemies, he entered into
the country with his army.

We would here willingly conceal the disloyalty of our enemies, and the
cruelties there practiced by their inducements, if their calumnious accusations
and the bitter anguish of our miseries did not now constrain us to open our
mouths for our own justification, and to call on vengeance before God and
men. We will not speak of the alteration made in the country, by the uniting
of it to the Crown of France, though it be evident it was not so much for any
advantage to France, as to make way for the alteration of our Religion. We will
only touch in few words so much as has bin done directly for the ruin of the
Gospel. The King then being at Nauarenx, and purposing to keep his promise
with Monsieur de Sales, made first at Bourdeaux, and since confirmed in the
country, that he would still maintain him in the government of the City, in
consideration of his long services, and the ready obedience he showed by all
manner of submission unto his Majesty: yet for all this, urged by our enemies
to take the government from him and give it to a Papist, but withheld by the
religion of his promises, the Jesuit that is still at his elbow interposing
his counsel of conscience (or rather without conscience) persuaded his
Majesty that it was lawful for him to break his promise, by an equivocation,
truly deserving the indignation of God and men. Your promise (says he) Sir, is
either of State or conscience. Of conscience (says he) it cannot be, for it is
contrary to the good of the Church. Seeing then it is of State, your Majesty
ought to believe your Counselors, who show you, that for the good of your
service, it is necessary that this place be no longer in the power of an
Huguenot. Thus the King led by the Master of his conscience, who will be a
surety for him to God for all he shall do by his counsel, commanded Monsieur
de Sales forthwith to resign his government to Monsieur de Poyane sworn
enemy to those of our Religion. And then the Towne-garison being first
removed, and the inhabitant disarmed, there were brought in four hundred
soldiers Papists under Monsieur de Poyanes command. This done, to take away
all that might yet any ways secure those of the Religion, the six Captains of
the Parsans were cassiered, and the Towns of Sauueterre, Orthes, Oleron and
Nai filled with Papist-garisons. The King being come the second time to Pau,
gave the Bishops the presidencie in the Assembly of Estates there called, that
so they might ouersway the whole country. And God grant he try not the same
experiment of their perfidie that chased his father thence in his infancy; and
that the neighbour-enemies practices find not in them a ready way into France
through that door where our fidelity has always been a bulwark. Now that
no part of the security and liberty of our Religion might remain vnviolated,
the Papists were made masters of all our Churches, notwithstanding the
condition of the restitution it self, bearing this reservation, that the
Churches should remain ours till such time as others were provided us. These
alterations made out of hate to our Religion, and to banish it the country, so
augmented their boldness who are continually taught and incited to mischief
us, that whereas respect of the Kings presence should have restrained them, yet
their licentiousness so ouerflowed, that wheresoever they came, our Churches
could not be saved from infinite rauages and scandals, so far, that even within
the City of Pau (the King himself being there) after they had broken down
the pulpit and seats of the Church, they burned publikly the Bible and New
Testament. The Ministers were in diverse places outraged, and diverse persons
constrained against, their consciences to kneel to Processions. The overplus
of the insolences, violences and riots that this poor Country endured, was
innumerable, and such as the most savage enemies could exercise in the midst of
a conquest. Hereupon for triumph Arnoux makes a book, titled, The King in
Bearn; where, not able to contain himself for joy to see his desseignes so
forward, he plainly shows how far he purposes they shall entend, and what we
must expect will be the sequel of them. The King (by his reckoning) is not to
surcease till he has quite extinguished the Religion that he so much
abhors: and highly extolling him for this commencement and pursuit of the
dessigne, above the late King his father; leaves to be understood that the
death of that good King having bin hastened for refusing to do as much; his
Majesty is to look for more favorable usage at their hands so long as he
will continue.

Bearn brought to this pitiful estate, the King upon his return left part of
his army in Guyenne, and scattered the rest in Poictou, filling all our
Churches with terror: And thenceforth no talk but of the ruin of all
Huguenots. All the discourse at Court is of the siege of Rochell. They say, it
is not a three months matter; they stay but for weather. In the mean while
all the promises made at Loudun being neglected, the time past, and nothing
performed, (save the delivery of the Brief for the keeping of places)
notwithstanding the earnest pursuit of our Deputies General all this while;
the congregation of Deputies nominated by the Provinces (and bound to meet to
present their requests to his Majesty upon the vnperformance of promises) as
called at Rochell against the 25 of November. We will not omit that after the
alterations made in Bearn, the Town of Leytoure was restored to a Gentleman of
the Religion; but let all in different persons judge, whether a Papist garrison
being left-there, and, against the order of the former government of the Town,
a Lieutenant established, that never had the approbation of the Synod of the
Province, according to the intent of his Majesty's Brief for the keeping of
places of safety, this be the square dealing that was promised us. Again, we
leave it to be judged, whether after that the safety of a whole country has
bin wrest^d from us, this maine promise executed after such a fashion, and all
the rest neglected and remaining unperformed; our right of complaining of so
manifest an abuse, and of these new and so intolerable grieuances, does cease,
whether the necessity of it be diminished, and whether the liberty of access
should be interdicted us. Such then being the weight of the reasons why we
should re-assemble our selves, and withal fly to the Kings justice, having
leave so to do; yet nevertheless we were scarce all met in this place, when
as a declaration came forth, that made us malefactors, denouncing wrath and
judgment of cond^mnation against the assemblers and assembled. But
notwithstanding forasmuch as we find that our grieuances are so urgent; that
our consciences summon us to fulfill the charge imposed upon us by our Churches;
and that they witness unto us in sincerity that we proceed according unto
justice. We endeavor to present unto the King our most humble remonstraces, to
purge us of the false accusations and crimes laid upon us by our adversaries,
who abuse the authority of his name to break his word with us. To show unto
his Majesty the urgent necessity of our just complaints: To beseech him in
all humility that it would please him to deliver our Churches from so many
alarums and frights as do now enuiron them on all sides. In a word, that he
would show himself our Protector against so violent an opposition as is
generally practiced against us over all his kingdom, to the prejudice of the
authority of his Edicts, and against the open threats of our ruin, which by
the example of the calamities of Bearn are made more fearful. But we find
that our enemies had stopped his Majesty's ears against all our requests, which
are rejected; neither will any thing be received or heard on our side. And at
the same time we are criminally arraigned in Parliaments and other Courts of
justice. This Town and all of us are threatened with war, as rebels and
seditious persons. Whereupon judging by experience of what is past, and by our
enemies method, which to our cost we have but too well learned and
experimented, that this accusation and these, threats were to authorize a
refusal and demall of justice, and to make us lose all hope of ever obtaining
any thing hereafter in our most just and necessary complaints; we insist at
several times on the justification of our innocence, and continue to beseech
his Majesty, and to lay down our most humble petitions at his feet. But as
all access is interdicted us, and that to bring our proceedings into hatred
even with those of our own side, and to save division in our Churches, our
enemies caused it to be told our Deputies General and diverse others among us,
that the King, though resolved to hear nothing from us, would notwithstanding
deal favorably with his subjects of the Religion, and do them justice. That
he was willing to hear our complaints by the Deputies General, and in the
name of the Churches. To try what would be the effect of these words, we
cease all pursuit in our own name, are silent, and put it over wholly to our
Deputies General, to follow it in their own name and in the name of the
Churches. And certainly we may boldly add, that if the estate of our
calamities increasing daily, and threatening worse, had not augmented our
apprehension and just mistrust, overcome with so many vexations, repulses,
threats, and with despair of any success, we could desire nothing more then
to retire our selves; and it may be our Churches would have pardoned us. But at
the same time the fraud of our enemies did further discover it self, and the
persecution proiected against us, breaking out in diverse places, has
manifested their dessignes by so many perfidies and outrages, that being forced
for justification of our innocence and lawful defense against the war they
make upon us, here to lay open their proceedings before the eyes of all the
world, we would be scrupulous for the honor of France to publish deeds so
odious, if withal it were not known that the authors of them are France's
greatest enemies, and have conspired her ruin and ours.

First of all, under color of these fair promises, that the the King would
keep his Edicts made in favor of his subjects of the Religion, and would
satisfy their complaints of vnperformance of promises, my Lord Duke de
Lesdiguieres is drawn to the Court, by persuading him that his mediation would
be a great furtherance unto the business, and all the Lords and persons of
greatest note among us are entertained with the same hopes. In the mean while
Monsieur de Montmorenci is up in arms against us in Languedoc, and after many
acts of hostility, sets upon Villeneufue de Berg a Town of ours in Viuarez.
And because it was easy to be foreseen that this violence would me^te with
opposition, Monsieur de Reaux Lieutenant of the Kings Guard is sent from Court
with apparent command to difarme all such as he should find armed. Monsieur de
Chastillon (whose prudence and affection to the Kings service and countries
peace had hitherto withheld the peoples impatience, desirous to repulse the
violence offered them) being informed of the said Sieur de Reaux his charge by
a yeoman of the Guard whom he had sent unto him, continued to stay our peoples
commotion: and as he expects more particular news from the said Sieur de
Reaux, and of Monsieur de Montmorencies obedience to the command he brought.
Villeneufne de Berg having withstood two scaladoes and diverse assaults at the
gate, yielding presently at the Kings name to the said Sieur de Reaux, and
submitting it self unto his protection and keeping, Monsieur de Montmorenci
coming in, establishes there a garrison, which at the same instant commits
all kind of riots and outrages. Hereupon our men being induced to aim
themselue for fear of the like frauds, and for the necessity of their own
defense. Monsieur de Reaux coming to Monsieur de Chastillon, and assuring him
that Villeneufue de Berg should be restored, and under hope that according to
the articles agreed upon between them, all things should be reestablished in
peace, having obtained that he should unarm; whiles he was truly doing so,
Monsieur de Montmorenci in stead of performing covenants, lodges five or six
companies in Villeneufue de Berg, and proclaims with a drum Monsieur de Perant
Governor thereof; and more over having dispatched diverse new commissions, dated
the morrow after Sieur de Reaux his ariuall there, he assiegeth Vals another
place of ours in Viuarets, where even the said Sieur de Reaux himself, whiles
Monsieur de Chastillon rested upon his word, that Monsieur de Montmorenci
should perform covenants, assisted in person, and was spectator of the
battery. This little and weak place, without any defense but the inhabitants,
having endured a hundred cannon shot, yielding upon honorable composition,
directly contrary to the capitulation all manner of cruelties, violences and
barbarismes have bin there practiced upon an infinite company of poor innocent
persons cruelly murdered or ravished. And again, contrary to the said
articles the like has bin done at Valons a place near unto the other. These
frauds and breaches of counterfeit contracts, do manifest unto the world that
the Kings word and apparent command, have bin used but as a snare for our
plain meaning, and under a secret approbation of all that Monsieur de
Montmorenci should do to the contrary, to make us lose those places.

Moreover at the same time Monsieur de Poyane having fortified himself in Bearn
to beat out Monsieur de la Force, Monsieur de la Saladie is sent from the King
to Monsieur de la Force to command him to dismiss those troops that he kept
by him for his own safety and to maintain the Kings authority in his charge
of Governor of the country against the violent enterprises of the said Sieur
de Poyane. But the said Sieur de la Saladie in stead of carrying back Monsieur
de la Forces answer to the King, as he seemed, went into Guyenne to Messieurs
d'Espernon, de Vignoles, and diverse others to arm, so that in an instant all
Guyenne was filled with troops, besides those that were left there before.

On the other side, at the same instant the troops left in Poictou drew near
unto this City and S. John d'Angely. And by order from the Council all Courts
of Audit for Receipts were removed from all our places of safety, where they
were established; a palpable argument that though the city of Rochell only
was threatened, yet all the rest were aimed at, by a general dessigne of war
against us ready to be put in execution; this remouall being to no other end,
then to take from us the means of helping our selves with those profits in our
own defense when the persecution should come, which by consequent they
intended against us.

Now as by these new alterations of our peace by these menaces, by the open
oppression and persecution in so many places, we did foresee well enough the
storm yt hung over our heads and ready to fall, knowing besides yt our enemies
puffed up with their success in the rauage and desolation of Bearn, did stay for
nothing but a fit season to continue our ruin by an open war; which was too
easy to be learnd by their open talk, upon the return from Bearn, of the
siege of Rochell, of the means and facility of taking it. By the discourse
which the King was hourly entertained with of the ruin of Huguenots: by the
calumnies laid upon us for a pretext; by the threats that followed; and by the
preparations visibly made for that purpose. Nevertheless because there was
some speech of the Kings good will toward his subjects of the Religion, and
the authority of his Edicts, our Deputies General (to whose charge the whole
pursuit was referred) presented unto his Majesty a bill of complaints,
requesting satisfaction for some of the most important grieuances, with a
speedier execution for the peace and safety of our Churches.

But after many instances and delays, after diverse solicitations and
supplications of all the chiefest among us, even of the Lord Duke de
Lesdiguieres himself present at Court, our Deputies general could never
obtain any answer. Only Monsieur de Fabas one of them, and a Gentleman that
came unto us from the Lord Duke de Lesdiguieres, having given us to understand
according to a writing of the said Lord de Lesdiguieres under his own hand.
That for all amends after so many complaints, my Lord Duke de Lesdiguieres did
persuade himself (for the King, howsoever our Churches were given to hope that
he would maintain his Edicts, did not here so much as pass his word, neither
by mouth, nor by any Officer of State) that if we would first separate our
selves, we should obtain the retraite of troops from all places where we did
mistrust them. That the government of the places in Dauphine should be searched
and delivered us in six months if it could be found. That order should be
taken for the payment of such sums of money as have bin promised them of Bearn
in lieu of their Ecclesiastical revenues. That Monsieur de la Force and his
sons should still hold their places. And moreover, that he was promised
assuredly that nothing should be attempted during the time that should be
requisite for the return of our resolutions. But as we were about them, we
were informed by Monsieur de Chalas the other of our Deputies general, that
the next day after, contrary to the said promises, our enemies had wrought the
King to an absolute and open resolution of making war against us. That order
was given for the leuying of an army of one and forty thousand foot and six
thousand horse. And that the government of Bearn was taken from Monsieur de la
Force, and given to Monsieur the Marshall de Themines, and the office of
Captain of the Guard, which his son Monsieur be Marquis de la Force had, was
given to the Marquis de Mauny, and that Monsieur de Manpauillan another of his
sons was commanded to leave the Court.

At the same time, as our enemies hastened our persecution by all kind of
means, as, seditious sermons, instructing of confessions d^famatory libels,
calumnies and impostures against our fidelity, impression of the Kingsha^e to
our Religion, and their declarations of war published against us, which have
wrought these effects. It happened in the city of Tours the 19 of April last,
that one Martin le Noir, (not long before converted to our Religion, for the
which he suffered many injuries and reproaches, so far, that the people having
made an effigy of straw, and sometimes calling it by his name, sometimes by
the name of Martin Luther, did burn it publikly, and no justice could ever be
obtained for so outrageous an insolence) died: and as he was carried to his
grave, the people made a head, and after they had abused his corpse and those
that accompanied it, after they had committed all sorts of indignities and in
humanities in the digging up of his grave, seeking to do worse, stirred a more
violent sedition. So that having broken down and razed a house near the
Churchyard, they run to the Church, being half a mile thence, they fire it,
they enter the Sextons house, and they pill and ransacke it; and being
increased to the number of a fearful multitude, they continue three whole
days together in firing and pulling down our Church, without the Magistrates
interposition, and coming too late he was not able to repress so raging a
violence. From thence the example of this sedition passes presently unto the
Town of Poictiers, where the people transported with like fury, have razed to
the very ground the walls of the Churchyard where they of the Religion bury
their dead, broke and battered all the sepulchers, and had committed the like
violence upon the Church, if the more careful Magistrate had not stopped their
course.

Now the order of our enemies counsels and actions hitherto, and chiefly these
tragical and horrid vprores, the great preparatiues for war, the unjust and
rigorous dealing with Monsieur de la Force and his sons, contrary to the late
assurance, with the croupes ready under Monsieur d'Espernons command for the
invasion of Bearn, witnessed and showed sufficiently, that he hour of a
general persecution was come, and that the dessigne of our ruin so long a
hatching now appeared. Wherefore our enemies, that their perfidies might play
their part and perform their utmost, promise that the King will see justice
done upon the sedition of Tours; and to take away all suspicion elsewhere, or
to lull asleep the more confident sort, they cause a declaration to be
confirmed in all Courts of Parliament the 27 of April, showing that though the
King would chastise some of his subjects of the Religion (such as are termed
rebels and seditious) yet he meant and promised to keep his Edicts with the
rest as long as they should remain in their obedience, and that he would
maintain and preserve their liberty and safety according to the contents of
the Edicts. And finally they assure Monsieur de la Force, that if he would
leave Bearn, he should no sooner send Monsieur d'Espernon word of it, but he
should presently withdraw himself. Now we will show what was the effect of
these promises. We will begin with the last, which was first violated. After
Monsieur de la Force had with drawn himself, and had certified Monsieur
d'Espernon of his disarming and retrait by the Baron d'Arros, presently
Monsieur d'Espernon entered the country with his army, and seized all towns
and places where they of our Religion were most in number, filled them with
strong garrisons, razed the Castle of Montanay, and brought the people to such a
lamentable estate, that most of them, yea the chiefest have bin forced to fly
to quit their goods and country; diverse unarmed and naked persons were
murdered, and the rest remain at this present restrained under a miserable
servitude, suffering all sorts of injuries and cruelties. On the other side,
the King setting forward for the execution of the menaces published against
this City, after he had spread abroad his assurances, that he went not against
his subjects of the Religion in general, and made particular promises to the
Governors of some of our places of safety, that coming to them he would
innouate nothing, passing by Tours, where the sedition being renewed and grown
stronger, and the Commissarie sent to execute justice, driven out of the Town,
the prisoners fetched out of prison by violence, the houses of those of our
Religion (who frighted with the first tumult had withdrawn themselves) pild
and ransackt, only the Kings reverence violated, has with much ado bin
expiated by the execution of five poor beggarly rogues; (and that yet to
entertain their credulity whom our enemies would feed with hope that the
keeping of Edicts should be continued.) His Majesty came to Saumur, where
Monsieur du Plessis relying upon the express promises made him, that nothing
should be altered in the government, and upon the truth of the Declaration
published three weeks before, having opened the gates of the City and Castle
to the King, experimented to our great damage the frauds and perfidies of our
enemies, who induced the King to take away the government from him, and to put
a garrison of four hundred soldiers of his Guard in the Castle, and another in
the Fauxbourg' of the green Cross, and by this means to make us lose this
place of safety. With what horror and indignation can all France see the
enemies of her peace and the Kings service abuse thus perfidiously his name and
word to commit these so detestable disloyalties? It is but ten months ago that
by his Majesty's express grant, the keeping of places of safety was continued
unto us for four years. Of all others, the city of Saumur was one of the
most important for our safety. It had bin in our custody ever since the late
King being King of Navarre, requested by Henry the third, came accompanied
with those of our Religion to deliver him from the captivity and tyranny of
the leagne. That Town was given him for his passage; and it remained
thenceforth in our keeping, as a token of our good services and fidelity to
this Crown. This place seated on the Loire was to serve us, in the
persecutions and confusions which the enemies of this Estate have now stirred
up, for a retrait or commodious passage for so many poor distressed flocks, to
save themselves from the future fury of fire and sword. This Town during the
peace of these later years, was a nursery of the Church, and was the seat of
a flourishing University. For these causes our enemies cruelty has caused
the King to begin this war, in the which they carry him headlong against us,
by this terrible blow, so great, that to give it us with greater facility, all
the precedent calumnies, all the pretexts of disobedience and rebellion, all
the particular declarations against our Assembly and this City, all fraudulent
declarations and promises made in favor of such as should remain in their
obedience to the King have bin set on foot. For can it be said, that Monsieur
du Plessis, whose long and faithful services done to the late King and his
Majesty now reigning, are known to all men, should have committed any act of
disobedience or rebellion? Nay rather did he not pass all measure of
confidence in the disloyalty of our enemies, out of his respect to the Kings
bare name? And hoping to avoid the storm that hung apparently over our heads,
did he not himself publish the benefit of that deceitful declaration; and to
make the first trial of it, opened with such confidence the gates of the Town
and Castle to the King? Wherefore the design being thus unmasked, our enemies
were now pleased to manifest that it was intended against all in general. For
as soon as the King was at Saumur, news came how that all the Protestants
throughout all the principal cities of Normandy were disarmed. Were they also
traitors? Or have they since the Declaration committed any act of rebellion or
disobedience? Besides all this, whiles the King was yet at Saumur, Monsieur
Arnaut comes to S. John d'Angely on Saturday the 15 of this month, to command
the Lord Duke de Rohan and Monsieur de Soubize to come to the King, who desired
their advice for the taking up of the present affairs. This was done to two
ends: first, that under hope of justice, the great ones and common people of
our Religion might be withheld as they have bin hitherto, whiles the
preparatiues for war against us were every where a hastening. Secondly and
chiefly, that there might be the less suspicion of the Kings troops led by
Monsieur d' Auriac, who the very next day entering the suburbs of S. John with
three thousand and five hundred men, assaulted the town and gates, and would
have gone further, and taken it, if he had not found resistance. Was this Town
also guilty of treason? Could the Town be guilty, and not the Lords of it?
And yet the King writes to Monsieur the Duke de Rohan, as to his faithful and
affectionate servant and his Lieutenant Governor in the Province of Poictou,
which surely he would not do to a rebel and traitor. What other crime then
has this Town committed, to be thus assailed and threatened with a siege, and
forced to expect before her walls the Kings cannon and army, which makes
toward it with all diligence and speed? What crime also may the Town of
Iargeau (another place of safety) have committed, which was at the same time
besieged, other then our enemies oath to have no mercy? then the hate of our
Religion, whose ruin they have conspired?

This is that which we lay down before the eyes of all our Countrymen, and not
of them alone, but of all Christians, whom we here appeal unto to judge of our
innocence, and of the violent persecution that we unjustly suffer. And though
this true narration of our enemies proceedings against us, and of ours toward
our King, witnesses sufficiently the calumny of their accusation, by the
which they proclaim us rebels; yet that we may not leave any shadow that might
alienate from us the favor of good men's equitable judgments, their compassion
of our miseries, and their help in our just and necessary defense: we can
easily show that as in us there is neither appearance nor suspicion of the
crime of rebellion which they lay unto our charge. God forbid that any one
should think that the complaints which violence and oppression does extort
from us, do any way concern our King, in whom we acknowledge and reverence
with our hearts the image of God here on earth. But if laying upon such as
abuse his affections and conscience, the injustice of the which we complain,
we would name who, and tell what they are that accuse us, all France that
groans oppressed with the intolerable burden of their tyranny, would
witness for us that we should not speak it by way of recrimination nor
calumny. But it shall suffice our innocence, that we only purge our selves
of the accusation. They accuse us of rebellion and disobedience, and say that
we kick against the Kings authority. Thanks be to God, the Religion that we
profess, and which we have from time to time declared by a solemn confession
presented to our Kings in witness of the purity of our service to God, and
the sincerity of our obedience to them, has long since acquitted us of that
imputation. We acknowledge no power on earth above our Kings. We swear not to
any other. We detest all doctrine that teaches, that either directly or
indirectly we may be freed from the allegiance we have sworn unto him. The
holy profession of these principles, has ever been the square and rule of all
our fathers and our actions. When was it found that any of us did bathe an
execrable knife in the blood of our Kings? or join swords with the great
enemy to spill our countries intrailes? Or rather after so many wounds as
France has heretofore received from him, did not God use our fathers arms to
raise her even from the grave? And now that the same conspiracy is newly
revived, that they who have sworn mortal hatred to our Religion, and with the
like fury have vowed the ruin and destruction of all the Estates of
Christendom, and particularly of this Monarchy, governing at their pleasure
the Kings heart and will by their suggestions to his conscience, do induce him
to hazard his State to undo us: we dare say, that time and experience will yet
make him acknowledge that he has not in all his kingdom a surer prop for his
Crown then our fidelity. And certainly there can be nothing more plain to
all such as look upon us, then that the interest of our conservation is
unseparably nailed to the peace and tranquillity of this kingdom, and
strength of our Prince's authority. It is undoubtedly true, that according to
the humane means that God uses for the advancement of his work, the
conservation and growth of our Religion in this country, do wholly depend on the
liberty and safety of the Edicts under which we live; the maintaining of
these Edicts, on the Kings absolute authority. Witness the happy reign of
Henry the Great, whom as God had raised in absolute power and authority
higher then any other of the Kings of Christendom, so also under that
prosperity and greatness of this Monarchy, our Churches were seen to
flourish and replant themselves, and the Gospel to fructify with so great
success, that our enemies bursting for spite, never left till they had
perfidiously deprived France of this so absolute King. And though now for a
pretext to invade us and stir up war against our Religion, they have
accused us of disobedience; have we done any thing else then complain of the
infringing of the Kings authority and Edicts, and demand redress? And is
there in this any shadow of rebellion against our Prince? We assembled our
selves to demand justice of him. Had we not need and right to do so? We have
already justified it by the estate of our calamities, and the condition of the
promises made us. Have we passed the limits of complaint? If being denied, we
often returned, and diverse times endeavored to lay down our most humble
petitions at our Kings feet; alas! who can distaste it, or blame us, when we
behave our selves toward our King. Gods image upon earth, even as God him
self has commanded us? And because many Deputies out of all the Provinces,
desirous to carry back from the Kings bounty and grace the effect of his good
will toward us, continued together; is it not a malignant and injurious
pettifoggerie, that to authorize a denial of justice, we should be accused of
shadowing the Kings authority? And for a special president for the said
denial, our enemies allege that the Parliament after the presentation of
their bills, breaks up, and stays not for an answer. But what proportion is
there between us and a Parliament? All our demands are particular. We demand
not that such rules be prescribed unto the State, or such new laws and orders,
wherein certainly the Monarchical authority would be disparaged and quartered
if the Parliament should do more then advice. But all that we demand, is, that
our burnt Churches may be repaired; that the exercise of our Religion let and
hindered us, be re-established; That Towns given us by the King, and taken
from us by violence, be restored us; That officers may be admitted; That
children taken by force out of their fathers arms be given them again; and
the like. Wherein should the Kings authority be disparaged, if he should
command out of hand that in every one of these points justice should be done
us? If a private man to whom an injury is done, may justly complain of it, and
expect justice from the King; why, if the if the injury be done out of hate to
a generality, may not a generality do the same? Can there be then any greater
injustice then to accuse us of rebellion and disobedience, because we
complained and demanded justice in this sort? any greater cruelty, then to
persecute us for this cause, and make war upon us? But this is sufficient to
show that the far fetched pretexts of our enemies are but colored subtilties,
to execute the old design of making war upon our Religion, and to plunge
France in confusion and trouble.

Wherefore considering the justice and urging need we had to have recourse by
our complaints unto the Kings protection: The right and permission granted us
to reassemble our selves to that end in such express and solemn terms: the
failing and breach of promises, caused by the fraud of our enemies. Their
violence in hindering our access unto our King, and in causing all our suites
to be rejected. The injustice of their accusation, and the slanderous crime of
rebellion that they impose upon us. The disloyalty of their proceedings
considered, whiles they temporize upon the refusal of doing us justice, that
they might take from us three Towns at once in Viuarez, by the fraud of a
treaty and breaking their public faith. The invasion of the whole country of
Bearn, contrary to such an express stipulation, and so fully performed on our
side: And after that to commit such bloody and inhumane acts of hostility.
And lastly, this infamous perfidie considered, that under the shadow of a
Declaration authorized with the Kings sacred name, and confirmed in all the
Courts of Parliament of France, promising liberty and safety by maintaining
the Edicts unto all such as should remain in their obedience; the Town of
Saumur was seized on, where the gates were opened with so much obedience and
respect under express and particular promises (besides the public faith of
the Declaration) that nothing should be innouated. That by a like fraud and
treachery the Town of Iargeau was at the same time invaded, S. John d'Angely
assaulted, and now is in expectation of a siege. All Protestants disarmed
throughout all the chief Towns of Normandy, to prepare them, alas! for a
more easy slaughter. If all these things, we say, be rightly considered
together, we doubt not but it will easily appear that we suffer this
persecution for justice sake, and by the hatred of our Religion, which a
general conspiracy throughout all Europe now threatens to destroy.

Wherefore being forced for the liberty of our consciences, and out of love to
our Country, to seek in our selves, and toward the friends of our Religion
and this State, a just and necessary defense: we here yet again present our
selves with tears before our King, beseeching him in all humility to consider
and believe, that the vows and ardent desires that we continually power forth
unto God in our prayers, are for the prosperity of his person and State. And
that it would please him to remember that our fathers taught by their Religion
the true obedience due unto their King, have neglected the sefetie of their
own lives, to further and advance the labors of Henry the Great, in the
recovery of his kingdom, perfidiously sold and exposed to the enemy, by the
very same pretexts of hatred and persecution against our Religion and us. And
that he would understand, that we following our fathers steps, as heirs of
their affections, have never forsaken the duty we were borne to, nor refused
the true obedience and ready service that our Religion teaches us to yield
him. And would to God, Sir, that your Majesty moved with the true interest of
your greatness, and out of your, natural generositie, would for the settling
of your Crown and diginitie of your kingdom, turn your arms upon the
enemies of your State, and use our fidelity in the defense of such a cause. We
will boldly say for our selves, that in so glorious an emulation between your
best subjects, we would carry away the prise from them all. But we say now with
tears of blood, and in the bitterness of groans that tear our intrals, that
the enemies of your Crown and person, Sir, having induced you to draw your
sword against us, and to bathe it in the blood of your loyallest subjects, will
undo both your Crown and person altogether. They are your undoubted enemies,
that kindle your hatred against us, to fire your Estate, and bury you in the
ruins. Who having cruelly murdered the greatest King of the world, your
glorious father, because he would not hate us, and that his goodness and
justice did protect us as his trusty subjects; do now induce your Majesty to
hate and destroy us, to ouerwhelme yourselfe with the fall of this Monarchy.
And if in this tempest which they have already stirred up, and which we feel
coming down upon us, we are constrained for our own defense and preservation
to betake our selves unto natural remedies, we here protest, Sir, before God,
before you, and before all men, that our purpose is evermore to preserve your
authority and the respect of your obedience among us; and that we will do our
best endeavors to save your sacred person and kingdom from perishing. God, who
is the God of mercy and revenge, and who according to the decrees of his
counsel, sometimes has powered out his wrath with diverse examples of horror on
the heads of Kings and nations risen against him. Sometimes has preserved and
reconciled to himself the greatest persecutors of his Church, grant, according
to our vows, that your Majesty secure from all dangers, may acknowledge the
Religion and fidelity of those persons whom you now hate and know not.

In the mean while we call here by our most humble supplications all Kings,
Princes and Estates interessed in the innocence of good and faithful subjects
oppressed, but especially bound in conscience before God to defend the cause of
his truth. And request them to prop with their help and succor the weak
defense that of necessity we oppose to the many and puissant forces of our
enemies, who having chosen this time of purpose, now that they have set on fire
the greatest part of the Estates from whence they imagine we might have
expected succor, hope to oppress us with greater facility. But our chiefest
trust is in the arm of the Almighty, who overthrows the dessignes of
nations, and blasts the enterprises of people conspiring against Israel. And
since that for the glory of his Name we are hated, and that to overthrow his
truth our ruin is sought after, we assure our selves that he will make us
feel the same deliverance that our fathers have proved by his succor, which
we call upon from the bottom of our souls. Keep not thou silence, O God;
hold not thy peace, and be not still, O God. For lo thine enemies make a
tumult: and they that hate thee, have lift up the head.

This is the Declaration of the Reformed Churches of France and Sovereignty of
Bearn by their Deputies assembled at Rochell. And in the name of all,

Combort, President. Banage, Assistant. Rodil, Secretary. Riffaut, Secretary.


COurteous Reader, I pray thee amend these few faults of moment, page 3. lin.
17. we, read do. lin. 28. action, r. affection. page 4. lin. 35. for, r. even.
page 7. li. 3. for, r. on. l. 32. thereof by, r. of the.


