A LETTER WRITTEN BY THOSE of the Assembly in ROCHELL: To Monsieur le Duc de
LES DIGVIERES.

Containing an admonition unto him, to leave the Enemy, and to aid them.

As also an exhortation and a warning unto those that forsake the truth, and
cleave unto the Enemies thereof, to shun that vengeance which God will send
down upon them for the same.

Printed in Rochell the 12. of July. 1621.

A LETTER WRITTEN BY THOSE OF the Assembly in Rochell: To Monsieur le Duc de
LES DIGVIERES.
MONSIEUR.
IN the pitiful estate whereinto our Enemies have reduced the Churches of
this Realm, it would be a great comfort and consolation unto us, if we were
but to fight and contend against false accusations, and to defend our selves
against the violent Counsels and courses of those, who openly adhearing unto
Antichristian Tirannie, esteeming it a title of Honor to be called our
Enemies, for having sufficiently satisfied the first by our most humble
Supplications and attestations to his Majesty, and by our declaration newly
published, we hope that God will bless and prosper our just defense, and
preserve his Churches from the utter ruin, wherewith they are threatened. But
we cannot sufficiently express, with what grief of heart we feel and
perceive our selves bound to maintain our Innocence against those, who as
well as we, have part in the public interests of our Churches: specially unto
your self my Lord, whose age, experience, and offices, make your proceedings
more dangerous and hurtful unto those against whom you employ them. We have
heretofore labored therein, by the Letters that have been delivered unto you,
from us, and perceiving the small benefit that we have thereby received, we
had resolved with our selves to rest silent, if our consciences did not bind
and prick forward us, to stir up and quicken yours, by setting before your
eyes the great hurt and detriment that you bring to the Church of God, at such
a time, wherein it has most need of your aid and assistance. It was not
without good reason, and experience it self shows us, that the last assembly
at Loudun, doubted of the accomplishment of the promises that were made unto
us, at the Court: But your word interposing it self, with that of Monsieur de
Chastillion, together with the consideration of the state wherein you were,
made us resolve upon a new proof, assisting our selves, that the effect of the
words given unto us, failing, you would make yours effectual, for the
subsisting of the asse^bly, which in that case was to re-assemble, and cause
them to obtain that just proceeding that had been promised unto them. With
what displeasure our Churches that sent us hither, have been tormented, when
they perceive that you disapproue it, that you blame it, and that by your
Letters, you prefer the colors and pretenses of the persecution, at this day
raised against faithful Innocents, before the prejudice of our cause? The
state wherein you were in, the precedent voyage that you made to the Court,
made honest men apprehend, that if after you withdrew your self from the
Court, you returned thither again, you should be bound to effect some
prejudicial action, against the Church of God, and therefore they desired you,
to stand still in your government during the subsistence of this assembly. But
without any respect or regard co the requests and entreaties of so many
Churches, you left your Province, made another voyage to the Court, and for the
contentment of our Enemies, and the displeasure of those of our profession, by
your presence you authorize those that incessantly labor to work our ruin
and destruction. Your protestation to continue in the same profession, the
refusal of the dignity, that was offered unto you, upon condition to change
your Religion, and your reconciliation not long since made unto the Church at
Charenton, put us in good comfort, and made us hope of some good effect for the
good and benefit of our affairs, and some happy success of the pains that
you should take therein. But our Enemies have gotten this advantage, that your
example having been made more considerable, the blame which you impose upon
this assembly, is more notorious, and your disunion with our assembly, which
represents all the Churches of this Realm, is more domageable, serving for a
pretense unto those, (who under hope by that means to keep themselves close
during the time of this public calamity,) to separate themselves from our
Union, from the which; those that have designed our destruction, seek to
disunite the Provinces, Churches, and persons of greatest quality, therein
using your name and authority, for the execution of so pernicious a design;
pernicious certainly we may well say: for to what end think you, my Lord,
such proceedings may tend but only to weaken us, and make our destruction more
easy, and less hazard unto those that undertake it? Monsieur de Plessis, who
without any respect of that, that had happened to Nauarreux, and after
throughout all the Country of Bearn, being carried away by your Counsel, and
abused by the particular promises that were made unto him, at this day feels
the effects of this proceeding. In your presence beholding the Town of Saumur
taken from him, and put into another man's hands. The Inhabitants thereof
making profession of the same Religion, subjected to a Papisticall Garrison:
The University which he with so much pains and great care had there erected,
destroyed. The Church in the same place made destitute of her first liberty,
and all those of this Realm deprived of the safety and security that they had
in that place. Has not the like dealing been used unto the rest of the
Governors of the places that we had for security in Poictow, seeing that in
stead of command in them, as they did for the security of our Churches, they
are now commanded by Garrisons of a contrary Religion, to the ruin and
subversion of the Flocks of our Lord Jesus Christ? Do these proceedings, that
followed the sedition in Towers, and were accompanied with the taking of
Iargeau, and the violent disarmings of those of the Religion in diverse places,
and seconded with the besieging of Saint John Angely, at this time furiously
battered, bear any show of any good intent that is meant toward us to do us
justice? But are they not rather directly contrary to the declarations not long
since published, and to the particular promises made in favor of those that
would addict themselves unto that which the Court desires of them? and doc
they not make every man manifestly and plainly see, that the obedience whereof
they so highly cry out, and which is required of us, by demanding pardon and
absolution, and that we should separate our assembly, before we have justice
done unto us, or any security for our Churches, tends only, to bind us to
lay our throats open unto those, that have an intent and desire to our them?
What faults are we culpable of, being assembled upon the permission that had
been granted and given unto us, by those words that to us should be as good
an assurance as Letters Patents, yea and upon yours also? What fault have we
committed, that being assembled, have sought by all submissiue means possible
unto his Majesty, to obtain that justice that had been promised unto us,
when we remitted the pursuit thereof to our general Deputies, and desired
those that are of the greatest quality and degrees, and make profession of the
Religion in this Realm, to join their intercessions with them? And seeing
that in stead of finding the effect of the performance of the promises made
unto us, upon your just and most humble supplications presented unto his
Majesty: we have been proclaimed Rebels, and declared to be criminals; and
that as such, our process has been made, some of us have been executed by
pictures, seeing in Viuards they have risen up in Arms, besieged, battered,
and taken those place's that we held, and in them, contrary to the agreements
made, murdered some, and used great violences unto us, that at this present
they besiege, and furiously batter the Town of S. John D'angely: can men
justly blame us, if against such violences we oppose our defense, which nature
teaches every man, and the law of God never reprooueth?

In the mean time, God forbid, that this extremity whereinto we are reduced
by constraint, should in our hearts deface that most humble obedience, and most
faithful service that we owe unto our King, wherein we protest inuiolably to
continue, desiring nothing more, nor so much then, that in the justice and
security required by us for our Churches, we may attain the means of a good
and an assured peace in this state, which as much as in us lies we have, and
to our powers do seek for: beseeching God with all our hearts, to defend and
preserve the King, from those dangers which the Enemies of his state, expose
his person unto, in the perils of war. In the mean time, my Lord, the
justness of our cause, which so manifestly appears, and which God will
always make to shine, as bright as the Sun at noone time, does not hinder
you, by your presence, from approving the proceedings, that are taken against
us; and which is more, blotting out the remembrance of the griefs that our
Churches receive, you promise and procure favor unto those, who leaving us,
will join themselves unto our Enemies, as you solicit them, by that means
putting into the mouth of the Church at this day, the complaint that the
Prophet Jeremy made, saying, That his nearest friends, behaved themselves
disloyally toward him, and were become his Enemies. The Savior of the world
teaches us, that a house divided in it self cannot stand. Judge then my Lord,
if it please you, what punishment they incur that shall have been a means
to stir up division in the house of God, and whether God will not revenge the
destruction thereof, not only upon those that openly procure it, but also on
those that in any manner or by any means shall have contributed unto the same.
But after we had seen what has been done in Bearn, Viuarez, and against the
assembly, after that by your presence you have favored a puissant Army
against the Churches of this Realm, and the loss of many places, that had
been given us to hold for our securities; In a time, wherein the violence of
our Enemies could not be restrained by any authority, after you had conducted,
or accompanied the Army that is encamped against our brethren before the Town
of S. John D'angely: if (as we have been assured) you your self in person
went to view the place, and used all the experience and dexterity that God has
given you in Arms, to make the siege, and the means to take it more easy;
what subject have not we to complain against you, who in stead of being sick
for Iosephes affliction, fear not to be the greatest instrument of his
murdering: Is it possible, that you cannot apprehend the ruin of so
flourishing a Church, that God has here gathered together, and that you are
not moved at the destruction that men seek to bring upon Monsieur De Sobize,
and upon so many brave Gentlemen, that have been the first that presented
themselves in the mouth of the breach, that is made in the City of David? that
courageously labor to repair the same, at this day in a manner wholly
hindering that course of the destruction already begun in our Churches, and
proiected against all of them. The knowledge that God has given you of his
holy name, binds you to employ that authority, whereunto he has advanced
you, and all the graces that he has imparted unto you, and bestowed upon you,
to the maintenance of his Church; and will you employ them in the destruction
thereof? Piety requires that you should procure all good, and liberty unto
those that make profession of Religion, and will you approve and allow of their
desolation? Christian charity can hardly endure without watery eyes, that we
should see one man only put to death: and can you with a smooth and smiling
countenance, behold and see the butcherie and cruel slaughter of so many of
our brethren? What reputation can they get or procure unto themselves that
fight against that Gospel, whereof they make profession? What fidelity may our
Prince expect from them, that being not faithful unto God, abandon the
maintenance of his cause? And from whence proceeds this great distaste of us
at this day, but only from this, that there are some men, (and those of
greatest qualities) that give themselves to affect the Religion, as long, and
no longer, then that it serves their turns to advance them unto dignities,
and to increase their riches? Is it not easy to be judged, that if
covetousness and ambition, be a means to make them disloyal unto God, and to
despise and neglect their own salvation, that the same vices will easily draw
them on to infidelity toward their Prince, and to the dispising of their own
honors? Was it a small matter in your sight, to see diverse Ministers driven
away from their dwelling places, the exercise of Religion banished out of thos^
places, where it was established, and the inhumanities, which have bin
impiously used, within these few years upon the dead bodies of the faithful,
almost in all places of this Realm, The burnings and destroying of diverse of
our Churches, the many seditions, and specially that, last made in the City of
Touers, besides the entier desolation of those of Bearn, have they not touched
nor moved your soul with a Christian compassion, and a just apprehension, in
short time to behold and see those horrible cruelties executed upon us and our
children, that after the like proceedings were at other times executed upon our
fathers, and that after (as at this day) they had bin deceived, by words of
peace and quietness? Certainly, my Lord, if you acknowledge that you hold
that honor which you at this present enjoy, from the blessings that God has
given unto your arms, then when you employed them for the defense of his
Church, you ought also to believe, that if now, when you draw near unto the
end of your days, it is time to crown your works, with most just and
Christian actions, you become an enemy unto, and procure the ruin of those
that with you make profession of the truth of the Gospel, he will be angry
against you, and will cover your face with shame and ignomie, you shall expose
your self to be despised of all men, and made a laughter unto those namely
that have made use of you, to execute their wicked intents, and bring that
curse upon your head, which he pronounces against those that curse his people,
and those most fearful judgments, which in his wrath, he shows upon those,
that rise up against, and withstand the Kingdom of his Son Jesus Christ: all
manner of the deaths of those whom God loves, are precious in his sight; but he
will require their blood at the hands of those, that shall unjustly shed the
same, he that touches them, touches the apple of his eye, and you are not
ignorant thereof: With what conscience then can you continue and remain among
our enemies, that abuse the affections and conscience of the King, for ours and
the states utter ruin, give counsel for the destruction of Towns, wherein
the holy name of God is purely inuoaked, and participate in the forcible action
that are done against them? would you thrust your sword into the breasts of your
own brethren, and bath your hands in the blood of those whom God has redeemed
by the blood of his dear Son Jesus Christ? No my Lord, rather in the name of
God, if there be any care of his Church, yet resting in you, if there be any
charity in your heart toward those that are his members, and which is more, if
you desire not to bring upon you and yours, the wrath and vengance of God (for
we are bound by the duty of our Offices and the discharge of our consciences to
speak in this manner unto you) be moved to compassion upon the pitiful
dealing which at this day is used against the faithful, acknowledge the
deceits and impostures of our enemies, note the violent courses they use
against your brethren, and with a prudent foresight apprehending future
mischiefs, come out from the middle of them, least you be enueloped among the
plagues, that God will power down upon the vessels of his wrath, when he shall
have ceased the using of them, for the punishment of his children. Aid not
them, that have no other intent then to destroy us, by making a division among
us: forsake not the members of our Lord Jesus Christ, but rather joining with
us, bring the rest of our brethren with you; who by your example, you have
withdrawn from us; and use the means, to cause them also to come with you,
who as yet are asleep, and rest under the deceitful assurances that are given
them of some quietness: to the end that being all, (according to our duties)
most stricktly united together by the sacred bands of piety, peace, and
charity; we may effectually labor together for the public Tranquillity and
quietness of Gods house: And seeing that there is no other means left unto
us, we employ a just and courageous defense, which being blessed by God,
stays the violent courses of those that persecute us, delivers the Town of
S. John D'Angely from their hands, and preserves all the rest: shall not so
many persons of good quality who acknowledging the unfaithfulness and the
intents of our enemies, consecrate their blood, to empeach the destruction of
the faithful, prouoake you, to a holy jealousy, by their example? You have
heretofore bin a puissant instrument in the hand of God, to defend his Church
from oppression: be the same again, my Lord, at this day, and that the rather
and strongly, because God has given you many blessings in abundance. And if
you dispising these exhortations, that we give you, by the compassion of
Christ, be still in this time, and fail in the succors which you owe unto all
good men, God will not cease to raise up, peace and deliverance by other
means, unto his children. But it is to be seared, that he will revenge, the
dissipation that you shall make of your brethren, upon you and yours. We
beseech Almighty God, with all our hearts, to touch your heart by his holy
Spirit, to inspire you with God and godly connsell, to do that which we
require of you according to his will, and that receiving you into his
protection, he will take pity upon his Church, send peace unto this State, and
tranquillity and security to those troops that he has assembled therein. We
rest, my Lord, Your most humble and most affectioned servants, the Deputies of
the reformed Churches of France, and the Soueraignety of Bearn assembled in
Rochell:

Bessay. President. Rossell. Lieutenant. Guerin. Secretary. de la Por^e.
Secretary.

In Rochell the 12. of June. 1621.

