NEWS FROM FRANCE.
GOD, whose goodness and clemency is incomprehensible, to our humane thoughts
and imaginations, does not always discharge the arrows of his wrath upon
miserable sinners; who by the innumerablenesse of their offenses, have stirred
up and provoked his wrath against them, because he desires not the death of a
sinner, but rather that he should convert and be saved: But when he sees that
they wax worse, and are hardened in their sins, and lull themselves asleep
in humane delights: Then he rouzeth up himself with the scourge of adversity,
and discharges the fury of his wrath against them, to make them turn unto
him, who is the Sovereign Ruler, of whom they hold their being, and all their
power. Then (I say) he employeth the great forces of the heavens, and the
Elements, thereby to heal the ulcer of their vices, that wallow and take
pleasure in sin, as a Sow delights to wallow in the mire.

Which plainly appears by the deplorable accident happened of late in the
City of Paris, where the force and fury of fire struck such an astonishment
in all the inhabitants, that they thought the Town, like a second Sodom,
would suddenly have been consumed to ashes, by the impetuous flames of fire
that threatened them; and yet could not truly know the truth how it began: For
it is so diversely reported, that men cannot assuredly declare any truth
thereof: And it is prohibited by a Decree made in Court of Parliament, in any
sort to speak thereof, to shun and avoid the tumult and commotion of the
people. But so it is, that upon Saturday the 23. of October, about one of the
clock after midnight, the fire began in such manner to flame out upon the
Merchants Bridge, that the inhabitants thereof were surprised sleeping in their
beds, before they heard or perceived it: for the fire (which met with nothing
else but that which was combustible) increased with such impetuositie, that in
a short time, all the houses that stood upon the said Bridge on both sides,
were on fire, by means of certain beams that lay cross over one to another.

The Change Bridge did no less feel the force and vigor which the said fire
vomited out, by means of the flames issuing from the same: for that descending
down to the foundations thereof, in the end it burnt and cast it into the
water, with all the houses standing thereon, together with the great riches of
the inhabitants, that by no means could save any thing thereof, by reason of
the smoke and heat, that hurt and choked diverse of the people, and some men
that were burnt, fell down with the beams and pieces of wood all burning into
the river.

You may judge how many children and poor innocent souls were buried in that
impiteous fire, for that their fathers and mothers had work enough to do, to
save themselves. Many women newly brought in bed, and others that were sick in
their beds, paid that debt to nature, which all of us one day must do, neither
having that force nor dexterity sufficient to save themselves. It was most
lamentable to hear the woeful cries and sighings, not only of those that were
afflicted, but also of the spectators of that miserable accident: The men in
great fear saved themselves from that unexpected deluge, in a manner half
dead, blaming the heavens for their disaster, and not knowing how to be
revenged for their loss, took revenge upon themselves; and men were as much
troubled to comfort them, as to save the rest of those that were within their
houses. Women in extreme discomfort, their hair hanging about their heads,
and in a manner naked, beholding that horrible spectacle, bathing their faces
with tears, and casting a thousand sighs up into the air, swouned, and in a
manner fell into despair. Diverse servants, both maids and men, as well as
their masters and mistresses, enduring and feeling the rigor of that mischance,
stood in the like manner as others did, ready to pay their debt to cruel
destiny.

The fire still waxing greater and greater, mounted up into the air with
mighty flames, and cast such and so great a light over all the City, that
those which knew nothing of that unfortunate mischance, being awaked by the
popular rumor, were in a maze, to imagine from whence that light should come,
not knowing the cause; but as others did, in great fear ran unto the place.

The Bells in diverse Churches began to ring, the noise whereof astonishing
diverse Citizens of the said Town, caused them to arm themselves: at which
time Paris began to enter into a great tumult. When the Duke de Monbason,
Governor of the City, having intelligence thereof, came unto the place with
his Company of soldiers, the Watch, and diverse others; all in Arms, placing a
Court of guard at both ends of the Bridges, and other places. From thence he
went to possess the strongest and most eminent places, as the Bastille, the
Kings Court called the Louure, the Town house, and diverse places of note;
which done, he caused fires to be made thorowout all the City, and Lanternes
to be hung out of every window, in so great quantity, that it was as light as
at noonday: and caused four Culuerins to be brought to both the ends of the
said Bridges: and to conclude, used such diligence in that imminent danger,
still keeping good watch, doubting some treason, that he is perpetually to be
commended for the same.

In the mean time, while he was thus prouidently busied about that public
care, so necessary in such an extremity: The fire, that like a tempest,
devoured and spoiled all that it took hold on, was not content with that
whereon it had first seized, but having satisfied the greedy desire thereof,
and brought all the houses and dwelling places upon the said two Bridges, into
utter ruin and desolation, and laid them in the valley of misery, increased
more and more, and carried her flames into the Galue place; and if it had not
been for some artificial trenches, and men's help, who in great numbers ran
thither, the great Castle, and the gate of Paris, was in danger to have felt
the fury thereof. On the other side, in the extremity of the raging flames,
at the other end of the Bridges aforesaid, the fire was no less furious: for
having seized upon all the houses and shops near unto it, as far as before
the Palace, it took hold on the Dyall, and began to melt the Lead that
covered it, until a great number of nimble and courageous men, ran thither,
and employed all their forces and industries, to save that admirable work.

The Duke de Monbason, while every man was busied about that pitiful and most
lamentable business, on Sunday in the morning, caused commandment to be made
by sound of Trumpet, that all the Citizens should fill and set diverse tubs full
of water at all the corners of the streets. And it is an incredible thing to
report, how great a number of people from all places ran unto that place, to
satisfy themselves with the sight of that horrible fire, which filled their
eyes with tears, and their breasts with sighs.

This (friendly Reader) in brief is the true relation that I can make unto
thee, to let thee know and understand this lamentable action: from whence the
same proceeded no man knows. Nevertheless, the Court, by a Decree made the
25. day of October. has commanded all Judges and Officers to make an exact
inquiry of those, that wickedly have committed that disorder; and that the
knowledge thereof being had, so good Justice may be used therein, that such as
they may take example thereby.

A Decree made by the Court of Parliament in PARIS, whereby Order is taken for
providing for the Merchants, that have lost their goods by the said fire, and
to prevent the like mischance in time to come.
Upon the Declaration made by the Kings Attorney General, touching the fire
happened by night, between Saturday and Sunday, the 24. of this month of
October, which burnt and consumed the Changers and the Merchants Bridges, and
some houses near unto them, as well on the Palace side, unto the Leather
street, as on the great Castle side, requiring, That the Court would be
pleased, to give him Commission to make information of the beginning of that
fire, considering the diverse reports that were spread abroad in the Town, that
might be a means to procure great trouble in the same, and to make speedy
provision for the necessity of those, that have lost their goods by the said
Fire, as also that the like inconvenience may not happen. After the Lieutenant
civil, and the substitute of the said Attorney general had audience, being
for that cause sent for, upon information that they had begun to make
inquiry thereof.

The Court has enjoined and enioyneth the Provost of Paris, or his Lieutenants
civil or criminal, diligently to continue the information by them begun,
touching the original of that Fire, and to make and finish the indictment of
the authors of the same, and their adherents, ready for the definitive
sentence, notwithstanding any oppositions, or appeals whatsoever: and to the
Substitute of the said Attorney general to be assistant unto them, and with
all diligence to certify this Court thereof. And withal, expressly command
and prohibit (upon pain of death) all persons, of what qualities or
conditions soever they be, to assemble together either by day or by night,
unless it be by commandment of the Magistrate, nor yet to mis behave
themselves by words, nor to use any reproaches, under pretense of diversity of
Religions, or to sow or cast forth any bruites or rumors touching the
inconvenience of the said Fire, tending to the disquietnesse of the City; but
to live peaceably and quietly, under the Kings Authority and Edicts. Commanding
all vagrant persons, and men that are of lewd conversation, living idly,
presently, without any delay, to depart out of the City, after the publication
of these presents: And their Oasts, and such as harbor them, to disclose them,
upon pain personally to answer for them: And to provide for the necessity
and relief of the poor inhabitants, utterly undone and beggered by the said
Fire: Humble supplication shall be made unto the King, to be pleased to bestow
His gracious liberality upon them. And in the mean time it is ordained, That
the said Attorney general shall make a note of the names of those, that have
endured the said losses; and what trades and occupations they were of, as also
of the number of their children and families, who may be put into Saint Louis
House, there to be lodged and nourished for the space of six months: and to
that end, there shall be ten thousand Frankes put into the hands of Perrot and
Sainctot, Overseers of the Hospital. And further, that gatherings shall be
made throughout all the Parishes of this City, to aid the said distressed
people. And to that end, the people shall be exhorted by the Vicars: and
Officers of the said Parishes, to appoint certain persons of good quality,
from month to month, to make the said Gatherings. Commanding the Provost of
Merchants and Sheriffs, to set men on work continually, to take up, and rid
away the ruins of the said Fire fallen into the water, that the course of the
same may not be hindered, and to make it nauigable: and in the mean time, to
appoint honest men of good credit, and well experienced, for the space of a
whole year, to search in the bottom of the water, for the goods and
merchandises, that shall be found to have been drowned; and the same to be
brought into the common Hospital of the said City; whereof an Inventory
shall be made by one of the said Sheriffs, that they may be restored to the
owners thereof. And also that all Boatmen, and such as use to sail up and
down the river; and all others, that shall have found any thing of the same,
to bring them to the said Hospital of the Town, and to bring a certificate
thereof, upon pain of hanging. We likewise command the Provost of Merchants,
and the Sheriffs, to keep and hold within the said Hospital of the Town,
and the Towne-house, as also in every Ward, such a quantity of hooks, buckets
of lether, and other such necessaries as shall be needful in time to come, to
serve for such inconveniences of Fire, and to certify the same unto the Clerk
of the said Court. And the Captain of the Watch, to keep good watch by night
in the Palace, and other usual places. And to the end, in time to come, that
the danger of Fire may not take in the Palace, by reason of the shoppes that
are built up against the same, We ordeine and command, that the new shops built
from the Dyall Tower, to the bailliage Gate, on the Quay-side of the river,
shall be pulled down; and none of them to be built up again for any cause or
reason whatsoever. And further, that all Processes sued out against the bodies
of those that dwelt upon the said Bridges, by reason of any Obligations,
Judgments, or Arrests, in what manner soever they be done, shall surcease for
the space of a year: and that by the ordinary Judges there shall be
sufficient delay made, considering their loss; and whatsoever shall by them
be ordained, to be put in execution; notwithstanding any oppositions or
appeals whatsoever. And this present Decree shall, by the diligence of the
Attorney general, be published, as well in the Church Porches, as openly by
sound of Trumpet, and set up upon the corners of the streets.

Given in the Parliament the 26. of October. 1621. Signed Du Tillet.


