THE Epitome OF All the Lives OF The French Kings

From PHARAMOND ye first to the now Regning Lewis the 13

Contaynening all there Chefest actions

LONDON

Printed by I.Oaks and Are to be sold by I.Becket at the Inner Templegate



An Epitome OF All the Lives of the Kings of France.

From PHARAMOND the first, to the now most Christian King LEWIS the thirteenth.

With a Relation of the Famous Battles of the two Kings of England, who were
the first victorious Princes that Conquered France.

Translated out of the French Copy by R. B. Esquire.

LONDON:

Printed by I. Oaks, and are to be sold by James Becket, at his shop within the
Inner Temple Gate 1639.

To the Generous Reader, the Translator presents his Labors, etc.
Courteous Reader,
HIstory has been from all Antiquity as Noble as Notable, and as full of
Pleasure as Profit. Poetry I must confess to be the elder Sister of the two,
and the first reducer of Mankind to Humanity and Civility: But what the Elder
has delivered unto us Fabulously, the other has done faithfully.

Great is the Vtility which redounds to all men by History (of what function or
quality soever:) First, to Princes, it is a model, by which to pattern their
Lives and Actions: And by reading the Heroical deeds of others, to make their
presidents, as well by imitating their Virtues, as avoiding their Vices. To
Statesmen how to establish politic Laws, and gravely to manage the Affairs
of a flourishing Commonweal. It instructs Sovereigns, how to govern with
Justice, mixed with Lenity, and Subjects to obey with duty, tempered with
loyalty.

Historiographers have in all Times and Ages, and amongst all Nations and
Languages bin held in great reputation and reverence. Amongst the Hebrews
Philo-Judeus, and Josephus Bengorion, who flourisht in the time of Hierusalems
last subversion, and depopulation, etc. Amongst the Grecians Herodotus,
Thucidides, etc. Amongst the Romans or Latins, Titus Livius, Cornelius Tacitus,
Salust, Iustine, etc. Amongst the French, Philip Comines: The Author of the
French Inventory, the Composer of this Epitome of Chronicle, etc. Of the
Scotch, Hector Boethius, Georgius Buconanus, etc. And of our English (to omit
many) Holynshed, Fabian, Speed, Mr. Samuel Daniel, etc.

But concerning the present Argument now in agitation, I have read of one
Spintherus Tarentinus, a man (for his known Wisdom) by the unanimous voice
of Greece, adding an Eight to the Seven Sages, who when he was to deliver his
Opinion of Epaminondas, prime Captain of absolute power, and command without
limit; after he had studied io honor him with his best Expression, he uttered
of him only these few Words: He was a man who knew much, and spoke little.
The like I may say of the Author of this present Work, who writ it first in
the French Language: who though he were frequent in all the French Annalls,
having read all their Voluminous remembrances at large, yet was so far from
troubling the Purse, or tyring the Patience of the Reader, that in his
succinctnesse of style, and contractedness of Circumstance, he has strived to
spare both: Imitating the old Adage, Frustra fit per plura, quod fieri potest
per pauciora: and my self who am the unworthiest of many in this Kingdom, for
the Translation of this Work, have undertaken to make the French History,
which I found accidentally, to speak English: where, in the ensuing Book thou
shall find such mixture of Discourses, both observeable, delightful, and
worthy to be had in memory, containing all the Kings that ever were of France,
which in number are sixty four, with their Conditions, Natures, chiefest Acts,
and Deaths, as also of theseverall places of their Jnterment, with many of
their accute and witty sayings: all which, noble and Courteous Reader, I
present unto thee, with a Table of all the Kings names at the latter end of the
Book: and if thou please to accept of my endeavors, and but cast a benign
smile and a gentle censure, I shall take it a double courtesy, and labor to
amend what has been done amiss. But least in commending the Brevity used in
his Discourse, I might (on the contrary) err in the prolixity of my Epistle, I
thus (though abruptly) as commit thee, so commend thee to thy gentle
Interpretation:

Thine, R. B.

An Epitome of all the lives of the Kings of France, from Pharamond their
first, to the now Reigning Lewis the 13.
Pharamond the first King of France. Anno 429.
portrait

THE French Nation inhabiting the lower Germany long time before the Reign of
the Valentinians, Emperors of Rome, whether they were Originaries there, or
Forraigners, they according to the report of Aymoynus, Ado, and other
Historians, had for an intervall of time ceased to be governed by Kings, being
contented to be ruled by Dukes, until such time that they had a desire to
return to their manner and custom, being incited thereto by the example of
other Nations; in so much that upon a mature deliberation, they concluded their
Election upon Pharamond for their King, by reason that over and above the
virtues resplendent in him, he was the last Son of their latest Duke
Marcomire, who was Duke of Franconia, or East France, whom Stilico had confined
as an Exulant in Tuscany, from the year of our Lord 395.

The time of his Election has not been precisely recorded by any Historians;
the Modern Authors also agree not upon the certainty and number of the years
of his Reign: For some German Chronicles account but 7, others 9, Onuphrius
14, but almost all the French Annalists following Sigebert, agree upon 10. or
12. years, which they begin at the year of Grace, 419, or 420.

The Frenchmen then estated him in the Castle of Dispargun, which was,
according to Gregory, in Tongry or Turingia, on that side the Rhine, where he
made his residence, or rather in Germany, without an intent of enlarging his
command any farther, studying only to institute and found the Kingdom with
good policy, and the Laws called Ripuary and Salique, by reason the French
inhabiting for the most part upon the River of Sals, (which disgorgeth it self
into the Mein, a great and famous River of Germany) were called Salians, and
their principal City Selgestadt, which peradventure might seem to derive its
nomination from Salagast, who was a chief Founder thereof. Pharamond lastly
coming to the period of his life, left the succession to his Son Clodion, Anno
Domini 430. His Character of life is drawn in these Lineaments; he made good
Laws, and conformed the French to the obedience of civil government; revived
the Salique Laws, and was the Founder of the French Monarchy: his Name
Waramond or Pharamond, imported a true mouth, Truth being a noble virtue in a
Prince. The Church was then happy in those Lights of Religion, Jerome,
Chrysostom, Ambrose, and Augustine, shining through the Clouds of Oppression,
wherewith those times were darkened and obscured: And the Papacy was then but
weak in power, afterward growing strong by the Emperors absence, warring
against the Barbarians, and by succouring afflicted Christians.

Cloion, or Clodion, the second King of France, Anno 432.
portrait

CLoion, or Clodion, according to Sidonius, Apollinaris, and Gregory of Tours,
succeeded his Father Pharamond in the Regal estate in the year 432. of our
Redemption. He was surnamed the Hairy, because he commanded the French men to
wear long hair in token of Liberty, to the end they might be known and
distinguished from Romans: or (as some Modern Writers will have it) to this
end, that none should wear long hair, but those of the Royal blood. In the
beginning of his Reign, perceiving the Romans to be employed altogether
against the Vandals in Afric, and a notable dissension between Aetius and
Boniface, went from his Castle of Dispargun, and fastened upon Cambray, and all
that Country which lies between the Rivers of Escaut and the Sum, where to
this day are the Cities of Monts, Valenciennes, Cambray, and the Forest
heretofore nominated Coaleorrest in ur tongue.
Carbonaire. Afterward having made a great discomfiture of the Romans, who
made head against him, he came as far as the Bourough of St. Helens, which
is in the Land of Artois. He also subjugated those of Thuringia, the Saxons,
and other populations of Almaine, as Funccius is of opinion. O there is also add,
that the City of Mayence was by him taken in: The Hunnibalt of Trithemius
holds, that he divided his Kingdom into two parts, nominating that upon the
Coast of the Rhine Austrasie, and the part upon the West, Nenstria or Westria.

The Chronicles of Flanders say, that he led his Army against those of
Therovenne, otherwise called Morinians, whom he made subjects: they perceiving
their Auxiliars the Cinabres and Ruthenians, and their Captain General
Gondmar overthrown, who had a Daughter whom this Clodion caused to be married
to a Nephew of his who was called Flandebert, from whom they will have the
Country of Flanders to derive its first Nomination, although it is more
evident that it was not so called before the time of Charlemaigne. He deceased
in the 20. year of his Reign, Anno Domini 450, according to Ado and Aymoinus,
leaving (as Jaques Meier and Richard of Wassebourgh do relate) Ranchaine, or
Ranachaire and Alberic (alias) Auberon, his sons. Wearing of long hair (as
was said) was ordained by this King to be the Ornament of Princes, whereby
Clodamire slain in Battle, was known from the vulgar Soldiers, and shaving
off the Hair was a Ceremony used at degrading of Kings; and Queen Clotilde
suffered her Sons Heads to be cut off, rather than their Hair, preferring
honor to life, and accounting the disgrace which her Children should receive
by shaving, making them incapable of the Royal dignity, worse than death; for
Life, after the decease of honor, is but a continual lingering death. Hippone
was now besieged by Genserick, King of the Vandals.

Saint Augustine being 76. years old, having seen and suffered in the
miseries of the Church, then generally afflicted by the Barbarians, wearied
with being a Spectator of those Tragedies, withdrew to Heaven, and dyed,
leaving the Christian World a mourner for his departure.

Merovaeus, the third King of France. Anno Domini 450.
portrait

MErovaeus, Maire of the Palace of Clodion (according to Jaques Meier and
Richard of Wassebourgh, the Authors aforesaid, which Merovaeus nevertheless
the Abbot of Ursperg thinks, and other French Historians are of opinion to
have been a Bastard-sonne, or a near Kinsman of Clodion, was by the reason of
his valor and experience in War, chosen King of the French, Anno Domini 450.
secluding the Sons of Clodion from the inheritance of the Kingdom. Many are
of opinion that he was the first that took upon him to March boldly all over
the Countries of the Gauls, because by force of Arms he opened the way into
those parts, where none of his predecessors had had any peaceable habitation or
abode. And for this cause he being acknowledged by the Ancient French to be
the first King to have passed so far, the Gauls or Frenchmen were called
Merovinians. Others are of opinion that it was, for that he was the first of
the Line that reigned over the French until Pepin, it being that the sons of
Clodion were supplanted, who betook themselves for assistance to their Mother
in the Kingdom of Thuringia: where being grown to age, by the aid of other
Nations recovered Almany, Cambresis, Tournay, Henault, and Couloine, of which
parts they termed themselves Kings, and maintained it against the Merovinians,
until the time of Clovis.

In the mean time Attilla, King of the Hunnes, having spoiled a great part of
Europe, labored to join with the Visigoths and French to ruin the Romans,
which was a cause that Aetius a Roman Gentleman, who had the command of all the
Roman forces of the West, had this War in charge, who gave unto Merovaeus the
right wing of the Battle against Attila who lost the field: This Battle was
fought in the Catalaunicke Plain, which some esteem to have been that at
Chaalons in Champaigne, others at Solongne by Orleans, who seem better of
opinion than those who would have it near Toulouse: because it is certain
that Attila never penetrated so far into the Country of the Visigoths, where
the Shock was so bloody and cruel, that there remained one hundred and
fourscore thousand men slain in the place. Merovaeus yielded to Fate in the
tenth year of his Reign, according to Sigebert and other Historians, Anno
Domini 459.

This King was fortunate in his Wars, for after the Death of Aetia, executed
by the Emperor Valentinians command, being so faithful a servant, that it was
said that the Emperor had cut off his right hand with his left: by valor,
potency, and opportunity he advanced the Monarchy of France, growing more
exact and complete in strength, he being the third Stone in that Royal
building called Gaul, which new-begun Estate was raised to a greater
perfection by many other Royal Builders, descended from his Race, and called
Merovingieres, in memory of this Merovee, who, as Titus Vespasian said, Non
perdidi diem, so he accounted that Day lost wherein he did no good.

This worthy King was much lamented of all men, they gave him the solemn rites
at his funeral, which appertained to a King in those days, which was tears
and sorrow for forty days after.

The Church was now much troubled by the Nestorian and Eutichean Heresies,
which weeds were by two Counsels assembled at Ephesus and Chalcedon, plucked
up out of the Garden of Christendom, and the true Christian Religion was now
defended by Cyrillus and Theoderet, two stout Champions for the Church, who
employed their whole strength and power for the maintenance thereof, so that
the remembrance of their pious and noble actions will continue in all ages to
their eternal praise and commendation.

Chilperic or Hilperic the fourth King of France, Anno 459.
portrait

CHilperic succeeded in the Kingdom by the favor of the memory of his Father,
Anno Domini 459. notwithstanding that he seemed borne fitter to lead an Army,
than govern a Kingdom in Justice and peace, by reason of his insolence and
lubricity, for which the great and powerful men of his Kingdom enforced him,
having already reigned three years, to fly into the Kingdom of Thuringia,
there to expect the issue of his fortune. But before his departure, his friend
Vidomare, (or as others report Guiemans) gave him his word and promise,
breaking a piece of Gold between them, the King keeping the one half, and he
the other, advising the King that he should boldly return when he should
receive the other half from him.

Hereupon the French chose in his place Gilles or Gillon Governor of Soissons
under the Romans, who reigned as King 8. years, in the end whereof Chilperic
was re-appealed by Vidomare, who had so dexterously carried himself, that
Gilles himself wrought his own ruin and hatred which the French conceived
against him. Chilperic hereupon endeavoring the recovery of his Kingdom,
gained a great battle against his Enemy Agrippina, which the French surnamed
Coloyne. But in his return he sought an ill requital to so good a friend and
Host the King Basin of Thuringia, because he took away with him Basins Wife
and Queen, carrying her with him into France, and of her begat Clovis.
Trithemius the Abbot says, that the Dutchies and Counties were erected and
instituted by Chilperic in France, who distributed them to those of his blood.
But it is more apparent, that the French coming into Gaul, retained only the
general policy which the Romans had there planted, with the nominations of the
Dutchies and Counties, which denominate no more than Provinces general or
subalterne. The Bretons of Gaul Armorick under him took their beginning Anno
Domini 460. as also the Roman Empire ceased in the West, Anno Dom. 477.
Chilperic breathed his last in the 24. veare of his Reign, about the year 484.

The first part of Chilphericks Life and Reign was much disgraced by his
vicious government, and his own actions, oppressing his Subjects, and for his
lusts satisfaction, abusing their Wives and Daughters: but afterward, being
awaked by affliction, and touched with the sense of his former wrongs, he
changed his course of Life, and took pleasure only in goodness, by his
conversion gaining the affection of the French. Thus Affliction does instruct
not destroy a mind capable of Reason; for as Winter storms kill not the Tree,
but keep down the wanton sap, which ascending in the Spring, makes it more
fruitful: so by adversity and misfortune the mind is somewhat oppressed, but by
virtue it is revived, and brings forth fruit of new conversion, and being dead
unto former vices, lives only to goodness, as this King, who in the last part
of his life conquered his desires, and tryumph'd in that noble Victory.

Clovis 5. King of France, and the first Christian King of that Nation. Anno
485.
portrait

THis Lovis, or Lewis, came to the Crown, Anno Dom. 485. at the age of 15. He
surmounted through his magnanimity, the glory of his predecessors: and we must
ascribe the true entry of the French into Gaul to him, according to the
affirmation of Gregory of Tours, Aymoynus, Ado, and the Modernes. For by the
overthrow by him given to Siagrius, Count of Soissons, son of Gilles the
Roman, he reduced the County to the subjection and Laws of the French, and so
abolished that small power and command which the Romans at that time had
formerly, in those parts of Gaul, 537. years after it had been subjected to
the Roman Empire by Julius Caesar. After that he espoused Clotilda, daughter of
Chilperic, one of the Kings of Burgundy, and being in the tenth year of his
reign, he compelled the Thuringians to receive and acknowledge his Laws. He
obtained the day at Tolbiac against the Almaines, reducing their Kingdom into
a Province and Dukedom: at his return he became a Christian in the 15. year
of his reign, and altered his Coat of Arms. Near unto Dijon he overthrew
Gondenbault his wives uncle, and in the 25 year of his reign, he slew with
his own hands in a battle Alaric King of the Visigoths, who was an Arian,
and drove them out of Gaul, and by that means he submitted to his Kingdom
the Country of Angolesme, Bourdelois, Perigort, Quercy, Rovergue, Albi,
Auvergne, and Tholouze, nothing remaining unconquered of Gaul, but Provence,
and a part of Languedoc. Afterward being honored with a Patriciall dignity by
the Emperor Anastasius, he removed himself to Paris, where he established the
Regal seat of his Kingdom. Others affirm, that in defiance and despite of
all his greatest friends and kinsemen, who at that time commanded a great part
of France, siezing their Estates and Lordships, prevented a disturbation of his
estate like to ensue. He reigned 30. years, and lies inhumed and St. Peter,
and St. Paul, now called St. Genovesue, yielding his last breath Anno Domin.
513. leaving four Children, Childebert, King of Paris, Clodomire of Orleance,
Clotharius of Soyssons, Theodoricke a bastard, son of his K. of Metts, and
two daughters; besides that son which was slain in the wars. The Kingdom
that was in its infancy of growth was twice mangled and dismembered.

In the time of this war, there came a messenger, that brought the King
tidings how that one of his sons was dead: upon the receipt of which news he
presently took the Crown from off his head, and fell into a heavy and
melancholy passion, insomuch, that for the time he was quite bereaved of his
natural sense; which the messenger seeing, added this to his former tale, that
his son dyed victoriously; hearing of which words, he revived, and took up
the Crown, and set it again upon his Head, and so rested satisfied. When
Richar Duke of Cambray, a man of bad conditions and lewd life, was by the King
taken prisoner, and put to death, being betrayed by the treachery of his
Barons, they imagining, as Seneca says, that Prosperum ac faelix scoelus,
virtus vocatur: That fortunate Treachery, should be esteemed virtuous piety:
and being not content with certain richly guilt Corcelets of Copper, which the
King had formerly sent them to procure the effecting of the aforesaid Treason,
they complained unto him, that they were but badly recompensed. He answered,
The gift of your lives is a sufficient reward for Traitors, who deserve
torments rather than preferments for betraying their Lord and Master. Your
lives which I suffer you to enjoy, is no small benefit and favor. For Kings,
though they seem to allow Treason, cannot love the Traitor. The Traitors thus
upbraided with their wicked nesse, and condemned by their conscience, slunke
away from his presence.

Childebert, the sixth King of France. Anno 514.
portrait

CHildebert, the eldest son of Clovis, succeeded in the Kingdom of Paris,
which was the Regal Seat of the Monarchy of France, Anno Domini 514. Upon his
undertaking the government, he was by his Brothers instigated, and his Mother
Clotilda to the revenge of the death of his Father and Mother, who were by
Gondebault murdered: whereupon making Wars upon the Burgundians, their King
Sigismund was taken in a Battle, and together with his Queen and Progeny was
thrown into a Well at Orleans. After that, they retreated against Gondemar,
brother to Sigismund, where Clodomire was slain in the pursuit. By the means
whereof, and the Wars following upon the whole Country of France, Gondemar
took possession of Burgundy: Whilst Theodorick afterward was against
Hermonfroy for the estating himself in the Kingdom of Thuringia, by the aid
and assistance of his brother Clotharius; Childebert seized upon the County of
Auvergne, but having intelligence of the return of his Brother Theodorick,
whom he supposed to have been dead, he went into Spain, against Almerick,
King of the Visigoths, on a quarrel for the ill usage of his Sister Clotilda,
which Alarick he slew near to Toledo, and took that City: and upon his
return he reduced Gascogny to his obedience, chasing the Visigoths back
again into Spain, by this means making the Frenchmen sole possessors of both
the Gauls, excepting one part of Provence, which for a time remained in the
hands and power of the Ostrogoths of Italy. Childebert upon his return from
Spain, went with Clotharius to beat Gondemar out of his Kingdom, which was
divided between them, as also that of Orleans was, after the slaughter of the
children of their brother Clodamire, except Claudius that made an escape.

About that time Theodobald, King of the Ostrogoths of Italy, yielded up all
the possessions they had in Provence, into the power of the French, to the end
that they should join forces with him against Belisarius, Captain General of
the Army of the Emperor Justinian in Italy, in the interim that Childebert and
Theodobert through ambition were in an ill course against Clotharius; but these
being reconciled by the Nobility of the Country, Childebert and Clotharius
went into Spain, and surprised Saragoca. Afterward upon a plot of Cranne, a
Nephew of his, he made War upon Clotharius, who being too eager and earnest
to scour the Field, and clear him of his Enemies, he dyed, in the 45. year
of his Reign, Anno Domini 558, and according to Sigebert and Aymoynus, 49. He
lies inhumed at St. Germans des prez.

This King was much troubled by his Brethren, with whom he had a divided power,
and ruled as the chief King; But Sovereignty admits no Partners, for Royal
power, like an entire stream, fed by the Spring, whence it descended, will not
mingle with other Titles, but does maintain an absolute and undenyed
Prerogative. His troublesome Reign concluded with his fatal death, for he was
slain by a wild Bull, which he hunted, the manner of his death being an
Emblem of his life; for in his life he persu'd wild imaginations and vain
desires, until this sad mischance laid him to rest in a Grave, to show the
vanity of humane designs, which are so soon struck dead, such is the glory
of this World. There is no virtue in this life, except it be to love the thing
that is to be beloved; and to love that, is Prudence; and not to be moved or
troubled for any matter of molestation, that is Fortitude; nor for any matter
of Flattery and delight, that is Temperance; nor for pride, that is Justice.

Clotharius 1. the seventh King of France. Anno 559.
portrait

CLotharius, the third legitimate Son of King Clovis, having reigned 45.
years at Soissons, (which is now called the Belgic Gaul) upon the decease of
his Brother Childebert, who dyed without issue Males, was proclaimed the 7.
King of France: which his Son Cranne perceiving, as being now destitute of
the support of his Uncle Childebert, by whose assistance he managed strong
Wars against this his own Father, came and cried him mercy. But he made so
mall use of his fathers Grace and goodness, that he committed again a new
Felony and Rebellion against him: And when his latter proceedings began to be
worse and worse in success than before, he fled to Conobre, or (as others
say) Canabo, Prince and Count of the Bretons, who entertained him, and
undertook to secure him from his Father. Whereupon his Father Clotharius with
his Army invaded that Country, where they joined Battle, wherein the Bretons
lost the Field, their Prince being slain in the place, and Cranne taken
Prisoner, whom his Father caused to be shut up in a house, and together with
his Wife and children to be all burnt to death. But Clotharius being the last
of the Sons of King Clovis, dyed that same day twelvemonth that he justly
had caused his son Cranne and his to be burnt, in the 51 years of his being
a King. Anno Dom. 563. leaving behind him four sons, who again divided the
French Monarchy into the former Tetrarchyes; insomuch, that that of Paris
befell to the eldest, named Cherebert, or Charibert: Soissons to Chilperic;
Orleans with the Kingdom of Burgundy to Gontran; and Austrasy to Sigebert,
with the Provinces on this side the Rhyne: but before the partage or division
aforesaid, they fell all upon Chilperic, in open Arms, for the surrender of
their Father Treasures, which he had already taken possession of, and by them
the City of Paris. Whereupon it seems that he took it to heart, and ever
after maliced his brothers, especially Sigisbert, who had been the motive (as
Paulus Diaconus says) that the Hunns made war against him. This King at the
time of his death said, Vnach, Anach, How great is the King of Heaven, that
has made subject unto death the greatest Kings and Princes of the world! which
speech discovered, that his too much affection to the world, made the approach
of death, coming to take off his upper garment of mortality, more terrible,
whereas, Mors aequo pulsat pede pauperum tabernas, regumque turres, and sceptra
ligonibus aequat.

Death impartially knocks at
Poor Cottages, and the Court gate;
And equally he brings down
Unto the grave, the King and Clown.
To satisfy Pope Eugenius, and for fear of Excommunication, for killing
Gawler of Quetot his servant, hearing divine Service in his Chapel, he
exempted the Lords of Quetot from homage and service due to the King, thereby
to expiate his bloody offense. But although his life was very bad and vicious,
and blotted with many impieties, yet in sickness his soul recovered some
health, by a free acknowledging his sin, saying, That his only hope and
confidence was in Gods mercy.

Cherebert 8. King of France. Anno 564.
portrait

AFter the decease of Clotharius, Cherebert his son was King of Paris, Anno
Dom. 564. He betook himself to all the kinds and sorts of dishonest
pleasures that his fancy suggested him. Gregory of Tours takes no notice of his
reign, because he governed not long: nevertheless, this mention he makes of
him, that he was excommunicated by S. German Bishop of Paris, for that he had
repudiated his lawful wife Iugoberge that he might take another, his brothers
Chilperic and Gontran, being no ways different in conditions. But Sigisbert
was an honorable and a virtuous Prince. Cherebert dyed (according to the
report of Sigebert, and the Chronicles of France) in the ninth year of his
reign, without issue or any notable memory worthy a King: which was a cause of
great controversy between his brothers concerning the succession; which in
the end proved a war, which (according to Paulus Aemilius) was of a long
continuance: nevertheless, although Gregory of Tours, and Aimoynus have very
confusedly spoken of that war, without designing or remarking the time that
it begun, nor what time Cherebert dyed: yet Gregory allows that there was a
sharing of the Kingdom. According to whose Relations, Tours, Poitiers, and
Aniou, fell to Sigisbert; but what partsbefell to the others is not mentioned
expressly but only this, that Chilperic obtained a part of Normandy with
Rouen: Gontran, Berry, Perigueux, and Gascony. But each of them kept his part
in the City of Paris, and promised each to other, that after their departure
thence, no one of them after that would enter into it again, without the
consent of the other two. This Cherebert dyed at Blaye, near Bordeaux, An.
Dom. 573. and was buried at St. Romanus of Blaye. Gontran, Sigisbert, and
Chilperic were, during their lives, in contention, until such time as their
brother Sigisbert was slain by two Soldiers, who were put upon that action by
Fredegunde, the wife of Chilperic, who was besieged in Tournuy by Sigisbert,
who not long before was acknowledged as King at Paris.

This King was enchanted with the cup of pleasure, whereof he drank deep,
and thereby committed many violent acts: for nulla capitalior pestis, quam
corporis voluptas hominibus a natura data est; unlawful sinful pleasure is
the cause of all plagues. And therefore Diogenes told Alexander, that he had
always pleasure enough, while Alexander had never enough pleasure; and
therefore he did not desire the insatiate pleasures of a King, and a King could
not enjoy his pleasures. But this pleasure does bewitch all the World,
especially the sensible and rational man, only the spiritual mind can fly a
higher pitch, and account all the delights of this world, but like the golden
trappings of the Ass, that is made brave to carry greater burdens.

Chilperic, the ninth King of France. Anno 577.
portrait

CHilperick having reigned Nine years at Soissons, and seeing himself raised
from a mean to a higher degree of his fortune, by the death of his Brother
Sigisbert, departed from Tournay to Paris: where having been received as
lawful King, Anno Domini 577. dispatched his son Merovaeus with an Army for
the reducing of the Countries and Cities situated upon the River Loire; but he
instead of that service, went directly to Rouen, where by the advice of the
Archbishop Praetextatus, he married Brunehault, the Widow of the foresaid
Sigisbert. Whereupon his father was enraged, and after having dispersed the
forces of the said slain Sigisbert, which came and assaulted him near
Soissons, he shut up Merovaeus in a Monastery at Man's, and afterward sent his
other son into Guienne, for the recovery of whatsoever had been in
Sigisberts possession: from whence he was repelled by Patrice Mumole, King
Gontrans Lieutenant. In the mean time Merovaeus, who was somewhat nettled, and
had betaken himself to Brunehault, is constrained to fly into Austrasie; from
whence being also expelled, was put to death, and Praetextatus confined to
perpetual Exile. After this Chilperick enforced Waroch, Count of lower
Bretagne, to acknowledge vassallage unto him, An. Dom. 584. On the other side,
Childebert, who labored to recover Marsiles which his brother Gontran detained
from him, made peace with his Uncle Chilperic, who on his behalf, with all his
forces fell upon Guienne, took Lymosin, Perigueux, and Agenois; and as he was
very desirous to follow his fortune upon Bourges, he was stayed by the Army of
Gontran, with whom he made peace. Not long after Chilperic perceiving too
amorous passages of his Wife Fredegund with Landry, Mayre of his Palace, to
take away the occasion of his resentment, they caused him that night to be
murdered, as he returned from Hunting, in the Month of September, in the 23.
year of his Reign, leaving one son, named Clotharius, four Months old.
Whilst the Daughter of Chilperic was in her journey to be married to the second
son of the Visigoths, she was stripped, ransacked, and robbed of her treasure
and jewels, and sent back again. An. Dom. 586. Helyeth interred at St.
German de prez.

The occasion of his murder was the discovering of Fredegunds affection to
Landry, for thinking to give his Wife a morning-salutation, he came booted
into her Chamber before he went to Hunting, and finding her kembing her hair,
which lay spread over her face, drew near without speaking, and with his
riding-wand in jest touched the hinder part of herhead; she taking the King for
Landry, who had free access for secret visits, said; In my judgment Landry, a
good Knight should always strike before, and not behind: whereupon perceiving
that it was the King, who by those words had discovered her mind, while the
King was gone a Hunting, plotting the death of Fredegund and Landry, they
contrived his death, and by murderers by them hired, the King accompanied
only with his Page, was killed as he returned from the Chase.

Clotharius 2. the tenth King of France. Anno 586.
portrait

THis Clotharius, the second of that Name, at the age of four Months, An.
Dom. 586, succeeded his Father under the tuition of his Uncle Gontran, who
confirmed Landry Mayre of the Palace, and constituted him his Lieutenant
General of the Kingdom, and retained Paris to himself, with all the
dependances of the Kingdom of Cherebert, the late King.

Gontran dyed in the 33. year of his Reign, Anno Dom. 595, having before
instituted for his Heir by will Childebert, King of Austrasia, his Nephew, who
lost the Battle at Soifsons against Fredegund, for the Guardianship of his
Cousin Clotharius: As also four years after, or thereabout, Childebert being
deceased, Brunechilde, who had the tuition of Theodobert and Theodoric her young
sons, lost the battle against her near Muret. Fredegund in the end dying,
the two Kings of Austrasia and Orleans being vexed at the Ambushments of
Clotharius, gave him battle near unto Sens and Estampes, and left him no
more than twelve Counties of his whole Kingdom. Theodoric as victorious and
tryumphant enters Paris. After that Theodoric having his hands full of his
other brother, and before that he would undertake any War against him,
accorded with this his brother Clotharius, that he would give him the Dukedom
of Denthelin, and other parts which he had taken from him, on condition that
he would be a Neuter between them. But he having intelligence of the death of
Theodobert, who was slain near Cologne in the 17. year of his Reign, enters
immediately upon those promised Countries. Theodoric being very desirous that
he should let go his hold, was impoisoned by Brunehault. Clotharius remaining
now sole peaceable possessor of the whole Monarchy of France, put all the
children of Theodoric to death, except Merovaeus, who was his youngest son.
Afterward he punished Brunehault according to her deserts and demerits; and he
instituted his son Dagobert King of Austrasia, against whom this man was much
incensed for the death of his brother Rodoald: but he was reconciled into
favor by the Marriage of Cometrude, Sister of his last Wife. Clotharius having
largely revenged himself upon the Saxons, who had revolted and wounded
Dagobert, daring that that were without the reach of his Sword, deceased the
45. year of his age, and of his reign 37. An. D. 632. leaving Dagobert by his
first Wife, and Aribert by the second.

Brunehault before mentioned, having caused many murders and mischiefs, was by
her own soldiers yielded up to Clotayre, and by the chiefest persons of his
Dominions, condemned to be tied to the tail of a wild Mare, and drawn
through a stony rough Country, being thereby torn in pieces, and dying many
deaths in one death; yet St. Gregory in certain Letters commends her piety and
wisdom, for many Temples were by her builded and endowed, while in the Temple
of her soul she sets up Altars to murder and whoredom.

Dagobert the 11. King of France. Anno 632.
portrait

DAgobert being possessed of the Crown Anno Dom. 632. notwithstanding the
oppositions of Brunulph, Uncle and governor of Aribert, he assigned him the
Countries of Aquitan and Guienne for his maintenance, whereunto he gave the
style and title of a Kingdom, and bounded it with the River Loire, and the
Pyrenian Mountains. After that he labored to polish his Kingdom,
administering justice to every man. In the ninth year of his reign, which was
the third year after the decease of his Father, he captivated himself to
vices, and voluptuousness, in such sort, that he grew infamous, although he
seemed much devoted to the Abbey of St. Denis, which he caused to be built, and
enriched it with the pillaging of other Churches.

In the interim, King Aribert deceased the seventh year of his reign, leaving
a son called Chilperic, who survived him but few days, of whose death
Dagobert was strongly suspected. He immediately united the Kingdom of Aquitan
to the Monarchy of France, and dismembered the Dukedom of Almania into diverse
parts, as Munster affirms. He released the Saxons of a yearly Tribute of
five hundred Cowes, which they paid to those of Austrasia, upon condition that
they should keep the Sclavonians out of the Dominions of France.

After this he crowned his son Sigisbert King of Austrasia. But because that
in the 12 year of his reign, Clovis, or Lewis was borne by his wife Nentilde,
he confirmed the kingdom of Austracy upon Sigisbert, and designed the
occidentall part of his Kingdom, called Neustria, together with that of
Burgundy, to his son Clovis. At that time Radulphe Duke, and governor of
Thuringia, for King Dagobert would needs oppose himself against Ansigise
Maire of the Palace of Austracy, and make himself King; but in vain.
Afterward Dagobert combated victoriously the rebellious Gascognes, and
intending as much to the Bretons Iudicael did him homage for his Kingdom.
Lastly, he deceased with a Flux the 19. or, as others affirm, the 29 of
January, Anno Dom. 647. sixteen years after the decease of his Father. He
lies inhumedat St. Denis: with this King dyed the splendor of the Kings of
France, and the power of the Maires of the Palace began to take a dangerous
and pernicious root.

The Character of this King may be thus drawn: He was better furnished with
virtue than his education promised: he strained the Kingdom by Justice, and
brought it to moderation, and obedience; the state thereof beingtoo much
slackned by his fathers lenity, and as he had tuned the government to yield a
virtuous harmony, he grew into the opinion of his Subjects, by his affection to
Piety, which he made to shine most clear and evident, by building and
enriching many Temples, especially St. Denis, honored since by being the
constant Sepulcher where the Kings of France lie buried. He banished also the
Jews out of his Territories. But these resplendant virtues were darkened and
disgraced by the foul sin of Adultery, whereby he grew infamous to his
Subjects and Strangers, and was so confirmed in this vice, that Anand Bishop of
Paris persuading his Conversion, was therefore banished. But his reason was
awaked by Pepius constant reprehension, to whom banishment being threatened, yet
he persisted, and by a brave importunity, neglecting his own danger, obtained
of the King to be merciful unto himself, and forsake his sin; such was the
mind of this virtuous Prince to hearken to the words of a wise man which were
spoken in season, that ever after he was wary both of his words and actions;
leavingan example of loyalty in a servant, and of Reasons victory in a Prince.

Clovis, (alias) Lewis 2. the 12. King of France, Anno 645.
portrait

THis Clovis or Lewis, although he were the younger brother of Sigisbert, whom
some hold to have been borne of a Concubine, took the possession upon him of
the Kingdoms both of France and Burgundy, under the government of his Mother
Nentilde, and of Prince Aega, Mayre of the Palace, who shortly after dyed: in
whose place was substituted Ercembault, kinsman to the late Dagobert by the
mothers side. In the mean time Pepin, Mayre of the Palace of Austrasie, dyed,
into whose office and place his son Grimoald would enter. But perceiving
himself to be opposed by a certain Otho, who formerly had had the government
of Sigebert in his minority made a quarrel between him and Leuther, Duke of
Almaine, who slew him. After, taking upon him the dignity of Mayre of the
Palace, he matched his Sister Begga to the Duke Ansigise, son of St.
Arnulph, by whom he had Pepin Heristel. Nentilde deceased Anno Dom. 651. as
also her Favorite Flaveate did, who was by Nation a Frenchman, Constable of
Burgundy, and Wilebald Governor of Burgundy Trans-jurane; by the reason
whereof Ercembault governed solely the Kingdom, until the King came to age.
Afterward in the year 657, Sigebert persuading himself that he should have
no issue, adopted Childebert, son of Grimoald, Mayre of his Palace as his
son: but after having a son borne to him, whom he named Dagobert, at his
decease he left him to succeed under the charge of Grimoald, who caused the
Infant Dagobert to be transported into Scotland by Dudo, Bishop of Poictiers,
there to be made a Monk, and caused his own son Childebert to be crowned
King of Austrasie; which caused the King Clovis, accompanied with his Mayre
Ercembault, to give him battle, in which they were both taken, and carried to
Paris, where they dyed. By reason whereof Clovis instituted his second son
Childeric King of Austrasie, and appointed Walfroy for Mayre of his Palace.
After that there being a great famine, Clovis took all the Plate and Treasure
out of the Church of St. Denis, and gave it to the poor, and in recompense
thereof he exempted that Abbey from the subjection of the Bishop of Paris. He
departed this life to a better, An. Dom. 665, in the 21. year of his age, or
as others, 23, and lies at St. Denis, expecting a glorious Resurrection.

This King and many other his successors, retained nothing of Sovereignty, but
the name and habilements of Kings, having resigned their Regal power to their
Mayres. For after they had committed all their Authority to these Vice-kings,
they themselves did never appear in public, but on the first day of May, and
then in their Chariots, stuck with flowers, and drawn with 4. Oxen. No suitors
were admited to the Kings presence, who in his Chamber surfetted on all kind of
pleasure, while the Subjects complained only to the Mayre, and by him had
their wrongs redressed; for the whole government, which belonged unto the
Kings, was now ordered by Mayres: yet this King was happy in his Consort and
Queen Bandour, of whose Piety and devotion to Religion, the Abbey of Shelces,
called St. Bandour, and other religious buildings were lasting Monuments.

Clotharius 3. the 13. King of France. Anno 666.
portrait

THis Clotharius the third, the eldest son of Clovis, succeeded in the Regal
power, Anno Dom. 666, (his brother Childeric or Childebert and Theodoric being
very young) Clotharius permitted the sway of government to his Mother Bathilde,
and his Mayre of Palace Ercembault, or Ereich, whom some are of opinion to have
been entitled Duke of France, and after the death of this, he entertained
one Ebroin in his place, (or as the Almaine Chronicles say) Eberwin, a German
borne, a man cruel, malicious, and wicked, who was preferred unto him by the
French.

He was the first, that, abusing the imbecility and Infancy of his Master,
raised the power and authority of his own dignity to such a height it never
had before, slighting and misprizing the Majesty and greatness of Kings:
insomuch that afterward nothing, of what importance soever, must pass without
the approbation of those Mayres, all the Principality (as it were) being solely
in their breasts and power, swaying yea, and limiting the expenses of their
Kings, as they list themselves: making Wars, Peace, Alliances, Ordinances and
Customs of the Kingdom at their pleasure. Some Chronicles say, that the Kings
living at their ease and pleasures, showed themselves but once a year in
public upon the first day of May in a general assembly, which was held every
year for the public affairs of the Kingdom, in a place called The Field of
Mars, where they rode in a Chariot drawn by four Oxen, accompanied with the
chief of the Baronry, as well hearing the complaints of their Subjects, as
giving audience to Ambassadors of foreign Princes; all which they received at
the second hand from their Mayres. This Clotharius was surprised by a Fever,
where of he dyed, having reigned four years, without leaving any issue, Anno
Dom. 670. Theodoric undertakes the government of the Kingdom, but through the
turmoyles between him and Ebroin Mayre of the Palace, the subjects enforced
him to a Monasticke life at St. Denis, and Ebroin at Leuxeul in the Franche
Conte. Clotharius lies at St. Denis in France. The composition of his mind was
cruel, which the subjects felt in heavy taxations, by him imposed, saying that
plenty and peace made them forgetful of their duty. And of him and his
successors it may be said, that they left nothing memorable, but that they left
no memory.

He may be reckoned among those Kings that were living Pictures of
Sovereignty, showed every year to the people, and so put up again into his
Chamber: but if Virtue be active, and consists in doing good, how could Kings
think that they might rule by their Deputies? You never knew that Flock of
sheep did thrive, when the Shepherd committed them to the care of an
Hireling, or a Boy and a Dog, for then the poor sheep are torn by Briars:
so are the poor subjects by oppressions, when Rex dormit securus, when the
King sleeps, and suffers his Mayres to govern him and his Realm. Therefore
it is said, that no man is good in regard of the nobility of his Birth, but for
the excellency of his Virtue: For true Nobility depends of Virtue, and all
other things are of Fortune. But this was the defect of these times that made
sovereign power have aweake aspect, and not to look so fine and clear as it
would have done, for this King and many others were then but like Pictures in
Arras: yet for all his cruelty, they bestowed upon him those funeral Rites
which appertained to Sovereignty, and inhumed him amongst the former Kings.

Childeric 2. the 14. King of France. Anno 670.
portrait

THis Childeric, King of Austrasy, and brother to Clotharius, being called to
the Crown by the Frenchmen, took Ulfoalde for his Mayre, but they found
themselves as much troubled with him as they had been with Theodoric and
Ebroin, whom they had made Monks, and confined into Monasteries. This
Childeric, who was a man of no great wit, and dissolute, confined (says
Sigebert) Ledger Bishop of Authun, a man of a holy life, to the Monastery of
Luxeul: Nevertheless the Supplement of Idatius affirms that he was so
gracious with him, that he was in a manner as Mayre of the Palace. He caused a
Gentleman to be ignominiously whipped, who was of Franconia, called Bodille, by
which fact he excited such a scandal against himself, and a general hatred
of most part of the Nobility of his Realm, that they all rebelled against him,
after the example of Ingolbert (alias) Wigobert, and Amalbert; giving such an
occasion to Bodille, that he sought all occasions of revenge for the notorious
disgrace he had received from him: who on a day espying him coming from
Hunting, caused him to be murdered by the assistance of his Compliees, who
also showed no more mercy to his Queen and Wife Blivilde, although she were
great with child; which was a cause that Ulfoalde fled into Austrasie, and that
the Lords of France, by the advice of Ledger Bishop of Authun, took Leudesil,
the son of the late Ercembault, for Mayre of the Palace, who (as it seems to
Aymoynus and Ado) taking Theodoric out of the Monastery, estated him in the
Regal Throne.

Childeric and his Wife were funebrially interred in the Church of St. German
des prez lez Paris, Anno Domini 676, and seven years after that by the
general consent of the Frenchmen he was called out of Austrasie to govern
the Kingdom of France. He left no issue; Sigebert and Paulus Aemilius seem
to confound the History, being of opinion that Childeric reigned after
Clotharius 12. years, and Theodoric 17. years after him: but others hold that
the reign of Theodoric continued 19, in the which they number the years of
his being a Monk, Childerick being substituted in his place. This King was
another of the same stamp with the former, by nature inclined to tyranny and
cruelty, disgracing his well-begun reign with a bad conclusion: for Kings
mounted on the top of Honor, and beholding their subjects with contempt,
thrust forward by flattery or ambition, do easily become Tyrants. And as this
Kings life did not show handsome, so his death plotted and effected by Bodille,
did instruct Kings not to dishonor or contemn their Nobility, being their
right Arm. And also it showed, that a disgraceful punishment inflicted on a
Gentleman, does touch the quick of the soul with a deep apprehension, for
being of a freer tender nature, they scorn as much to receive an injury, as
do any, and therefore they account it Justice to revenge, though they dye in
the confirmation of the act: This appears by Bodille, who concealed her anger,
until like Lightning it struck the King before it was seen; for he must be
silent, full of dark thoughts, and carry his light inward, that will vindicate
an injury; and write Mihi and vindictae litavi, this is a sacrifice to Revenge.

Theodoric 2. 15. King of France. Anno 680.
THeodoric (alias) Thierry, the second of that name, having been called out of
the Monastery by Ebroin, who in the time that things were in a combustion and
confusion through the death of Childeric, went and assaulted Leudesie, from
whom he recovered the Royal Finances. Afterward pursuing him, he, contrary
to his promise, caused him to be put to death, and causing himself to be
re-estated in that dignity of which formerly he had been deprived, persecuted
all those that had any way opposed him, filling all France with murtherous
cruelties: insomuch, that he put to death Ledger, Bishop of Authun, and his
brother Guerin. Whilst the Austrasians substituted Pepin, Heristed, Maire of
the Palace of Austrasie, in the place of Vlsoald, and appointed for his
Coadjutor Martin, his Cosen German, son of Clodulphe, second Son of S.
Arnulph. Where of Ebroin being advertised, went to give them battle at a
place called Locofic, where Pepin was enforced to betake himself into
Austrasie for safety, and Martin to Laon: From whence Ebroin, upon his word
given him in way of promise, fetched him out, and caused him to be put to death.
Immediately hereupon Hermonfroy slew Ebroin, and for refuge betook himself to
Pepin. By the reason whereof, Theodoric took to be Maire of the Palace one
named Waraton, a man well advised, who having been supplanted and undermined
by his son Gislemare, who dyed shortly after, entered into the State,
although he kept it not long, but dying left it in the hands and power of
Bertaire, who in such a high nature disgusted the Lords and Nobility of France,
that they withdrew their affection from him, and there went (namely Andr amne
and Reole) to consult with Pepin for a War upon Theodoric the King, and
Bertaire, who was near Taxieres in Vermandois defeated, and the said Bertaire
slain by some that pursued him. Whereupon Theodoric made a peace with Pepin,
and gave him the office of Maire of his Palace, as he already had that of
Austrasie. Pepin being desirous to compose the matters of Austracy in order,
instituted Norbert as his Lieutenant in France, in his absence. Afterward he
made his eldest son Drogon Duke of Campaign: Pepin began to govern in
France, Anno Domini 687.

Theodoric deceased 688. having reigned nineteen years, being a wonderful
patient King, and one that would not be moved with any small disaster that
should have happened unto him, either through the Divine Power, or Humane
Resistance. He left behind him three Sons, Clovis, Clotharius, and
Childebert.

This King being only a picture of Sovereignty, without any active motion, Ne
vixisse inutilis olim, videatur, left issue to show that he had lived. He sat
like a patient man, and beheld the Tragedies played by the Mayres, as they had
been a game of Tables, until Pepin won the set and Sovereignty of France.

This King was of a slow disposition, not contemning, but neglecting the World;
for if he had only slighted earthly glory, he would have violated Curious, who
when the Samnites brought him great store of Treasure, as he was sitting by the
fire side, he said, Non aurum haberi praeclarum sibi videri dixit; sedeis, qui
haberent aurum, imperare: He accounted it no glory to have store of Gold, but
to govern those that had store of gold. This was a magnanimity of mind, but a
dejected mind in a Prince, suffering a Subject to over-toppe him, did not
express the Courage of a Caesar, or an Alexander, that desired to be Monarchs
of the whole world.

Clovis 3. the 16. King of France. Anno 689.
portrait

AFter the decease of Theodorick, Clovis, his eldest son, began his Reign in
his minority, Anno Domini 689, having Pepin for Mayre of his Palace, who was
surnamed Heristel, son of Ansigise, under whom France, that heretofore seemed
to be divided, and (as it were) dismembered, seemed now to be as an entire
body, as formerly it had been, and began to recover its pristine luster and
honor, which it had in a manner lost by the precedent divisions, and intestine
dissentions; which also had given an occasion to the Aquitans and Gascognes to
range apart under the government of one proper and peculiar Prince, whom they
styled Duke; an occasion that Roderic of Toledo took to make mention of one
called Loup who was about that time.

Clovis reigned (according to the Contivator of Gregory of Tours, Ado, and
Sigebert) only four years, although Aimoynus, through the default of
Writers, acknowledges but two years. And it seems that in his time the
Saxons and Swedes, who upon the occasion of the precedent Wars by the
succession of times, had withdrawn themselves out of the obedience to the
French, were by Pepin summoned to their duty. And because they made him know
that they would not perform any such thing but upon compulsion, he passed
over the Rhine with an Army against them, wherewith he gave them such
downright knocks, that he beat them into a subjection according to his
desire. By the means whereof France for some space of time continued in peace,
recovering by little and little its authority and renown amongst other Nations
and strangers. Wherefore Clovis had no leisure to enjoy a long content, because
he dyed, although young, (as it is said) leaving the succession to his brother
Childebert, An. Dom. 692. The place of his death or interrment is not mentioned
in any Authors.

This King reigned but four years, and therefore his Character may be drawn
by the Emblem of the Sun rising, with a fair and clear aspect, but
presently over-cast with thick clouds, having this Motto, Orior and morior.

As the Sun which fairly rose,
Is hid with clouds that do enclose
The clear beams, while that it does show
A sorrow, weeping tears of dew:
So this King rose to a Crown,
And setting soon in death, went down
Leaving the Sphere of Majesty:
His Motto this; I rose to dye.
Childebert 2. the 17. King of France. Anno 692.
portrait

After the death of Clovis, his brother Childebert succeeded him, and reigned
according to all Authors, 17. or 18. years, except Ado, who allows him but
13. Nevertheless it seems that it was in his time that Pepin made war upon
Ratbod, Duke of Frizeland, who was as yet a Pagan and an Idolater; so that he
being overthrown, Pepin would not grant him any conditions of peace, unless
he would permit a Monk called Wilebros, (alias) Clement, a learned and
virtuous man, might freely give instructions to the Frizons in the Christian
Religion; which for the most part was generally approved and liked by the
people: but the Nobles and chief men remained and continued in their ancient
error together with their Prince. Moreover, that Pepin was a man accomplished,
and of singular parts, yet contrary to the Laws of Marriage, he was so much
taken with the fond love of a Gentlewoman called Alpaide, that he utterly
loathed his wife Plectrude. By reason whereof Lambert, Bishop of Utrecht, or
(as some report) Liege, a man of a holy life, boldly undertook to lay open his
sin unto him, although he had restored him to his See Episcopal, whereof
Ebroin had deprived him. Whereupon Alpaide was so much enraged, that she
instigated her brother Dodon to kill him: but he and his associates received a
reward due for such a demerite and murder. Pepin on the other part hearing
that Norbert his Lieutenant of Maireship of France was deceased, substituted
his second son Grimoald in the place, and caused him to marry Theudesinde,
Daughter of Ratbod, Duke of Frizeland.

About five years after, Drogon, the son of Pepin, Duke of Champagne, dyed,
(as Ado notes) Anno Dom. 708, but according to Sigebert, 699, whose estates
were by Pepin given to his son Thibault: after that, seeing the Swedes to
rebel against Childebert, under the conduct of Villarius he sent Anepos Bishop
against them with a powerful Army, which overthrew them, says Ado. Childebert
deceased An. Dom. 710, having reigned 17. years, leaving issue, Dagobert,
Clowis, and Daniel.

That which is chiefly observable in this King, was his dotage on Alpaide, a
fair and beautiful Gentlewoman, whom he loved beyond all respect of himself,
letting his Fame bleed to death, wounded with a bad report for his incontinent
life. For that King that is addicted to the love of a woman, has all his
senses so charmed, that he understands nothing but his pleasure, and is quite
given over to follow his own wicked desires. For, Est infoelicius quam
meretrice nihil.

A Whore may well compared be
Unto a Garden of misery:
He that does both touch and taste
Her fruit, does unto death make haste.
And he that endeavors to make a King see his own vice, does always perish
in the attempt, and resembles Virgils poor Gnat which the shepherd killed
with clapping his hand against his face, while he strove to wake him. So Bishop
Lambert, that would have waked the King, was by Alpaides plot and the Kings
consent murdered.

Dagobert 2. the 18. King of France. Anno 710.
portrait

DAgobert, the eldest son of Childebert, began his Reign Anno Dom. 710,
according to Trithemius, Ado, and Aventine; not as Sigebert would have it, 716.
There is not any memorable thing by Pepin done in his time, found or read
recommendable to posterity, but only the death of Grimoald, Maire of the
Palace of France, which was Anno Dom. 714. in April, who was miserably slain
by a Soldier, a Frizelander, in the Church of St. Lambert, belonging to the Sea of Liege, whither he went to visit his father Pepin then lying sick in
his bed, whereof he dyed the same year, about the midst of December, having
executed both the Maireships with great honor for the space of 27. years and
a half, after he had surrogated Thibault to his son Grimoald to be Maire. He
resigned the Mayery of Austrasie to a natural son of his called Charles,
whom he had by his Concubine Alpaide, already perceiving in him the signs of a
great Generosity, which enabled him for such a charge, although he were but
yet very young. Which gave an occasion to Plectrude, the lawful wife of Pepin,
cunningly to surprise him, and to imprison him in the City of Cologne, as well
for the Novercall jealousy she had of him, as for having means also to ruin
the estate of Austrasie, as also of France, being in the hands of her younger
son Thibault, assuring herself that the managing of businesses would pass
well enough under his name: But the Frenchmen not willing to be governed by a
Woman, being grieved also that the office of the Maire should be hereditary,
which formerly had been by Election, made an insurrection against Thibault,
whom they forced to fly into the Forest Cocie. After that they chose Ranfroy
for Mayre: The same year 714. Dagobert dyed, having reigned 5. years.

This King was dissuaded from the love of Alpaide, by Lambert Bishop of Vtrect,
whom this cruel Dame in revenge caused to be slain by her brother Dodon,
struck after the acting this Murder, with a disease of worms, the stench
whereof he being not able to endure, threw himself headlong into the River of
Menze. See here a punishment to affright the sinful soul; a King that had
before lived in a most voluptuous manner, that made a Whore the Center of all
his thoughts, thinking all happiness to be contained within that
circumference, having lost his reason, and being wholly governed by a
petty-coat, what a sad and fatal end did he meet withal! For pleasure comes
with a fair alluring face, tempting to taste of her Circes Cup, but when she
turns her back, she has a ragged ugly shape, which offends the sight, and
brings the mind to sad repentance. This King had highly sinned, and now worms
began to be bold with him, and eat his living flesh, so that corruption did
not follow after death, but contrary to nature he rotted and corrupted while
he lived, until the worm of conscience tormented his soul; a miserable death
attending a bad life.

Clotharius the 4, 19 King of France. Anno 719.
portrait

CLotharius the fourth, son of Theodoric, who was the fifteenth King of
France, was brother to the Kings, Clovis the third, and Childebert the second,
and Uncle to Dagobert the second; and by the plots of Charles Martel, upon the
decease of Dagobert, was made King. For, he perceiving that the greatest part
of the French had constituted King, a certain Daniel, a man of the Royal
blood, whom they had drawn out of the Monastery, and nominated him Chilperic
the second; he, by force of Arms having valiantly fought it out in the field,
and victoriously overthrown them, (as hereafter shall be mentioned) made
himself Master of all France, and from thenceforth Charles Martel against his
will was made King: But he knowing that the French, that could not contain
themselves without a King, and would not admit any to the Title, but those of
the Royal blood, knowing also himself not so descended, he caused this
Clotharius to be Crowned King, as the next of blood; not that he thought him
worth such a dignity as that of a Kingdom, but for a gaining of authority by
this fair pretext, and for the transferring of the Crown of France by little
and little to his Children, which afterward came to pass. For under the name
of Clotharius, Charles Martel did what he pleased, which so fortunately
succeeded daily, that by this means he made a scaling-Ladder for his son
Pepin to the Crown: So, that Clotharius the fourth, was made but an imaginary
or titulary King, who did not any thing worthy of memory, because he reigned
not above two years or little longer: and in the time of his reign, all
France was in great Factions and Divisions, by the reason of so many
pretendants to the Office of Maire of the Palace: also that Charles Martel had
after him the entire government of the whole Kingdom, and command of all;
insomuch, that he was called, Prince of the Frenchmen, great Master and
Governonr of France: And Clotharius had but the bare title of King: which is a
cause that Paulus Aemilius, and other Historians have not inserted him into the
Catalogue of the Kings of France. The aforesaid Clotharius deceased about the
year 719, and lies inhumed at Nancy.

This King, having not the power of a King was like a Picture of Majesty, for
some years exposed to the public view, but afterward death drew a Curtain
between him and the world, and then he was soon forgotten, whereas virtue does
give a second life to Princes, while their name is preserved fresh in memory:
For Sola virtus expers Sepulchri.

Virtue alone can never dye,
But lives still in memory.
And therefore that excellent monument, better than any Marble stone cut into
form by Carvers Art, is the statue of the mind, not that of the body: for
Statuae huiusmodi relinquendae, quae virtutis sint monumenta magis, quam
staturae corporis.

That King does need no Tomb cut out by Art,
Whose Fame does live in every Subjects heart.
Daniel (alias) Chilperic 20. King of France. Anno 719.
portrait

DAniel, whom some affirm to have been the Son of Childebert, and brother
to Dagobert; and others, that he was only of the blood Royal, was taken out
of the Monastery to be made King; and his former name was changed into
Chilperic, Anno Domini 715. In the beginning of his Reign he entered into a
confederacy with Ratbode Duke of Frizeland. In the mean time Charles Martel
escaped the imprisonment of his Stepmother Plectrude: and as he made all
possible means and ways for the recovery of his right, before that he could
effect any thing, he was by Ratbode defeated, near the Meuse, before that
Rainfroy, and Chilperic could come to charge him. Nevertheless, Anno Domini
716. after, as the Frenchmen went with a Convoy of an infinite treasure of
monyes from the parts near Cologne, which Plectrude had given them. Charles
Martel set upon them with such a fury, that he enforced them to forsake it
near unto Albis. By the means whereof, taking heart for this his first
fortunate enterprise, he overthrew Rainfroy, and Chilperic, Anno Domini 717.
the 21 of March, near unto Vinciate, who came with an intent of an ample
revenge, Charles by this victory assuring himself of the French, desirous to
reduce the rest of the Kingdom of Austracy, entered by force into Cologne, and
forced Plectrude to surrender unto him all his Fathers Treasures. And for the
greater validity of his cause, puts one forward (whom some esteem to have
been the Uncle of the last King Dagobert, called Clotharius, or Lotharius)
forcing him to take upon him the title and name of King: with him afterward
he went to encounter Chilperic, and Rainfroy, who by the means of Eude Duke
of Aquitan, or Gaseogne, were destitute of their Forces, being by him defeated,
and overthrown in Champagne, insomuch, that for safety Chilperic retired to
the said Duke with all his Treasures: Anno Domini 719. Clotharius, the titulary
King, departed this life, whereupon Charles Martel sent to demand King
Chilperic of Eude, that he might be sent unto him: by whom he was afterward
acknowledged as a King, and entertained Eude, into his amity and love.
Chilperic also a year after deceased, Anno Dom. 720. having reigned five
years and a half in a troublesome and turbulent Stare, which was scarce
settled in all the time of his Reign: Charles Martel, with Clotharius, (or
Lotharius, who had took the name and title of King) raising many perturbations
in his Kingdom: But Death at length drew his days to a period, after his
great and manifold troubles, and lies interred at Noyon.

Theodoric 21. King of France. Anno. 720.
portrait

THeodoric was by Charles Martel substituted to Chilperic, Anno Domini 720. and
reigned only titulary, as others had done before him, for the space of
eighteen years. Charles Martel left Aniou to Rainfroy, upon condition, that
he should resign the office of Mayre, and after that went to terrify and
chastise the Saxons, who had rebelled: at which time Ratbod Duke of Frizeland
dyed A. D. 727. He brought the Almaines into such a servitude to the French,
that before that time they never performed. Afterward, having enforced
Plectrude to come to an agreement, he marched into Aquitan, against Eude, where
in the way he, by a general Parliament, made himself to be styled Prince of
the French. Whereupon Eude, more enraged than vanquished, incited the Saracens
of Spain, by the means of Muguoce, Lord of Lerdane his son in Law their
servant, whom Charles encountered before Tours, and gave them an overthrow by
the assistance of the said Eude, who was enforced to take his part by reason of
the insolencyes committed by the Saracens, who had now come down into his
Country. In this expedition he gained the surname of Martel, for the
Mortality he made of his enemies. After the ending of this war, he went
against the Burgundians, to punish them for their rebellion, and also those of
Provence. After that, knowing the death of Eude, he reduced Gnienne and
Aquitaine into his obedience, dis-inheriting Gaifer and Walde the sons of
Eude; who retiring themselves into Gothland, and Septimany (alias) Languedoc,
recovered by the assistance of the Visigoths, a part of Guienne, in the mean
time that Martel was in wars against Pepin, the son of Ratbod, whom he
overthrew, and forced the Frizons to become Christians. After, having sent
back his Uncle Childebrand against the Visigoths and Saracens, who had
possessed Avignon, himself went to quell Burgundy, now upon a revolt, and by
the aid of Luitprand, King of the Lombards, he went to drive Athin out of
Narbon, and out of all Languedoc, and Provence, all which he submitted to the
Crown of France, and he took away the Earldom of Marsiles from Count
Morice, who had delivered Avignon to the Saracens. Theodoric dyed about they
year 740.

It was a usual custom for great Warriers and Soldiers in those times to get
some titular addition to their name; as Alexander was called Ille magnus; so
Martel was so surnamed, Quasi mortalis, or Martialis, because he was mortal in
his expeditions, and full of martial valor; he was the first founder of the
second Race of the French Kings, and therefore must needs be a man of great
virtue, since the raisers of private families are either Saints or Devils,
that get honor by virtue, or go to hell for it, to leave it to their
Posterity.

Childeric 3. the 22. King of France. Anno 740.
portrait

CHilderic succeeded his brother Theodorick, Anno Domini 740. He was the last
King of the race of the Merovees, Charles Martel deceased at Paris, October the
22. An. Dom. 741, leaving Carloman and Pepin surnamed The short, Giles
Archbishop of Rouen, (and Griffon, who was by another Mother) Carloman and
Pepin took upon all their Fathers possessions, and entitled themselves Dukes
and Princes of the French. They called Hunaud to account, who had made himself
a proprietary Lord of Aquitaine. In the mean time Griffon fastened upon Laon,
claiming it as his right; from whence he was fetched out, and imprisoned at
Ardennes. After Carboman having compelled the Almans (who had revolted) to his
obedience, An. Dom. 743, went with his brother to combat Odilon (or) Vtilon,
Duke of Bavaria, who was now in Rebellion, and had stolen and married their
sister: whom they having compelled to alter his Title of King to Duke, they
were contented he should peaceably enjoy their Sister as his wife. At their
departure out of Bavaria, An. Dom. 744. they went against the Saxons, whom they
enforced to undergo their accustomed yoke, giving their Duke Theodoric as an
Hostage, who upon his own word was sent back; but the year following he was
again taken in a relapse of a new revolt against the French. An. Dom. 746.
Carloman became a Monk of Mount Soracte in Tuscany, and afterward at Mount
Cassin. Whereupon Pepin reduced the whole Monarchy into his sole power.
Afterward he pursued his brother Griffon, who had retired himself into
Saxony, and from thence into Bavaria, from whence Pepin having fisht him, he
brought him into France, and gave him the Dukedom of Angely in Normandy. After
this Pepin affecting to join to himself both the name and the Royal
Authority, wrought with Pope Zachary by Bouchard Bishop of Witsbourg, and by
Volrade his Domesticke Chaplain so far, that the States of France assembling
at Soyssons, following the declaration of Pope Zachary, degraded Childeric and
his wife Gisale, and sent them to live a Monasticke life in the Country of
Bavaria, Anno Dom. 752. Thus was the Merovaean race deprived of its honor 293.
years after the death of Merovaeus.

This King and his Queen were enforced to be religious, and being deposed,
were sent to a Monastery; for it was a usual custom sometime to confine the
right Heir to such houses, or when they would be tid of their Kings, they did
shave their heads, and made Monks of them, wherein it may be they did their
souls good; but compelled Religion can never be sound. Jerome living in a
wilderness beheld Rome, and a King in a Cave will think on a Crown, and
therefore it may be said,

When a King wears the Friars hood,
He is either very bad or good.
Charles Martell, Duke and Prince of the French.
portrait

ONE Charles Martel is placed here amongst the Kings of France, not because in
his life time he took upon him the Name and Title of a King, but because
indeed he commanded all France (after that he had made an escape out of the
imprisonment of Plectrude his Mother in law) until his death: having made
himself to be created in an Assembly of three Estates of the Kingdom, Prince
and Duke of the Frenchmen, more haughty and illustrious than that of Mayre of
the Palace, wherewith his Predecessors were contented, and the Kings that
reigned in his time, had only the bare Name and Title, without any power at
all, as it has been already mentioned; yea, and after his decease his
successors qualified him as a King, as it appears by his Tomb in the Church
of Denis in France, where his Statue is crowned, and acoutred with Robes of
Regality, and is written about it in Latin words, Charolus Martellus Rex. And
justly he may be so styled, because there was no King in his time, but who he
pleased.

Pepin Heristel was his Father, Ansigise his Grandfather, S. Arnulph his great
Grandfather, who being a Widower was made Bishop of Mets, which S. Arnulph was
directly descended in the Masculine Line of Clodion, the son of Pharamond,
the first King of France. This Charles was so valiant and generous, that he
obtained the Surname of Martel, for the exceeding great strength of his arm,
and the memorable Victory which he obtained against the Saracens, near unto
the City of Tours, of whom he slew in the place to the number of 375. Thousand.
He reduced the whole Country of Languedoc, otherwise called Septimany, to the
Monarchy of France, which until that time was not warranted. He was very
zealous in the defense of the Christian Religion: yea, and Rome it self being
distressed by the siege of Luitprand, King of the Lombards, and brought into
great extremities, Pope Gregory sent by a Bishop Anastasius and Sergius a
Priest, the Keys of the Sepulcher of St. Peter to Prince Martell, whereby he
intimated unto him, that he put himself, the Church and the City of Rome into
his protection and safeguard. Wherefore he sent Ambassadors to the Lombards, to
entreat them for his sake to desist, and to permit a peace to the City of
Rome: which took such effect, that from that time afterward the Popes in all
distresses sought to France for relief upon all occasions, whereof they never
were destitute. In the end the Goths being vanquished, the Saxons and Frizons
subdued, Languedoc conquered, and Provence recovered, and France enjoying the
tranquillity of a happy peace. Charles made a distribution of his estate to his
Children, and shortly after dyed the 22. of October, Anno Domini 741, who was
the first that was ever styled Prince of France, and lies at St. Denis in
France.

This Charles Martell being King of France in power, though not in Title, did
make Childeric called Daniel, Clotarius the fourth, Theodoric the second, and
Childerick the third, successively Kings of France. The Realm and Crown of
France being by Childerick the third offered to Charles Martell, who refused
the Diadem, saying, That it was more glorious to reign over kings, than to be
a King, as appears by this Epitaph on his Monument.

Ille Brabantinus Dux primus in orb triumphat,
Malleus in mundo specialis Christicolarum,
Dux Dominusque Ducum, Regum quoque Rex fore spernit.
Non vult regnare, sed Regibus imperat ipse.
The Duke of Braban, whom Fame does renown
For the chief Champion of all Christendom,
Ruled both Dukes and Kings, and did disdain
To be a King, but over Kings did reign.
He had four sons, Caroloman and Giles of modest mild spirit, Pepin and
Griffon rough and ambitious: he left to Caroloman, Austrasia; to Giles, being
more hardy, France; and Giles given to devotion, he made Bishop of Roan; and
Griffon being of a turbulent dispotion, had no portion, but was enforced to
depend on his brothers, whereby the ambition of many brothers reigning together
was prevented. Fame does report that this Monarchy nor any foreign State did
ever yield a worthier man, or any one so well accomplished with so rare and
goodly qualities, being greatly admired and generally beloved for his pious and
renowned actions. For Religion, Wisdom, Justice, Valor, modesty in
prosperity, resolution in adversity, temperance in Authority, diligence, and
good fortune, made him a most complete Prince, not wanting any endowments fit
for so high a calling; and the example of virtuous perfection, for Virtue is
the highest perfection of Nature, beyond which humane frailty cannot reach.

Pepin the short, the 23. King of France, Anno 752.
portrait

PEpin the short, son of Charles Martell, was crowned King of France in the
beginning of the year 752, by Boniface Bishop of Magence. The Saxons rebelled
the year following, but Pepin made them very feelingly sensible of their
default. An. Dom. 754. Pepin having been again anointed and crowned in the
Church of St. Denis by Pope Stephen, successor to Zachary, who came to demand
aid of him against Astulph King of the Lombards, passed over the Alps, and
two several times put the King Astulph into such streights and extremities,
that he was constrained to surrender to the Pope duties belonging to St. Peter,
the Segniory of Ravenna, and all that he could claim in Romania: whereupon
the Emperor of Constantinople, to whom those Territories did belong, being
much discontented, An. Dom. 759 overthrew the rebellious Saxons, and compelled
them to pay tribute at every general Parliament of France 300. Horse fit for
service of War. From thence he went against Waifer, Duke and Governor of
Aquitaine, and enforced him to come to a composition, which nevertheless had
no effectual issue, until he had defeated him in diverse battles, and taken
the greatest part of his principal Cities. Which Waifer perceiving, and the
taking of his Mother, Sisters, and Nieces, was enforced to commit the rest of
his fortunes to the hazard of a Battle near Perigord, where, with the day he
lost his life also, and his Principality likewise.

Moreover Aquitaine received a governor (who in those times was styled Duke)
from the appointment of the King, and was reunited to the Crown of France.
Pepin retreating with his Army, was arrested with a fit of sickness at the
suite of Death, whereby he paid Nature what he was indebted, the 24. of
September, in the 54. year of his age, Anno Domini 768, leaving by his Queen
Berthe, Charles, and Charlemaine, to whom by a partage they made between them,
the Occidentall part of France, together with Burgundy, and Aquitaine befell to
Charles, who established his Seat at Noyon: and to Charlemaine the Oriental,
whereunder the Provinces on this side the Rhine were comprised, and held his
Court at Soyssons.

This King was the first of the second Race, under whose virtuous government
the happiness of France was much improved, and in his sons Reign; but
Virtue being no inheritance descending to posterity, the glory of the Kingdom
by the vices of succeeding Kings declined, showing that Grace and Goodness are
the absolute free gifts of God. That which assured him of his Subjects love,
and made him become gracious in their estimation, was his honorable Actions,
followed by the love and obedience of his Subjects, for the attractive love of
Virtue firmly obliges subjects to their Prince, and does by a secret violence
draw their affections. His last act concluded in a Royal death, being happy in
his honors and hopeful Children, one of his sons being afterward
acknowledged the worthiest and most excellent Prince that ever reigned: And
himself by his virtue and valor gaining his subjects love, instructed Princes
that the subjects love is the strongest guard, and that Virtue is the best
preserver of Majesty, giving a good and prosperous success unto all their
actions by whom she is embraced and daily followed, never leaving them
hopeless in any danger which may seem to threaten them, but rather encourage
and comfort their troubled spirits with assurance of overcomming and
withstanding whatsoever may prove obnoxious or hurtful unto them, and lastly,
it does not only enrich a man with all temporal blessings here in this life,
but hereafter advance him to immortal honor.

Charlemayne, Emperor of Rome, and the 24. King of France. Anno 768.
portrait

NO sooner had Charles made a partage with his Brother Charlemayne, but he was
enforced to restrain Lupus Duke of Gascoigne, and Hunaut of Aquitaine with
including them in a Fort called Fressac, built near to Libourne. After that,
marrying with the daughter or sister of Didier, King of the Lombards, he
entertained Trasilon Duke of Bavaria, into his amity. The year following,
Charlemaine deceased, leaving two sons, whom Charles permitted not to govern
in their fathers estate, but annexed it to his own. After that he made war
upon the Saxons, and in the year 773. at the request of Pope Adrian, he took
Didier in Pavia, whom he confined in banishment to Liege, recovering all the
possessions he had in Italy. And the same year he returned against the Saxons,
where he founded a Fort by the name of Francfort. Again, being gone into
Italy against Adelgise, son of Didier, who was revolted, he returned
immediately against the Saxons, whom he forced to embrace Christianity. Anno
Domini 776. The same year he took from the Sarazens in Spain, Pampelonne,
Saragosa, and made many Kings tributaries: in his return from thence the
Gascognes slew most of the best men of France. He subdued the Bretons of the
lower Brittagne, who had revolted: and Anno Domini 787. He took the fidelity
of Adagise, Duke of Benevent, and of Trasilon, Duke of Bavaria, whereupon he
confiscated to his own use, the whole Country of Bavaria, and enforced
Theodon, and his son to a Monasticke life. He overthrew likewise the
Sclavonians, and the Vandals, who held the Country of Brandebourg, Malgebourg,
and Pomerania, and also the Huns, and Avarois, who at that time possessed
Pannonia. He was saluted Emperor Anno Domini 801. upon Chistmas day. And
having received presents from the King of Persia, he was sought in marriage by
the Empress of Irene. After that, having combated the Venetians by his son
Pepin, and defeated the Normans; and having founded the Universities of Paris,
Bologne and Pavia; an intending to unite the Channel of the Rhine with that of
Danubius, he was intercepted by Death, Anno Domini 814 being threescore and
twelve years of Age, having reigned over the French six and forty years, and
of Italy three and forty, and of his Empire fourteen, and lies inhumed in Aix
la Chapelle.

This Charles got some addition to his name, as Alexander the Great, being
indeed great in the gifts of body and mind, Arts, and Arms. The groundwork
whereon he raised noble Trophies to Fame, was Religion, to which he give due
honor, and from thence deriving Moral perfections, he grew an admired Prince,
naturally favoring the Muses, learned in the Greek and Latin languages.
Philosophy, the Mathematics, and other Sciences, he called his pastimes and
companions of his sword. Something he wrote in Poetry for recreation, but he
especially delighted in History, the Register of noble Actions.

The Acts of Charlemaine in the Life of his Brother Caroloman, were many, and
most renowned, and also when he was King alone, but when he was enstalled
Emperor, he crowned all those actions by his care of the Church, and his godly
preparing for Death: for he was much inclined to to the reading of such Books
as were for the bettering of his understanding, and which tended to the leading
of a virtuous and godly life; as may appear by his spending three years in
reading the Bible and St. Augustines Books before he dyed. And the Character
of his Life was: That his virtue was the pattern of Princes, and his good
fortune the subject of their wishes.

Lewis the Debonaire, Emperor of Rome, and 25. King of France. Anno 814.
portrait

LEwis, who was left the sole son of Charlemagne, was consecrated at Rheimes by
Pope Stephen, Anno Domini 814. In the beginning of his Empire, he reduced the
Sclavonians, Sorabes and Gascoignes under his obedience who had revolted upon
the death of Charlemaine: He held a Parliament at Aix, where he caused his
eldest son Prince Lotharius, to be crowned Emperor with him, and caused his
other sons to be Crowned Kings, giving unto Pepin the Kingdom of Aquitaine,
and to Lewis the Duchy of Bavaria. By reason whereof, his Nephew Bernard
rebelled against him, who by a sentence of the Emperors Counsel had his eyes
pulled out, whereupon he dyed with grief. From thence Lewis went against the
Bretons, who had made an insurrection, and chaced Lindeute, Governor of
Austria, out of Pannonia. And having Anno Domini 824 renewed his alliance with
Michael the Emperor of Constantinople; and his wife Hermingarde being dead, he
married with Judith, daughter of the Count Artolf, which Judith, because she
advanced hers to the disadvantage of the Emperors Children, was a cause that
they raised an army against their Father; who having confined her into a
Monastery of Italy, she was put into a Coffer at St. Medards of Soissons, from
whence she was conveyed out by the French Princes. Lotharius seeing this, fled
into Italy: The troubles of France being appeased, the Danes and Normans
ransacked the Country of Zeland, and Frizland, and also the Bretons rebelled.
Also the Saracens much perplexed the Emperor in the chasing them out of Italy
and Provence, who finding himself near his end, bequeathed unto his son
Charles the Occidentall part of France, and by the death of Pepin, A. D. 838.
Aquitaine was added; and to Lotharius he left the Empire, with the rest of the
Kingdom of France; and to Lewis the kingdom of Bavaria. Lewis being
discontented at this partage, would needs take Almaine into his power: but
having been hindered two several times by the Emperors Army, in the end the
Emperor dyed in an Isle of the Rhine the sixtieth year of his age, and the
27. of his Empire and reign. Anno Domini 840.

This Lewis was of a mild and gentle disposition, fitter to be a Churchman,
than a King; whereby he grew contemptible to his Subjects; yet mild natures
much provoked are violent in revenge; for having taken Bernard, he imprisoned
him, then put out his eyes, and all the Bishops and noblemen his adherents: He
indiscreetly gave his sons their portions, and thereby procured his own
affliction, arming them with strength to rebel against their Father; and for
affection to Churchmen he was by them censured for his cruelty to the Bishops,
to be confined to a Monastery, while the Clergy adhered to the rebellious
Children against the father; whose late attempt was to chastise the insolency
of of his son Lewis; but age and grief concluded his happiness, and the
good old King having felt enough vexation in the unnatural rebellion of his
Children, forsook the world, and so found rest and happiness.

Charles the Bald Emperor, and the 26. King of France, Anno 840.
portrait

THis Charles the Bald having attained to the Kingdom, Anno Dom. 840, made
great Wars against Lotharius, until he gave him battle at Fontenay:
During these debates the Bretons revolted, and the Normans came even unto Paris
to sack the Abbey of St. German, insomuch that Charles was enforced by money to
hire them to a retreat. After this, Charles went against Neomenius King of
Bretagne, whom he routed and defeated twice afterward. Anno Dom. 851. after,
Aquitaine fell into the hands of Charles, who encloystered his Nephews Pepin
and Charles. He again overthrew the Bretons; the Normans on the other side
took the City of Nantes, confounding all with blood and fire, not sparing the
Bishop who was then at Mass.

Fifteen years after the battle at Fontnay, Charles the Bald made himself
to be anointed King in the City of Limoges. Lotharius became a Monk, leaving
the government to his son Lewis; but that part of Gaul beyond the mountains,
was divided between Charles and Lotharius his other sons. Baldwin having
espoused the daughter of Charles the Bald without his consent, in the end was
acknowledged as Son in law, to whom Charles gave the County of Flanders, and
lost Aquitaine, whereupon Lewis caused himself to be Crowned King of Germany
in the City of Sens, while Charles was entertained in Wars against the
Normans: which he recovered Anno Domini 859, forcing his brother to retreat
into Germany. Anno Dom. 863. they entered into a League. In the mean time
there grew great troubles amongst the Nobility of France, by the means whereof
the Bretons came as far as Poitiers, whence they were chaced by Charles, and
An. Dom. 863. they were constrained to take their Kingdom and Duchy by faith
of homage to him. And Anno Dom. 869. he was elected King of Loraine by the
death of his Nephew Lotharius. He was also crowned Emperor Anno Dom. 875. by
the death of his Nephew Lewis, which he enjoyed not above two years; in the
end whereof being desirous to return out of Italy into France, he was poisoned
by his Physician, the sixth of October, Anno Dom. 877.

The Reign of this Prince was confused, and unhappy, and of small fame, being
a King of no merit, for from the confusion in his reign the fall of this Race
did spring: But as Timanthes, when he drew Iphigenia ready to be sacrificed,
painted Calchas with a sad countenance, Ulysses sadder, and having spent all
his Art in expressing Menelaus grief, and not knowing how to make the Fathers
countenance more sorrowful, covered his head with a veil, leaving his passion
to be conceived by imagination: so this Kings Picture deserves to be hidden
and obscured with the veil of silence: for it is better not to write at all,
than to write, though justly, disgracefully of deceased Princes.

Lewis 3. Emperor, and 27. King of France, Anno 877.
portrait

AFter the decease of Charles the Bald, Lewis surnamed the Stut, was heir and
successor of his Father, declared himself not only King of France Anno Dom.
877, causing himself to be crowned in a full assembly of Princes and Prelates
at Rheimes, but also Emperor of Rome. Aymoynus testifies that he was in some
difference before his Coronation with the Primates of his Kingdom, because he
had distributed the estates and dignities of France without their advice:
Insomuch that he was enforced to give them content. In the mean time Pope John
the 8. conceiving a better hope of the French, than of the Almaines, labored
what he could to reduce Italy into the good liking of Lewis the Stut, by the
reason whereof he became an enemy of those that took part with Caroloman,
Nephew to the said Lewis, and eldest son of Lewis, King of Eavaria, who took
the Pope prisoner, whence he made an escape by the means of his adherents,
and retired himself into France with the Treasures of the Church, after that
he had excommunicated his adversaries, who nevertheless desisted not to
detain the City of Rome for the party of Caroloman. In the mean time the Pope
was conducted from Arles by Duke Boson to Lions; from whence he went to visit
the King at Troyes, and there the King caused himself by him to be crowned
with the Imperial Diadem.

After that the Pope was reconducted by Boson into Italy, whiles the Emperor
Lewis went to visit Lewis King of Germany in Loraine, where they concluded a
treaty of peace, for the which the controversy touching the Empire was
deferred till another time, and it was agreed that the possession should rest
as it did of that which each of them had in Italy, until such time that it was
otherwise agreed upon. Afterward as the Emperor was in his journey with his
forces to go visit Bernard Marquis of Gothland, or of Languedock, which had
given an occasion to the Emperor to distrust his fidelity, he was surprised
at Troyes with a malady, which moved him upon hope of recovery to return to
Compaigne, where he deceased the tenth of April, An. Dom. 879, leaving his Wife
great with child, who shortly after was delivered of a son who was called
Charles, afterward surnamed the Simple, whose life is set down as the
occasion falls convenient; wherein you shall read Notes worthy your
observation: In whose minority three things are observable, the efficacy of the
Law of State, preserving the unborne lawful Heirs right: The minority of a
King, subject to many miseries: And the liberty of great men in the weakness
of a young Prince. For Lewis and Caroloman being first chosen Regents, after
procured themselves under color of the pupiles interest, to be crowned Kings.

Lew is and Caroloman, or Carlon, the 28. King of France, An. 879.
portrait

THis Lewis and Carlon or Caroloman, sons of Lewis the Stut, and of Ausgarde
whom he had taken to wife without the knowledge of his father, and after by
his command divorced her, according to the Almaine Chronicles, were crowned
Kings of France, An. Dom. 879. according to the appointment of Lewis the Stut
at his death to the Peers of his Realm. Upon which occasion some Abbots and
great Lords partializing against them, appealed Lewis King of Almany, to take
charge of the affairs of France into his hands. To which purpose being arrived
at Verdun, he was pacified with the part of the Kingdom of Loraine, which was
given him, upon which he and his late Father had quarrelled with the Kings of
France. This fire being thus quenched, another controversy grew concerning the
County of Authun, between the Counts Theodoric, to whom it was given by the
late deceased Emperor, and Boson, who laid a claim thereunto, to whom it was
adjudged by Hugh the Abbot, upon condition that he should leave the Abbeys with
their revenues which were in those parts, to Theodoric.

The State of France being thus troubled, Boson grew more turbulent, causing
himself to be crowned King of Burgundy, as also did the Normans, whom the
Kings overthrew upon Saint Andrews day, Anno Dom. 879, slaying 5000. of them in
the field. After in the year 880, they made a partage of the Kingdom of
France, by which all the Neustrick France befell to Lewis, and Aquitan with
Burgundy with the Marches to Caroloman. This being done, they went to surprise
the Normans, whom they cut in pieces in the Carbonary Forest, to the number of
9000, the year after he deceased. The Normans not desisting from wasting and
sacking the Country of France, came up as far as Paris. Carloman was
enforced to buy a peace of them for 12. years, which he enjoyed not long, for
in the year 884. he was slain by a wild Boar a hunting, having reigned five
or six years; or running after a Gentlewoman, his horse carried him away, and
crushed him under a gate, or at the Chase he fell down and broke his neck,
for report differing in the manner of his death, agrees that it was violent and
accidental.

Lewis the Lubber, and Charles the Gross, the 29. K. of France, An. 885.
portrait

THis Lewis surnamed the Lubber, or Doe-little, son of Carloman, succeeded in
the Kingdom An. Dom. 885, at the pursuit of Hugh the Abbot, (who was so
named, because as it is thought, he was the first of the LayPrinces that
usurped the revenues of the Abbeys) so that all that part on this side Seine,
and that which was called Neustry, remained in the obedience of Lewis the Do
little; and the parts beyond the Seine with Burgundy, were under Charles the
gross, Emperor; who came to take the protection of France against the
Normans, according as Fulco, ArchBishop of Rheimes, testifies. Therefore it is
that they are placed in the Rank and Catalogue of the Kings. In those times
the Normans ranged about Neustry, sacking and spoiling the greatest part of
Cities in those parts, namely, Rouen, Eureux, and Bayeux: but they were so
soundly curryed by the valor of Hugh the Abbot, that in a long time after they
durst not set a foot there, which was a cause that the same year 887. they
returned to thunder upon the other parts of France, not sparing the Emperors
Country, where they surprised the Castle of Lovanne. From thence they came
before Paris under the conduct of their King Sigesroy, hoping there also to
make a prey as they had done elsewhere; but it was so bravely defended by Count
Eudes and the Abbot Goslin, that they were quite frustrate of their expectation
and pretense. This Lewis dyed immediately after, having borne the name of a
King to his dying day, for the space of two years, according to the Chronicle
of St. Benign. Moreover, Charles became so stupefied in his senses and
understanding, that when the Princes of the Empire knew that there was no hope
of his recovery, and that the affairs of the Empire might fall into some
disasters, they gave him into the charge of his Nephew Arnulph, natural son
of the late Caroloman, in whose custody he dyed soon after, on the 12. of
January, Anno Dom. 888.

This King was approved in the beginning of his Reign, and reverenced by his
Subjects, but afterward having made a dishonorable peace with the Normans,
yielding them Neustria, now called Normandy, he lost his Subjects affection,
and then through grief and jealousy conceived against his Queen Richarda,
fell sick, and through the distemper of his body and mind being unfit to
govern, was deposed, rejected both from the Realm and Empire, banished from
the Court, and having neither house nor means, was starved, and dyed for want
of relief in a poor Village of Suevia. Thus one of the great Monarchs of the
world dyed without house, without bread, without honor, without mourning, and
without memory, but that his end was prodigiously memorable. The reasons were
his imperious pride in prosperity, and his despairing dejectedness in
adversity, foolish extremes becoming not a magnanimous mind; therefore his
affliction was hated of his subjects, not considering the true cause of his
affliction. But the chief cause was his distrust in God in his extremities,
for he should have acknowledgd that (...) as David said,

O Lord, although I am thrown down,
I have held my peace, thou have it done.
Eudes or Odo. the 20. King of France. Anno 891.
portrait

EVdes or Odo, son of Robert Count of Paris, and of France, Tutor to the
young Charles, took the government of the affairs under the Title of King,
and by the consent of Arnulph and the Lords of France: He was consecrated and
anointed King, and crowned by Walter Archbishop of Sens, who was a cause that
Baldwin, Count of Flanders, and Fulco Archbishop of Rheimes, sent Guy, Duke of
Spoleto into Italy, to take the affairs of France into his hands. Odo being
established, gave the County of Paris and of France to Count Robert his
brother, and instituted Richard, Count of Authun, governor of the lower
Burgundy, for the defense thereof against the Normans; who having been Anno
Domini 888. repulsed from before Paris by Count Robert, came before Sens: from
whence they were beaten by the said Richard Duke of Burgundy, who was the first
that left that dignity hereditary and patrimoniall to his successors. Walter,
Nephew to Eudes, making an insurrection against him, betook himself into
Lygus, whence fetched out, he was put to death. At the same time Ebulo, Abbot of
St. Germans, and Count Ranulph, together with his brother Gotsbert, arose
against Eudes in Aquitaine, whom he made to go against them. In the mean time
the greatest part of the Lords of Neustria were in pursuit of Fulco,
Archbishop of Rheimes, and of the Counts Heribert and Pepin the young, Charles
the Simple, whom they caused to be crowned King in the City of Rheimes.
Whereupon Eudes and he grew to great Wars, so that Charles the Simple would
have entered into a confederacy of a Fleet of Normans under the conduct of
Hastings for the recovery of his Kingdom, but he was prevented by Fulco, the
Archbishop of Rheimes, because they were as yet Pagans. Fulco made peace
between Eudes and Charles the Simple, Anno Domini 897, and by this
reconciliation a part of the Kingdom was given to Charles, and the other
permitted to Eudes, who enjoyed it not long after, because he deceased without
issue, the 13. of January, Anno 898, and at his death he declared that of
right the Crown after him ought to return to Charles the Simple, to whom it
of equity and right appertained.

From the Race of this Eudes sprung Hugh Capet, for Widechind of Saxony
favored by Charle magne, sent his son Robert or Rupert into France, who had
two sons, Eudes and Robert, Father to Hugh the great, Father to Hugh Capet,
afterward King of France. Fame drew this Character of Eudes, that he was a
good wise man, yet he could not please the French by his Regency, for the
excess of his virtue curbing the desire of such as sought to raise their
fortunes by usurping power over the State and the Kings weakness supported by
Eudes, drew envy on his actions seeking the good of the Commonwealth, which
he neglected, but with approved resolution not abated l y private malice, went
forward with the government of the Realm, and at last resignes all his
Authority to the King, who like Phaethon, unfit to rule the Chariot of the
Sun, by his bad government met those misfortunes, which Eudes kept off while
he lived; for Wisdom and Discretion is Scutum invincibile, an invincible
Buckler, folly, envy, policy, treachery, slander, adversity, necessity, power
and injustice, and all the Devils invisible Artillery cannot pierce nor wound
him that is therewith armed.

Charles the Simple, the 31. King of France, Anno 898.
portrait

CHarles surnamed the Simple, was estated in his Fathers Throne, Anno Dom. 898,
and by the reason of his imbecility every one encroched upon him, by making
whatsoever passessions they held, as hereditary to their posterity, what
belonged of right to the Crown: in so much that great dignities, Dutchies,
Earledomes, and government of Provinces, which formerly were held but for term
of life in a titulary way, were now made hereditary. Anno Domini 912. he made a
peace with Rollon, upon condition that the Country of Neustry, bounded by the
River Epte on the one side, and by the Ocean on the other, should remain to
Rollon in Title of a Duchy, to hold it in homage of the Crown of France,
conditionally also, that he and his whole Country should be baptized in the
Christian Faith. By reason whereof he was baptized Robert, after the name of
his Kinsman Court Robert, from thence Normandy had its denomination. In those
times also there were great troubles in France, which were raised by Robert
brother to the former Odo, who had caused himself to be crowned King by
Herivee, Archbishop of Rheimes, whilst Charles was in Loraine; for the
recovery whereof Charles led an Army of Lorainers against Robert, whom he took
at unawares near to Soyssons. Notwithstanding this Robert resisted him
valiantly, but with the loss of his life: The battle nevertheless was lost
by Charles, who fled into Loraine. Whereupon the Allies of Robert called in
Duke Rodulph of Burgundy, whom they caused to be crowned King at Soyssons for
want of Hugh le Blanc, son of the late Robert, who by reason of his youth
durst not pretend the Crown.

After this Charles staid not long to be entrapped in the snares of Hebert the
Count, who sent by his Cousin Bernard, Count of Senlis to take him: so that he
was detained prisoner in the City of St. Quintin, and afterward was sent to
the Castle of Thyerry upon the Marne, and from thence to Peronne, where he
ended his life five years after his imprisonment, leaving Lewis in the power
of his Mother Theargine, who for his safety conveyed him into England. This
King having resigned his Crown to Raoul his God-sonne, the first Prince of the
blood by his Mother Hermingrade, Daughter to Lewis, and wife of Boson, King of
Burgundy, dyed with grief, and of a languishing Melancholy, to see that his
treacherous vassage should so affront and oppose him, and use him in such a
disgraceful manner. For there is no greater misery or vexation, than when the
Master through want and poverty is abused by the man, it does even astonish the
mind, and pierce the Heart unto death; for Asperius nihil est humili cum
surgit in altum.

Rodulph, or Raoul of Burgundy, the 32. King of France, Anno 923.
portrait

ROdulph having been crowned King at Soissons the 13. of June, Anno Dom. 923,
reigned 13. years; he went afterward to war with Hugh le Blanc against the
Normans, others against those of the Faction of Rollon, and also those that
inhabited upon the River Loire: from whence he was recalled to receive the oath
of the Lorainers, excepting that of Duke Gislebert and Rotharius, Archbishop
of Treues. Afterward having espoused Berthe, the Daughter of the Duke of
Swede, and because having a hope to attain the Empire, he passed into Italy,
where he overthrew Berengarius, and drove him out of Italy: and at his return
having made peace with the Normans, he went against William Duke of Aquitaine,
whom he enforced to acknowledge his estate to have dependence from the Crown.
And upon the parting of Estates of the Kingdom, which was held at Attigny, he
had gone into Loraine, had he not been hindered by a fit of sickness, which
retained him at Rheimes. After that he went against the Normans, but through
the rebellion of the Lorainers, who had surrendered the upper Loraine into the
power of the Emperor Henry, he was enforced to make peace with the Normans,
which continued not long, because having recommenced their wonted courses, he
was constrained to purchase his peace with a great sum of moneys, that he
might go against the Duke of Aquitaine, who was now in rebellion, from whom
he took Nevers. The brute of the Hungarians coming into France, gave him to
understand of the revolt of Count Heribert, who accompanying himself with Hugh
le Blanc, went to take an Alliance with Henry the Emperor in Loraine, and in
his return released King Charles out of prison, who went to meet William Duke
of Normandy, to enter a League against Rodulph. This beginning of Wars being
pacified between them, Heribert caused Charles again to be imprisoned, who
dyed shortly after at Peronne.

In those times there were great contentions amongst the Paires of France
concerning the Provinces, which proceeded from the politic slights of the
Emperor, who sought to hold the partialities of France in an equality, for
fear lest the tranquillity of France might not produce a trouble to his estate
in Loraine. Rodulph deceased the twelfth or fifteenth day of January, Anno
Domini 939.

This Roll was an usurper, and his reign was troublesome and unfortunate, and
for he and others, that had been servants to the Crown, being now Kings and
Dukes, thought to make their Dominions proper to themselves, and not depending
on the Crown, which bred much confusion in France, Italy, and Germany. The
Church did now strive to advance the Authority of the Pope of Rome, gaining a
great opinion among Christians in the Empires declining estate, and growing so
great a Monarch, that he assumed primacy above Kings and Emperors, which they
and their subjects refused to acknowledge.

In these times a young Maid attired like a Boy, went with a learned man to
Athens, and returned from thence so good a Scholar, being well read in many
Authors of exquisite learning and profound knowledge, and so expert likewise in
the holy Scriptures, that after the death of Pope Leo, she was created Pope
John the eight; but afterward being with child by one of her Grooms, she was
as she went in solemn procession, (according to the custom and order
observed amongst them) delivered of a child in the open street: Thus the
Empire, the Realm, and the Church were in those times much distempered and
disgraced, pride and ignorance breeding many miseries and reproachful
accidents.

Lewis 4. the 33. King of France. Anno 939.
portrait

LEwis, son of Charles the Simple, was recalled out of England by the Princes
of France, and at the instance of Hugh le Blanc was crowned at Laon by the
Archbishop of Rheims, the 19. of July, An. Dom. 939. From thence he went to
recover the City of Langres from Hugh le Noire, brother to King Rodulph, and
having entertained the Lords of Burgundy before he came to Paris, he discarded
Hugh le Blanc, and for his own Mother, that he might make use of her counsel:
which caused Hugh to allye himself to the Emperor Otho, by taking his sister
in marriage, and to reconcile Heribert. Afterward they went to follow the King
even into Burgundy, who in revenge fell upon Loraine, which caused the Emperor
to depart out of Almaine to oppose him, but they made a peace between
themselves. This notwithstanding, the King could not obtain peace of his
adversaries, until the Dukes of Normandy, Aquitaine, and Bretagne being
encouraged by Pope Stephen, embraced him, and they wrought so, that the
Emperor accorded with the Princes Hugh and Heribert, who awhile after that was
taken by the King, and hanged, because he had imprisoned his Father, which so
much disturbed the repose of France, together with the death of William, Dukes
of Normandy, who was murdered by the Count of Flanders, that Wars being
enkindled over all France, the King was taken prisoner by the Normans, from
being recovered by Hugh le Blanc, who delivered him to Count Thibaut, who
detained him longer for the space of a year. The Emperor Oath seeing this,
debated the cause of Hugh le Blanc, and began to maintain the Kings so long,
until carrying himself indifferent, he came to reap the fruit of both
their ruins without any danger at all. In conclusion, this last War which
had continued seven or eight years, being ended by an agreement between the
King and Duke Hughes in the City of Soyssons, the King dyed of a strange malady
in the Month of September, or according to others, the 12. of November, Anno
Domini 954, after he had reigned about 19. years, leaving by his wife Gerberge
Lotharius and Charles. This King, (as it is formerly briefly mentioned) to
revenge the death of his Father, whom Hebert Earl of Vermandois, had kept a
prisoner in the Castle of Peronne until he there dyed, caused one in the
habit of an Englishman, to come in haste to his Court at Landun, with Letters
which himself had written, though fained to be sent from the King of England.
The messenger being entered, and the Letters read softly to the King by his
Secretary, the King smiled, and said; The Englishmen are not so wise as I
estreem'd them to be: for our Cousin Harmant, King of England, has signified
unto me by these Letters, that in his Country a laboring man inviting his
Master to dine at his house, caused him to be slain, and now he desires your
counsel my Lords, what punishment this fellow has deserved: Whereupon
Thibaut, Earl of Bloys, said; that he was worthy to be tortured, and then
hanged on a Gibbet: which sentence all the Lords there present, and also Hebert
Earl of Vermandois did confirm and allow: Whereupon the Kings Officers there
provided in a readiness, apprehended the said Hebert Earl of Vermandois, unto
whom the King said, Hebert, this wicked Labourer is thy self, who did put to
death thy Lord and Master, King Charles my Father, for which thou have
condemned thy self to dye by thy own judgment. Whereupon Hebert was hanged on
a Gibbet on the top of a Mountain near Lodun, which since his Execution is
called still Mount Hebert.

This Lewis, (as was said) being nine years in England, was therefore surnamed
D'entremer, or from beyond the Seas: He was disloyal and unfortunate, for
though he endured much affliction, and many unkind fortunes, yet he was not
mended in his life by his sufferings, nor had learned to embrace Virtue, whose
Beauty appears most fair and comely, when her eyes are filled with tears,
making sorrow look with a sweet and lovely countenance: It is that which in a
Prince is most glorious, causing him to fix his mind only upon that which
may prove beneficial to the Church and State. But this was not the object
wherein this Monarch was delighted, so that he was deprived of that excellency
which by Virtue is attained. Besides he did degenerate from the blood of
Charlemaine, for birth nor adversity did enlarge his narrow thoughts to take
pleasure in noble actions: He came came unto the government after a long
absence, which made his return more grateful to the Subjects, while his
Enemies thought to creep into his affection by the tender of fained service,
especially William Duke of Normandy: thus Prosperity commands counterfeited
offers of fidelity.

Lotharius, the 34. King of France. Anno 954.
portrait

THis Lotharius succeeded to the Crown the 12. of November, Anno Domini 954.
He gave Burgundy and Aquitaine to Duke Hughes, and would have made him
Governor of Aquitaine: But Count William defending his right, shut the Gates
of Poitiers against him. Hughes deceased the 16. of June, Anno Domini 956,
leaving Hughes Capet, Otho, Odo, and Henry, with whom the King fell into some
differences concerning some Castles which he had seized from them. All which
were appeased by Bruno Archbishop of Cologne, Uncle to the King, who was sent
by the Emperor Otho. After this the King made an Assembly of the Princes and
Prelates of France at Soissons, for the surprising of Richard Duke of Normandy,
who plotted against the King, but he could not be found.

In the mean time Arnulph the old Count of Flanders being dead, who before had
made a donation of his Lands to King Lotharius, caused his body this year 965.
to be transported into Flanders, thereby to receive the submissions of their
fidelity. Lotharius Anno Domini 966. espoused Hemina or Emma, Daughter to
Lotharius the 2. King of Italy, and Adeleide, Daughter to the Emperor Otho, as
also Matilde, Sister of this our Lotharius, was married unto Bernard King of
Burgundy. Afterward the King intending to make Wars upon Richard Duke of
Normandy, at the instigation of Thibault Count of Chartres, was enforced to
come to an agreement with him. A while after Lotharius wrought with Ranier and
Lamhert, sons of the late Count of Monts in Haynaut, to make him a way for
the re-entry upon the Kingdom of Loraine, which the Almaines detained from
him: which was a cause that Otho, to cut off his designs, gave the Lower
Loraine to Charles the brother of Lotharius, to bring him thereby into his
disaffection. The King passed with his forces as far as Aix, where he thought
to have surprised the Emperor; who to requite him went before Paris, from
whence he was notably repulsed: whereupon they came to an accord, and Loraine
continued to Charles, who then added to his Coat of Arms an Arm proceeding
out of the clouds. After the death of Otho, King Lotharius falls again upon
Loraine, which he did not long enjoy, because he dyed immediately after, Anno
Domini 985.

This Kings life was a mere blanke, wherein no brave actions were inscribed
for the example of posterity, being a fruitless branch, and the first that
grew out of his stock, excepting his son, who derived from him no sap of
virtue, but was also barren in goodness: He did so contemn his brother
Charles, whom his Father had left no portion, but his favor, thereby to
increase his respect to his eldest brother, so that the Emperor, whose
assistance he desired, undertook the quarrel. From whence this Note may be
collected, that there is no depending on the favor of Kindred, who look for
much reverence, and will do no justice in rewarding desert, which they rather
contemn, until Virtue despised breeds open hatred.

But Charles aided by the Emperor, was undiscreete in his carriage, for the
aid received from the Emperor, made him to cleave too fast to the Germans,
and disclaim the French, as if kindness had altered his nature, and this
change drew on the justly conceived hatred of the French, and thereby overthrew
his estate, by carrying too open a show of disaffection for the wrong done by
his brother, and righted by the Emperor. Lastly, (as we said) Lewis dyed, but
the remembrance of his Reign survived to his disgrace and ignominy in
succeeding ages, leaving his son Charles to be the last King of this second
Race.

Lewis 5. the 35. King of France. Anno 986.
portrait

AFter the decease of Lotharius, Lewis the fifth, his only son, succeeded to
the Crown, Anno Domini 986, and was consecrated at Rheimes. The Continuator of
Aimoynus writes that he reigned nine years, as also another Chronicler called
Hugh, is of the same opinion. Nevertheless it may be proved by certain
testimonies that Lotharius dyed An. Dom. 985, to whom Lewis succeeded, and that
Hugues Capet began not to reign before the year 987, or 988, so that it
appears that this could not reign above two years, and was enterred at S.
Cornelius of Compeigne. Moreover, Glaber testifies that Lewis married one
Blanch which was brought him out of Aquitaine, who finding him not a man, left
him, and retired into her Country; which makes a likelihood of that which is
written touching his death: moreover, that if she were Daughter to the Duke of
Aquitaine, that she by consequence must be Niece to Hugues Capet. This Lewis
dyed (as many are of opinion) in the same manner as his father did, by the
means of his Wife Blanch, not leaving issue to succeed him. Odoramus gave him
the surname of Do nothing, because he had no leisure to perform any thing
memorable by the reason of the brevity of his Reign. Moreover, whilst Charles
Duke of Loraine, was the next by right to succeed him, as being his Fathers
brother; so is it that Hugues Capet, son of Hugues le Blanc took part
against him, pretending that (as many do write) that Lewis had resigned the
Crown to him by testament and will. But others are of opinion, that he
confiding to the power that he had in France, and to the favor which the
Nobility and the popularity of France did bear him, and through the discontent
of having a Competitor who was exceedingly beloved and affected of the
Almaines, and that he was too slow in gaining the succession of the Kingdom
fallen to him, and through the ill will he bore him, because he had married
the Daughter of Hebert, Count of Troyes, encouraged him to contest against him
for the Crown.

Hugh Capet the 36. King of France. Anno 987.
portrait

HUgh Capet was proclaimed King at Noyan by the Princes, Barons, and Prelates
of France, and afterward anointed at Rheims the third of July, Anno Domini
987, where he caused also his eldest son to be crowned King with him, named
Robert* about half a year after, viz. on the first of January. The people,
the soldiers, and all the Prelates swore a fealty to Capet against all men,
and especially against Charles of Loraine, who came with an Army to challenge
and stoutly make claim to his right by force of Arms in France, for the space
of four years, and first made himself sure of Laon by the means of Arnulph,
natural son to the late King Lotharius, whither Hugh went to assail him:
but he made such a brisk and valiant sally out against him, that he
shamefully routed both him and his. After having taken the Castle of Montagu,
and pillaged the Territories of Soissons and Rheimes, he retreated to Laon, and
the year following he made himself Master and possessor of Rheimes, through
the intelligence which he had with the said Arnulph, newly elected Archbishop
of that See upon the decease of Albero. Whereupon Hugh using the same passages
upon Charles, dealt underhand with Ascelin or Anselme, Bishop of Laon, who
made a way for him and his Army into Laon, where Charles was taken, and carried
Prisoner to Orleans with Agnes his wife, by whom during the time of his
imprisonment he had two children, but all four of them dyed prisoners. By
this prize the Wars against Charles being ended, and the Cities of Laon and
Rheimes retaken, yea, and the Duchy of France being incorporated to the
Domaines of the Crown, and the City of Paris beginning again to take upon it
the name of a City Royal, Hugh caused a Synod to be held at Rheimes, whereby
Arnulph was deposed, and Gilbert, Tutor to Robert the son of Hugh, was
substituted in his place; whereof the Pope not content, caused a Council to
be called in France, by the decree whereof Gilbert was dismissed, and Arnulph
restored. Hugh deceased the 22. of November, Anno Dom. 996, and as others
report, 998. He was funebrially inhumed at St. Denis in France by his Ancestors.

This King was the first of the Race of the succeeding Kings, being ordained to
bring the Kingdom to a flourishing estate, by so many great and eminent
virtues meeting in his Person: He was surnamed Capet, either from the bigness
of his Head, from the Latin word Capitosus, or because when he was young, he
would pluck off his companions Capps, fore-shewing that he should afterward
pluck off Kings Crowns; for when matters were by policy and the affection of
French advancing his desires fitly prepared, he got possession of the Crown,
though claimed by Charles, son to Lothaire, and with a complement of being
unwilling to leave the Crown to any particular Nobleman, least he should seem
to be preferred before the rest equal in desert, his son Robert propounded
to their Election, was also crowned, being a wise and temperate Prince, that
gave much apparent hope of making the Kingdom happy in his fruitful progeny,
pledges of his virtues, some whereof were expressed in this saying: That he was
a son without frowardness, a companion without jealousy, and a King without
ambition; which was a sufficient testimony of the goodness of his disposition,
and that he was wholly bent to those things which were truly honorable,
applying his best help for maintaining the general good of his Subjects,
whereby he gained the love and obedience of all men; and afterward he proved
an exact Picture of his fathers great and perfect virtues.

Robert 1. the 37. King of France. Anno 997.
portrait

RObert succeeded his Father Hugh, Anno Domini 996. Coming to the Crown he
caused Melun to be surrendered to Count Buchard, which Count Odo of Chartres,
son of Berthe, sister of Raoul of Burgundy, had possessed. After the death of
his wife Lutgarde, he married Berthe the widow of Eudon, Count of Chartres,
whom he after dismissed, because she was his Godmother; and took Constance,
daughter of William, Count of Arles, and of Blanch, daughter of Foulques, Count
of Aniou. At the same time Henry, Duke of Burgundy, Uncle by the Father to this
Robert, dyed without heirs. By reason whereof Otho Guillaume, surnamed the
stranger, pretending a right to that Duchy, by cause of the adoption which
Henry had made of him, made himself very strong in Auxerre, which was taken
from him by the King, with the Duchy of Burgundy. Otho the son of Charles,
Duke of Loraine being deceased, the Emperor Henry caused Count Godfrey of
Ardenne to be invested, notwithstanding that Geberge and Hermengarde, Sisters
of Otho, married to Lambert and Aubert Counts of Brabant and Namures, would
have put them in possession; which was a cause that the King instigated Baldwin
Count of Flanders, against the Emperor, who siezed upon the Cities, which are
upon the River of Escaut, as Valenciennes, Dinam, and others. Anno Domini 1015.
the King took away the City and County of Sens from Count Ramard, surnamed the
Wicked, by reason of the insolences and violences committed upon the
Archbishop thereof, and was confiscated to the Crown. Afterward he
compelled the Burgundians to return to their obedience, who Anno Domini 1016
were revolted: and after, having pacified the quarrel between Richard Duke of
Normandy, and Odo Count of Chartres, who were in great wars, he went to
treat with Henry the Emperor concerning matters of Religion, and their
Dominions and Royalties, in a Parliament which they held together at Iovy upon
Chere. And after having also appeased the quarrel between Eudes Count of
Campaign and Chartres, and Foulque, Count of Aniou, he deceased at Melun, Anno
Domini 1031. having reigned about three and thirty years, and lies interred at
St. Denis in France.

This Robert in his whole Reign expressed much wisdom; for as his father to
settle the Crown on his progeny, had caused him to be enstalled, so he
Crowned Hugh his eldest son at Campaign; and after his decease, preferring
virtue before eldership, elected the younger to be King, being of a more Royal
disposition, and the Duchy of Normandy was by Will left unto Robert.

When he had thus ordered his affairs, and pleased his Subjects with his
happy reign, having got enough Fame and Honor, he dyed, leaving him in the
remembrance of Posterity, this opinion deeply settled: That the Kingdom was
happy in his government, and blessed in his wisdom, resolution, peaceablenesse,
and continency, most eminent virtues, like Stars shining in the Sphere of
Majesty; but with a dim brightness in respect of his piety, whence the other
derived their borrowed light.

In the praise of the holy Martyrs he composed a Hymn, beginning thus: O
constantia Martyrum mirabilis; and washighly pleased, that his wife, with whose
name the former words had some agreement, had an humorous affection to approve
his writings, then generally applauded.

Immensum in Regis gloria calcan habet. In hope of praise the Muses tune their
strings
And hope of Glory makes virtuous Kings.
Henry 1. the 38. King of France. Anno 1031.
portrait

THis Henry succeeded his father Robert, Anno Domini 1031. notwithstanding that
his Mother Constance would have advanced her younger son Robert to the Crown
by the favor of Baldwin, Count of Flanders, and End Count of Champagne. But
being come upon them by the aid of the Duke of Normandy, he constrained his
brother to content himself with the Duchy of Burgundy. A while after Robert
Duke of Normandy visiting the City of Jerusalem, dyed at Nice in Bithynia: by
reason whereof Maugier, Archbishop of Rouen, and William Lord of Arques his
brothers, maintaining themselves to be true Heirs, raised great Wars against
William the bastard-sonne of the said Duke, by him instituted to be his Heir,
which was a cause that the King sent the said William of Arques, accompanied
with a great number of the Nobility of Normandy and France to the Wars of
Italy: from whence they were recalled by George Maniaces, Lieutenant for the
Emperor of Greece to Poville and Calabria, to employ them for the recovery of
Sicily, which the Saracens had now possessed upon promise of giving them a
part. About the year 1042, Thibault Count of Chartres, and Stephen Count of
Troyes, fell into a quarrel with the King Henry, whereupon he first fell upon
Stephen, whom he in a Battle overthrew. Afterward he deprived Galleran,
Count of Meulan (who took their part) of all his lands, and annexed them to
the Crown, and encouraged Godfrey, surnamed Martel, to make War upon
Thibault whom he took prisoner, and enforced him to surrender up the Town of
Tours for his ransom.

After this the King went to visit the Emperor Henry at Mets, where they
confirmed the Alliance made between them, which he broke by supporting
Thibault against the King, who following the example of his Father, resigned
his Crown to his eldest son Philip, Anno Dom. 1059, being aged 7. years,
and caused him to be crowned at Rheimes the 29. of May the same year: the
year following King Henry deceased, leaving the young King and another son
named Hugues, under the tuition of Baldwin, Count of Flanders. He lies at St.
Denis.

This Kings reign was somewhat troubled at the beginning to maintain his
Title to the Crown, given him by his Father, but belonging of right to his
eldest brother, which bred swelling thoughts between the brethren, the Mother
maintaining the elders right. An Army was prepared to end the difference,
whether the Fathers gift, or right of inheritance were a better Title; but the
cause was tried by the Sword, for Robert, whose right was then in question,
content with tame patience to loose it, and so prevent the effusion of blood,
by his mild disposition doing himself injustice. Whereupon agreement being
made between Henry and Robert, the Armies returned, and peace was between the
brothers concluded. Afterward when he following therein his Fathers example,
had seen his son firmly seated in the Throne, Death discovered the love of
his Subjects, expressed in their mourning for his decease, and was most
honorably interred with the rest of his Predecessors, having all the funeral
Rites and Ceremonies which belonged to so high a Monarch, to set forth the
excellency of his Person. His Reign begun with some blustering troubles, being
opposed on every side, which soon ended, and his subjects felt the beams of
favor shining most gently on them, when this Sun of Majesty was ready to
descend and set, which gave them great cause of lamentation and sorrow for his
departure out of this world.

Philip 1. the 39. King of France. Anno 1060.
portrait

PHilip succeeded his Father Henry Anno Domini 1060, of whom Baldwin, Count of
Flanders, took charge in regard of his tender infancy, until he came to riper
years: He perceiving that the Gascognes would mutiny, led his forces against
them, under pretense of going against the Saracens, and by this means he
dissipated the beginning of the seditions which were pullulating. A while after
Edward King of England dyed without issue, having by will instituted William
Duke of Normandy, heir and successor to his Crown, which in vain was opposed
by Harald son of Godwin, because he was slain in a battle which William
gave him. Baldwin, Regent of France, deceased about the year 1067, leaving the
County of Flanders to Baldwin of Monts his eldest son; at which times King
Philip might be at the age of 15. or 16. years. He married Berthe, Daughter of
the said Baldwin, by whom having two children he divorced her, and betook
himself to the Wife of Foulques, Count of Aniou, whom in the end he dismissed,
and returned to Berthe. Anno Domini 1095. Pope Urban convocated a Council in
November at Clermont en Auvergne, wherein the Pope upon the complaint of the
Patriarch of Jerusalem, and Peter the Hermit excited the greatest part of the
Princes of France, of whom were principal, Hugh the Great, brother to King
Philip; Robert Duke of Normandy, brother to the King of England; Godfrey of
Bovillon, (who in the year 1089, had the Duchy of Loraine given him) with his
two brothers Baldwin and Eustachius, together with the Counts of Flanders and
Tholouze, of Bourges and Bloys, to go to Jerusalem, which was taken in the
year of our Lord, 1099, the 15. of July, and was given to Godfrey of Loraine,
to defend and keep it as Governor under the Title of a King. After that he
took in Palestine, after having slain above five thousand Egyptians in a
battle, and seized upon the Port of Jasse, making hereby an end of the War.
Philip at the age of 57, deceased at Melun the 25. of July, Anno Dom. 1109, and
lies interred at St. Benets upon the Loire. William the bastard Duke of
Normandy, having been long sick of a great swelling in his belly, this King
Philip intending to make War against him, sent him word that he had lain
long in Childbed, and that if he might know of his uprising, he would provide
lights against his Churching. To which scoff the Duke returned this answer;
That he would come in person into * France, and have a solemn Mass sung at
his Churching, and that for Lights, he would provide a thousand wooden Torches
without wax, and a thousand Lances tipped with steel to fire those Torches,
meaning by the Torches, Houses, Towns, and Villages; by the Lances, Soldiers
to set them on fire.

The dissension betwixt England began in this Kings reign, and upon this
occasion: William the Conquerors sons, Robert and Henry, came to the King at
Conflans upon Oise, and playing there at Chesse with Lewis King Philips son,
the young Princes fell out, and words drew on blows, for Lewis called Henry the
son of a Bastard, and Henry struck at him with the Chesse-boord, and had
slain him if Robert had not stayed his fury. Afterward Robert and Henry fled
into Normandy, where they complained of wrong, and incensed many to take their
part. Afterward natural affection made the Fathers embrace their Childrens
quarrel, invading one another Territories, and maintaining hot wars. But to
conclude, the memorable War undertaken to recover the Holy Land from the
Saracens, was now begun under the conduct of Godfrey of Bologne, who being
chosen King of Jerusalem, refused the Diadem, saying, It is not fit for any
Christian Prince to wear a Crown of Gold, since Jesus Christ, the King of
Kings, did wear one made of Thorns.

Lewis the 6. the 40. King of France. Anno 1109.
portrait

THis Lewis the Gross succeeded to the Crown after Henry his Father, and was
solemnly Crowned at Orleans by Gislebert, Archbishop of Sens, Anno Domini
1109. He first began to quell the pride and power of the great Lords of
France, who countenanced by the King of England, arose up against him: but in
the end he accomplished his designs. In those times the Englishmen moved their
first wars upon the French, in the behalf of Count Thibault of Campaign and
Bloys. But the King in revenge commanded William the son of Robert Duke of
Normandy, and sent him, accompanied with Baldwin, Count of Flanders, and
Foulques, Count of Aniou, with an army to surprise them; whereupon there was a
peace made between them and the English, to quit Gisors to William the son
of Henry. Baldwin Count of Flanders, being wounded in the Conquest of Normandy,
went to end his life in Flanders; who for want of issue instituted Charles, son
of Canutus, King of Denmark, to be his heir. In the mean time the King being
advertised that the Emperor came in aid of the English, prevented his
design, and forced him to retreat. He forced also the Count of Auvergne, and
the Vicount of Polignac, to give satisfaction to the Bishop of Clermon; and at
his return he notified to William Duke of Aquitaine, that only Avergne but
also Aquitaine were in tenure of the Crown of France. The County of Flanders
was in question between Arnulph the Dane, Baldwin Count of Haynaut, and
William of Ipres, by the death of Charles, who was slain in S. Donatus, in
Bruges; and by the King it was adjudged to Robert Duke of Normandy, by right of
consanguinity; whereupon wars ensued. After that the King caused his son
Philip to be Crowned at Rheimes, the fourteenth day of April, 1129. the King of
England being in presence; but two years after he dyed, by means of a Hog
that came under his Horse feet, and frighted the Horse, that he threw him on
the ground. Lewis his brother was Crowned in his place by Pope Jnnocent, the
five and twentieth of October. 1131. Lewis the Gross deceased at Paris, Anno
Dom. 1137. leaving six Children.

Baldwin, Earl of Mons in Henault, complaining unto Lewis the Gross, that he
had wrongfully given the Earledom of Flanders, which was his right, unto Duke
William of Normandy, and desiring to have leave granted to maintain his Title
by Combat. The King said, You must combat then against me; for the Seignory
which you claim is my right and inheritance. This King also in a Battle,
being severed from his Soldiers, was likely to be taken Prisoner by an English
Knight, who laying hold on the raines of his Horse, cried aloud, The King is
taken: whereupon the King valiantly killed the Knight, and as he fell down,
said: One man alone cannot in Chesse play, give the King the Mate.

At a certain siege, being forsaken of his Soldiers, in regard of the
unseasonablenesse of the weather, and constrained to retire, he said with a
brave kind of anger; That an honest and honorable death was better than a
shameful and dishonorable life. The last action of his reign was the
marrying of his son unto the daughter and heir of William Duke of Normandy;
by this alliance to settle a more firm peace, and make his son strong in
friends, while his younger sons were compelled to depend on the mere favor of
their elder brother; on whom the estate being settled, they might thereby he
instructed to show unto him a willing obedience; for equality breeds discord
and grumbling; but an acknowledged dependence on another procures respect; for
necessity makes brave minds glad to be obliged.

Lewis the 7. the 41. King of France. Surnamed Augustus. Anno 1137.
portrait

THis Lewis undertook the government the same Month wherein his Father dyed,
and married Elianor, the only daughter of William Duke of Guienne, and
Poictou. Afterward he made war upon the Count of Vermendois, because
following the censures of the Pope, he repudiated Peronelle, sister to Queen
Elianor, that he might re-entertaine his former wife, whom before he had
divorced. And taking the Town of Vitry, in Parthois, he put to the sword and
fire more than 3500 persons: for the expiation of which fact, St. Bernard
advised him to make a voyage with his Army into the Holy Land, for the succor
of Palestine. Whither he arriving with his army, he had but an ill trick put
upon him by the Emperor of Greece: Moreover, perceiving his Army much
affoibled by the assaults of the Turks, he saved himself in the town of
Attalia, and came to Antioch, where the King conceived a great distaste against
his Wife, who had accompanied him all that voyage. Afterward he joined forces
with Conradus the Emperor, for the beleaguering of Damietta. But that siege
took no effect, through the envy of the old Christians there, conceived
against the new-commers; which was a cause that the Emperor, and the King
retreated each to his own home, where the King was in danger to have bin
surprised by the Emperor of Greece; but he was rescued by George, Lieutenant
of the King of Sicily. The King upon his return divorced his Wife, who married
with Henry Count of Aniou, and Normandy, who should succeed to the Crown of
England, bearing with him the Counties Poictou and Aquitaine. Afterward the
King took to wife Constance, the daughter of Alphonsus, King of Castile, who
being deceased he took Adele, or Ale, (alias) Alice, daughter of the Count of
Champagne, by whom, An. Dom. 1165. he had a son named Philip, and surnamed
Deodoctus: to whom, the King grown aged, resigned his Crown, notwithstanding
he was but 14. years of age, and was Crowned at Rheimes, An. Dom. 1179. King
Lewis deceased the 19. or the 29. of September; although some report upon the
29. of the same Month, or August, An. Dom. 1180. He lies interred in the Abbey
of St. Barbeau, which he had formerly built.

In his reign the Holy Land, which the Christians had taken, seemed to be
utterly conquered, remaining under the Christians obedience, until the unhappy
death of Godfrey of Bouillon; for when the Commander was gone, whose unspicious
good fortune put life into this action, the War did not prosper, yet before
his death he encountered an Army of six thousand men, which the Turks had
brought into Palestine, and came off with very good success, and had so
proceeded, if his Death had not prevented, the good fortune of Christendom.
For the name of so great a Warrier conducting an Army, prepares the way for
conquest, as opinion of victory; and learning is a great Engine in policy to
bring about matters. This King lost some reputation by his unchaste Wife Elenor,
who following him to the Holy Land, blotted her Fame with a sensual
imputation, loving Saladin a Iester better than the King her Husband; thereby
showing that lust is base, and does not regard either birth or honor. Yet
Lewis (showing the vertuousnesse of his mind, and Nobleness of disposition)
brought her back in his own Ship, because he would not be derided by any
foreign Prince: but being safely landed, he was much oppressed with grief, in
stead of casting her in the River, which she had deserved, he covered her shame
and his own by a divorce granted by a general counsel, punishing her by
showing too much mercy, while he sought only to be freed from the disgrace.

Philip 2. surnamed Augustus, the 42. King of France. Anno 1180.
portrait

AFter the decease of Lewis 7, Philip 2. succeeded to the Kingdom Anno Domini
1180, out of which he chased the Jews then there, and by his prowess and
conquests acquired the name of Augustus and Conqueror. He married Isabelle
(or) Alice, Daughter of Baldwin 4, Count of Flanders, in favor of which
Marriage he resigned the County of Artois: but afterward taking upon him the
cause of Lionor the Inheritrix of Elizabeth, (or) Mabel, Countess of Flanders,
in the Counties of Vermandois and Valois, against the Count Flamend, who laid
claim to the said Counties, as being of the ancient stock of Flanders, he
took only that of Vermandois, leaving that of Valois to the said Flamend,
whereupon he being in an indignation, went and performed homage to the King of
Germany, the eldest son of the Emperor, for the County of Flanders. Richard
also, Duke of Aquitaine, second son of the King of England, began to
dis-acknowledge the King: whereupon the King made war against him, and took
some Towns from him; but they were immediately accorded by the Popes Legate,
by whose persuasion they entered a League upon an expedition for the Holy Land.
But this agreement was incontinently broken upon new differences which happened
between the Kings of England and France; during which, the King took into his
possession the Counties of Man's and Tours, whereupon King Henry of England
took a conceit, and dyed in the Castle of Chinon: whereupon Richard his son
undertaking the Kingdom, married Adele Sister to King Philip, and they both
went to the Holy Land: where arriving they took the Town of Acre the twelfth
of July, 1191. After, upon some jealousies conceived between them, Philip
returned into France, leaving the charge of his Army to the Duke of Burgundy.
And because Philip, Count of Flanders was deceased, the King retained to
himself the County of Artois, which he gave to Prince Lewis. Whereupon
England made wars against him, which were ended by the death of Richard; to
whom John being substituted, and losing the battle at Bonnivel, the King
caused his son Lewis to be proclaimed King of England, which he afterward
left to Henry the son of John. After that King Philip sent his son Lewis
against the Albigeois, and as the said Philip held a Parliament at Nantes, he
deceased of a Fever, in the 43. year of his Reign, in tbe Month of July,
Anno Domini 1223.

This King being to join battle with the Emperor Otho, having caused a gilt
Bowl to be filled with Wine and sopps of bread, he said; Princes and Lords of
France, here with me assembled, let every one that is resolved to live and dye
with me this day, show his resolution by taking a sop out of the Bowl of Wine,
and eating it as I have done: which words being spoken, the Cup was presently
emptied, and afterward the battle being joined, the King got the victory.
Being informed by his Courtiers that some Royal Jurisdictions belonging to the
Crown were usurped by the Clergy, his answer was, I had rather connive at some
petty injuries, than commence Suits against the Semitears of God and his
Church. This King having put away his Queen Gelberge, the King of Denmark
complained to the Pope of this wrong done to his Sister, and a day of hearing
was appointed before the Popes Legate in the Bishops Hall at Paris: Philips
Case was well defended by his Advocates, but when none appeared to plead for
the Queen, a young man unknown steps forth of the press, and demands
audience; and having delivered the truth, and pleaded against the King for the
Queen, and when his Speech was ended, he returned into the press again, and
was never seen more, neither was it ever known from whence he came. The
amazed Judges remitted the Cause to the Council, and King Philip did ride
presently to Bois de Vinennes, where Gelberge was confined, and having embraced
her, received her into favor, and lived with her afterward in nuptial love.
And hereby it may be discerned, that no man can bring Nature to any
perfection, for this worthy Prince was much troubled in mind, and divided in
his thoughts by loving this Gelberge, whom he could not forsake, for she had
got such strong possession in his affection, that he could not turn her
remembrance out of his heart, passed away to her by deed of gift. Thus he that
could overcome his Enemies, could not conquer his passions. He reigned 44.
years, and by his virtue governed the State with such wisdom, that all his
troubles had a happy fair end; from whence this conclusion may be drawn, That
a virtuous King is in the end happy, howsoever he be compassed in with
difficulties.

Lewis the 8. and 43. King of France. Anno 1223.
portrait

LEwis, the eldest son of Philip, succeeded to the Crown, Anno Domini 1223.
He, together with his wife Blanch, sister to the King of Castile, was Crowned
at Rheimes, the 6. of August, to whom afterward the Surname of Montpensier was
given, because he dyed there: In the beginning of his reign, he renewed the
ancient consideration and alliance which was between France and Almany, and
upon his return he led his Army into Guienne; where in a set battle he
overthrew the English, whereof Savary of Maleon had the command: by means
whereof the French took the towns of Niot, S. John D' Angely, and Rochelle,
leaving nothing of the Country of Guienne, on this side the River Garonne,
unreduced to the obedience of the King. Insomuch, that all the Lords as well of
Poicton, as Lymosin, and Perigort, came to swear him fealty and obedience.
Amaury also, son to the Count of Montfort, came to resign into the hands of
the King of France the right which his Father had left him in the Countries of
Alby, Languedoc, Agenois, Quercy, and the County of Tholouze, whom in
recompense he made his Constable, knowing him to be a man capable of such a
charge. The year following Richard, Brother to the King of England, besieged
Rochelle; but hearing of the coming of the French Army, he passed over
Dardonne with his forces, and so into England to his brother. The year
following, the King, with the greatest part of his Nobility, upon the
encouragement of the Popes Legate, addressed himself to go against the
Albigenses and Tholosans, to encounter whom, he led his Army, and encamped on
Witsun Eve, before Avignon, which he took: passing further, he received the
keys of all the Towns, Places, and Castles of Languedoc, as far as within
four leagues of Tholouze: where, through the incommodity of the winter, and
maladies which much weakened his Army, he retreated and wintered in France, with
an intent of returning thither the Spring following to accomplish his
enterprise. But his death prevented him at Montpensier in Avergne; the twelfth
day of November, 1226. leaving Lewis, Charles, Alphonse, and Robert his sons,
all very young, and in their minority of years.

This King reigned but three years, in whom Vice had struck no reproach, nor
Virtue had made him famous; whereby it seems that his mind was of a middle
temper, not so poor as to become impious or wicked, nor so well bent and
inclined to noble actions, that he would strive to get Fame by his own
virtue; therefore he was only famous in this, That he was Son to an
excellent Father, and Father to an excellent son.

In his reign the Counsel of Lateran was assembled, whither resorted all the
chief Bishops of Christendom, and Ambassadors sent from Kings and Princes.

After Lewis had subdued the Albigeois, and left Governor to suppress any
rebellion which should happen, for the affection of conquered people is
treacherous, who do watch only an opportunity to revolt; he came to Mount
Pensier, in the year 1225. October the seventh, and there resigned his life
and Scepter, leaving a fair progeny, having four sons, who were flourishing
Branches of the Royal stem, the eldest whereof was heir unto his Fathers
Crown, but inherited more virtue than his Father gave him by natural descent.
The Flemings were now much disquieted by an Imposture, pretending that he was
their Prince; some were drawn to believe his claim, until by putting him to
death the people were better satisfied, and clearly discerned that his right
was mere fixion, maintained by boldness, as that Scene was, wherein Parkin
Werbecke in England played the same part.

S. Lewis 9. the 44. King of France. Anno 1226.
portrait

THis Lewis the 9. at the age of 12. years, succeeded his Father, An. Dom.
1226. He was consecrated at Rheims by the Archbishop of Sens in the absence
of him of Rheims. Blanch taking of possession of her son Lewis, confirmed
herself Regent of the Kingdom with the consent of the States: whereupon the
Princes in a rage proclaimed Philip Count of Bologne, Uncle to the King by the
Fathers side, Regent of France, which was a cause of great dissentions. She
brought through the sweetness of her words, Robert Count of Dreux into the
Kings obedience. But the Duke of Bretagne, and the Count of Champagne, with the
King of England, were enforced to acknowledge the King, on condition that the
Breton should do homage to the King for his Duchy, whereupon he was surnamed
Mauclarke. He having out-growne his minority, Anno Dom. 1234. espoused Magaret
the eldest Daughter of Raymund Berenger, Count of Provence, and after erected
the Country of Artois into a County or Earldom, which he gave to his brother
Robert, who was the first Earl thereof. He made a voyage into the Holy Land,
where he took Damietta after he had overthrown the Mamelucks: and from
thence marching to beleaguer Massaure, the plague grew amongst his Army, which
caused the Sultan of Egypt to charge him so strongly, that he was taken, and
most of his Army slain, nevertheless he was freed upon the re-delivery of
Damietta.

About that time Blanch, Mother to the King, deceased, which caused the King
immediately to return into France, after he had composed all matters in
Palestine. Being returned, he studied to polish and embellish his Kingdom
with good and holy Laws. He made an accord with the King of England, who by
that renounced all the right which he pretended to the Kingdom of France, and
the Duchy of Normandy. About that time Charles, brother to the King, conquered
both the Sicilyes, whereof he was crowned King, An. Dom. 1266. The King Lewis
made a second voyage for the recovery of the Holy Land, together with the King
of England. He went first into Afric, where he took Carthage, and at the
siege of Tunes he departed this life, Anno Domini 1270. He was canonized
after his death for the holiness of his life. He founded the holy Chapel at
the Palace at Paris, wherein he placed many holy Relics.

This King being asked by his Lords what Title of honor he would assume, as
the Roman Emperors and Kings of France in remembrance of their Acts and
Victories had formerly done, he answered, My greatest victory was obtained
against the Devil, when I was baptized in the Church of Poissi: and therefore
it shall be my greatest honor to be called Lewis of Poissi. His familiar
Letters, wherein he did not entitle himself King of France, but Lewis of
Poissi, being blamed by a private friend, he said, I am like a Twelfe-tide
King, chosen with a Bean, and keeping his Feast in the Evening: intimating
thereby his Election to another Crown in the Kingdom of Heaven, which second
Coronation should be in the Evening and end of his life. Having caused a
swearer and blasphemer to be branded on the lips with a hot Iron, whereat the
people murmured: he said he would undergo the same punishment, conditionally
that oaths and blasphemies might be no more used in his kingdom. He sitting in
Counsel, or beginning any action, would accordign to his Mothers instruction
in his infancy, bless himself with the sign of the Cross. And lastly, he
gave unto his son Philip these instructions at his death. My Son, love God
with all thy heart, with all thy strength, and with all thy soul; offend not
God in any case, suffer any torment rather than sin: Bear all adversity
patiently, acknowledging that God has sent it unto thee deservedly: Make thy
Confession often to some Minister of the Church; hear diligently the divine
service sung in the Church of God: Keep the good customs of thy Kingdom
carefully, abolishing those which are evil: Impose no Taxes on thy Subjects,
but upon great occasion. Favor those that fear GOD, love Justice, and hate
Covetousness: Let not thy Judges be impartial against thy Subjects: Keep the
Cities and Towns gotten by thy Predecessors; prefer good and sufficient men
to Benefices and Offices: Be an Example to thy Subjects, moderate the expenses
of thy Court, and so God bless thee. These were the good instructions which
this godly Monarch gave unto his Son for the leading of an upright life, and
to abandon all worldly delights and pleasures, so as he might both please God,
and be a pattern to his inferiors.

Philip 3. the 45. King of France. Anno 1271.
portrait

AFter the decease of S. Lewis, Philip the third, surnamed the Hardy, his
eldest son, having been proclaimed King in the Camp before Tunis in Africa
took his journey in his return through Italy, directly to Viterbe, to make an
agreement between the Cardinals, who in two years space were in a dissension
upon the Election of a Pope. He was Crowned at Rheimes by the Bishop of
Soissons, the thirtieth of August, Anno Dom. 1271. He after incorporated the
County of Toulouse to the Crown, upon the decease of the Count Alphonse his
uncle. He went to aid Gerard of Cassebonne, his Subjects, against the Counts
of Armigna and Foix, by reason whereof, the Count of Foix submitted himself to
his mercy. He restored the Country of Navarre to the obedience of Ioane,
daughter of the late Henry King of Navarre deceased. The King married Mary, the
daughter of Henry Duke of Brabant, who was suspected to have poisoned Lewis,
the eldest son of the King, by his first wife Isabelle of Aragon: She was
found innocent by the report of two Bishops who were sent to a Nun, or rather
a Sorceresse, to know the truth. The year after Peter De la Bresche, great
Chamberlain of France, and superintendant of the Finances, and affairs of the
King, was hanged, being accused and convicted, for having discovered the
secrets of France to the King of Spain, together with the death of the Kings
son. Anno Domini 1282. the Sicilian Evensong were executed upon the
Frenchmen, upon an Easter day, or (as others report) on the thirtieth of March,
or thirteenth of April: whereupon Charles, Uncle to the King, offered battle
to Peter of Aragon, the author thereof, but he refused it. Afterward the King
having caused Ioane, the only daughter of the late Henry, King of Navarre, to
be married to his eldest son Phillip, he marched with his Army for the
Conquest of Aragon, which by the Pope had been given to Charles de valois, the
second son of Philip, who conquered the County of Russillon; after that the
City of Gennes. And after that, having in an Embuscado slain the King of
Aragon, he forced the Town of Gironne to be yielded up. He went to conclude
his Fate at the Town of Perpignan, of a Malady which surprised him in his
Camp, Anno Domini 1285. the 6. of October.

This King, as it appears in the whole course of his life, would engage
himself in all businesses, and was therefore called the Hardy; but his
desperate Father would not undertake his Neighbors quarrels, nor seek to make
between them any agreement, unless it might be done by safe and quiet means.
The reign of this King was much disturbed by the wars maintained by Peter
and Roger for the Isle of Sicily, and after much effusion of blood, Charles
dyed, and also Peter, though politic, could not deceive death, but having
received a great overthrow, concluded his Act of life with grief and sorrow.
At last this King was by Roger, Admiral of Arragon, friend unto Peter set upon
him, lying sick a bed at Pepignan; yet in extremity he expressed a noble
courage, and with his sick weak voice so encouraged his Soldiers, that Roger
was droven out of Pepignan, the City held by Philip so distempered with this
alarm, that he grew sick and dyed the fifteenth of October, two months after
Peter, Pope Martin the fourth dying the same year, 1286. to show great
Princes, that their chief designs are crossed by death.

It was now decreed in a Counsel at Lions, that the Cardinals meeting after
the Popes death, should not come out of that Conolme until they had chosen the
Pope, which begun upon occasion of the tedious Election of the former Pope, and
the Decree is still observed. Thomas Aquinas now dyed, being a subtle
disputer: But Bonaventure, John Duns, called Scot, and Gabriel Biel succeeded,
and were famous scholars.

And to conclude, he was a Prince borne for a testimony to that obscure age,
and for corrupted times, to be a pattern to all Kings and Princes of
religion, equity, clemency, wisdom, valor, magnanimity, patience, and
constancy: to love piety, justice, order and peace, to join the love of
sanctity and modesty of manners, with Arms and State. Having showed that it is
very fitting for a King to be a good Christian, a good warrior, a good
husband, a good father, a good governor, a good Iustier, and to know how to
make war and peace. That it is very necessary to join unto the Majesty Royal,
piety, clemency, and authority to gain the low respect and obedience. And
lastly, that the best guard, and most assured revenew of a Prince, is the love
of his Subjects. Thus he was worthy of that venerable name, wherewith posterity
has justly honored him, being the Honor of virtue.

Philip 4. the 46. King of France. Anno 1286.
portrait

PHilip 4. surnaming himself The Fair, King of Navarre, succeeded his Father,
An. Dom. 1286. After that he had withdrawn his Army from Parpignan, he was
crowned at Rheims the sixth of January. He caused the Palace to be built at
Paris: at that time Edward, King of England, pretending to lead his Army to the
aid of the Town of Acre, which the Saracens had now beleaguered, made some
incursions upon the Sea-townes of Normandy, thinking to have surprised Rochell:
whereupon ensued the second War which the French had against the English,
(Here the French Writers show themselves most shamefully partial and false,
yet I am bound to follow my Authors, they being of that Nation) who
notwithstanding their alliance with the Emperor Adolphus, were valiantly
repulsed as well by Charles of Valois, where the Lord of St. John was taken; as
by Robert of Artois, who gained the victory upon the fresh Army, which Edmund,
brother to the King of England, had led to Bayonne: yea, and the Count of
Flanders, who declared himself on the English party, lost the battle at
Furnes against the Count of Artois, who went to join forces with the French
who besieged Lisle; and the Lords of Mont Morency and Harcourt took the Town
of Dover. The English perceiving that, demanded a Truce, which was converted to
a peace, by the Marriage of Madam Marguerite of France, Daughter of King
Philip, with the King of England.

Afterward the Emperor Albert and this King made an accord between them for
the conservation of their kingdoms against all men. A while after, the Pope
being much moved against the King, sent a Bull into France by the Archbishop
of Narbona, interdicting the King, which Bull was burnt in the Court of the
Palace. At that time the Flemings slew all the French Garrisons; whereupon the
King being enraged, sent his Army to Courtrac, which was by them defeated.
Whilst the King sent the Lords, Tarra a Colonian, and Nogareth with 2000.
Horse into Italy, they put the Pope in such a terror, that he dyed: The King
also took such a revenge upon the Flemings near to the Mount of Poville, that
he overthrew 36000. of them. After that, the King having suppressed the
Knights Templars, and causing James de Moulay or Beavieu, General of that
Order, deceased at Fontainebleau, An. Dom. 1314, and lies inhumed at St. Denis.

This King being persuaded to take revenge on a Bishop who had underhand
struck fire to kindle the tindar of contention between him and the Pope, he
said: That it was more noble in a Prince to save, than kill; to pardon, than to
persecute; and to forgive and remit, rather than to revenge: for says he, It
must be of necessity that all things which angry men do, must needs be full of
blindness and necessity, because it is no easy matter for a man troubled with
envy, to have the use of Reason; and whatsoever is without Reason, is without
Art. It behooveth us therefore to take reason as our guide in all our actions,
and to remove these passions of envy and revenge, for they ought not to rest in
a wise man's breast: Yet he was much affronted by Pope Boniface, commanding him
by his Bull to succor the Tartar, which the King, engaged in many affairs,
refusing to do, the Bishop sent by the Pope, told him: That if the King would
not obey the Pope, he would deprive him of his Realm. But afterward two
Gentlemen employed by the King, seized on the Pope in his Palace-Hall at
Anagma, and carried him to Rome, where he grew mad, and dyed Thirty five days
after he was taken, and had this Epitaph made by common Fame in his disgrace:
He entered his Topedome like a Fox, he reigned like a Lion, and dyed like a
Dog.

Lewis the 10. the 47. King of France, surnamed Hutin. Anno. 1315.
portrait

THis Lewis the tenth, already by his Mother King of Navarre, Count of Brye,
and Champagne, succeeded his Father, Anno Domini 1315. His Kingdom from the
beginning was marvellously troubled with mutinies and popular seditions; and
for that cause he was surnamed Hutin, which in old language imports mutiny and
quarrels. Enguran De Marigny Count of Longue Ville, was accused before the
King, by Charles of Valois, the Kings Uncle, for having ill governed the
Finances, charged the people with many impositions and taxes, and infinite
confusions; also for having taken money of the Flemings to grant them a peace
to the disadvantage of the King: wherefore he was hanged upon the Gallows of
Paris, which himself had caused to be built.

Afterward the King caused himself to be anointed, and Crowned at Rheimes,
upon the Feast of the Assumption of the B. Virgin: then he led his Army against
the Flemings, whom he forced to raise and forsake the siege of L'Isle. And at
his return he seated the Court of Parliament at Paris, to the end, that the
pleaders should not be anymore incommodated by so often removing it. The year
following the Count of Flanders came to visit the King at Pontoise, to treat
of a peace with him. In the interim, Lewis Count of Navers, his son, would
sieze upon Flanders, if the Flemings would have been content therewith, which
was a cause that his Father returned after that he had promised the King to
ratify to the Flemings that which he had treated with him. Upon this the King
was surprised with a Malady at Bois De Vincennes, whereof he died the fifteenth
of June, in the eighteenth month of his reign, leaving his second wife
Clemence great with Child, who was delivered of a son the foureteenth of
November, who was baptized John, who lived above eight days, there remaining
none of his Line, but Ioane, whom he had by his first wife, the daughter of
Robert Duke of Burgundy: by whom, Eudes, Duke of Burgundy, her Uncle, would lay
claim to the Crown: but Philip the Tall, brother to the late King Lewis,
opposing the Laws and Customs of France, in right of his Niece caused the
Crown to be adjudged unto him.

Lewis the tenth, surnamed Hutin had two Wives, Marguerite, daughter of Robert
Duke of Burgundy, by whom he had a daughter named Ioane, who was married after
to Philip Count of Evreux, son to Lewis of France, brother to the late Philip
the Fair, and by this means the Kingdom of Navarre entered into the families
of the Counts of Evreux: and Clemence sister to Carlobert, King of Hungary,
whom at his decease he left with Child of a son who was called John: and
although he dyed an infant, without having been crowned, he has not been
heretofore ranked in the Catalogue of the Kings of France. Nevertheless,
seeing that he was truly legitimate, and sole heir to King Lewis Hutin, he
deserved the title Royal, and to be inserted to the number of Kings, seeing
that dying he was with solemnity, and Regal pomp carried to St. Denis; the
Princes, his Uncles, and kindred being present at his Funerals; where he was
proclaimed, although dead, King of France, and Navarre. In the mean time that
Clemence was with Child, immediately upon the decease of Lewis Hutin, it was
ordered by the Court of Parliament, that Mounsieur Philip of France, Count of
Poitiers, should be Regent of the Kingdom until the fruit of the Queen (if
it were Male) should attain to the maturity of eighteen years: and therefore
he he bore in his Arms the Title of Philip Son of the King of France, and
Navarre, Regent of the Kingdoms of France, and Navarre. And so the Regency was
given to the next Prince of Blood, so that he were the nearest to succeed the
Crown. After the death of the said John, who lived but eight days, or at the
most but 20 days, (as some do write) there was some dispute amongst the
Princes of the kingdom, some maintaining the right to be ill grounded upon
Ioane, daughter to the late Lewis Hutin: and others resting upon the Justice of
the Salique Law, which yet was never violated in France, and ordayneth, that
there being never an heir Male of a King, the next of Blood, of the Male side,
shall come to the Crown, and excludes the daughters and the descendents from
them, although they be Males. But in the end the Parliament of the Paires and
Counsel of France, adjudged that Philip the Tall, Uncle to the late John, was
the true and lawful heir to the Crown: which was the first debate and
difference of the Salique Law.

The King reigned but an year and an half, thereby to make good the position
of Philosophy, Nullum violentum est aeternum; for his government was violent,
and therefore could not long continue. Enguerand, accused by Charles Earl of
Valois, and made odious to the people by his oppression of them, whereof they
are only sensible, was made a Sacrifice and Hanged; but after his execution
the Earl of Valois fell into a languishing Consumption, and King Lewis Hutin
dyed suddenly, so that the people began to imagine that Enguerands unjust
death was thus revenged on these Princes; which change of their opinion, shows
that it was rightly spoken: what the people says, a fool speaks: Therefore
it is observeable, that good Subjects may be unjustly afflicted, that the
people blinded by passion, and discerning not the truth, will undeservedly
speak well and ill of the same Action, and the same man. And lastly, that
great men, loving not to come to account, may abuse their authority.

Philip 5. the 48. King of France. Anno 1317.
portrait

THis Philip the 5, surnamed The Tall, the controversy of the right to the
Crown being not yet determined between him and his Niece, (Daughter to Lewis
Hutin) whom Eudes her Uncle upheld, and maintained her right, marched with
(...) Army every where complete to Rheimes, where he made himself to be
anointed King by the Archbishop of that See on the Feast of the Epiphany,
Anno Dom. 1317, and after returned to Paris: Whither he summoned Robert Count
of Artois, whom he forced to renounce the right which he pretended to that
County, whereof he had Vi and Armis, by force and Arms taken possession, to
the prejudice of Mahaut his Wives Mother. In the mean time Lewis, Count of
Neuers, Son of Robert Count of Flanders, entertained the Flemings to his
utmost endeavors in a revolt against the King; who, because he came not to
render homage for the Counties which he held in France, was cited to answer
for himself before the King: and failing in his appearance, all his
possessions were seized for the King. In the end the said Lewis, Count of
Nevers, came and submitted himself to the King, and recovered his Countries.
After, upon persuasion of the Popes Legate, there was a peace concluded
between the King and the Count of Flanders, the 15. of May, Anno Dom. 1320,
insomuch that the said Count did homage for his Lands to the King of France,
and accorded that Lewis, the son of Lewis of Nevers, should marry Madam
Marguerite, the second Daughter of France, upon condition that he should
succeed to the County of Flanders after his Grandfather and Father.

About the same time the Marriage of Isabelle, the third Daughter to the King,
with Guy the Dolphin of Vienna was treated, who not long after succeeded his
Father John in Dauphine. The Eldest Daughter was before married to Odo Duke of
Burgundy. After that the King quitted all the actions against his Subjects,
which some of his Council in abuse of his good nature had put upon and against
them. And as he was deliberating to have but one sort of weights and measures,
in one and the same species, and also a certain rate and value of moneys, a
malady intercepted his designs, by which he ended his days the third of
January, An. Dom. 1322.

He was a Prince of a tractable disposition, and therefore easily corrupted;
inclined more to ill than good. The chiefest thing worthy remembrance in his
Reign was, that his bad servants presuming on his gentle Nature, laid heavy
taxations on the people, who thereupon maintained, and thus he suffering his
Authority to be abused by them, showed that although he were great and tall of
stature, yet he had but little wit and understanding. A Benedicting Priest and
Monk pretentending a voyage to the East, committed many outrages in the East,
with a multitude of people by them assembled, and called themselves Shepherds,
until they were defeated in Languedoc.

This Philip would have made one weight and measure throughout his Realm, but
it proved but an Eutopian conceit, not to be maintained by Authority or
Reason. The Jews which were formerly expelled and driven out of the Kingdom,
were now again admitted; but after they endeavored to bring in an Artificial
Plague into the Kingdom, by using the help of Lepers, some were grievously
punished, and the rest banished out of France. Lastly, this Kings five years
Reign was Rasa Tabula, a blanke Table, wherein Fame has written no Royal
action.

Charles 4. surnamed the Fair, the 49. King of France. Anno 1322.
portrait

CHarles the 4, Count of March, brother to Philip the Tall, and to Lewis
Hutin, came by the same Law to the Crown, as his brother Philip had done, who
left no issue Male to inherit. He was crowned the twelfth of February, Anno
Dom. 1322.. He was severe in Justice, giving every man his right; desirous that
all should be guided and governed by the Laws and Authority of Magistrates.
Following that Norme, he caused Jordan of L'Isle, a great Lord to be attached,
who upon accusations of infinite enormities was attainted and convicted:
wherefore he was hanged, although he had married the Niece of Pope John 22,
and (as others are of opinion) his Stepmother. About that time deceased Lewis
Duke of Nevers, the eldest son of Robert Count of Flanders, who dyed
immediately after. By which occasion Robert, the younger son of the said
Robert Count of Flanders, entered into a difference with his Nephew Lewis, son
of the Count of Nevers: Hereupon the cause was pleaded in the Court of
Parliament, which proved of no validity to the good of the Nephew.

Then began the Wars between the English and French, Anno Dom. 1324, upon
the occasion that the Lord of Montpesac would, to the Kings prejudice, fortify
a Castle in Gascogne, upon the borders of France. Whereupon the King sent
Charles of Valois, his Uncle, who so happily acquitted himself of his charge,
that he recovered into the Kings powers all the Towns and strong holds in
Burgundy, which are beyond the River Garonne, except Bourdeaux, Bayonne, and S.
Senes. Afterward having obtained a Truce of the English, he dyed in December,
An. Dom. 1325, as also the King deceased at Bois de Vincennes, the first of
March, leaving Madame Joane de Eureux his wife great with Child, who afterward
in the Month of April, 1328. was delivered of a Daughter called Blanch. He
was the first King that ever permitted to the Pope the Decimations of the
Churches of France.

This King reigned six years, being wise, temperate, and just, three chief
virtues in a Prince, but unhappy in his progeny. As Soon as he was anointed,
he held a great Sessions in Paris, to hear complaints, and caused many
Gentlemen to be punished, in which number was one Jourdain of Lisle, a Gascon,
who being Nephew to Pope John the 22, had been pardoned for eighteen capital
crimes, and yet still grew more impious, former mercy making him presume more
of pardon, until at last he was taken, and brought to Paris, where King
Charles caused him justly to be hanged, as a memorable example, that Respect is
an enemy to Justice, which must be executed without sparing the guilty. To
conclude, this Prince was worthy of the French Monarchy, and deserved to be
reckoned amongst the chiefest men of State. And as the Kingdom was happy in
having so worthy and sufficient a King, so his short Reign deprived the Realm
of that good which it should receive by his government. But the best and most
perfect men, are in the blind world either despised for excess of good, or
some took away by death, to envy greater happiness, equal to their desert.

Philip of Valois the 6. and 50. King of France. Anno 1327.
THis Philip Count of Valois, the Son of the late Count Charles, and Cosen
german to the three precedent Kings, succeeded to the Crown by title of his
favor, excluding Lewis of Evreux his Uncle (who at that time, as it is thought
was already dead) and was confirmed by the States, notwithstanding that Edward
King of England pretended the Crown by his Mothers right, who was the only
daughter of Philip the Fair. He recovered a fair battle against the
Flemings, who had revolted against their Duke, and enforced the King of England
to do homage for the Duchy of Guienne, and other lands which he held of the
Crown; who in revenge thereof entertained Robert of Artois, Count of Beaumont,
who was banished out of France through a false accusation; by whose persuasion
the King of England being allied to all the Princes of the Empire, whereof he
had already obtained the Vicariate, began to war against Philip in
Nantonge, Anno Domini 1336. Afterward he caused the Flemings to revolt against
their Duke, by the means of one James Artivel, an Artisan. The French that were
in the Town of L'Isle, and first discomfited the English and Flemings, but
afterward they were shamefully overthrown at the Sluice Port, when they
labored to hinder the English from joining with the Flemings. And after this
victory he encamped before Tournay, where he continued during fifty days;
during which time, the Mother of the Count of Hainault, wrought a Truce between
the Kings of England and France, which continued not long, because the wars
were renewed shortly after between them, because the King of France caused
Oliver de Clisson to be executed for Treason: In which war the French lost
the memorable battle of Crecy, near Abeville, wherein the greatest part of
the Nobility and flower of all France was slain, and the Town of Calais
taken. After this, the King having married in a second wedlock the Lady
Blanch, daughter of the late Philip, King of Navarre, and received the
Danphinate of Humbert, together with the City and Country of Montpelier, for a
purchase of the King of Maillorque, he retired to Nogent, there to conclude his
days the 23. or 28. of August 1350. leaving John Duke of Normandy, and Philip
Duke of Orleans.

He was an ingenious wity Prince, as appears by his justification of the
Salique Law, by these words of Scripture. Consider the Lillies of the field,
how they do grow, and do neither labor nor spiune: intimating (whose Arms
are Lillies or Flower de Lyces) should not fall to the Distaffe. Also he taxed
the unfaithfulness of King Edward of England, in these two Verses by himself
composed.

Anglicus Angelus est, cui nunquam credere fas est.
Dum tibi dicit Ave, tanquam ab host cave.
The Englishman an Angel is, which trusted will deceive thee;
Beware of him as of a Foe, when he does say God save thee.
After his marriage with Blanch, daughter of Philip of Evreux, he lived not
long after he had tied this knot, this new wife being an unnecessary trouble in
his old age; so that sickning at Nogent, advising his two sons to live in
peace, and be careful of the Realm, which he resigned to the eldest, he
concluded his reign, and dyed. He was a King in whom virtues and vices were
equally mingled; for he was valiant in danger, and courageous in affliction,
just and loving to his subjects. But his rash valor, whereon he presumed
often, engaged him and his subjects in many miseries.

Edward the third, King of England. Anno 1351.
portrait

THis King comes here to be inserted amongst the Kings of France, being the
first that left the Title Hereditary to the Kings of England, and first
quartered the Arms of France with the English Arms, giving thereby occasion
and provocation of his succeeding Wars, he obtained a gentle victory at
Sluice, upon Midsommer day in a sea fight: Afterward he challenged Philip of
Valois, then King, to a single combat, by him not accepted, afterward makes a
Truce with France, their battles being ready to join in Britagne in France,
then he declares the Truce with France broken. He arrives afterward in France
with bloody Colors, with his hopeful son the Prince of Wales, then about
sixteen years old. Afterward he got the Laurel wreath of Conquest in the
battle of Cressey; and his son was as victorious as his Father, both
sharing equally in honor purchased by valor. But his son afterward, whose
veins were full of his Fathers Spirit and fortitude, showing that Nasci a
Principibus est magnum, obtained another triumphant victory against the French
at Poictiers, and by it confirmed his Fathers achievements.

Then again Henry invaded France, besieges Paris, concludes a peace: King John
of France being taken prisoner, and afterward ransomed, hostages were also
given, and so the Clouds of war were a while drawn away: but suddenly
again France felt a new storm from England; for the Earl of Blois slain in
Battle by the English, loses the Dukedom of Britagne. Then again King
Edward sends John Duke of Lancaster to invade Prance, and Sir Robert Knoles to
the parts about Britagne: and thus, as he was famous for his many other Royal
virtues expressed done at home, and in the circumference of his own Dominions,
so likewise he appeared in France like a flaming Comet, which boded the
effusion of much French blood: But age and sickness coming on he was forced
to leave the world, as the same did him before his breath left him: but Nature
could not hold out any longer, and he was forced to resign his life into the
hands of his Creator at Shene, (now Richmond) the one and twentieth day of
June, Anno Domini 1377. in the 64. year of his Age, having reigned fifty
years, four months, and odd days; in which time France felt the desolation
which war had made, he carrying away the never dying Fame of a valiant
Conqueror, he lies buried at Westminster, for as much of him as was Mortal;
but Multum sui vitabit Libitinam, his sonle and Fame are immortal in Heaven
and on earth, and was especially famous for Conquering France, and writing
himself, Roy de Angle terre and France, King of England and France.

John 1. or the second of that name, the 51. King of France. Anno, 1350.
portrait

JOHN the first, or second of that Name, succeeded to the Crown, and was
consecrated at Rheims the 26. of Septem. An Dom. 1350. In the beginning of his
reign he caused the Lord Ralph of Nesle, Constable of France, to be beheaded
for Treason, and in his place he jnstituted Charles of Spain, Count of
Angolesme. The Truce being broken between him and England, he betook him to
S. John d' Angely, and in his return he instituted the Order of the Star in
the Noble and Royal House or S. Owen. Afterward Charles King of Navarre,
caused the Constable to be massacred upon a jealousy which he had conceived
against him, on the sixth of January, 1353, and the Lord James de Bourbon was
substituted in his place. In the mean time the King of Navarre, whom the King
of Prance had pardoned, instead of acknowledging his fault, complotted against
the State of the said King, which being discovered, he entered into an Amity
with the King of England. By means whereof King John having surprised him,
sent him prisoner to Paris. Hereupon Philip of Navarre, his brother, in an
indignation caused the English to come into Normandy, against whom the King
intending an opposition, was enforced to turn it upon the Prince of Wales in
Poicton, where having lost the field through his temerity, he was taken
Prisoner. In the mean time the Parisians at the persuasion of Stephen Martel,
mutinyed against the Dauphin, who took upon him the Regency of the Realm, and
appeased the tumult, having first restored the places of Normandy to the King
of Navarre, who had escaped out of prison.

Afterward upon a treaty made at Bretigny the eight of May, 1360, a peace was
concluded with the English, and ratified at Calais the 24. of October. In the
mean time Philip, Duke of Burgundy, deceased at Roucere near Dijon without
issue, by reason whereof John the King declared himself to be his Heir. After
that he making a preparation for a beyond sea voyage, first came to London,
intending to make a strong peace with England, and dyed there the eighth or
ninth of April, 1364, leaving Charles the Dauphin, Lewis Duke of Aniou, John
Duke of Berry, and Philip Hardy Duke of Burgundy.

This King showed magnanimity in his most adverse fortune; for Apparet virtus
arguiturque malis:

Virtue will apparent be
In the depth of adversity.
which was verified in this King John, who sitting in the English Camp at a
Supper, prepared for him by the Prince of Wales, who had taken him prisoner in
the Battle of Poitiers, said, I purposed to have bestowed a Supper on you this
night, but the fortune of the War has made me your Guest. The Englishmen for a
sum of money having got by composition the Castle and Town of Gwines, King
John complaining to the King of England, that the Truce was broken, contrary to
their compact and agreement, King Edward answered, That Traffic or
Merchandise, the surrender of the Castle being by money procured, did not
break the former Truce.

This King, when King Edward required homage for the Realm of France, as held
of England, answered, that he could not justly alienate a right inalienable,
received from his Ancestors, and therefore he resolved to leave it entire to
his children, for affliction might engage his person, but not the Crown of
France, while he was King, who would sacrifice his life for the preservation
of France. He dyed in England Anno 1364, being a good Prince, but unfortunate;
wise in ordinary matters, but not in great affairs; just, but too confident in
trusting others; temperate in his private life, but violent in the public
government. For great virtues meeting with Wisdom, do on the Theater of this
life give unto Kings a Crown of applause and commendation.

Charles 5. surnamed the Wise, the 52. King of France. An. 1364.
portrait

AFter the decease of John the first, this Charles 5. surnamed the Wise, was
crowned the 19. of March, Anno Dom. 1364. At the coming to the Crown, he
gained against those of Navarre a very memorable victory under the Conduct of
the Lord Bertrand du Guesclin, in favor whereof he gave him the Dukedom of
Longueville. From thence the said Guesclin went to aid Charles of Blois,
against whom John of Monfort relying upon the English, had begun wars for the
Duchy of Bretagne, where he was taken fighting valiantly before the Castle of
Aulroy, against John Lord Chandos, High Marshall of England: but a peace being
made between the Duke of Monfort and the Countess of Blois, the King likewise
made a peace with those of Navarre, and after sent Guesclin to aid Peter King
of Arragon, against Peter King of Castile in favor of Henry, Sancho and Telco
his natural brothers; and also in revenge of the death of his Wife Blanch,
the daughter of the Duke of Bourbon, whom he had caused to be slain. Peter of
Castile being deposed of his kingdom, and Henry substituted, he retired to
the Prince of Wales, who restored him to his former estate.

After returning into Guienne, he imposed upon his Subjects unaccustomed
taxations and imposts, which caused the Lords of Armaignac and of Albert to
appeal to the King of France, as to their Sovereign Lord, which was a cause
that moved Charles to give an ear to Henry, who offered to hold his kingdom
of Castile from him, so that he would aid him in the re-conquest thereof.
Whereupon the King sent him Guesclin, who gained fix battles against his
Enemy, and in the fixed Peter of Castile was taken by the Lord de Villains, a
French Knight, of whom Henry ransomed him, and put him to death, enjoying by
that means the kingdom of Castile.

In the mean time, because the King embraced the appeal of the Lords of
Gascogne, the Prince of Wales denounced war against him, which the King
managed so well by the assistance of his brothers, that repairing the losses of
his Father and Grandfather received by the English, he reconquered Guienne,
Poictou, and Bretagne, and deceased in September, Anno Dom. 1380, leaving
Charles and Lewis under the tuition of their Unkles.

This King had many virtues, shining in all estates, both in happiness and
adversity, and when the Realm was in the heat of troubles, he saved it from
ruin, so that his fame was spread abroad, leaving an honorable remembrance to
his posterity. He favored Learning and the learned, preferring the
Schoolmaster Nicholas Oresme: He caused the Bible to be translated, imitating
therein St. Lewis, and took great delight to read the Scripture and
Philosophy, and he made Aristotle's Ethics and Politics, and many places of
Tully to be translated into French; and his favor showed to learned men,
cherished their fancies, and made them seek unto the forsaken Muses for witty
inventions. He would hear Suits in open Court, and redress the wrongs of the
oppressed, and took pleasure to advance his household servants, and gave them
means for bringing up their sons, and marrying their daughters: And as he was
a favourer of Learning, so Bartholl, Baldus, Petrarch, Bociac, Plorindes,
Bonaventure, and John Wickliffe of Oxford in England lived in his Reign. But
Virtues are not hereditary, for Charles son to this King, degenerated from
his Father, and the Kingdom of France was afterward punished in the weakness
of the succeeding Kings, so that the confused government brought forth sad
effects, such as are to be expected where the rabble multitude have a power
unrestrained by Authority, and do swarm and rove about like unruly Bees.

Charles 6. the 53. King of France. Anno 1380.
portrait

THis Charles 6. about the age of 14. years, was crowned the first of
November, Anno. Dom. 1380. In the beginning of his Reign he received homage
for the Duchy of Bretagne, and enforced the Gaulois to their obedience to
their Duke; as also he chastised the Parisians, who had mutinyed about imposts,
having Mallets as a token of their faction, whereupon they were called
Maillotins. In the mean time Peter de Craon wounded Clifson Constable of
France, whereof the King intending a revenge, fell into a frenzy, by reason
whereof the kingdom was put into the hands of the Dukes of Berry and Burgundy,
who laying hands upon Clisson, by an Act of Parliament, caused him to be
deprived of his estate, and banished the kingdom.

The King of England married the Lady Isabell, the eldest Daughter to Charles.
whereupon a Truce was concluded between the English and French for Thirty
years. But King Richard being afterward slain, she was sent back into
France without a Dowry; by reason whereof the Duke of Orleans presented a
combat of seven French against seven English within the lists, which combat
the French gained. Then also upon some rancors and dissentions between the
houses of Burgundy and Orleans for the government of the Kingdom, John the
eldest son of the late Count of Burgundy, caused the Duke of Orleans, brother
to the King, to be slain the 22. of November, 1407, whereupon ensued all the
subsequent disorders in France, by means whereof the King of England gained
the famous and memorable battle of Agincourt, and continued his wars for
the space of 29. or 30. years, during which he took Rouen, and in a manner
all Normandy. In those times also the Duke of Burgundy was slain at a
Parliament upon the Bridge of Montereau Faux-yonne, by those that accompanied
the Dauphine, who for that fact was by his Father Charles, not yet in sense,
dis-inherited, and in his place he instituted Henry King of England, to whom
upon a peace he had given in marriage Katherine of France, together with the
government of France and Paris, making wars against the Dauphin until death,
which was followed with that of the King, who had before given consent to the
Duke of Bedford, to be Regent in France for young King Henry, who was yet in
his Cradle.

This Charles the 6. was of a magnanimous and Heroic soul, full of the fire
of true valor, which upon any brave occasion broke forth in glorious actions:
which virtue was declared in his younger years by this answer to his Father
Charles the fifth, by whom a Crown of Gold enchased with precious Stones, and
a Helmet of Steel fairly guilt, being propounded to his choice, he answered
he would rather choose the Helmet than the Crown. Afterward being crowned King
of France, this Son of valor rising in the sphere of Majesty, shined forth
with early beams of valor; for being showed by his Officers, his deceased
Fathers rich Treasury and precious movables, and also his Armory full of
warlicke Furniture, and all sorts of Arms, he said, He had rather have those
Arms, than his Fathers Riches. As this King and his Noblemen marched against
the Duke of Britain, being entered the Forest of Man's, a man bare-headed and
bare-legged, attired in a Coat of white Rugge, steps suddenly forth betwixt
two Trees, taking hold of the Raines of the Kings Horse, and staying him, said
unto him: King ride no farther, but return back, for thou art betrayed: The
King was amazed at this voice and the man being forced with blows to leave the
Raines of his Horse, vanished. Afterward it chanced that his Page being very
sleepy, let fall his Lance upon him which carried the Helmet, making a great
noise like the rustling of Arms, the King starts with amazement at this noise,
and seeing the Crimson Bandroll of the Lance, having his spirits weakened with
the former distemperatures, transported with the imagination of this sound,
sleepy with labor and heat, he imagins himself to be compassed in with many
armed men which pursued him to the death. Charles thus transported with this
phrenzy, lays hold on his Sword, draws it, runs violently after his Pages,
and calls them Traitors. The Pages conceiving at first that he had been
displeased for the disorder of the Lance, fly from him: The King follows
after: The Duke of Orleance runs toward him to let him know the cause of his
anger. The King very violently lays at him, not knowing him; the Duke flies,
and the King follows. Thereupon all drawing near unto him, they take his Sword
from him, and his thick Velvet Jerkin, and scarlet Cap, and lay him on the
ground.

Pope Urban his Enemy, triumphing and rejoicing at his misery, said it was a
just judgment of God for supporting and assisting his Competitor: But the holy
Scripture says, O how happy is he that judges wisely of the afflicted,
representing an admirable example in Job, who was accused by his friends that
he was an hypocrite, good in show, but not in integrity of life. Such is the
judgment of the World, accounting adversity a vice, and prosperity a virtue,
measuring matters according to their passions, and not with reason; for GODS
Judgments are just and righteous, but the causes thereof are unknown, though
GOD does all well whatsoever he does.

Henry the fifth, King of England. Anno 1412.
portrait

THough it be more easy to succeed in victoryes, than atchieve them, yet this
Henry maintained by the sword that Title of King of France, which his
Predecessor, Edward the third had gained; and as King Edward cut down the
Flower of France in the Battle of Cressey, so Henry the fifth, exasperated by
the Dolpins of France, sending him a Tun of Tennis Balls, sent him back such
Iron Balls, or Bullets, that the French were near brought to a great hazard
in this Tennis Court, or field of Mars. For hereby Henry won France, teaching
Princes, that contempt adds a double courage, when right is by contumelies
sought with greater violence.

Afterward King Henry took Harflew, and fought the memorable battle of
Agincourt, wherein he got a wonderful and unexpected victory, by a stratagem
of erecting sharp Stakes before the foot troops, whereupon the Horse issuing
violently, they were disranked and routed, so that the earth blush't with blood
to see the French so overtaken, and also the Archers upon the nicke of this
opportunity sent many showers of Arrows, whereby the whole Army on the French
side was discomfited; and the English Archers giving back, the French Horsemen
ran themselves upon the sharp poynted stakes. At last the French maine
Battle was put to flight, and then King Henry gave thanks unto God, the
giver of all victoryes.

This Battle was famous, triumphant, and fortunate; the success whereof was
celebrated with great joy at the Kings return into England; Princes being then
most amiable (as well as private men) in the sight of their subjects, when
Fortune smiles on their attempts: and Victories, such as this was at Poictiers,
makes their virtues more apparent.

Afterward, Truce being made with the French, and by them broken, he invades
France again, and takes the Town of Harflew in Normandy, and Cane. Then
proceeding in his Conquest of Normandy, takes Fallais, after a long siege, and
Articles of agreement confirmed by the King, he besieges also Roane, and the
Lady Katharines Picture was sent to King Henry, to move him to pity Roane: He
grants them peace, and receives of the Burgesses of Roane 356000. Crowns of
gold, upon the sixteenth of June, Anno Domini 1418.

Afterward many Towns were surrendered to Henry: At last a peace was concluded
between King Henry, and King Charles, and the Duke of Burgogne. Afterward
Henry goes in person to Trois. where he was met by John King of France, the
Queen, and the Lady Katharine, to whom he was contracted, and by their
marriage peace was established in France, and the Crown of France was entailed
to England; and the Subjects of France were sworn to duty of allegiance unto
King Henry; as also the two Crowns of England and France were united and
confirmed to King Henry, by his marrying the Lady Katherine; for marryages have
always been the happy conclusions of Tragical Wars, as may appear by
happy marriage.

Afterward the French growing rebellious, King Henry besieges Paris, and takes
it. Bicardy afterward swears fealty and obedience to King Hen. Matters being
settled, all the Wars was concluded with joyful Solemnities at the marriage
of King Henry and the Lady Katharine, with whom he returned afterward into
England, where every Subject expressed his love and loyalty to him, each one
contending, who should be the forwardest for the entertaining of so Noble and
victorious a Prince, and his most Royal Consort.

Afterward King Henry being at the siege of Meaux, his wife was delivered of
Henry of Munmouth, his last joy on earth; for not long after sickning at at
Melum, and his malady increasing at Bois De vincennois, he cheerfully rendered
his Soul to GOD, who received him to immortal joy, where he remains Crowned
with Caelestiall glory, while his body being conveyed into England, was with
all pompous Celebrity interred in the Church at Westminster, where on his Tomb
are engraven these Verses.

Dux Normanorum, verus Conquestor eorum,
Haeres Francorum, decesset and Hector eorum.
Here Normans Duke, so styled by Conquest just,
True heir of France, great Hector lies in Dust.
Charles 7. the 54. King of France. Anno 1422.
portrait

AFter the decease of Charles the 6, Charles 7. his son, began to style
himself King of France, notwithstanding that his Father had dis-inherited him,
and given it to Henry King of England. In the beginning of his Reign having
made Count Arthur, brother to the Duke of Bretagne, High Constable of France,
sent him against the English, who in a manner were Masters of all France, and
had now beleaguered Orleans contrary to their promise made to their Duke, who
at that time was prisoner in England: whereupon the King sent the Count of
Dunois, the Bastard of Orleans, Pothon, Hire, all valiant Commanders to relieve
it. At that time the French lost the Battle of Harens: whereupon the King
being enraged, and not knowing which way best to betake himself, was
encouraged by Joane the Maid, who miraculously drove the English from before
Orleance: and having recovered many lost Towns, and gained the battle near
Patay, and conveyed the King to be crowned at Rheims, but upon a Sally which
she made out of Champagne upon the English, she was taken, and put to death at
Rouen.

In the end a peace being made between the Duke of Burgundy and the King of
France, they first drove the English out of Paris, nineteen years after their
enjoying it, into which the King made his entry the twelfth of November, Anno
Domini 1437, to equal which there presently ensued the Praguery Faction. The
quarrels also of the Houses of Orleance and Burgundy were extinguished by the
Marriage of Charles Duke of Orleance, with Mary of Cleue, near to the Duke of
Burgundy: The English also lived promiscuously with the French, but the Truce
being broken by an English Captain, who took in the Castle of Fougeres, the
King employed his uttermost to quit France of all the English: and thereupon
he to this design appointed his Francarchers or Boemen, and began with
Normandy, which he reduced wholly to his obedience: after that Guienne and the
City of Bourdeaux, insomuch that the English could retain nothing on that
side the Seas, but Cales and the County of Guiennes. The King enjoying this
repose of peace, was much troubled with the absence of the Dauphin, who for
six years had betaken himself to the Duke of Burgundy, and thence into
Brabant, where he remained till his Fathers decease, which was the 22. of
July, Anno Dom. 1461.

This King being unfortunate in his Wars, grew so behind hand both in fame
and estate, that amongst other afflictions, he was burdened with reproach and
poverty, so that he dined in his Chamber, attended on by his household servants,
where Pothon and la Hire coming to Chusteandun to require succors, found him
at Table with a Rumpe of Mutton and two Chickens. He was reproached for the
love of fair Agnes, but the History of St. Dennis reports, that he loved her
only for her pleasing behavior, eloquent speech, and beauty, and that he
never used any lascivious action unto her, nor never touched her beneath the
chinne. Joane a Virgin, or rather Witch, professing that she had a Revelation
how to succor the King, and chase the English from Orleance, was brought by
the Lord of Baudie Court, Provost of Vancoleurs to Chinon, attired like a man.
The King takes upon him the habit of a Countryman, yet she goes directly to
the King, although they told her she was mistaken. She had Arms and Horse
given her, with a Troop to enter the City, accompanied by the Admiral and
Martial of France: She comes to Orleance, they rejoice to behold the Maiden
Warrior, whereupon Joane sends threats to the English by Letter, subscribed,
Understand these News from God and from the Virgin. Orleance was assaulted by
her counsel: The Virgin entered the Fort first, crying, Montjoy St. Dennis, the
Fort is won. The English grew amazed at the Virgins exploits: In memory
whereof a Monument was erected; King Charles the seventh armed, and Joane the
Virgin armed, kneeling on their knees before a Crucifixe of Brass, which is
still to be seen upon the Bridge at Orleance.

Lewis the 11. and 55. King of France. Anno 1461.
portrait

LEwis the 11. departing out of Brabant, being accompanied with the Duke,
Philip of Burgundy, and the Count of Charolois his son, caused himself to be
crowned King of France* the fifteenth of August 1461. The Princes seeing
themselves in contempt, especially Mounsier Charles his brother, who rose up in
Arms against him, under a pretensive color for the common good, giving him
the famous battle of Montlehery, the fifteenth of July, Anno Domini 1463. The
King for the dissipating of their forces, following the advice of the Duke of
Milan, gave Normandy to his brother, which afterward by subtilties he withdrew
from him again. But in the end he was enforced by the Duke of Burgundy to
give unto his brother Mounsier Charles the Counties of Champagne and Brie,
which he afterward exchanged for the Duchy of Guienne, by this means to
weane him from the Duke of Burgundy, recalling all the Towns upon this side
the River Sum; and afterward against his brother Charles, for the
withdrawing of the Duchy of Guienne, who immediately dyed, not without
suspicion of poison. Afterward he made a treaty of peace at Bouvines, with the
Dukes of Bretagne and Burgundy for the ensnaring of the High Constable S. Paul,
who had been the prime spark of all the dissentions after the battle of
Montlehery. In the mean time the King works the Duke of Burgundy quite out
with the Emperor Frederick, and with the Duke of Loraine, working his ruin
at the siege of Mus. Then he takes in many Towns of the Burgundion, who had
appealed to the English for aid, with whom the King had already made a treaty
of Piquigny, by which Charles the Kings son was to marry with the daughter of
England, when they came to be of age; which constrained the Burgundion to make
his peace with the King, and to deliver the High Constable into his power. The
Duke of Burgundy was slain before Nancy, leaving one sole Daughter Mary, who
was married to Maximilian, the only son of the Emperor Frederick; by reason
whereof the King recovered all the Country upon the Sum, together with the
Duchy and County of Burgundy. But afterward the Prince of Orange caused the
Franch-Conite to revolt. After this the King allied himself to the Swisses,
and recovered the County of Provence, from Renatus Duke of Aniou, by way of
Donation. The K. afterward having married his son Charles to the Lady
Marguerite of Flanders, he surrendered his life the 30 of Aug. 1483.

He said that Charles the sage might be a wise man in his Tiring-Chamber, or
Closet, but in giving his youngest brother the Duchy of Burgundy, he played
the fools part. Being told after a battle, that his enemy Count Charolois
did lodge in the field: He replied, That he having neither Town nor Castle
must needs lodge in a fieldbed. It was his usual saying: That when pride
walks, or rides before, shame and dishonor, like servingmen, attend behind.
Being told that one of the Canons of the Church where he had heard Mass was
dead, he gave the Prebendship to a Priest which lay sleeping in an adjoining
Chapel, that he should say afterward, that his good fortune came unto him
sleeping. To a Gentleman that was ready to handle a rich Chain of gold, which
a Captain wore about his neck, and was suspected to be made of the relics of
a Church, he said: Take heed how you touch that Chain, for it is a holy thing.

He said also, that, in regard of his troubles at the beginning of his reign,
if by the expression of courage and experience he had not procured fear and
reverence, he might have been ranked amongst the unfortunate Princes in the
last Chapter of Boccace. A rich Nobleman having builded a fair Hospital, he
said, That having made many poor for the Hospital, he might justly make an
Hospital for the poor, and so convert his sins into Almes-houses. He would
often say to his Noblemen, that his son should learn no more Latin, than
Qui nescit dissimulare, nescit regnare; and that the government of the Kingdom
and Commonwealth was his best study, for other studies would too much soften
his mind, and Historical examples, unfortunate in their event, and success,
would discourage him from attempting brave Actions. He said also that the
Genowayes should not long remain under his protection, for he would bequeath
them to the Devil. Being advised to send an Ambassador, that had many
Dignities and Titles: he said he is like a piece of Brachigraphy, that has
many a Title but Learning very little. Being told that the Gout haunted rich
men that fared deliciously, and wore fine clothing; he said, he would always
afterward wear cloathcloathes, because the Gout should not take him for a rich
man. He could find all things he said in his Kingdom, and his Court, except
truth, which was sick in his fathers time, and was now stark dead, having
before her death made no Confession to a Priest. The Realm of France he said
was a meddow which he did cut every year, and as often as he listed. He asking
a mean fellow, which knew not the King when he saw him, what he gained by
following the Court? The fellow answered, I get as much as the King, that is,
maintenance while I live, and a sheet when I dye.

He said that a curious ignorant man, having a Library of fair Books, was
like a crooke-backt man having a Bunch on his back, whereby the deformity of
the one, and the ignorance of the other was more discerned. He made gold the
engine of his actions, saying, that an Army of silver Lances does usually
win the victory. Great services (he said) through the arrogance of the
parties performing them, or the neglect of Princes regarding them, were often
recompensed with hatred or ingratitude* and therefore the bounty of Princes
exceeding desert was more fortunate and happy than desert exceeding the bounty
of Princes, not enduring to be indebted or obliged. Having felt the smart of
the English wars, he said the King of England was his Brother in his own
Country, but he did not like his company in France.

Having caused a fair goodly Tomb to be made for the fair Lady Agnes, the
love of his late Father, the Cannons of the Church desiring that the Monument
might be removed out of the heart of the Church into a side I Will, or Chapel,
he answered, that their request was neither just nor reasonable, neither would
he suffer her Tomb (whom his father loved) to be violated.

After Monsieur Bussi was beheaded and buried, he caused the head to be dug
up again, and placed on a wooden pole in the Market place, and so being
covered with a scarlet Cappe, furred with Minivere, in regard he had been a
Counselor of the Parliament. A suitor to the King for an Office, bein denied,
humbly thanked his Majesty, who wondering at his moderate, yet man-like spirit,
asked if he conceived a right of his answer? yes, said the Suitor, and I thank
your Majesty for giving me a dispatching denial, rather than feeding delays:
with which Answer the King was so contented, that he had his Office immediately
granted.

A Nobleman seeing this King ride a Hunting on a very little Horse, said he
had gotten a goodly stout Horse; for though he seemed but weak and little, yet
he must needs be very strong, because he carried him with all his Counsel:
Thereby taxing the King, preferring the wisdom of his own conceit before
all other Counsel.

He demanding what present he might bestow on the English Ambassadors that
might not cost him much, was answered; That he might present them with his
Musicians, that so they might not cost him much, as formerly they had done.

Before the joining of a Battle, this King said hastily unto a Nobleman,
that he had no affiance in his service: who for proof thereof, having desired
to exchange Arms and Ensigns with the King, charged bravely on the enemy, and
being supposed to be the King, was slain: wherein the King with weeping tears
said, he had lost his life to express his love and loyalty. Being informed
that the Saracens were misreckned 10000 Francks, in the payment of 200000
thousand pounds for a ransom, he would not embarke or set sail until the
aforesaid Francks were paid: such was his fidelity to those Infidells. This
King having appointed a Bishop to go take a Muster of the Soldiers in Paris,
a great Nobleman desired a Commission to reform the Bishops Church, saying
that employment was as fit for him, as the other was for the Bishop. When this
King was Daulphin of France, he taking great pleasure in hunting, often
resorted to a poor Forresters Cottage, where he did use to eat Radishes, he
coming to be King, the Forrester persuaded by his Wife, and in hope of reward,
presented to the King a fair Radish, which his Majesty accepted, and rewarded
the Forrester with a thousand Crowns. Afterward a Courtier presented the King
with a fair goodly Horse, expecting a greater reward, because he had been so
bountiful to the Forrester. But the King contrary to his expectation, gave the
Courtier his Radish, wrapped up in white paper; the Courtier returning to his
lodging, opening the packet, found nothing but a Radish, whereupon he informed
the King of the mistake, as he supposed: The King said, I have paid thee well
for thy horse: for the present which I gave thee cost me a thousand Crowns;
thus the poor man's good affection was well rewarded, and the Courtiers
audaciousnesse slightly regarded.

This Lewis sends an Ambassador to the Emperor, to excuse him for not sending
an army, promised by treaty, entreating him not to make a greement with the
Duke of Burgogne; but that he should confiscate all the Dukes Signonories that
held of the Emperor, as he would do those that held of the Crown of France:
The Emperor answered, that they must not divide the Bears skin before the
Beast be dead. This King commming to an interview of the King of Castile, unto
whom he was formerly strickly allied, conceived a contempt and disdain each
of other: The French of the Castilians sumptuousness and pride, in their
words, countenance and apparel: The Castilians of the plainness of the
French attire: So as from that day these Kings did never love, and the French
did ever since hate the Spaniard.

Charles 8. the 56. King of France. Anno 1483.
portrait

CHARLES the 8. at the age of 13. years came to the Crown, under the Regency
of Madam de Beavieu his own Sister, and of the Duke of Bourbon her Husband:
whereupon the Duke of Orleance, the nearest to the Crown, and had married his
other Sister, as in an indignity conceived, convocated and summoned all the
Statesmen to Tours. In the mean time the Duke of Orleance seeing that Madam of
Beavieu managed all the affairs of the kingdom, retired himself into
Bretagne; whereupon the King made War against him, and recovered a Battle
against him at St. Albins, the Duke of Orleance, and the Prince of Orange being
taken Prisoners. After this the Duke of Bretagne deceased, leaving his sole
Daughter Anne. Inheretrix: who notwithstanding that she had made a promise to
Maximilian, King of the Romans, was after married to the King, for which cause
the King of England made a preparation for War against him in the behalf of
Maximilian, but it was concluded that the King should send back the Princess
Marguerite with her Dowry of the Countries of Artois and Burgundy. After,
having surrendered the County of Roussillon to the Spaniard by the persuasion of
his Confessor, he went upon the recovery of the succession which Renatus, the
late King of Sicily, and Charles the Count of Maine his brother, had left unto
him by Will, for the rights which they pretended to the kingdom of Naples.

In his journey he was Regally entertained by Ludovicus Ssorza, surnamed the
Moore, in the Town of Ast: and after having proceeded into Tuscany, by Peter
de Medicis, who delivered into his command the Fortresses of Florence and the
City of Pisa: From thence he went to Rome, where nolens volens, he entered,
Alexander 6. being then Pope, who working his peace with him, gave him the
Title of Emperor of Constantinople, and invested him to the kingdom of
Naples: whither the King having made his entrance the 12. of May, Anno Dom.
1495, he was crowned King of Sicily. Whereupon the Monarchs and Potentates of
Italy being amazed, intended him an Ambuscade in his return at Fournoue; but
the King passing another way, escaped the plot, and came safe into France:
where having intelligence of the loss of Naples, and intending a second voyage
thither for the recovery of his losses, dyed of an Apoplexy, as he was seeing
a Game at Tennis in the Castle of Amboise, the seventh of April, Anno Domini
1498.

This King among other facetious sayings, gave the Florentine Ambassadors this
merry Answer, denoting their unfaithfulness, in these two Italian Verses:

Concortesia e feed poca
Va a Florence vender loca.
To Florence he went of his Goose to make sale,
Without any faith or courtesy at all.
which Verses were formerly made on this occasion: A Country Pesant sold a fat
Goose to a fair Dame of Florence, for the fond satisfaction of Venery, but
afterward on colder thoughts growing wiser, this piece of leatherne ignorance,
contrary to his former agreement, without either fidelity or courtesy,
demanded the price of his Goose in the presence of her Husband, and made her,
for the former sauce of the Goose, pay him again. And with this Italian
Proverb, which had this wanton Original, the King answered the unfaithful
Ambassadors of Florence. His Queen Anne having received tidings of his Death,
said; Gods will be done, I doubt not but I shall be as great as I was before,
intimating thereby her hopes to be Queen of France; afterward verified by her
Marriage with King Lewis the twelfth. Friar Jerosine Savonarola living at
Florence, foretold in his Sermons that this King should come into Italy, and
obtain great victories, which fell out accordingly; and in those Wars
nothing was gained but a stinking contagious disease, afterward spread over all
France, and since then called the French Pox. After this King had ended his
wars, he builded a Castle at Ambois, not knowing that instead of a stately
Palace, he should end his life in a base and filthy Gallery. He intending to
reform his life, it chanced the seventh of April, going after with the Queen
into the Castle-ditches, he struck his forehead against the door of a
Gallery, whereas he meant to see a set at Tennis. This blow driving him to the
premeditation of his approaching end, he said to his Confessor, that he
would never commit any mortal or venial sin, if he could avoid it, which was
a good reservation: upon this protestation he fell back ward into an Apoplexy,
wherewith he had been troubled, and dyed about 11. a clock at night, in a
Chamber near to a Gallery, stinking with the urine which every one made as he
passed through it, being laid on a Matresse, such as they could find by
chance. In him the direct Line failed, and the Crown came to the Collateral
Line, the nearest whereof was Lewis Duke of Orleance, and Valois his Successor.

Lewis 12. the 57. King of France. Anno 1499.
portrait

THis Lewis the 12. succeeded according to the Custom of France, to Charles
the 8, who dyed without issue, and was crowned the 27. of May. He repudiated
the Lady Joane of France for her indisposition of conception, and married the
Lady Anne of Bretagne, Widow to the late King. Afterward having made sure of
Milan, Genes, and Lombardy, by the taking of Ludovicus Sforza, he made an
accord with the King of Spain, with whom he conquered the Kingdom of Naples,
which was after lost by the French through the infidelity and perfidious
treachery of the Spaniard. Whereupon the King having yielded his claim and
part that he pretended to it, unto Ferdinand King of Aragon, in favor of the
Marriage of Madame German de Foix, his own Sisters Daughter, and makes an
agreement with the Pope against the Venetians, against whom he gained a
battle the 15. of May, Anno Dom. 1509, without any assistance of the Truce.
He withstood the Pope, who declared himself an Enemy to the French, and he
took many places in the Duchy of Ferrara, which gave an occasion to the Duke
to recover what he had lost: as also Gaston de Foix raised the Popes Army from
before Bologna, and relieved the City of Brescia, which the Venetians had now
beleaguered; and having defeated their Army, from thence he went to hazard his
life before Ravenna, having first won the field. The Lord of Palisse was
substituted in his place as Commanmander, who sacked it. Whereupon the Emperor
and the Pope joining with the English, recovered many Towns upon the French,
and the Spaniard re-entered into the kingdom of Naples. VVhereupon King Lewis
being moved, sent the Duke of Longueville with an Army to re-estate the King of
Navarre into his Kingdom: but he was constrained to return without any
effect, which was a cause that the King being desirous to re-enter his Duchy
of Milan, accorded with the Spaniard and the Venetian, and after sent the Lord
of Tremoville with his Army into Italy, whence he was beaten out by the
Swisses. In the mean time the King of England besieged Therouenne, where was
fought the battle of Esperons, after which King Lewis being a widower,
married with the Daughter of the King of England, with whom he having peace,
as he was in a preparation for an Army into Italy, he was prevented by death,
the first day of the year 1515. He was surnamed The Father of the people.

This King being instigated and persuaded by some of his familiars to take
revenge on the Citizens of Orleance, because when he was Duke of Orleance, and
when Charles the 8. maintaining wars against him, had compelled him to fly
into Britain, they had shut the gates of their City against him: But he
forgetting their former injury, answered; That being now King of France, he
would not revenge injuries done to the Duke of Orleance. He being told, making
war then in Italy for the recovery of the Duchy of Millaine, that Agnadell
was taken by his Enemies, who had there taken up their lodging, answered: Then
will I lodge upon their bellies, or else they shall lodge upon mine. Being
advised to preserve his person from the shot of the great Ordnance, he
answered, A rightful King of France was never slain with the shot of a
Cannon: Therefore let him that is afraid, come behind me. He lying in Camp,
and a Soldier standing near him, being slain with a Cannon shot, and showed
unto the King, he smild and said, He is but a little cold in his hands.

This King having commanded that a company of Footmen should be levied of
strong active men, and at the day appointed a company of old Soldiers, as
appeared by scarres, being presented unto him, said; These men, as it seems by
their wounds, were more willing to take than to give blows. Whereupon the
Soldier replied, They were not valianter than we, for they wounded us, but we
slew them. To a Gentleman that boasted of his scarres and wounds in his face,
and desired the King to reward his service, he said, Take heed hereafter of
turning back thy face when thou art flying from thy Enemy. He being dissuaded
from making Wars on the Venetians, being a wise and prudent people, said, We
will set so many fools upon them that shall beard them to the teeth, that they
shall not know which way to turn. To certain Ambassadors of Greece that
demanded succors against the Turk, he objected this old Verse Barbara Graeca
genus retinent quod habere solebant. The Lords of the Parliament refusing to
admit a Counselor for his ignorance and insufficiency, though preferred by
the King; he asked them how many Councillors there were? They replied, an
Hundred: Then said the King, cannot you many wise men make one become wife? A
Courtier being wondered at for his great stature, and accounted a Giant, the
King said, it is no wonder, for his Mother took pains to make him, and
perhaps he had many Fathers. He told the Ladies of the Court, that Hinds had
at first Horns as well as Hearts, but for their pride and rebellion against the
Hearts, Nature offended therewith, deprived them of their Horns, to show that
Wives should be obedient to their Husbands. He told the Duke of Angolesme his
son in law, that a certain Father and his son traveling toward a Town,
the son said, that now they were almost at the Town; but yet they afterward
traveled until it was night before they could get to the Town: whither being
come, the Father said to the Son, Henceforth Son, never say I am at the
Town, till thou art past the Gates. He said also that Asses were happier than
Horses, for Horses run post to Rome to get those Benefices whereof Asses are
possessed. Being asked to marry his Daughter the Lady Claudia to a strange
Prince, he said, I will make no alliance but with the Kats and Mice of my own
Kingdom.

Francis 1. the 58. K. of France. An. 1515.
portrait

FRancis of Valois, Duke of Angolesme, as next the Collateral* Line Masculine,
succeeded Lewis the 12, who dyed without heirs Males. He was consecrated at
Rheims the 25. of January, 1515, at which time Charles of Bourbon was made
Constable of France. The King having taken Prosper Collonne, and obtained two
battles against the Swisses, took Milan. After by the persuasion of Pope Leo
the tenth, the Milaners revolted, and immediately after, Charles of Bourbon
took part with Charles the fifth, Emperor. The King accompanied with the
Marshall of Chabanes, having recovered the Duchy of Milan into his power, he
went to besiege Pavia, where he was taken, and by the industrious treaty of
Madric, Anno Dom. 1525, he was sent back into France. Afterward Charles of
Bourbou was slain, skaling the Walls of Rome, which was taken by the Spaniards
with the Pope. Anno Dom. 1529. a Treaty of Cambray was concluded, and the
children of France were sent back into France with Madame Elianor. The King
and the Pope by Embassies came to an agreement at Marsilles, where the Marriage
of Henry Duke of Orleance, with the Countess of Bologne, the Popes Niece, was
solemnized.

After this the King sent the Lord of Montmorency against the Emperor, who
intended to come against Marsilles, who enforced him to retire into Spain, and
afterward invaded France upon the Coast of Picardy, and sent another Army to
Piedmount, against whom the King sent his forces, which took Suse, Villane,
and Montcalier, which caused the truce of Nice for ten years, during which the
Emperor passed through France into Flanders. In the mean time Caesar Fregose
and Anthony Rincon the Kings Ambassadors to the Turk, were slain by the
Imperialists. Whereupon the King according with the Duke of Cleve against the
Emperor, took Luxembourg, Landrecy and other places: Of which the Emperor
being certified, besieged Landrecy, but in vain. On the other side the Lord of
Anguyen, the Kings Lieutenant in Piedmont, having gained the battle of
Cerisolles, took Carignan: whereof the Emperor being advertised, made a
preparation against Paris, but perceiving the French too powerful in forces,
demanded a Peace, which was published at Paris. This being done, the King
intends a War against the English at Boulen, with whom having made Peace, he
went to pay his debt to Nature at Rambouillet, the last of March, 1547, and
lies interred at St. Denis. To one that desired pardon for another that had
used ill speeches of his Majesty, this King said, Let him for whom thou art a
suitor, learn to speak little, and I will learn to pardon much. At Paris in
an Oration against Heretics, he said: If my arm were infected with that
contagion, I would cut it off from my body, and cast it into the fire. He said
that he was sorry that the Gentlemen of his Realm being most serviceable, and
ingenious, were not qualified with Learning, to be capable of Civil offices as
well as Military, since Virtue is the formal cause of Gentility, which should
exceed base low dispositions, by an eminent exaltation of goodness, deriving
their pettigree from Heaven, for Vera est Nobilitas quaedam cognatio Dijs, True
Nobility is a certain affinity to the Gods. A Treaty of peace being
propounded, and ready to be concluded between the Emperor Charles the fifth
and this King Francis, he said: Peace and amity between us cannot long
endure, for the Emperor cannot abide an Equal or Companion, and I cannot
endure a Master.

Henry the 2. and 59. King of France. Anno 1547.
portrait

HEnry the second succeeding to the Crown on his birth day, was consecreted at
Rheimes in August 1547. He sent the Lord of Esse into Scotland, for a defense
ofthat Country, and built a Fort over against that of Boullen: immediately
after the Commons of Guienne mutined upon taxations whilst the King was in
Piedmont, from whence, being upon his return into France, he caused them to be
punished by the Constable, and made his entrance into Paris: proclaimed open
wars against England, and renewed his alliance with the Swisses. Pope Julius
the third being incensed against the King for the City of Parma, solicited the
Emperor to take up Arms against him, and to beleaguer Parma and Mirandula:
whereupon the King made a prohibition of sending to the Court of Rome for
matters of Benefices; and in the mean time he took Quiers, S. Damian, and
other places of Piedmont: on the other side the Burgundions, and Hannuyers
overrunne the Country of Santois, above Peronne: but to requite them, the King
making an expedition into Almany, by the policy of the Constable seezd of the
Metz, and the Country of Messin, and took the Duke and Duchy of Loraine into
his protection: Afterward he joined forces with Duke Maurice, who falsifying
his faith in his return invaded the Duchy of Luxembourg, taking the Towns of
Tvoy, Montmedy, Lumes, and Civay. In the mean time the Emperor marched to the
siege of Metz, whence he was forced to dis-encampe with the loss of 30000 men,
and threw himself upon Therouenne, which he took with the Castle of Hedin.
The King on the other side took Mariembourg, and other Towns in Piedmont.
After that the Emperor quitting the Empire, retired himself into Spain, to
live a solitary life, and a peace for five years was concluded between the
Emperor, the Kings of England and France, which continued not long. For wars
being renewed between the said Kings, the day of St. Laurence, to the loss of
the French: in revenge whereof the King took Cales, Gnines, Hames, and the
County of Oye: Peace after being made by the marriage between King Philip, and
the Lady Elizabeth of France, and of the Duke of Savoy, with Madam Margarite,
sister to the King; and in the continuance of the solemnity, the King running
at Tilt, was hit in the eye, of which hurt he dyed at Tournells, the twentieth
day of July, Anno Domini 1559. and lies interred at St. Denis in France.

This King having the good inclination of his Nature confirmed, by being well
brought up under his Father, ordained many good Laws for the reforming
apparel, providing for the poor, maintenance of Justice, and releeving his
oppressed Subjects; but especially he made a Law against swearing and
blaspheming, and herein he did singularly well: but he disgraced these good
actions, by permitting a bloody and fatal Combat, betwixt Iarnac and
Chastaignery, Gentlemen, upon the giving the lie, performed at St. German in
Lay on the sixeteenth of July, before the King and diverse Princes and Noblemen,
wherein Jarnac, held the weaker, got the better, and gave the other many deadly
wounds whereof he dyed; whereupon the King did forbid all Combats.

Thus he began his reign with this Tragedy, and ended it with his own; For
at the marriage of Elizabeth of France, the King having published a solemn
running at the Tilt, (as is before mentioned) the King would needs be one of
the Challengers, and the second day of the Tourny, being persuaded by the
Queen, and the Duke of Savoy to retire out of the Lists, he desired to run
once more against the Earl of Montgomery, who first refused, but afterward
run, and upon the Kings Helmet broke his Lance, and with a splinter thereof
(his Beaver being somewhat open) strikes him so deep in the eye, so that he
dyed in his house at Tournells, in the 44. year of his age. The day before his
death he would have the Duke of Savoy and the Lady Margaret his sister married
in his Chamber. His heart was interred in the Celestines Church, in the Duke of
Orleans his Chapel. His Character was good, but he was formerly voluptuous,
and permitted himself to be abused by his Officers, selling Laws and his
authority. For such Kings are but pictures of Princes without life, all power
remaining in the subject, to the oppression and wrong of the Land.

Francis the 2. and 60. King of France. Anno 1559.
portrait

THis Francis, King of Scotland by Mary Stuart his wife, at the age of fifteen
years, and five Months, succeeded his father Henry, and was Crowned at
Rheimes, September 1559. by the Cardinal of Loraine, Archbishop of that See:
after his Coronation, he went to conduct his Brother in law the Duke of
Loraine, and the Duchess Claudia his sister as far as Barle Duke: from
whence he returned into France, and sojourned for a while in the City of
Blois, where he reformed some abuses of those that followed his Court. In the
mean time this President Minard was slain in his own House, returning from
Court: This murder was a cause that it was forbidden to carry trucheons and
weapons. The Counselor of Bourg was burnt for his Religion. The King having
made preparations, sent the Lord of Martigues into Scotland, for the
suppression of some Scots, who upon pretext of Religion were in Arms: during
which time, Mary of Loraine Dowager of Scotland deceased. At the same time also
certain Gentlemen of France, being assembled in Arms near the City of
Amboise, where the King was attended by the Cardinal of Loraine, and his
brother, the Duke of Guise, were discovered in a certain enterprise, which
they pretended to be for the public good, and for the dispossessing of some
strangers, usurpers of the Kings authority, and Kingdom, contrary to the
ancient authority of the three Estates of France; and also for making some
remonstrances to the King concerning Religion: for which many were executed to
death, amongst whom the Baron of Castelnau was one. At that time the
Chancellor Oliver deceased, in whose place and dignity was instituted Monsieur
de'l Hospital. Shortly after the King went to Orleans, there to settle
himself, where he fell sick of an Apostume in his left ear, whereof he dyed
the foureteenth of September, Anno Domini 1560. having reigned about eighteen
months and twenty days, and lies interred at S. Denis.

The Protestants were very much persecuted in this Kings reign, and there were
four prisoners of especial note, Castelnau, Villemongis, Campagnac, and le
Picard, who cried out against the Chancellor that had signed the sentence of
their deaths, who thereupon fell suddenly sick, and when the Cardinal of
Loraine came to visit him, cried out: O Cardinal thou have damned us all.
While the King lay dangerously sick, the Queen mother intending to support
the Guisans, called the King of Navarre into her closet, to whom, as he was
going a Lady of the Court said: My Lord, deny the Queen mother nothing that she
shall demand, else you are dead: whereupon he signed what she desired, and
thereby obtained her favor. Afterward the King dyed of Catarch and a Fever
the 14. of December, whose seeds of virtue lay hid in his nature, and were not
discerned, only some shows of courtesy, modesty, and continency were in his
younger years apparent, and rherefore his death was not much lamented, but of
such as in his nonage possessed usurped estates. After his decease the Prince
of Conde turned the stream of affairs. To give a brief Character of this
King and his reign, he was a picture of Majesty drawn in raw colors, being
young in years and judgment, governed by his Mother, and his wives Uncles.
The Princes of Blood were in his reign not regarded, power and might prevailed
in Court, and the Clergy sought protection from the disturbers of France. The
Nobility were engaged in wars, and the people divided in matters of Religion,
and in the Court factions were maintained: this was the face and complexion of
those times; miseries incident to the minority of Princes.

Charles the 9. and 61. King of France. Anno 1560.
portrait

THis Charles the ninth, at the Age of thirteen, succeeded his Brother
Francis. He pursued the enterprises of his Predecessor, for his State
affairs, which were begun the eighth of December' Anno Domini 1560. at
Orleans, and and afterward finished at Pontoise, Angust and September
following, Anno Domini 1561. At that time he assembled the Prelates of France
at Possi to a National Counsel. The January following it was permitted to the
Hugnenots to make their exercises and Sermons out of the Cities. Whereupon
ensued great troubles, wars, and slaughters of great Lords and personages, as
of the King of Navarre, who was slain before Rouen; and in the battle of
Dreux, which was given the 19. of March, Anno Domini 1562. the Martial of St.
Andrew, and the Duke of Guise were slain before Orleans. A while after, the
Town of Haure de Grace was recovered, which had been before yielded to the
English. The King at the Parliament at Rouen, being declared Mayor, after an
Edict of Pacification made, went to visit his Kingdom, Anno domini 1564. and
went to meet his sister, the Queen of Spain, at* Bayonne, where great
magnificences were parformfd. After having visited the Gascogne. Guienne, and
Poitou, he came to Moulins, where he made many excellent Ordinances. The second
civil war sprung up, wherein, after that the King had made an escape out of
Meaux, the battle of St. Denis was fought, wherein the Constable was wounded,
which was a cause of another Pacification, by reason of the siege of Chartres,
which was broken by the third intestine war, which continutwo years space;
during which, the ed battle of Iarnac was fought, wherein the Prince of Conde
was slain; and another battle at Montcontour. After which, another Edict of
Pacification was made, Anno Domini 1570. Afterward the King married the Lady
Elizabeth of Austria, daughter to the Emperor Maximilian. Also the marriage of
the King of Navarre was celebrated Anno Domini 1573. and the 24. of August, the
same year the Admiral was slain in Paris, with a great number of the
Hugoueotes and Rochelle was besieged. Then a fourth pacification by the
election in Poland of the Duke of Aniou, brother to the King, was made: he
being gone in his Kingdom of Poland, was certified of his brother, the Kings,
death on the 30. of May, at the Bois de Vincennes, 1574. having one daughter
who dyed an Infant. He lies at St. Denis.

He was a Prince that had excellent natural gifts, but blended and mingled
with vices, wherewith his Governors and Schoolemasters had corrupted his young
mind, which at the first was more virtuously inclined, delighting in Music
and Poetry. But as he was a great Hunter, that loved to shed the blood of wild
beasts, so he suffered also (during his reign) the Protestants blood to be
shed, and in revenge thereof in his sickness before his death great store of
blood issued out by vomiting, and by other passages of his body, in the two
last weeks of his sickness, wherein he endured as much pain and torment, as
the strength of youth could suffer in the last pangs of death. And this
judgment showed that God loves not the Prince that thirsts after his subjects
blood, which is the very blood of the Prince. Some few hours before his death
he said: It was a great comfort unto him that he left no heir Male lawfully
begotten; for leaving him young, he must endure many crosses, and France had
need of a man.

Henry 3. the 62. King of France. Anno 1575.
portrait

THis Henry the third was at the instant of his brothers death, in his Kingdom
of Poland, whereof he having notice, he in privacy went out of Poland, and
arrived at Lions the sixth of September, Anno 1574, and was consecrated at
Rheims February the 13. Anno Dom. 1575, and the 15. of the same Month he
married Madam Loyse of Loraine, Daughter of the Count of Vaudemont. After in
the year 1576, he convocated his Statesmen to Blois, where singular good
Statutes were enacted. Anno Domini 1577. there was an Edict of Pacification
published for the quiet of his Kingdom. He began the foundation of the
Augustines Bridge Anno Dom. 1578. The Order of the Knights of the Holy Ghost
was by him instituted, Anno Dom. 1579. After his Edict of Pacification, until
the decease of his only brother Monsieur the Duke of Aniou his Kingdom was in
peace: but soon after, Anno Domini 1585, there grew up a faction pernicious to
him and his Estate, which was called the Ligue, or the holy Union, the Author
whereof was the King of Spain, purposely to hinder Henry King of Navarre from
his access to the Crown of France, to whom after the decease of this King, it
of right did belong. This Faction was violated under a color of Religion,
which was of such a force, that the Principality thereof made sure of the
primest Cities in the whole Kingdom, their own, and amongst the rest, Paris
it self: the Inhabitants whereof having barricadoed themselves against their
King on the twelfth of May, Anno Domini 1588, he was constrained to retire
himself to Chartres, and thence to Rouen. In the end the second time he
assembled his men of State at Blois, at the end whereof he caused the Duke and
Cardinal of Guise to be executed. Upon which execution Paris revolted,
together with the prime Cities of the Realm, and the Rebels made the Duke of
Mayenne to be their Chief: which was a cause that the King removed his
Parliament to Tours in March, in the year 1589, and being reconciled to the
King of Navarre, he went to beleaguer Paris, and being at St. Claud, on the
first day of August he was most traitorously stabbed with a knife in the
bottom of his belly by a Jacobin, of which wound he dyed the day following in
that siege in the midst of his Army, having reigned 15. years and two Months.
His Corpse was conducted to Compaigne, where it remains to this day entombed.

This King plotting before his receiving the Crown, how to ruin the Hugenots,
the Emperor told him, that there was no greater sin than to force men's
consciences; for such as think to command them, supposing to win Heaven, do
often lose that which they possess on Earth. He was at last murdered (as was
said) by a Jacobin Friar, who as the King bended down to hear in private that
which he expected, drew a knife out of his sleeve made a purpose, and thrust
his Majesty into the bottom of the belly, and there leaves the knife in the
wound: The murderer was by those which ran to help the King, presently
killed. But the King lived awhile, and at his death he advised them to unite
themselves in revenging his murder, but yet he forgave his enemies, and charged
them to seek the preservation of the Realm, by purging out Faction. And
lastly he wished them to refer the difference of Religion to the Convocation
of the Estates of the Realm, saying that Piety is a duty of man to God, over
which worldly force has no power. The Picture of his mind was fair and
lovely, being drawn with the lines of wit, eloquence, gravity, devotion,
affection to learning, bountiful to desert, reforming abuses, peaceable and
willing to hear counsel, but this comely beauty was disgraced by a pale
weakness in adversity, a smiling wantonness, and too liberal a prodigality,
which somewhat blemished this Prince, who had otherwise been an exact piece of
perfection, worthy to be placed among the chiefest Monarchs.

Henry the 4, the 63. King of France. Anno 1589.
portrait

THis Henry the fourth, surnamed the Great, King of Navarre, as first of the
Bourbon line, being descended from Robert, the last son of St. Lewis,
succeeded to the Crown of France by consent and assistance of the Nobility,
and Army of the late Henry, by whose deplored death it was dispersed, retired
himself to Dieppe, where he was besieged by the Duke of Mayenne with a potent
Army, which by this King was routed, with a small number of Arques the 21. of
September, Anno Domini 1589. And from thence pursued his victory even to Paris,
taking the Suburbs thereof upon All-Hallows Eve. Afterward he recovered
Vendosm le Man's and Falaise.

The fourteenth of March 1590, he obtained the famous victory of Yury, after
which he blocked up Paris and St. Denis, and reduced them to such an extremity
of famine, that in July following St. Denis yielded it self to his power, and
Paris also was upon the point of surrender. April, 1591. the City of Chartres
after a long siege was yielded up also to him.

January, 1593. began the Estates of the Ligue at Paris, and the Truce of
Suresne followed, which being in dispute the King took the City of Dreux, and
shortly after he was instructed in the Roman Faith, whereof he made a public
and solemn profession at St. Denis, the 25. of July. August following the
general Truce began, and continued until the first day of the year 1594,
which being expired, the King caused himself to be crowned at Chartres by the
Bishop of that See, the 27. of February. Hereupon ensued the submission of
Meaux, Lions, Orleance, Bourges, Rouen and Paris, where the King was most
magnificently entertained.

A while after the City of Laon was besieged, and yielded up to the King, and
upon that Champagne and Picardy also submitted, yea, and the Duke of Guise. The
King being returned to Paris, was stabbed in the face with a knife by a young
desperate Student called John Chastel, who for that fact was deservedly torn
in pieces with wild Horses the 29. of December.

The King being recovered of his hurt, made Knights of the Holy Ghost, in
January, 1595. After the City of Dijon submitted, and in a manner all Burgundy.
Also the second general Truce was published, and in the interim the
reconciliation of the Duke of Mayenne was wrought, together with those of the
Dukes of Toyeuse and Espernon.

In the beginning of the year 1596, the City of Marsilles was surrendered to
the King, and to the Duke of Guise, Governor of Provence: He also after eight
Months siege, took the Town of La Fere in Picardy about mid May,
notwithstanding the resistance of the Spanish forces then under the Conduct of
the Archduke of Austria, who came purposely out of Flanders to raise that
siege.

At Rouen in a general assembly of the Peers of France, the Alliance between
him and Queen Elizabeth of England was renewed by Embassages extraordinary in
October, when the King received from her the Order of St. George, (alias) the
Garter, as, not long before, the Order of the Chevalry or Knighthood of France
was sent unto the Queen of England, by Monsieur the Marshall of Bouillon.

Anno Domini 1599. the King made ordinary Knights of the Holy Ghost at Rouen,
which was never there done before, at any other place than at Paris.

Not long after, the Town of Amiens was taken by the Spaniards, and cruelly
pillaged for the space of 5. days, and the French beaten out. The King
resolved upon a revenging siege, and to that end caused it to be encompassed by
Monsieur the Marshall of Biron and his Troops for the impeachments of all
manner of supplies: and the King in person the 21. of May marched toward the
said siege of Amiens, which after many furious assaults, Sallies, and
Skirmishes, was surrendered upon composition upon Thursday the 25. of September,
notwithanding that the Cardinal of Austria came even to the Trenches with an
Army of 18000. foot, and 2000 Horse, with 18. Cannons for Battery, but was
valiantly beaten back, and intercepted of his design of relieving the City,
and enforced to a shameful retreat, with the loss of a great part of his men.

The same year the Marriage of the King with Madam Margaret of France for many
strong and lawful causes was annulled and made void, and by the Authority of
Pope Clement the eight, was so published.

The year 1600. the Marriage of the King was treated, and concluded with the
Lady Mary of Medicis, Princess of Florence, Daughter of the late Great Duke of
Tuscany, Francis of Medicis, and of Joane of Austria, Daughter of the Emperor
Ferdinand, and in May she in her own Country was proclaimed Queen of France.

The 13. of June 1602. Charles Duke of Biron, and Lord High Marshall of France,
being come to Fontainbleau, was arrested upon high Treason by the Kings
command, and from thence conveyed to the Bastile at Paris. He was convicted by
his Peers for attempts against the Kings Person and State, and upon the Monday
before, being the 29. of July, he was adjudged to lose his head, with the
confiscation of his goods, and the land of Biron deprived for ever of being a
Duchy and Pairy of France, and was reunited to the Crown.

It was pleaded against him, Qui nec virtute nec fide prodest, prosit exemplo:
He that can never profit by his virtue, nor his loyalty, must profit by his
example; and thereupon he was condemned, and put into the said Bastile, whither
the Chancellor coming to pronounce the sentence of death against him, he
shaked the Chancellor by the Arm, saying, You have judged me, and God will
absolve me; he will lay open their iniquities, which have shut their eyes,
because they would not see my innocence: You my Lord shall answer for this
injustice before him, whither I do summon you within a year and a day. I go
before by the judgment of men, but those that are the cause of my death, shall
come after by the judgment of God. Afterward he said, I see well that I am not
the most wicked, but I am the most unfortunate. Those that have done worse than
I would have done, are favored, the Kings Clemency is dead for me. He does not
imitate Caesar nor Augustu, or those great Princes, who not only pardoned the
intention of doing ill, but the Act; and wherein can the King show himself
greater than in pardoning? Clemency is a Kingly virtue; every one may give
Death, but it belongs only to Sovereignty to give life: But the Chancellor
told him, that a condemned man must not dispute against his Judgment, whereupon
the Duke of Biron delivered up the Kings order. Afterward the Chancellor said
that he had brought two Divines to comfort him, and prepare him for death, but
the Duke said, That he was already prepared, and that his soul was in such
tranquillity, as the night before he had spoken with God. Within few days
after he was beheaded, and his body interred by night in the Church of S. Paul.

The year 1604. the King was advertised that one Nicholas l'Hoste, Secretary
of State, discovered to the King of Spain, (from whom he received an annual
Pension to that end) the secrets and affairs of the State: upon the notice
taken L'Hoste put himself in flight for his own safety, but he was so closely
followed and pursued, that he was enforced to hide himself in the River of
Marne, where he dyed through cold and fear. His body being found, was
condemned to be drawn in pieces with wild horses, and the four quarters to
be set upon four wheels at four gates of Paris. The year 1610. there were
taken out of the Arsenal of Paris Fifty great Gunnes, with store of Munition of
powder and shot, and great numbers of Soldiers were leavied.

The King intended shortly after to enter into his Army, but he would first see
his Queen should be crowned at St. Denis, which was performed with great
solemnity. But the next day after this Magnificence and pomp of the Queens
Coronation, this great King was on Friday the 14. of May, 1610. about four in
the afternoon most traitorously murdered in his Caroch with two stabbs with a
knife near the region of his heart, passing in the Street of the Ferronery,
near the Charnells of the Innocents Churchyard, by Francis Ravaillac, borne
in Angolesme. His Obsequies were performed the three days following, the 21,
22, 23. of June, with infinite tears and lamentations: and after many
funebriall solemnities, his Corpse was conducted to St. Denis, where it
remains interred.

He lived fifty six years, and thirty one days. He reigned in Navarre
Thirty seven years, eleaven months, or thereabout; and in France Twenty
years, nine months, and thirteen days.

Lewis the 13. and 64. King of France. Anno 1610.
portrait

LEwis the 13. at his age of eight years, seven Months, and seventeene days,
succeeded his Father Henry the Great, and the fifteenth of May, Anno Domini
1610. he sat personally in the Court of Parliament, then sitting at the
Augustines, where, in the presence of the Queen his mother, who sat by him of
the one side, four Cardinals, four Ecclesiastical Peers of France, some
Princes of the Blood, and other Princes, who met in that assembly; also of the
Constable, with many Dukes and secular Peers, of the Marshalls of France, and
Officers of the Crown, of Governors of Provinces, of Presidents and
Counselors of the Parliament, he by the Mouth of the Lord Sillery his
Chancellor declared his Mother to be Regent in France, that she might have
the tuition of his person, and the administration of the affairs of his
Kingdom, during his minority, with all authority and power, according to the
charge of that Court given the day before.

The same Month the criminal indictment was preferred against the most
inhumane Parricide, Francis Ravaillac, and on the 23. of May, he was declared
guilty, and justly attainted, and convicted of the crime of Laesae Majestatis
in the highest degree, in the great Court and Chamber of Turnella in Paris,
before all the Assemblies, Presidents, Counselors, and Commissioners, at the
request of Du Viquit, Attorney General to the King, whose place and authority
was there then to inquire against this Francis Ravaillac, for the murder of
his late Sovereign Henry the fourth, King of France and Navarre: Whereupon
this Ravaillac with a sad and death-like countenance, holding up his guilty
hand before this great assembly, presently confessed guilty; and that he became
this his Countries shame, only by the instigation of the Devil; and not any
other accomplices and confederates would he reveal, but in a Satanicall manner
vowed himself to secrecy; and being found guilty, he was with a strong guard
of armed men conveyed to prison, which otherwise by the violence and rage of
the common people, had been torn in pieces, such was their love they owed to
their late King: for which Fact he was condemned to pay his forfeit before the
great gate of our Lady Church in Paris, and thence to be conveyed to the place
of execution; and in the mean time, to make him confess, he was to be pinched
with hot Pincers upon his breasts, arms, buttocks, thighs, and the Calves of
his legs; his right hand to be burnt off with fire of brimstone, with an
order, that in those places where he was so pinced, melted Lead should be
powered, boiling Oil, Pitch, Rozen, Wax, and Brimstone, melted altogether.
This being done, that his body should be torn in pieces, and dismembered by
four horses, and that his Limbs should be burnt and consumed to ashes, and
cast into the wind; all his goods to be confiscate to the King: that the house
wherein he was borne, should be demolished, and never any Edefice upon that
ground to be built: that within fifteen days after the publication of this
sentence in the town of Angolesme, his Father and Mother should depart the
Realm, and never return again, upon pain of being hanged, without any other
proceedings: It was also forbidden in the aforesaid High Court, that his
brothers, sisters uncles, and all others that bear the name of Ravaillac, to
whom it was enjoined to change it into another name, upon the same penalty: All
which was published and put in execution the same day, by the order of the
whole assembly in the aforesaid Court in Paris: but before I conclude, I will
speak again of the manner of his death; because in that place I will not omit
some things more worthy of note.

Afterward it was provided for the Funerals and obsequies of the dead King,
and then the body of the late Henry the third was removed from the Town of
Compeigne to be interred at St. Denis; which was performed, and the heart of
this Henry the Great, at the same time was carried to the Jesuits at la Flech.

The Sorbone renewed the Decree of the Council of Constance against Paracides
of Kings, and by the Court of Parliament upon the Iuine, it condemned a Book of
John Mariana, one of the Society, a Spaniard entitled De Rege and Regis
institutione, and caused it to be burnt by the Executioner before our Ladies
Church.

The Martial de la Chastra, being sent with an Army of twelve thousand foot,
and two thousand Horse to Tulliers, which he took the second of September.

Diverse Ambassadors came to Paris to the King, to bemoane and condole with him
the death of his father: and King James of England sent unto him the Order of
the Garter, which he received the foureteenth of September.

The 17. of October the King was consecrated at Rheimes, and the next day he
received the Order of the Holy Ghost; and he gave the Order to the Prince of
Conde, and returned to Paris, where he was magnificently entertained.

The six and twentieth of November it was proceeded and decreed in the Court
of Parliament against a Book of Cardinal Bellarmine, touching the Popes
authority In Temporalibus, which was forbidden to be printed, to be sold, or
kept, upon pain of High Treason.

The seventeenth day of November, Anno Domini 1611. the Duke of Orleans,
brother to the King, deceased at St. Germane en Lay, and his body was conveyed
to St. Denis in France.

The Lord of Vatan made a kind of a Rebellion in Berry, whereupon his Castle
was taken, and he carried to Paris, where he was beheaded the second, of
January, Anno Domini 1612.

This year were solemnized the marriages of the King with the Lady Anne
Infanta of Spain, and of the Kings Sister, with the Prince of Spain.

The year 1614 the Prince of Conde retired himself to Paris, and the
Marquess D'Ancre was made Marshall of France.

The Statue of Brass of Henry the Great, was by the great Duke of Tuscany sent
to Paris, and placed with the Horse of Brass, upon the midst of the New
Bridge; And about that time the Prince of Conty dyed.

The Prince distasted with the Kings espousalls with the Queen at Burgos, made
a hurly burly in the Country, but the Espousalls being ended, the Duke of
Guise with a strong Army conducted her to Fontarable, where she was received
by the Spaniards, and an exchange being made, the Queen was by the said Duke
conveyed to Bourdeaux, where she was most magnificently entertained by the
King, where he expected her, and the Nuptials were celebrated on St.
Katharines day.

The year 1616. such was the rigor of cold weather in January, that the
Rivers were frozen, and the ice was the cause of the fall of St. Michaels at
Paris.

The 16. of August, the taking of Peronne was a cause of new commotions, and
the first of September was apprehended at the Louure, and after kept under a
strong guard in the Bastile.

Many of the Lords retired from the Court, as the Duke of Vendosme, of Nevers,
of Guise, of Mayenne, and Bovillon, with other Lords, whereof some returned
again, the others not: which was a cause that the King in Parliament declared
the causes wherefore he kept the Prince his brother in hold.

In the beginning of the year 1617. he made a Declaration against the Duke of
Nevers in Parliament, the 17. of January, also in February against the Dukes of
Vendosme, Mayenne, Bouillon, the Marquess of Caevure, and the President le
Jay. Also another Declaration was made in March for the reunion to his
Domaines, and a Confiscation of the goods of the said Nobility upon the 16. of
the said Month.

This King succeeded after the Tragical death of his Father, when great
troubles were like to follow; but all those clouds were blown away, and this
young Prince shined forth like the Sun in a clear sky. First of all he went
to the Parliament, and made a Declaration that his Mother should be Queen
Regent during his minority. Afterward the Jesuits received his Fathers heart,
with great Ceremony, being received into La Flech. Here the Arraignment and
cruel Execution of the Murderer Ravilliac deserves to be drawn forth in
black colors. Imagine that Ravilliac was first arraigned after he had been
put to the Rack, then condemned, afterward he was brought out of the prison in
his shirt, with a Torch of two pound weight lighted in one hand, and the knife
wherewith he had murdered the King, chained to the other: then he was set
upright in a Dung-cart, now he is doing penance at our Ladies Church; now
imagine the raging people are ready to tear him in pieces, but the Officers
restrain them; the Murderer came to the Scaffold, he crosses himself in sign
that he dyed a Papist; he was bound to a St. Andrews Cross, then his fatal
hand with the knife chained to it, smoaks in a Furnace of fire and brimstone;
it is consumed, yet he will not confess any thing, but roar and cry like to
a Soul in hell, but yet unpitied: and then his flesh was pulld off with hot
Pincers, and burnt, then scalding Oil, Rozen, pitch, and brimstone, melted
together, were powered into his wounds, and on his navell a roundell of Clay was
set, into the which they powered molten Lead, and then he roared, but confessed
nothing. At last, to conclude this Tragedy, his body was torn in pieces with
four strong Horses, which could not pluck them asunder, being so firmly knit
together, until the flesh under his arms and thighs was cut. In this manner
was this Paricide tormented and executed, being the horrid picture of a
Traitor, suffering extreme tortures, yet misery nor death could not enforce
from him any confession. And surely if Hells tortures might be felt on earth,
it was approved in this man's punishment, yet he would reveal nothing, but that
he did it by the instigation of the Devil, and his maine reason was, because
the King tolerated two Religions in his Kingdom. Oh small occasion, that for
this cause one servile slave should thu quench the great light of France, whose
brightness glistred through Europe: One thing this Villain confessed, that of
all the several torments that were invented and laid upon him, none was more
terrible to him, than his loss of sleep for six days and nights together,
for there were appointed several officers by turns to keep him waking, by
thrusting red-hot bodkins into his breasts and sides; so that if he did but
offer to wink or give a nod, then presently they awaked him with those Irons.
He was torn in pieces as I said before, and his bones burnt, the ashes whereof
were scattered in the wind, as being thought unworthy of the earths burial.
This Ravaillac was borne at Angolesme, and by profession a Lawyer, and was
persuaded as it is thought, by the Jesuits to perpetrate this bloody act, by
murdering this Kings Father, Henry the fourth, the hope of Learning, and the
glory of Arms. Afterward the Duke of Fener, Ambassador from Spain, came to
Paris, and being brought into the Kings presence, he said that he came from the
King his Master to visit his Majesty. This young Prince answered, I thank the
King my brother for his good will, I will remember him and you also: Seeing he
desires it, he may expect from me all friendship and good intelligence, such as
he had with the deceased King my Father. Afterward the Lord Wotton,
Ambassador from England, came to Paris, and then Ambassadors for confirmation
of mutual league being sent into Spain, England, and to Rome, the King was at
Rheims with solemn pomp and great state crowned.

FINIS.
The Table of all the Names of the Kings of FRANCE, which are contained in this
Book.
PHaramond, the first King of France, Anno Domini 429. page 1. Cloion or
Clodion, the second King of France, Anno. Dom. 432. page 5 Merovaeus, the third
King of France, An. Dom. 450. page 9 Chilperick or Hilperick, the fourth King
of France. Anno 470. page 14 Clovis, the fifth King of France, and the first
Christian King of that Nation. Anno 485. page 18 Childebert the sixth King of
France. Anno 514. page 23 Clotharius the first of that Name, and the seventh
King of France. An. 559. p. 28 Cherebert, the eighth King of France. Anno 564.
page 22 Chilperic, the ninth King of France* Anno 577. page 36 Clotharius, the
second of that name, and the 10. King of France. Anno 586. p. 40 Dagobert, the
11. King of France. Anno 632. page 44. Clovis, alias, Lewis, the second of that
name, the 12. King of France. Anno 645. page 49 Clotharius, the third of that
name, and the 13. King of that Nation. Anno 666. page 53 Childeric 2. the 14.
King of that Nation, Anno 570. page 58 Theodorick the 15. King of that Nation.
Anno 680. page 62 Clovis the 3. the 16. King of that Nation. Anno 689. page 67
Childebert the 2. the 17. king of that nation. Anno 692. page 71 Dagobert the
2. the 18. king of that Nation. Anno 710. page 75 Clotharius the 4. the 19.
king of that nation. Anno 719. page 79 Daniel, alias, Chilperick, the 20. king
of that Nation. Anno 719. page 83 Theodorick the 2. the 21. king of that
Nation. Anno 720. page 87 Childerick the 3. the 22. king of that Nation. Anno
740. page 91 Charles Martel, Duke and Prince of the French, Anno 788. page 95
Pepin surnamed the short, the first of that name, the 23. king of that Nation,
Anno 752. page 101 Charlemaine, Emperor of Rome, the 24 king of France, An.
768. page 106 Lewis the Debonaire, Emperor of Rome, and the 25. king of France,
Anno 814. page 111 Charles the Bald, Emperor of Rome, the 26. king of France.
An. 840. page 115 Lewis and Charoloman, or Carlon, the 28. king of France. An.
879. p. 128 Lewis the Lubber, and Charles the gross, the 29. king of France.
An 885. p. 126 Eudes or Odo, the 30. king of France. Anno 891. page 130 Charles
surnamed the simple, the 31. king of France. An. 898. page 135 Rodulph or Raoul
of Burgundy, the 32 king of France. page 139 Lewis the 4, the 33. king of that
Nation, Anno 939. page 144 Lotharius the 4* the 34. king of France, Anno 954.
page 150 Lewis the 5, the 35. king of France, Anno 986. page 155 Hugh Capet,
the first of that name, the 36. king of France, Anno 987. page 158 Robert the
1, the 37. king of France, Anno 997. page 163 Henry the 1, the 38. king of
France, Anno 1031. page 168 Philip the 1, the 39. king of France, Anno 1060.
page 173 Lewis the 6, the 40. king of France, Anno 1109. page 178 Lewis the 7.
was called Augustus, being the 41. king of France, An. 1131. p. 183 Philip the
2, who was surnamed Augustus, the 42. king of France, Anno 1180. page 188 Lewis
the 8, the 43. king of France, Anno 1223. page 194 Lewis the 9, the 44. king of
France, Anno 1226. page 199 Philip the 3, the 45. king of France, Anno 1271.
page 205 Philip the 4, the 46. king of France, Anno 1286. page 211 Lewis the
10, who was surnamed Hutin, the 47. king of France, Anno 1315. page 216 Philip
the 5, the 48. king of France, Anno 1317. page 223 Charles the 4, surnamed the
Fair, the 49. king of France, Anno 1322. page 228 Philip of Valois, the sixth
of that Name, the 50. king of France, Anno 1327. p. 232 A Relation of Edward
the 3, King of England, who was the first that quartered the Arms of France,
and made it subject to England, Anno 1351. page 237 John the 1, the 51. king of
France, Anno 1350. page 241 Charles the 5, surnamed the Wise, the 52 King of
France, Anno 1364. p. 246 Charles the 6, the 53. King of France, Anno 1380.
page 251 A Relation of Henry the 5, king of England, who gave a great overthrow
to the French at the Battle of Cressay, and still maintained the right left
him by Edward the 3. of England. Anno 1412. page 258 Charles the 7, the 54.
king of France. Anno 1422. page 264 Lewis the 11. the 55. king of France. Anno
1461. page 269 Charles the 8, the 65. king of France. Anno 1483. page 281 Lewis
the 12, the 57. king of France. Anno 1499. page 287 Francis of Valois, the
first of that Name, was the 58. king of France. An. 1515 page 294 Henry the 2,
the 59. king of France. Anno 1547. page 299 Francis the 2, the 60. king of
France. Anno 1559. page 305 Charles the 9, the 61. king of France. Anno 1560.
page 310 Henry the 3, the 62. king of France. Anno 1574. page 315. Henry the 4,
surnamed the Great, the 63 king of France. An. 1589. page 320 Lewis the 13,
which now reigns, styled the most Christian king, is the 64. King of France,
and began his Reign in the year 1610. page 331
FINIS.

