THE Joyful and royal entertainment of the right high and mighty Prince,
Frauncis the French Kings only brother, by the grace of God Duke of Brabande,
Aniow, Alaunson, etc. Into his noble City of Antwerpe.

Translated out of French by Arthur Golding, according to the Copy printed by
Plantine at Antwerpe, his highness printer.

Imprinted at London for William Ponsonby, and are to be sold at his shop in
Paul's Churchyard, at the sign of the Bishops head.

The Preface.
STrange and wonderful changes, have by Gods just judgment happened
heretofore unto men, for their horrible and outrageous crimes, even in the
greatest Empires, Monarchies, and commonweals. And like as God, who knows
how to pull down the pride even of the greatest which abuse their authority,
has executed those judgments too manifest his justice: so has he also set
them forth for example to such as should come after, into whose hands he
would put the scepters to rule folk withal: to the intent they might
understand, that as they report them selves to reign by his grace, so in very
deed they be his Lieuetenantes, and Ministers of his justice upon earth, and
therefore ought not to abuse that sovereign and welneere divine authority,
wherewith he has inhonored them.

Also, (which thing has not come to pass without Gods providence) there have
ever bin learned men of rare wits, which have conveyed the remembrance of
such changes over to posterity, to serve them for example: leaving in writing
the causes of such chances, with their effects and diversities of falling
out, to the end that whenever the like turnings come again, men may be in
a readiness to take the counsel which may be most for their welfare, or at
leastwise with may be least hurtful to their Countries and to their own
persons. Thucydides the prince of Historiographers among the Athenians,
affirms that his taking upon him to write the civil wars among the Greeks,
called the wars of Peloponnesus, which were full of diverse chaunges: was for
the example of them that were to come after him, when they lighted into wars
of the like kind. And of a truth, wise men which have advisedly examined the
causes of the civil wars, as well which have been in certain ages past, as
which have bin in our age: have found many things resembling the said wars
of Peloponnesus, whither it be in the causes and the effects, in difficulties
of resolution, in differences of dispositions, in lettes of execution, in
treasons, trecheries, surmizes, misreportes, or slanders against good men,
and in such other like incidentes. The like also is to be seen in other
Historiographers: For the more precisely and faithfully they have written, the
more have they done us to understand, that this saying of the Orator is true,
That an History is the Scholemistresse of man's life. And soothly if ever any
change in the world were notable and worthy to be imparted to posterity* it
is that which has happened in these Low countries. For whither ye have an eye to
the far differing qualities of the two princes that entered (...) into these
wars: or to the inequality of their forces: to the diversity of the causes
which moved them to enter into arms on either part: to the diversity of their
success, on the one part with secret enterprises sagely demeaned, and on the
other part with wiles, deceites and mischeeues practiced: or to y^ treaties of
peace and unity made, double made, and unmade again: to the diversity of
parts which some self same persons have followed almost at one time, or
finally to the change of the prince that had bin followed with long, advised,
and sage deliberation and to the incou^terings that have bin made to the
contrary, and the things that are to ensue thereof hereafter: these things (I
say) being diligently examined, will show how there have been feawe chaunges
heretofore, which have better deserved to come to light, tha^that which we
have presently before our eyes. Which thing makes us to hope, that God will
not suffer so goodly and rare an example to be buried, but that he will
stir up some wise, learned, and eloquent man, meet to set it forth in
writing, to commend it to posterity. Howebeit forasmuch as it is our duty
to help him that shall enterprise so great, so high, and so difficulte a
work: and one (as it were) of most principal and special points, fallen
out in the inuesting of the Duchy of Brabande in the person of the Lord
Frauncis, only brother of the French King, Duke of Aniow: and in his
entering into the right renowned city of Antwerpe: I thought it my duty to
write down the same truly now while the remembrance thereof is yet fresh:
as well to give knowledge thereof to strange nations, as to s^rue his turn with
notes of remembrance, with shall impart to posterity the whole and universal
change happened in this country. By the way, I would have all men to
understand, that although we have no cause to repentevs of the receiving of
the said Prince, chiefly for that it has pleased him to like well of it: yet
notwithstanding, the said city of Antwerpe had not any more then six days
respit, to prepare for the entertaynement of so great a prince: to the intent
that all men may perceive, after what sort the people were affectioned, which
in so short time undertook so great a matter: and how great the sumptuousness
of his entertainment was like to have bin, if the time might have bin
answerable to the good will and earnest desire of all the inhabitants of the
noble and rich city of Antwerpe.

The departing of the Mounsire the Duke of Aniow out of England, and the
receiving of him into Zeland.
When the Queen of England and Mounsire the Duke of Aniowe understood by
report made to her Majesty and his highness by Mounsire de Pruneaux, (who had
bin sent over a little before from the Duke to the Prince of Orange, and had
prosecuted the treaty the former years as his ordiniarie Ambassador,) what
good will and great longing he had found in the prince of Orange, who was come
into the I Will of Walckeren with a great number of Gentlemen, and with the
deputies of the States and of the chiefest and best Cities of the Low
Country, to receive his highness and to do him most humble service: And when
they had also heard the Embassage of y^ Lords of Ohain and Iunius, sent from
the Lords of the State to the Duke, to show unto him the exceeding great
desire which all the people had to see his highness, for the present ratifiyng
of the former covenants y^ had passed betwixt the^: for the acco^plishing
whereof it was needful that he should pass over with all speed: whereby the
same thing was confirmed which had bin declared often before by ye Lord of Mount
Saint Aldegond, ordinary Ambassador to her Majesty and his highness: Upon the
intelligence of these things, it was resolved by her Majesty and his highness,
that the Mounsire should depart. Whereupon the Queen calling the Lord Haward,
commanded him (for the Earl of Lincoln the high Admiral of England was the^
sick,) to take upon him ye charge of the Admiralship, and to go to Rochester,
and there to chooze vessels meet for the transporting of the Mounsire and his
train, and to furnish them with men of war, Mariners, and all manner of
necessaries as well of war as of vittels. Which thing was done with such
diligence and speed, that the ships being ready with all things in less
then eight days, passed out of the river of Rochester and the Thames, and were
conveyed to the Downs nere to the town of Sandwich, where y^ Mou^sire was to
take shipping. And forasmuchas ye Mounsire came into England accompanied but
with a few princes and Lords, and they also had left their train in France,
and some of the same Lords were sent back again afterward by his commandment
and for his service. The Qneene determined to give him a company and train
meet for his greatness, taking his journey about so great and noble exployt. And
therefore she commanded the Earl of Leycester master of the Horses, the Lord
of Hunsdon governor of Barwicke, her Majesty's near kinnesman, and the L.
Hawarde the Uiceadmirall, (of whom the first two were of her privy Counsel,
and al three were Knights of the order of the Garter,) to attend upon him,
and to assemble as great a number of English Lords and Gentlemen, as could
be gotten in so little time, to honor him withal: Whereunto the said Lords
obeyed very willingly: and there went with them to accompany them, the Lord
Willowghbie, the Lord Windsore, the Lord Sheffeelde, the Lord Hawarde, and
the Lord Awdley, second son to the late Duke of Norffolke: master Sydney,
Nephewe to the forenamed Earl of Leycester, sir George Caree, and master John
and Robert Caree all three sons of the said Lord of Hunsdon: master William
Hawarde brother of the said Lord Haward: sir Thomas Shorley, sir John Parrat,
sir William Russell, sir William Drurie, and sir George Bowser Knights, and a
great number of other Gentlemen, so as the whole train that attended upon the
said Earl, was to the number of a hundred Gentlemen, and of mo than three
hundred Seruingmen. The Lord of Hunsdon had of Gentlemen and others together to
the number of a hundred and fifty: and the Lord Hawarde had as many.

The Queen determined to accompany the Mounsire to the seas side: and yet
nevertheless commanded the said Lords to keep their course, and to attend
upon his highness to the said place, with all manner of solemnities,
interteynments and feastings. He on the other side desired and besought her
Majesty, not to depart out of London, as well for that the journey would be
painful unto her, as for that he saw the wether fair and wind favorable,
and therefore was loath to loose any occasion of perfourming his voyage withal
speed. But he could not prevail. Whereupon her Majesty took her journey
with her whole Court, the first day of February, and lodged that night at
Rochester. The next day, abiding still at Rochester, her Majesty showed him all
her great ships with were in that place, into most whereof his highness and the
Prince and Lords of his train entered, not without great admiration of the
French Lords and Gentlemen, who confessed that of good right the Queen of
England was reported to be Lady of the Seas. Also he behilde how all those
ships were ready furnished and well appointed. And her Majesty told him,
that al those vessels and the furniture of them, should do him service
whenever he would employ them: For the which he humbly thanked her Majesty:
and so after all the great ordinance had bin shot of, they returned for yt day
again to Rochester.

The third day they went to Sittingboorne, where dining both together, the
Queen was served after the English manner, by the greatest Ladies of her
Court: and the Mounsire after the French manner, by the Gentlemen of his
train, which Ladies and Gentlemen dined afterward togithers. Then his
highness be sought her Majesty again, to go no further, declaring unto her
that the fair wether pas-, sed away. But notwithstanding his intreatance, the
Queen went on still to Cauntorburie. At which place, after one days
tarriance, when she had openly feasted all the French Nobility, either part
took their leave of other, not without great grief and show ^f very great
amity, specially between her Majesty and the Mounsire. Which thing was
perceived also in the Lords and Gentlemen of both the nations, and likewise in
the Ladies, to all whom it was like grief to depart after they had been
conversant and had lived friendly and brotherly together, by the space of
three months, without any change or alteration of their good wills. But the
honor which enforced his highness, assuaged his grief, and made him to
proceed on his journey with the said Prince and Lords of both the nations.

The sixth day of the same month, whereas he was determined to have taken
ship, he was counseled to lodge that night at Sandwiche, because the wind
was somewhat changed. Howebeit, some of the English Gentlemen, namely master
Killegrey, master Dier and others, to eschew thronging at their imbarking,
went to Dover, and there taking shipp the same night lay a while at anchor, and
somewhat after midnight sailed away with certain other vessels.

The seventh day, in the morning about ix. of the cloak, his highness took
the sea in three great ships of war. In y^ greatest of the^ named The
Discouerer, sailed the Mou^sire himself with the Earl of Leycester, and the
Lord Hawarde the Uiceadmirall: In the second called the Sentinel, went the
Prince Daulphin: and in the third went the county of Lauall, and the Lord of
Hunsdon. Now as his highness was yet at anchor, there came a post from a Lord
of England, who brought him word that the States of the low Countries were
revolted, and namely the city of Antwerpe, and therefore he prayed him not to
depart, until he had more certain news. Notwithstanding this, his highness
determined to depart, and so sailed away with fifteen ships: and he had so
fair a weather, (which continued even until after his entering into
Antwerpe, and his feasting and solemn entertainment there): that the heaven,
the winds, the sea, and the earth seemed all to favor his voyage, and to
further y^ gladness which the people showed in receiving him with so great
goodwill.

In the mean time, the Prince of Orange, seeing the time fit, departed from
Middleborowgh where he had tarried the Mounsires coming six weeks and more,
and came to Flushing, to take order for althings that were requisite for the
honorable and commodious interteyning of so great a Prince. At y^ which place,
understanding by the letters of the said Lords Ambassadors and others, that
the Mounsire was departed from London and comd to Cauntorburie: and therefore
thinking that it would not be long ere he arrived there: he dispatched
Mounsire Treslon his viceadmirall of Zelande with a little Pynnesse called the
Chasse, to go before to meet the Mounsire: commanding him that as soon as
he had discovered his fleet, he should give him a watch word thereof by
the shot of two Cannous. Mounsire Treslon having about noone tide discovered
the ships that were parted from Dover, and thinking that they had been the
great fleet: gave his watchworde, which was the cause that a certain vessel
went forth to the sea to meet his highness. But anon after, perceiving his
error, he returned to Flushing, where by and by the fleet of Dover arrived.
Then Mounsieur Treslon going forth, found the Mounsire and the great fleet
between Newporte and Dunkirke: where after salutation given and taken on
either side, the Mounsire standing upon the Hatches of his ship, espied his
own Secre^arie named Nephewe standing likewise upon the Hatches of the Chasse,
to whom he sent his shipbote, commanding him to come a board to him, which
thing he did, and there advertised the Mounsire, that as concer^ing the
reuolting of the states, there was no such matter, but that all things went
very well, and that his Highness was waited for with great longing. That day
by reason the wind (...) turned Northeast, they could go no further, but were
feign to cast anchor over against a place called Eastende, where they passed
that night, waiting for the tide the next morning. His ships were perceived
by them of Flushing, where anon after midnight arrived the Lord of S.
Aldegond, who assured the prince Orange, that the next morning the Mounsire
would arrive there with the tide. Whereupon the prince of Orange and the prince
of Es pynoy with a great number of Gentlemen took sea the next morning, but
because the tide was against them: and on the other part the Mounsire having a
side wind with him was constrained to haste to the Land: by means thereof
the Prince being not able to come aboorde to him with his ship, was feign to
turn sail back again to Flushing, where the Prince Daulphin had taken land
already, and sought every where for the prince his brother. When they had
embraced and saluted one another like brethren, the prince of Orendge
perceiving the Mounsire to approach very near, took the water again. But
when he perceived him to come down into his boat to take land, he turned
back again, and hyed him so fast that he took land before him, and there
tarried his coming. As s^ne as he was arrived, while he was yet in his boat
ready to come a land, the prince received him with great reverence, and
embracing his highness knee, because he saw the weather was cold, said unto
him in few words, that he was very glad to see that happy day, which had
been so long expected, wherein he had the honor to behold his highness, and
to offer unto him his most humble service, with goods and life and all that he
had besides: hoping that by means of his highness, that country having endured
so great adversity, should now be fully set at liberty. Whereunto the
Mounsire answered very wisely and breefly, And when he had embraced him with
such honor as was dew in respect of his age and doings: he came a land, and
was brought by the prince to the palace of the city, howbeit not without great
difficulty, by reason of y^ great preace of men of war and other people
pestring one another, the folk of that country pressing to see his highness,
and the Englishmen which as then were come down thither in great number,
pressing to know the prince of Ore^dge: In ye mean while y^ tru^pets and (...)
sounded with such noise, yt the air rang of it, and ^ll the Ordinanceshot off,
(as well of the Queens ships as of the other ships whereof y^ number was great
which lay the^ in ye rode,) with so great roaring and thundering, that they
conu^yed the news of his highness happy ^yuall in the Low country, to
Caleis and to other places of France. They of Flushing shot two peales, with
so great noise by reason of the great number of y^ pieces y^ are in the town,
that al ye ground rang of it. The Mounsire found in that place all sorts of
his Officers: for his household and his guard of Swisses and Frenchmen,
departing from Caleis and Bolloin four days before, were come to Middlebrowgh.
The Magistrate of the city waited for him at the gates of ye city, who told
him by ye mouth of their Recorder y^ they were very glad of his coming and
thought themselves happy to see him, in hope that by his guiding and
government, they should see their country restored to tra^quillitie, and set up
again in her former renown.

The states of Braba^d speaking by ye mouth of Mounsire Uan Stralen Amptma^ of
Antwerp, after their welco^ming of him declared with what mind y^ noble and
good cities of Braband had expected him, beseeching him most humbly to honor
the country of Braband with his presence out of hand. Next them the deputies of
the city of Brusselles (besides the declaration which they made of their own
goodwil, and generally of all the peoples of that country) declared also
particularly, with what great good will and affection his highness had bin
waited for in that city, the cheef seat of the lords of yt country: and that
after so many mischeefes which they had suffered for withstanding the tyranny
of the Spaniards, next unto god they had not any hope but in the coming of his
highness their prince and Lord.

Afterward they of Antwerp were heard: who declared y^ affection of ye people
toward his highness, their long lo^ging for him, and the great desire with they
had to see their prince and souerain. The colonels and captains of y^ town
spoke afterward, and declared unto him how carefully and diligently they had
kept y^ city, in hope to put it shortly into his hands, and rejoicing
likewise at his coming.

Unto all these Orations his highness answered very sagely and breefly as unto
all the residew, to the well liking and coutentment of all that stood by.

The prince of Orendge tarried a while with the Mounsire in the town house of
the city: and then taking his leave went to visit the princes and Lords of
both the nations that came with him, to see how they fared, and to take order
that they should want nothing, so far forth as the ability of the town of
Flushing (which is none of the greatest) could extend, where such provision
was made, that all were well lodged and served, notwithstanding that above ^iue
hundred men of the only english Lords were come a land that day. All that
afternoon was spent in feasting, in making of Bonsires, in firewoorkes, in
sounding of trumpets, and in all manner of tokens of toy, which all men uttered
universally for the coming of so great a prince.

Also the four members of Flaunders, which came by the council of the prince
of Orendge, waited to present themselves unto him at middlebrowgh.

The Prince of Orendge perceiving that the Monsyre was minded to go next day
too middlebrowgh, told him that there were three ways The one about by the
castle of Ramekins to euter in at the great channel of Middlebrowgh, by the
bowght of the foreland. An other by the little channel through the country:
and that he had kept ships in a readiness too go the outer way, and a great
sort of boats to go the inner way, because his highness could not journey
either by coche or on horseback by reason of the winter: and there was but
only one causey whereby folk traueled ordinarily on foot. The Mounsire
beholding the fitness of the time, (for in deed it was very fair wether, and
understanding that ye way was not past a good french league in length,
undertook to go it on foot: and so did all the rest of the princes lords and
gentlemen as well of the same country, as of France and England. A great
sort of the Mounsires house which were lodged already at Middlebrough, came
to meet him, specially his guard of Frenchmen and Swissers. A good way out of
the town, the magi^rate of Middlebrough came too meet him, as it were about a
third part of the way: and there making an oration to him, told him of the
great and long desire which all the people had of his coming, and that the
people of Middlebrowgh for their own part thought themselves greatly
honored, in that he had voutsafed to come to their ^itie, offering all
duetifulnes unto him. His guard also met him in the same place, and then began
y^ Swis sers to march on in their order, stryking up their drums after their
manner. Moreover six companies of the citizens well armed and well arrayed, stood
imbatteled without the town: who kept their place til y^ M^u^sire was past,
and then they followed after leizurely behind.

The deputies of the states of the Erledome of Zeland, waited his coming at
the town gate. Who having declared ye gladness which they conce^ed, rejoiced at
the happy success which his highness had had in making ye peace in France, and
in rescowing the city of Ca^braye by his army and in his own person, and in
his passinge into England, which they knew he had taken upon him for none
other cause, then for the furtherance of the affairs of those countries, and
finally for y^ having put his person in danger of y^ passage, he was now
happily arrived in zeland: most humbly thanking his highness, and declaring
what hope they had conceived of his presence and therewithal offering right
humbly what soever their duty required.

At the entery of the gate one brought him a courser of Naples: but he
determined with himself, (seeing that the princes and Lords had not their
horses there) to go through with his journey on foot, and so entered into the
city of Middlebrowgh in this order.

First went the Magistrates of the city with their under officers and ministers
of Justice. Next them the deputies of the states of Zela^d. After them followed
diverse Gentlemen of all the three nations, with the deputies of the cities of
Braband, and of the four members of Flaunders. Then marched the Swissers after
their accustomed fashion: in whose train were a great sort of noblemen and
Gentlemen, of whom the most part were Englishmen of the retinew of the three
Lords sent thither by the Queen. Behind them insewed as it were in one troop
together, the Prince Daulphin, the Earl of Leycester, ye prince of Espinoy, y^
county de Laual the lord of Hunsdon, y^ lord Haward, and the rest of the
Lords. Then came the Mounsire himself, having on his left hand some what more
than half a pace beneath him, the prince of Orendge, of whom he always asked
some question. After him followed his guard of Frenchmen, and after them the
guard of the Prince of Orendge, and last of all the six ensigns yt stood in
battle ray without the city, and ten others which had marshalled the
streets unto the market place, where all the rest of the citizens were
imbattelled. Throughout all the streets from the gate to the Mounsires
lodging, there were rayles: and at every tenth pace on either side were burning
cressets. And so his highness and all the nobility which accompanied him,
passed on, maruelling to see so goodly a city in so little an isle, and so
near to three other good towns, not distant one from another above one
league. But most of all they woondered at the beauty of the marketsted, and of
the common hall of the city. His highness lodging was very well and richly
hanged and furnished, considering the small respit that the inhabitants had: so
as he was very well and (...) lodged, both he and all the princes, noblemen,
and gentlemen of all nations that attended upon him. That evening was passed in
feasting, in making of bonfires in the streets, in artificial fire works
upon the towers and steeples, and in sounding of trumpets.

The next morning, the twelve deputies of the four members of Flaunders,
speaking to his hignes by the mouth of Mounsire Tayard the Recorder of Gaunt,
declared at large the great good will of all the people of Flaunders cowards him,
and that like as they had been of the first that had sent unto him, so they
hoped to be of the first that should yield al hum ble service and subjection
unto him. Whereunto his highness answered very discreetly, as his custom was. He
passed the rest of the time in playing at tennis, with the Prince of Orendge
and afterward with the other Lords.

The thirteenth day he had a solemn feast made him in the Townehall, where his
highness commanded the tables too be prepared of purpose, that he might have
the company of the Prince Daulphin, the prince of Orendge, the Earl of
Leycester, the Prince of Espinoy, the County de Lauall, the Lord of Hunsdon,
and the Lord Haward. For the Lords of England were highly regarded and honored
every where, both in respect of her Majesty which sent them, and also for the
woorthines of their persons. The feast was excellently well furnished of all
things, and specially of tapistrie work and other devices of sugar: insomuch
that both the Frenchmen and Englimen confessed, that they had not been wont
to see such manner of services in their countries.

The fourteenth day, the prince of Orendge would needs go see the putting of
the ships in a readiness, which should carry the Mounsire and his train, which
were in number four and fifty: and therefore he would have gone to the
foreland of Middlebrowgh. Whereof the Mounsire hearing, would needs go with
him.

On thursday the fisteenth of that month, his highness went to see the town of
Ermwyden which is about half a league from Middlebrowgh. And understanding
that the english lords were gone to see the Town of Uere, (called by
strangers Camfer by reason of the passage that was sometime in the town of
Camp which is now drowned) he also took boat and went thither, where all the
company was very well received by the inhabitants, notwithstanding that they
were taken unprovided.

The sixteenth day, his highness was determined to have taken ship: but there
arose so great a storm, that the mariners counseled him to forbear the sea
for that day: by reason whereof his imbarking was deferred till the next
morrow, at which time his highness wi^h al his train sailed away. He himself
was carried in a ship peynted all over with his own colors, beset with a
number of flagges and pensills of the arms of Aniow. The residue had their
accustomed flagges so greatly feared of the Spaniardes, belaied with the
colors of the prince of Orendge. This fleet came y^ day against Beerlande
in the isle of South Beueland, where they cast ancre and spent that night there.

The next day being arrived luckely at Li^oo, after many shot of ordinance
from the Fort and from the ships of war which accompanied his highness,
they did cast ancre again. He himself went a land, and lay that night in the
captains lodging, longing for the morning. This Forte of Lis^oo is builded a
three leagues beneath Antwer^ upon the point of a dike or causey in the parish
of Lisloo. The place is so commodious, that with a Musket a man may easily
shoot from the one bank of the river Skeld to the other: and by reason that
the stream of the river and the tide of the Sea which passes that way twice a
day, do make it crooked, that place being occupied by the enemy, might
greatly hinder and anoy the sailing thereof. And therefore the citizens of
Antwerp following the advice and platform laid forth by the prince of
Orendge, bestowed great cost in fortifying that place, which has a great Tower
with great bulwarks, rampires and ditches, and is so well strenthened and
flanked to the purpose, and has the water so at commandment, that as now it
is not too be woone by any force.

The next day being monday the nienteenth day of February, his highness departed
thence, to make his entry into the renow^ed city of Antwerp.

The royal entertainment of the right high and mighty Prince, Frauncis the
French Kings only brother, by the grace of God Duke of Braband, Aniow,
Alaunson, Berry etc. into the city of Antwerp.
IN all great and stately shows and assemblies, they that are the authors
and setters forth of them, endeavor too beautify and commend as much as they
can, the things which they offer to the sight of those whom they intend to
honor, and of those which resort thither from strange places, to delight
themselves with the beholding of them. The ancient Histortographers describe
unto us many great tryumphes, and stately entertainementes of Emperors,
Kings, and great Captains, and they forget not to put into their writings, the
great costlines and charges, and whatsoever else was set forth to the show,
to content the eyes of the beholders. And albeit that another gold, silver,
precious stones, tapistrie, cloth of silk, fine linen, diversities of
vessels, nor variety of paintings were spared, but al such things have
enriched those shows: yet notwithstanding, there is not any thing y^ has
yielded greater grace, beauty, and conte^tme^t to such assemblies than the
multitude and brighnesse of armorie and of things perteyuing too martial
affairs, as engines, art^lery, and shows of cities and castles beaten down
or taken by force from the enemies, And therefore in the Roman Empire, (which
excelled all the other not only in conquests, martial discipline, and
politic order of government, but also in sumptuousnes and royalty) although
infinite numbers of public games and exercises were exhibited by them being
the greatest Lords of the world, who not only spared not any thing that was in
their own power, but also made the cities and countries which were any way
bound unto them, to send unto the^ whatsoever rare and exquisite things they
could come by, to serve their turns in the shows which they exhibited to the
people: yet notwithstanding their Tryumphes have so borne the bell above all
the rest, that the word Tryumphing which comes thereof, has been applied to
all high, great, and stately doings Not that in their other shows any thing
was spared which might content the eyes (...) of c^etous folk, or satisfy the
bludthirstie hearts of such as tock^ no pleasure but too behold the sheading
of blood, yea and oftentimes of man's blood before their eyes. But in their
triumphings nothing was so glorious as the armorie and personages of y^ great
Captains that had been conquerers, which thing contented the b^holders far
more with out all comparison. And therefore when men intend to betoken the
exceeding huge greatness of Rome, they term it the Tryumphant Rome, which
imports as much as the rich, welthie, and victorious Rome, repl^nished with
great numbers of noble Captains, and valiant soldiers. And this term is come
of the great numbers of Truimphes, which were seen there in y^ times of y^
Scipios, Paul's, Claudies, Metells, Po^peis, Cesars and others. True it is y^
the other shows also were very glorious and beautiful to behold, and did (I
wot not how) tickle the hearts of such as were fed with the beholding of
their rich^s and of ye infi nite numbers of Lio^s, Tigres, Pa^thers, bears,
and swordplaiers incountring one another to to the death: but yet the beholding
of a goodly company of men armed in goodly armor, marching in good order
(besides the contenting of the sight, which is far better then too see
riches) does also wonderfully ravish men's minds, and drive the beholder into
an astonishment, setting him after a sort besides himself, and yet
nevertheless filling him with a joy and contentation surmounting all others.
For as in the pleasures of the body, those seem greates^ which do most
alter the senses with their plea^nes: so ^ares it also with the delights of
the mind: which beecome so much the greater, when admiration being matched
with them, does also moreover ravish the understanding, and set a man as it
were out of his wits. And therefore when great personages (who can better
judge of matters tha^ plain simple folk can) do make discourse of things that
are beautiful and desirable to behold: they speak of gold, silver, precious
stones, pictures, vessels, tablets, and diverse other exquisit Jewels: but yet
they pass over those things and stand not upon them, but when they come to
talk of fair armor, good horses and such other things as belong to
knighthoode and chiualry: then they make such taryance upon them, as they hold
it for a thing fully agreed upon and granted that in beauty and glory
nothing is comparable to a goodly army. Only this matter remains still in
question undecided: namely whether is the pleasanter sight, to see three or
four great battles of footmen well appointed in bright armor, well flanked
with small shot, and with their great ordinance before them: or to see as many
Squadrons of horsemen, or else two or three hundred ships furnished with their
flagges and banners, and raunged in order as if they were ready to give battle.
But as for the rest of al goodly things, all men are fully agreed that they
come nething near to any of those three, and much less do them al three
together, if a man might behold them all at once, as it is reported that at one
instant a man might have seen the great army of Xerxes both footmen and horse
men raunged in battle ray: and also the two fleetes of the Persians and of the
Greeks fighting upon the Sea by Salamine, where by the wisdom and valiantnes
of Themi^ocles, the Greeks got that famous victory of the Persians. In mine
opinion that is the rause why the glad receiving and joyful entering of
Frauncis Duke of Brabant into the City of Antwarpt, seemed so goodly and
royal to all such as saw it: insomuche that there has not been any of them
which has not confessed that he never saw the like. And yet were there very
many present at it, as well of the same country as of strangers, which have
seen many stately and royal meetings, both in the same city and in other
cities of the Low countries, and also in other great cities of other
Countries, as Paris, London, Roan, and Lions: and yet nevertheless the common
voice is, that this last has passed all the rest. And truly the City had no
more but six days respit to prepare for it, as I said before: insomuch that
they could not put to making any work of silk, nor of gold and silver
beaten or wouen, nor any embroderie: no nor in so shorttime make any mean
apparel new, nor any rare costlinesse of imagertes, pillars, tryumphall
arches or other pageantes: but were constrained to make a shifte with such
things as they had in a readiness aforehande of their own store. In other
entertemements, there have in deed been seen great plenty of riches and
royalties in attires of Kings and Queens, Princes and Princesses, Lords and
Ladies, Citizens and their wives: but in the entertainment no such were seen:
howebeit there was not any grossness, nor ought that might not well beseem
the neatnes and finenesse of that people, although it came nothing near the
sumptuousness of other intertainements. As touching triumphall arches,
Chariots, Portratures and such other Shows: although there were many witty
inventions and agreeable to the time: yet have men seen of the^ in other
places, which might match these. And as touching the number of their people,
although it was great: yet it is well known that Paris exceeds them in that
behalf. But the only reason of this contentment, comes chiefly of the great
number of people in armor, being not fewer then twenty thousand, in so good
and so fair armor: and of their order and obedience, and of the small noise
which all that huge multitude made: insomuch that if it had not bin for the
thundering of the Canons, and y^ sounding of Trumpets, Clarions, Halboies, and
other instruments, there was no more noise than is among a Counsel of grave
men. That the^ was in mine opinion the only very cause, with was greatly
furthered by their beholding of y^ Mounsire of Braband, who represe^the
statelines of old time, was clothed in a large Mantle, with ye Bonnet of his
Dukedom upon his head: so that among that great number of people, which were
so well armed that three of the best cities in Christendom could not show so
many fair armours of their own:) his highness resembled a precious stone or
Jewel set in fine gold. And because that they which were the beholders thereof,
(for they could not be every where, nor see every thing) will be very glad to
understand of the things that so escaped them, and delight their minds now
with the remembrance of the things which they saw before, as they delighted
their eyes and minds with the beholding of them that day: And strange nations
too whom the fame of that so renowned days work is come, will take pleasure
to understand the same, whereof they could not be beholders: Therefore is this
book set forth, for the satisfiyng of all men, and also to make it known to
a number of men, (who partly for enmity, partly for envy, and partly for
other surmizes and mistrustes will not believe it,) with what mind and
affection the Prince of Orendge, and the other Lords and noblemen of Braband,
the good cities, and the small Towns, and namely the most renowned city of
Antwerp, have received their new prince and sovereign Lord.

The nienteenth day of the foresaid month in the forenoone, Mounsire y^ Duke
of Aniow departed from Lisloo and sailed toward Antwery, having in his
company but twenty ships: for the rest had gotten to Antwery before, as well
to put themselves in a readiness as for other affairs. And he came about eight
of the clock, nigh to the new town, and passing along by the towns side,
left the forela^d of Flaunders on his right hand and the town on his left, and
passed beyond all the town and the place where the Castle was. By the way he
heard all the Canons shot of from that part of the town which faceth the
river, and from a great number of ships which rode at ancre there: and he saw
all the wharfes furnished with men of war of the city, well armed, who
welco^med him with their shot, and were answered again by the ships of war
that accompanied him, conducted by Mou^sire de Tres^on and the Uiceadmiralles
and diverse Captains of Flushing. And so the first foot that he did set on
land in Brabande, was at a Uillage called Riell, which is at the Canon wharfe
of Antwerpt. The states of Braband, the Magistrates of the City, and diverse
other States, coming in like order on horseback to the same place with their
trumpets, Serieants and Heraults apparelled in cotes of ye arms of Lothyer,
Braband, and Limbourge: alighted there, and waited on foot at the wharfe to
receive his highness, and to show him the good will and affection of the
States and people. But the preace of people was so great, which resorted
thither to see the prince, whom they looked for to be their duke: and again
there were so many impediments in his landing: that it was found better for
them by the advice of the prince of Orange, to return back and to tarry for
his highness upon a Theater which was prepared for him.

This Theater was set up toward a corner of the Castle, and opened toward
the city, so as his highness being there, might at one time view both the City
and the Castle, and behold the Counterskarfes: the deep Ditches full of fair
water clear to the very bottom of the channel, inclozed on either side with
heawen stone: the great and fair buildinges, the goodly walls, beawtifull to
look on and very thick: and the broad Rampyres garnished with trees planted
by hand, that it resembled a little forest. The Mounsire was brought up to this
Theater accompanied with y^ prince Daulphin the only son of ye duke of
Mountpanuser: the Earl of Leycester, and other English Lords representing the
Queen of England: the Princes of Orendge and Espinoy, the county de Lauall,
the other english Lords, the County de Chateauroux, and a great sort of other
barons, lords and gentlemen, besides the chief Magistrates and Masters of the
companies of the City of Antwerpe.

The Lords of the State of Brabande waiting upon the Theater, came duetifully
down to go meet his highness: which thing he perceiving, did stand still.
Then the prince of Orendge stepped forth to take his place among the States,
as one of the chief Lords and Barons of the Duchy of Brabande. As soon as
they had saluted his highness, and with great humbleness kissed his hand,
they mounted up the steps again with him, after whom followed the Princes
and Lords of France and England, and when they were come up above, they
raunged themselves on either side. There was set for the Mounsire a chair
covered with cloth of gold, wherein he sat him down. And upon y^ theater there
was likewise a trauers of cloth of Gold, and all the Theater was covered with
Tapistrie. On the front of the Theater on the highest part thereof were the
arms of the Marquesship of the holy Empire: and a little beneath them on the
right hand, stood the arms of Brabande with a wreath of fruits: and on the
left hand stood the arms of the City of Antwery. Also there were set up two
banners of ^ilke azured with the arms of Aniow, and in one partition were
written these verses.

O Noble prince, whose footsteps faith and gentlensse preserve:
Receive thou here the honor which thy virtue does deserve.
That these Low Countries may at length take breath by meaues of thee,
And thou a father to us all in name and doings be.
A^er that every man had taken his place and silence was made, the States of
Braband began their Orarion by the mouth of Moun^ de ^esseiles doctor of both
the laws, Secretary to the said estates: and one of their Counsel: the sum
whereof was that the Barons noblemen and deputies of the chief cities, and of
the other good Towns, representing the states of the Duchy and country of
Braband, having now the good hap too see among them and to behold face to
face, the prince in whom next unto God they had wholly set the hope of their
deliverance, and of the stablishing of their ancient rest and liberty: Did
highly thank the almighty Lord, which had showed them that favor: taking it
for an assured warrant, that he of his infinite goodness and providence, had
not forgotten nor forsaken their just quarrel: but had chose^ his high nes too
be the defender of his people and the administrer of his justice, too the end
that too Gods glory, and to his own honor, and renown, the storms of al
troubles, and of al other things that anoyed their estate, might by the beams
of his princely majesty wisdom and prowess be chaced away, and the
^ightues of their former prosperity heretofore known to all nations, be made
to spring up and shine forth again: In respect whereof they gave his highness
most humble thanks for the singular love and good will, which he of his own
only motion and princely disposition, had voutsafed to continue toward them
unto that instant, notwithstanding all ye cross dealinges and practices that
cunning heads could skill to put forth to the hinderaunce of their affairs,
forasmuch as they were not ignorant that for their calamities and miseries
sakes, nothing could have fallen in, which could have made more to the
favor and furtherance of their case. Which thing they had esteemed and would
esteem for ever, as a peerless president of his incomparable stayednesse and
rare constancy: for the which, and for the great number of his other benefits
and gracious dealings toward them, they were and ever should be bound to
acknowledge themselves indetted to his highness with all faithful obedience,
and were ready that day (by Gods grace) to submit themselves to him, as his
humble vassalles and subectes. And although they doubted not but that his
highness did well understand, and was fully satisfied, not only of the
general causes which had universally moved the states of the Provinces of the
Low Countries together, to sewe to him for succor, and to put the^ selves
into his hands: but also of the particular causes, which the states of that
Duchy and country of Brabande had, to renownce their obedience to the King of
Spain: Yet notwithstanding to the intent to put his highness in remembrance
thereof, and to confirm that sacred resolution and high interprise of his,
builded thereupon: and moreover to yield some reason of all their doings to the
Princes and Noblemen, and to the rest of that whole company, who for the honor
of his highness were come thither of courtes^e, to further the solemnity of
his interteinment: to the intent yt at this his repair thither, (which always
was called joyful,) they might utter the more good will and gladness of
heart: they would say no more but this, that as long as the Dukes of Brabande,
(specially since the falling of that duchy into the hands of the Dukes of
Burgoyne, and other the famous Auncetours of his highness) gave themselves to
the governing of their subjects by them selves, thereby making it to appear
that they loved them and were not careless of them: they reaped so great
commodities and notable services at their hands, that their names and
puissances became oftentimes renowned, yea, and sometimes dreadful to^ the
greatest Monarkes kings and commonweales of Christendom, whereof their wars
and conquestes made proof, howbeit that of those things as of matters
familiarly known by the histories, it was not requisite to make discourse in
that place and time, which were appointed to greater matters. But after that
their Dukes and princes either by other allureme^ts, or being wtheld in their
other country and Sentories, began to leave them for a time, and afterward at
length to forget them, abandoning them to the pleasure and wills, and
sometimes also to the lust and covetousness of their under officers, whereof the
king of Spain had lastly finished and perfected up the work, leaving them
disdainefully as husbandlesse and fatherless utterly destitute of his presence
by the space of twenty years: It came to pass, that having altered and
changed almost all the whole state of the country, and committed the offices
to such as by the laws and privileges of the country were not capable of
them, or rather to such as would give most for them, and yet the insatiable
covetousness, malice, and exceeding tyrannical lordlines of the Spaniards being
not contented therewith: in the end, when they had abused the whole
commonweal after their own lust, they grew intoo so great pride, that they
fell to ^natching of y^ private goods and substance of the inahbitants, to
living upon the labor and sweat of the poor. yea and to rauishing y^
chastity of men's wives and daughters: and (to fill up the measure of al
obhomination and cruelty) they fell to taking away the lives, and to sucking
the blood of those which sought by all means to please them. Whereupon in the
end y^ great and rightuous God (who has a care of his servants,) being
offended thereat, made that people (who had aforetimes been of great valor) to
call to mind their former state and liberte: and gave them both will and courage
to maintain y^ same, in such sort as they had received from their forefathers.
Which thing they sa^ could not be better done, than by the election which the
said States of Braband, united with the other provinces, had made of his highness
person to be their prince and Lord, of purpose to bring all things back to
their former order having first sought (howbe it in vain) for all remedies of
their mischeefes and of y^ disorders of y^ estate, from the causes and
welsprings there of. Declaring y^ the dukes in old time had bin of great valor
prowess and power, and had made many renowned voyages and exployts of war,
and that among others, they had chose^ a duke of Aniow hertofore: who had bin
equal with the rest in chiua^rie and feats of arms, as their conquests and
dominions witnessed. That they had had their princes gentle, mild, gracious,
familiar, and favorable to their subjects: and that his highness had in y^
beha^fe already given such proofs of his ge^tlenes, truth, and (...), y^ to
their seeming, some ancient duke of Burgoyne was raised up again unto the^.
Insomuch that in his only h^hnesse, they firmly believed themselves to have
recovered whatsoever good renown the dukes of Brabande, (...) and Burgoine
could have left unto them. Wherefore inasmuch as there remained no more, but
to proceed to the accomplishme^t of y^ chief work, which it had pleased the
soueraingod to put into y^ hands of his highues, and of the said states to
perform y^ day: they on their part were ready and resolute to do him the
homage, fealty, dewtie, and obedince, which loyal subjects, and good
vassalls ought to do to their rightful princes: of which sort they trusted in
God without doubting, that his ^hnes was, and that he would promise by solemn
oath unto God so to continue.

Hereunto his highness answered in effect, That intending not to hold the
States with long talk, but only to be mindful of the honor and good will
which they had vowtsafed to yield unto him, in that among so many other great
Princes, they had chozen him cut to do deliver them from the oppression and
tyra^nie of the Spantard, and to rule the^ according to their customs laws
and privileges: he thanked them heartily for it, assuring them that the
justness and equity of their case, their honorable dealings in his behalf,
and the love which they had* showed him, had made him to resolve with himself to
take upon him their protection, and the restablishing of their ancient
liberty, and to hazard therein whatsoever ability God had put into his
hands, and whatsoever else it should please the king his Lord and brother, and
the Queen of England of their favor to bestow upon him, yea even to the
sheading of his own blood and the spending of his life.

This done, the foresaid Mounsieur (...) told his highness, how it was y^
custom there, to proclaim openly before the people in yt duch tongue, y^
points and articles of the joyful interance, which y^ dukes of Braband are
bound to promise and swear at their admission. Hereupon, when as one hild the
said articles translated into French, ready to rehearse them point by point
after the proclayming of them in Duch: for as much as the day was far spent,
and communicatio^ had bin had thereof already, the Mounsire to win time thought
it expedient, by y^ advice of y^ prince of Ore^dg, y^ they should be read but
only in duch. Which thing was done by the said Mounsire Hassells, with a new
preface added too the articles, containing breefly the reasons and causes of y^
dealing.

After the reading of the said articles, it was demanded of his highness
whither he lyked of them, and whither he were contented to be sworn to them,
or whether it were his pleasure to be further satisfied of them. Where upon he
said to the prince of Orendge, that forasmuch as he had seen the articles and
conferred of the^ wi^h him as they came by ship out of Zeland, he held him
self well satis^ed with them, and was well contented to swear unto the^.
Which speech of his was for^hwith proclaimed, and with further declaration,
that for their better contentation his highness was desirous to have them al
known, y^ although the said articles were read but ouely in duch, yet would
he of his own good mind, with aduized deliveration and certain knowledge be
sworn unto them.

Then did the said Monsieur Hesselles recite unto the people in the duch
tongue, the first oath which the Dukes of Brabande were of old time accustomed
and bound to take, for the observing of the said Articles. Which done,
delivering the book wherein it was contained, to Messire Thierrey de
Leiesfield Chauncellor of Braband, he read the same oath ageine openly in
French, and the Mounsire spoke it after him word for word.

Then Mounsieur Hesselles taking the book ageine, told the people that y^ Dukes
of Braband made another second oath to the Barons, Noblemen, Cities, Boroughes,
and all y^ Inhabitants and subjects of the country, too be to them a good
and just Prince, and not to deal with them after his own will, nor by way of
rigor, but by law and justice, and according too their privileges. Which oath
was like wise rehearsed in the duch tongue, and the book delivered ageine to the
said Chau^cellor, and the Mounsire repeated the oath after him as he had done
the first.

Then were the mantle and Bonnet of the Duchy b^ought unto him, which were of
Crimzen velvet: the mantle was tra^ed on the ground, and both of them were
furred with powdered ermine turned up very broad. The Prince of Orendge told
his highness, that it behooued him too be apparelled in those Robes. And when
he aske^ whither he must wear them intoo the city, it was answered yea: and
that it was the solemn attire of the Princes and Dukes of Braband of old
time. Wherevntoo when his highness had agreed: the Prince did first put upon
him the said mantle, and fastening the button thereof, said these words: My
Lord, you must keep this button fast clozed, that no man may pull your mantle
from you. And then he set the bonnet upon his head, and said unto him: Sir, I
pray God you may well keep this attire, for now you may well assure your
self that you be Duke of Braband.

Then the said Hesselles told him how the custom required, that the States
should presently be sworn too him ageine, to yield him fealty. Whereupon
he uttered to the people the form of the oath: and then the said Chauncelor
required it of the Barons, noblemen and deputies: and they pronounced it after
him according too the manner of the former oaths, reverently doing again their
homage, and promising their fealty and obedience.

After the taking of the oaths on both sides, as well by the Mounsire as by the
States of Brabande, while his highness was yet still in his robes of estate,
the Magistrates of Antwerpe commanded their Recorder and Counselor Master
Uanderwerck too come up upon the stage, to make him an offer of the Marqueshipp
of the sacred Empire, in the name of the city of Antwerp. Which thing he did
as follows:

Most gracious Lord and Prince, the Markgraue, Amptman, Boroughmaisters and
Skepons, the Treasurers, and Receivers, y^ chief Burgesses and
Quartermaisters, the Wardens and auncientes of the Handycraftes; together with
the Colonelles, Wardens of ^wyldes, and captains of the City, were very glad
when they understood of your highnesses happy arrival in the isle of Walckeren,
as they have caused too be very largely and with all humility and reverence
showed unto you, by their deputies sent unto your highness for the same
purpose. But now, forasmuch as they see your highness not only arrived in the
country of Braband, but also received for Duke, and for their prince and lord:
their foreco^ceiued joy is greatly increased and made fully perfect: trusting
y^ by this your coming, there will once ensue an end of the desolations,
calamities and miseries, whereinto the Country has bin brought by the unjust
government past, and by the more unjust and wrongful war which the enemies
hold yet still, to bring the whole country too destruction, with all manner of
calamities and oppressions, which they are able to devise. And therefore they
give your highness most humble thanks, for the peynes and travel which you
have voutsafed too take too come intoo this country: yielding infinitely like
thanks unto God, for that he has given and sent them such a Prince, as not
only is of ability and power, but also is willing, and well disposed to
defend them from all enemies, and to rule and govern them with all good
policy and justice, according to the privileges laws and customs of the
country. For although they be joined in league with the rest of the ^tates of
Braband, and generally with all the states of the low countries, and that they
have all entered intoo arms jointly together: yet their so doing has not bin
to exempt and withdraw themselves from the just go^ernment of their Lord and
Prince: but only too mainteyne their ancient liberties, laws, and
privileges: that being governed according to the same, they might live with all
duetifull obedience, in good rest, peace, and tranquillity: The full
accomplishment of which their desires, they think themselves too have most
happily obtained, ^ith it has pleased God of his infinite grace and mercy, to
put into your highnesses heart, to take upon you the souereintie of these low
countries, the Dukedom of Braband, the city of Antwerp, and the Marqueship of
the sacred Empire. For seeing that God has stirred them up so great a Prince,
the brother of a mighty king: they have no doubt at all, but that your
highness will (by Gods grace) soon find means to deliver these Countries,
from the wretched wars wherein they have bin so long plunged. The Markegraue,
Amptman, Boroughmasters, Skepons, and other members of this city, think it
not expedient too repeat the causes of the war, and the equi^ie of the case
whereon they stand, forasmuchas it has diverse times heretofore been
discussed largely enough by the general estates, and moreover been notably
known too the world, and many ways allowed by your highness: Yet again
therefore, with all humble submission and reverence, they thank your highness
that it has pleased you too agree unto them, and to promise the maintenance
of their privileges, Laws and customs, yea and of the articles comprised in
the principal composition and in the joyful enteraunce intoo the Duchy of
Brabande. Assuring your highness, that the people of the city of Antwerp and
of the Marqueship of the holy Empire, shall be and continue right humble
subjects too you, even too the spending of their bodies and goods, and
whatsoever else they be able to make, for the increasing of your honor and
glory.

Heerevntoo his highness answered very graciously, that he thanked those
noblemen for their good will and affect^n toward him, and that he meant to show
them by his doings, how desirous he was too govern and rule the country with
good policy and justice. And all this he did at large and with very great
grace.

This done, the said Uanderwercke turning himself to the people, cried with a
loud voice: that his highness as Duke of Brabande, Alaunson, Aniow, Berrey
etc. would be sworn to the city of Antwerp and the Marqueshippe of the
sacred Empire: desiring them to pray unto God, that by that so good and
solemn deed, Gods name might be sanctified, the safety and prosperity of
the country procured, and the honor and glory of the said Duke increased.

Then was the oath which his high^esse should take, read openly too the people
in the flemishe tongue by the same Uanderwerck. Which being done, Mounsieur
the Amptman read the same oath too his highness in French, and his highness
made and performed the same in his hands, which the Borowghmayster of the
Town of Antwerpe hild up, because the receiving of the oath at his hand
belonged unto him. Also the said Borowghmaister whose name was Sir Philip of
Schoonhouen, kneeling down before the Dukes highness, at the same time, gave
him a ^ilte key, in token of subjection, and that he might dispose of the city
as of his own: which Key was delivered again by his highness too the
Borowghmaister, too whom he said very graciously, that he assured himself,
that the said Borowghmaister, and all the Burgesses and Inahbitants of the
city, would keep the city faithfully for him, as they had done unto that
instant.

After the finishing and accomplishment of all the said Solemnities, the
Herawltes of Braband and Lotrick, (or in the vulgar Braband Wallon, Lothyer,
that is too say Lotharing, or the true Lorraine,) cried with a Iowd voice, God
save the Duke of Braband. And then sownding the trumpets, they made a Largess,
casting a great sort of pieces of goold and silver among the standers by.
These pieces were of two sorts: the one sort had on the one side the image of
the Mounsire then Duke of Braband: the other sort had on the one side the arms
of Aniow and Brabande, and about the verges was written Frauncis of France
Duke of Braband. On the other side of the^ all was a device of yc Son, with
the Mounsires own inscription, Cheriseth and Chaseth, which is the Mounsires
ordinary poesy. Without the Town were three Regimentes of the Citizens, too
the number of a three thousand men in order of battle, who made a goodly
show with their fair armours and their antesignes displayed. And they never
went out of their place, until all the Ceremonies were dispatched, and that
his highness was gone intoo the city. Besides these, there was an infinite
number of people in the city, whereof many were Strangers: who marueiled
greatly at these sightes, and especially the Frenchmen, who woondered to see
their master in that apparel, and spoke diversely of it, as is wont too be
done in matters that are new and erst unseen. But when they understood how
it was the Dukely apparel, and that he wore it as a representation of
antiquity, the like whereof is worn yet still by the Electors of the sacred
Empire in their great ceremonies: they were astonished, and thought him to be
a Prince of more stately countenance and majesty then before: insomuch that it
was said alowd among them, that seeing it was ye mantle of the Duchy, it
should cost the lives of fifty thousand Frenchmen, before it should be
plucked from him again.

As soon as the Ceremonies were ended, his highness came down from the
Theater, and mounted upon a white courser of Naples, covered with a coperison
of velvet richly imbroydered with gold. And so he began too take his way
toward the right re nowmed and rich city of Antwerp, and was conveyed along
by the counterscarfe, unto the sumptuous and stately gate called Keizars gate
or Saint Georgis gate, whereat he entered into the good city of Antwerpe,

The order of his entering in was such as this.
FIrst marched the 2. Serieant Majors or Marshalles of the city, accompanied
of two Pursiua^ts with the arms of the city, after whom followed the Trumpets
with the arms of Braband.

The first company was of Almayne Merchantes commonly called Easterlinges,
well mounted and well apparelled after the manner of Almayne.

Next them followed the English mercha^ts in excellent good order: all
appareled in Cassockes of black velvet, all of one fashion.

Then came the Colonelles, and captains of the city: after whom followed a
great number of Gentlemen, as well of the same country as of other nations.

Behind them went the body of the city, that is to wit, the Wickmaysters, the
Wardens, the ancient Magistrate, the masters of the Wards, the
Burrowghmasters, deputies, y^ Wardens of the halles, the Usshers, the
Secretaries, the Registers, the Receivers and Treasurers, the Skepons, the
Amptman, and the two Borowghmasters, all appareled in Clokes of black velvet,
and all of one fashion.

After them came y^ Tru^pets of ye States of Braba^d, Lembourg, and Lothyer:
and after the^ the states themselves in this order.

First went the deputies of the under cities.

The Deputies of the city of Antwerp.

The Deputies of Brusselles.

Then succeeded the noblemen of Braband, as

The Chancellor of Brabande, and above him Lamorall Egmonde Brother too the
County of Egmond, Baron of ^asebecke.

A great number of Lords of the same country, of France, and of England well
horsed and richly appar^ed.

The Swissers with their drommes and fiffes.

The Mounsires own household, among whom were intermingled certain Lords of
England.

Next this came the county de Lauall, having on either hand an English Lord:

The Prince of Espinoy, having on his right hand the Lord of Hunsoon, and on
his left the Lord Haward:

The Prince Doulphin, having on his right hand the Earl of Leycester, and on
his left the Prince of Orendge:

The Markgraue of Antwerp bare headed, bearing the mace of Justice:

The Lord Peterson Baron of Merode, taking upon him that day as Marshall of
Braband, and bearing the naked sword before the Dukes highness:

Then came the Duke himself, mounted and apparelled as ye have heard before.

Next behind the Duke, followed Cou^tie Morice of Nassau son too the Prince
of Orange, having on his right hand Cou^tie Philip of Nassau, nephew too the
said Prince, and son to county John of Nassaw: and on his left hand the Lord
Shefeeld.

His Highness was guarded by the companies of the Guyldes, that is to say, by the
ancient brotherhoods of the Archers, Crossebowes, and Harg webuzers in so
goodly armor, as fayrer could not be found: The is went before him and about
him on a cluster without order, like flowredeluces upon a royal robe.

After them followed the guard of Frenchmen on a like heap, and after them the
Prince of Orendges guard on foot.

Then lastly in very good order came the twenty Antesignes of citizens, which
had stood in order of battle without the Town.

Over the gate where his highness entered, there was a compartement of Doricke
work, wherein was written as follows.

Too Frauncis the Son of Henry the second, and only brother of Henry the
third King of France, called by Gods singular providence to the sovereign
Principality of the low Countries, and to the Dukedom of Braband, and the
Marqueship of the sacred Empire, which God grant to be most happy and luckie
unto him, as to their invested Prince whom they have most earnestly wished for,
and who as now is happily come intoo this his most ^er uisable city, His most
hearty Favorers.
The Senate and People of Antwerpe.
THe Chariot of the Maiden of Antwerp could not go out of the city for want
of room too turn in: and therefore it tarried for his highness at the gate
within the city. This Chariot was called the Chariot of Alyance: wherein sat
a damsel apparelled in Satin red and white, which are y^ colors of Antwerp:
who had in her left hand a branch of Baytree, and on her head a garlande of
Laurel, in token of victory against the tyrannies of the king of Spain, and
in token of the deliverance which the people hoped for by means of their new
prince, through his gracious goodness, faithfulness, victoriousnes, and
defense: too whom with her other hand she presented the keys of the Town,
according to the verses written over her head, which shall be set down
hereafter. Before her were the arms of the Marquiship of the holy Empire. On
her right hand was Religion apparelled like one of the Sibylles, holding in her
one hand an open book, named The Law and the Gospel: and in her other hand
a swoorde: named Gods word: and on her left hand was justice holding a bala^ce
and a sword in her hand, and over the Balaunce was written, Yea and Nay. Before
the Damosel sat Concord, clothed in white, yellow, and Orengetawny, bearing a
target upon her arm, wherein was painted a crowned Scepter, with two little
snakes, and under them two dooues, all closed in with a garlande of Olif,
betokening commendable government with providence. Upon her head she had a
helmet, betokening Wisdom. In her hand she carried a Lance, with a penon
upon it, on the one side whereof were the arms of Aniowe crowned with Olif,
and on the other side a Lamb with a Woolfe, and a Lion with an Ox, to betoken
the great peacefulnesse that is looked for under this Prince, as well in
Religion as in matters of State. At Concordes right hand satte Wisdom, and at
her left hand Force. In the mids of the Chariot was a Pyller richly made of
Corinthian work, upon the top whereof was a Heart hilde between two armed
hands, which heart had two wings, betokening Union, Faith and Force: and a
Sword with two serpents writhing about it, and holding their tails to their
ears; signifiyng discreet government, and ears stopped against flatterers.
At the foot of the pyller, was a compartement with the arms of Aniow and
Brabande. On the breast of the Lion of Brabande, were the arms of the
Marquiship of the sacred Empire, and of the City of Antwerpe, Upon the Arms
was written Atonement. Upon the corners of the Chariot, were two armed Images,
with morions on their heads, attyred in Orendge, white and blewe. The one of
them was named Faithfulness, and the other Watchfulnes. In their hands they
had each of them a shield, wherein were painted two swoordes a cross, and two
Dooues with a sheafe of arrows, betokening Union. Upon one of the Shieldes
was written, Defense: and upon the other, Offense. Each of the images had a
penon of azure silk: in one of the which there was a Pellicane killing
herself for her young birds: and in the other a Hen a brooding her Chickens.
Over the Maidens head were these verses.

My rulers outrage wickedness, and furious tyranny,
Have cast me back these keys which I had given obediently,
Upon conditions never kept O Prince of noble fame,
With better boade of luck and lotte receive thou now the same.
Thy godliness and proweffe have of right deser^ ued it.
O treble happy Prince to who^ these Co^reys do submit
Their state! O happy Belgik, O most happy like to be,
Which underneath so great a prince may now live safe and free.
Six Gentlemen of the city waited at the gate with a Canapie of cloth of
gold fryzed, which they afterward unfolded and carried it over the Dukes
head, who went under it into the town in the forementioned order.

All the streets from the gate to his lodging, were set on either side with
armed men under their ensigns with their ^iffes and dro^es. The officers
carried gilt targets and swords in their hands: and all the rest were armed
after the best and goodliest manner y^ could be seen. His highness proceeded
forth on to the corner of the street called Gasthouse street, yt is to say, the
Spittlehouse street, nere unto S. Georges Church, where was a show made in
the liknes of a table, very great and high: which was made by one of the
companies of their tragical and comicall poets, commonly called among the^
Rhetoricians. The company was called Care, or as some others term it, the
Follow sun, after y^ name of a flower with follows y^ son, and the spee^h of
y^ device was, Growing up in virtue. The Show or table had three compartime^ts
or pertitions. The first was the first book of Samuel y^ fifteenth chap. where
Samuel charge Saul with his disobedience, and has a piece of his garment rent
of by him, in token that the kingdom should be plucked from Saul's house and
given to a better. Whereby was meant, y^ the souerainetie of those low
Countries, was taken from the king of Spain for his abominable periuries,
tyrannies, and extorttons. In y^ second compartiment was set forth, how Samuel
commanded I say ye father of David to bring forth his sons: of who^ God
would make one the prince of his people, yt is to wit the youngest, with was
David. In y^ third was showed how David being anointed fought with Golias and
overcame him. The title or superscription was a Pl^igian work, wherein were
written these verses:

As God bereaning Saul of Crown and Mace,
Did dispossess him of his kingdom quight,
And after set up David in his place:
so now likewise dispatching from our sight,
The tyrants which oppressed us by might,
He gives thee (O noble Duke) the Reyne
Of these our Countries, over us to reign.
The frunt and krest being garnished with banners, skutchions of arms,
Cressettes and torches, carried the Dukes device Cherishes and chaceth. And at
the foot of the Table lay Discord closed up in a prison of Lattisworke, where
she was tormented with Helhoundes and Serpents: and there were these verses.

Alaunson whom God cherish ay,
Does chase all ire and wrath away.
His highness passing forth still beyond the place called the Threewayleete,
came to the street named Hwyuetterstreete, that is to say, the Chaunlers
street, where was another stately Pageant with arms, torches, and cressets,
made by another company of the Rhetoricians, called Peynters or Uiolers, who
had for their device, Knit together by singleness. In this Pageant was painted
the near aliaunce of David and Ionathas: to betoken the firmness of the oath
mutually made by his highness and the States of Braband, and the Magistrates,
Members, Colonelles, and Captains of the City of Antwerpe. In this table was
written in a compartiment of Phrygien work.

Like as the faithful Ionathas did promise to defend
Good David from the harms which Saul against him did intend:
So keep thou us (O gracious Prince) which love to live in rest.
Against the Tyrants by whose force we have bin sore oppressed.
Then went he further to the end of the street where the Upholsters shops
are, which part was full of burning torches and barrels of burning pitch, and
so came to the Merebridge. At the entering thereof stood an Oliphant bearing a
castle of stone with soldiers and artillery. Before ^e Olyphant were painted
the arms of (...) Marquesdome and of the City: and (...), a spear with a
banner of Taffata, with the arms of Aniow in a wreathe of Laurel, and four
other bannerets of Crimosen taffata, pulled out, wherein were painted the
Hands of Antwerpe, with this posie: Cherishes and Chaceth. And upon his side
of his belly were these verses.

Whom light of Phebee heretofore did lead,
Inowe am drawn away,
Her brothers beams to follow in her stead,
A far more certain stay.
I think my change right gainefull, since I see,
These Lower Countries under him to be.
From the Merebridge he went along the Mere street, till he came to the
ward, where were four companies rau^ged in order of battle. From thence he
passed to ye corner of Clare street, where was a stage made by a company of
Rhetoricians called ye Olifbranche, who had for their posie, Behold grace. Upon
this stage sat a Damsel named Antwerp, bearing in her bozom a pretty daughter
called The knowledge of God: who hild a cofer wherein were privileges, laws,
fraunchizes and truth: which were kept by the grace of God, and by providence,
wisdom, faithfulness, diligence, loyalty, perseueraunce, unity, good heed,
and order. And aloft was a compartiment of Phrygian work, wherein were these
verses.

O prince, our father, hope of help and stay:
Dame grace, Gods impe, who^ here thou see to stand,
From top to toe fair clad in white array,
With branch of Olif in her heavenly hand:
Has willed thee to harber here within
The stately walls of Lady Antwerpe, and
The love of her with endless fame to win,
By curing of her greefes with law and right,
And ^cke by putting of her foes to flight.
Somewhat lower toward the mids, was Neptune with his threetymed mace,
riding over the waves upon a Dolphin: and on his left hand were these verses:

Gods heavenly grace, and soothfull skill, reviving Antwerpe new,
Through chare defense of faithful leage have kept her safe, as dew
To thee her Duke innobled both by father and by brother,
Both kings of France, tone gone to Godlong since, still reigning toother.
And therefore bend thou now thy wits, by rightful force to wreake
Her cruel foes, which did so often their leagues through falshod break.
He passed from Clarestreete through long new street unto S. Catherins
bridge, right over against Cross street, where was a triumphall arche cunningly
painted and builded of white stone: which was garnished with his highnesses
arms, and with torches and cresfettes, and with Music of Holboyes and
Clarions, And on the top of it was written:

To the happy coming hitherof Frau^cis, only brother to Henry the third,
son to Henry the second, graundchilde to Frauncis the first, now invested
Duke of Brabande, the prince that has most deeply deserved of this their
Country, as a Father of the same.

The Senate and people of Antwerp.

Underneath this in another compartiment of Phrygian work, was written this:

At length yet hinder not this Impe to bring thee wrooping world, again to
some redress.

In passing through the short Newstreete, and by the Marketsteed he turned
toward the Coopers street, in the street called Cheeslane to the great
Market place, which was full of Torches of wax, and of Barrelles of pitche
upon long poles up to the highest windows, which commonly are five stories
high. In this Market place were inbattelled six en^ignes with the ensign of
the youth which was under a green standarde, all in the best armor that was to
be seen in any place of the world. In the mids of the citizens was the
great Giante the founder of the City of Antwerpe, whose Curace was azure, and
his apparel tawnie white and gray: He boore banners of Azure with the arms of
Aniow, and had these verses written before him:

Feerce Furi^, moody rage, unbridled ire,
Stout Force, whot violence, cruel Tyra^y,
Naught booted me, ne furthered my desire:
In keeping of my wished Soueraintie.
The surest way for kings to govern by,
Is meeldnes matched with a prudent mind,
to vice severe, to virtue meek and kind.
For often the calm and quiet governance, brings things to pass which violence
could not win:
Feercenes that case will naught at all advance:
By mildnes shall thou better hold folk in:
Outrageous storming is not worth a pin.
By mine example therefore have a care,
All cruel dealings utterly to spare.
Behind the Giant were written these verses:

See you this Orped Giant here,
so huge oslim and bone?
Fame says that Antwerp was
sometime a thrall to such a one.
This Giant was made by cunning to turn his face toward the Duke as he
passed by, and to let fall the arms of Spain which he hilde in his hand, and
to put up the arms of Aniow.

Also there was a stage in the same Marketplace before the Town house, full of
nymphs and virtues. But forasmuch as it served chiefly for the day of his
taking of his oath in the city of Antwerpe, which was the xxii. day of y^
month: it shall be spoken of more at large hereafter.

His highness departing out of ye market place, took his way toward the street
called y^ high street, and when he came to the street called y^ old cornmarket:
there was a Whale carrying neptune naked with his threeforket mace in his hand,
which betokened ye great commodities which y^ city of Antwerp received by the
sea and by ye river Schelt. Before this monster was another naked man, and by
him two other portratures, y^ one of navigations, and the other of merchandise,
with a baoke of accounts, and a purse, such as y^ factors do carry with the^ when
they go to receive money. Before the Neptune in a compartiment were written
these verses.

The lordship of y^ seas to thee y^ destenies beh^ght,
In sign where of I Neptune yield this mace as thine of right.
That Antwerp having rid allets by thee on sea and land,
May once enjoy her wished fruit, and safe from peril stand.
His highness kept on his way through y^ high street, to a place where sometime
was y^ gate called S. John's gate, which was beaten down the year before: in
steed^ where of there was a tryumphall arch of Ionian work. This arch was
wholly applied to his highness own posie Cherishes and Chaceth. On high over it
was strained a covering after the manner of a round vault, wherein was painted
the Son: and under the Son was painted the sea with ships, and the earth
clad with her verdure. Also there appeared a cloud on both sides, so as the
light of the Son did shine forth and yield out his force to the earth. On
the outside of the bowing of the Arch, were painted three goddesses: namely
Flora, who hilde her flowers in her hand: Ceres, who had her corn: and Pomona,
who hilde a horn stored with abundance of all things. Likewise the earth was
clad with green trees, fruits, and feeldes replenished with all fruitfulnes,
which thing came to pass by the heat and operation of the Son, which was
betokened by this word Cherishes. On the other side being the left hand, were
drerie and barre^ fields, the air every where lowri^g and clowdie, and the
trees and plants withered, which thing was done by the three Helhounds
Discord, Uiolence and Tyranie, who fled away at y^ sight of his highness,
according to y^ signification of his other word, Chaceth. On another side stood
the same po^e again, Cherishes and Chaceth, by another mean.

At the right hand over the word Cherishes, was a great feelde well tilled,
with a husba^dma^s house upon it. The husba^dma^ himself being apparelled after
ye french fashion, was sowing of corn: and another by him was spreading of
Mucke. At the left hand was written the word Chaceth, on which side also was
painted a French Captain in armor, following his allies, confiderates and
soldiers: to do men to understand, that by the treaties, leages and
agreementes, made with the dukes highness, all tyranny, violence, and discord
should be chased a way: and that by ye beams of that son, the country
should receive al peace, prosperity and abundance. Upon the forefrunt were
these verses:

Like as the rising of the Son does chase the night away,
And with his kindly heat the ground well cherish ay:
Even so thy coming (noble Prince) does Chase all tempests quight,
And folk with cheerful hope of freedom much delight.
This Arch was impossed aloft with scutchions of the arms of Aniowe, compassed
about with branches of Olif, all upon Azure. Also there were diverse other
s^utchions, whose field was gewles bordered with argent, and a great number of
burning torches. And the said Arche was furnished with diverse instruments of
Music, and the musicions themselves were clad in the colors of the city.

His highness passing under this triumphal arche, came to a place called the
Owure, that is to say y^ bank, where were two companies unbattelled, armed
like all the residue. And so passing by the Ward there, he went to y^ place
that is right oueragainst the Mint: before the which there was a huge and
monstrous seahorse, of twenty foot high, upon whom sat a Nymph called
Concord, bearing a shield wherein was painted a book and a rod, which was named
The rule of truth. In her hand she bare a flag, wherein was written faithful
aliance. This monster of the sea was named Tyranny, and he had a bridle in his
mouth with double Reins of iron cheyned, called law and reason. Whereby the
dukes highness was done to understand, that he as a true Perseus, was to deliver
yt country from all tyranny, and afterward to govern it by justice and
reason. Over against ye mintgate, where ye street is narrowest, were two
Obelisks or round Spires, and between the^ a triumpha^ arch with his pillars of
Corinthia^ work, gilded and enriched with his relief under him. Upon y^ forefront
were his highnesses arms, and likewise on ye sides were other arms, with
banners, torches, and cressets. Under the arms of his highness, were these
verses following:

Fulmighty is that co^mo^weale, and in a happy case
And blessed with all commodities through Gods most heavenly grace,
Where prince behaues himself as head, and commons him obey
As members, either carefully regarding others stay.
From this tryumphall arch unto the palace, yt is to wit, all along S. Mighels
street, which is a mile in length, stood on either side threescore and ten
pillars, with a space of 22. foot between pillar and pillar. Every pillar was
12. foot high, and upon the pillars was a continual Tarras, and on every each
other pillar was a cresset: and on ye pillars between, were the arms of
Braband, Aniow, and Antwerpe, divided according to ye spaces between the said
pillars. And ye pillars were crested about with garla^ds of iuy.

On the side of the street toward the palace, was a pageant with banners,
torches and pyramids. Upon the uppermost part of one of y^ sides whereof was a
Crane, and upon the other side a Cock. Giving knowledge as well to y^ heads as
to ye members, yt watchfulnes is needful. A little spaniel betokening
faithfulness, and a little lamb betokening peace, were painted accompanied with
ye Sibils, which represented wisdom, love, faithfulness, obedience, virtue,
and honor: without the which, no true peace can continue. And al these were
guided by the light of the holy Ghost, which was resembled by a certain
brightness that discovered ye chief instruments of discord, namely Envy and
Slander, who peered out be hind, Envy gnawing her own heart, and Slander
having double heart, double tongue, and double face, howbeit with small effect.
Foron y^ two sides of this pageant, were two counterfets: on the one side,
Hercules, and on the other David as it were in Copper, haning gotten the upper
hand of Golias, betokening strength and stowtnes: and underneath was Concord,
who hild discord in a cheine with collers about his neck: which discord
offering with his one hand an apple of gold, and with his other hand threatening me^
with his force and tyra^nie, was yet never theles driven into the dungeon of
sorrow, where he is kept prisoner by concord, who keeps the door fast shut:
betokening the same thing which ye country looks for at his highness hand,
according to his posie, Cherishes and Chaseth.

Upon the forefrunt of the compartiment made of Phrygian work, were these
verses:

O let the earth the kissings sweet of peace and justice see,
And let her power her riches forth in all men's bozoms free:
Let godliness and faithfulness go matched arm in arm,
And let the bond of endless love keep all things knit from harm.
Before the duke came at S. Mighels, where the palace was prepared for his
highness, y^ day was so far spent, y^ they were feign to light up their cressets
and torches, which cast so great and clear a light through the whole town:
that ye dukes highness, and the princes and lords which accompanied him, and
likewise the soldiers with their glistering armors, were seen more clearly
then at any time of the day. And as the multitude of people was very great in
the city, so the nearer yt his highness drew to his palace, ye greater still
did the number grow. So at length the Duke of Braband and Aniow entered into his
palace in the order aforementioned, having moreover a two or three hundred as
well of offenders as of banished folk, with followed him ^are headed and
fettered, craving mercy.

The Herawlts did cast pieces of goolde and silver abroad, as they had done
at the meetinges of all the Streets as they passed through them.

At the entry of the palace was an Arche of twenty foot high, resting upon
three pillars of Phrigian work. Upon the top whereof was a co^partiment,
wherein were the three Graces, that is to wit, Virtue, Glory, and Honor, who
offered unto his highness an Olifbranch in token of peace, a Lawrelbowgh in
token of victory, and a Crown which was sent him from heaven. And under the
compartiment were written these verses.

O Prince whose merits pass his praise, whose vertewz have no peerz,
Whose mind surmounts his fortune far, whose thewz exceed his yeerz:
Take gently here this Olifbraunch, this Lawrelbowgh and crown,
Three presents given thee by three Nymphe, and sent from heaven down.
The oath made by Frauncis Duke of Braba^d to the members of the right renowned
city of Antwerpe: and the oath made by them again unto his highness.
THe Duke of Braband being come into his palace, caused a peale of a twenty or
thirty thousand Hargwebuzers to be shot of, and then all the companies, (saving
those which were to watch y^ night,) began too withdraw themselves apace.
Which thing was done in such order and with such silence, that in less than
half an hour, all the city was disarmed, after which manner they bad also
armed themselves in less than an hour without any noise in the morning. The
Princes also and y^ Lords withdrew themselves to their lodgings, and then was
all the great ordinance of the town shot of twice, as it had bin at the Dukes
first coming to the city, that all the town seemed too be on fire. Cressets
were lighted and fires made for joy through all the streets and meetings,
ways, and upon y^ steeples, in so great number and so continually, y^ all the
night resembled the day: insomuch y^ when they that were without the Town
looked up into the sky, they thought the element was all on fire. These
bonfires continued every night until the next Thursday, on which day his
highness took his peculier oath too the town of Antwerp, in the doing
whereof, these solemnities insewing were observed.

The Amptman, Borowghmaisters, and Skepons of Antwerp, came too the said
Palace of S. Michael the next Thurseday being the 22. day of the same month.
At which place they made humble su^e to his highness, that as he had vowtsafed
too give his oath too the States of Braband and the Marquesdome of the sacred
Empire, and likewise too receive theirs: so it might please him too give his
oath that day peculiarly to the city of Antwerpe, and likewise too take
theirs, at the place of old time accustomed. Where unto when the Duke had
assented, they took their way in the same order that had bin observed at his
entering into the town, saving that the Lord Edward de clastro Ambassador
for Don Antonio King of Portingale, was that day in the latter company of the
Princes and Lords. And so they marched along the said street of Saint
Michaell too the great marketsteede, where the sumptuous common house of the
city is. And because that on the day of his enteraunce in, it was not possible
for him too take a perfect view of all the shows, by reason that the night
ouertooke them: they were presented unto his highness ageine, as well in the
place before the mint, as in other places. Also there were two pageantes mo
prepared, which were devised both in one day. The one was Mount Parnasus
whereon sat Apollo apparelled like the Son, and accompanied with the nine
Muses, playing upon ^uers kinds of Instruments, and with sweet voice singing
a certain ditie together, written in commendation of his highness. This Pageant
was in the street called the high street, over against the street named Reyner
street. Right over against this Pageant, was another on the side of the
street called the flax market: Which was a mossie Rock over growe^ with dry
and withered trees, wherein appeared a cave very hideous dark and drerye too
behold, and in the same lay lurking the three Helhowndes, Discord, Violence,
and Tyranny: who feeling Apollos beams, and hearing the sweetness and
harmony of the voices and instruments, shroonke away and hid themselves in
the deepest of the Dungeon, and afterward peered out ageine, to hearken whither
that melody and harmony continued still or no: mynding to have come forth
again, and to have troubled the common weal, if ye same had ceased.

His highness passed on and with very much adoo came to the great Market
place, by reason of the infinite multitude of people, which could not be put
asunder without great pain. As soon as he was alighted from his horse, he
went up a scaffold which had bin set up for the same purpose, in the mids of
the Market place hard by the Town house, before whom went the Magistrate of
the city, and a great number of Princes Lords and Gentlemen. This Scaffold
being great and large, of the height of forty foot, was hanged with scarlet.
Upon it was a cloth of estate, the back whereof was cloth of gold frized,
under the which was a chair of the same. The day of his first coming thither,
there had bin presented unto him on the right side, Wisdom offering him a
golden Scepter: on his left side, Justice offering him the sword of Justice
from above the Chair: and behind him Clemency offering him the Cap of the
Dukedom. Before the chair as it were at the feet of it, were Obedience,
Faithfulness, Love of God, and Reverence. And by the chayres sides there were
with them, Concord, Sagenesse, vaeleantnesse, Good will, Truth, Pitifulnes,
Perseverance and Reason, of whom two on either side held each of them a torch
of virgin wax, and they were all appareled like Nymphs. But on this day when
his highness went up too this stage, the Nymphs were away. And in steed of
them, the chair was garnished on both sides with pyllers. On the right side
between the pillars was a Lion holding a naked swoorde, to betoken the
authority of the magistrate. Above the Lion was an Eagle feeding her young,
and turning her self toward the shyning of the Sun, as taking her force of
the Prince. On the left side was an Ox with a yoke on his neck, and above him
a Hen brooding her chickens, and by her a cock. The Ox with his yoke
signified obedience: and the cock and the hen betokened the watchfulnes, care,
and (...) of the superior. The said scaffold was garnished with ba^ners of
azure beaten with the arms of Aniow, and with banners of gewles beaten with
the arms of Antw^rpe, and with cressets and torches. And above among the arms
were written these verses.

At length thou art come, and joyful we be,
Thy presence long looked for here present to see.
And a little under, at the right hand under the arms of Braband, were these
verses.

Of tryumphes though stately, kings boast but in vain,
Unless they by justice do uprightly reign.
And on the left hand under the arms of Antwerpe was written thus.

Nowght booteth law, Authority, or sage forecast of wit,
Unless to lawful government folk do their force submit.
And yet somewhat lower was written.

God, God is he the hearts of kings which holds in his hand,
He, He it is that highest things does make too fall or stand.
When he with gracious look beholde^ a people: they enjoy
A goodly Ruler, under whom no troubles them anoy.
But if misliking make him frown, then makes he them a pray
Too Tyrants, under whom they taste of sorrow every day.
FRom this Scaffold, he might behold before him an infinite number of people,
ready too be sworn unto him: and also three companies of banished and
condemned men in fetters, and bareheaded, craving mercy at his hand, which
was granted unto them. Moreover all the houses about the Market sted had
Cressets burning on high before them. Now then, after that room and silence
was made, their Counselor and Recorder Uanderwerck propounded the matter as
follows.

Right gracious Lord and Prince, y^ Markgraue, the Amptman, the
Boroughmaisters, the Skepons, the Treasurers, the Receivers, the old Deputies,
the chief Burgesses, the Duartermaysters, the Wardens, the Auncientes of the
Handicraftes, the Colo^lles, the Wardens of the ^wyldes, and the capteynes of
the city, your Highnesses most humble and obedient subjects, are exceeding
glad to see that you whom they have already received for Duke of Brabande,
and for their sovereign Lord and Prince, are ready to make your oath unto
this City, and to receive it at the hand of the Magistrates, Burgesses and
Citizens thereof, in respect of the City it self, and of the Marquesdome of
the sacred Empire. Assuring them selves that your heighnesse will be unto them a
good, righteous, and lawful Prince, to govern them according to their
fraunchises, Laws and Customs: And promising mutually on their behalf to
your heighnesse, to be good, loyal and faithful subjects unto you, to spend
all their goods yea and their lives in your service, and in the maintenance
of your dignity, rightes and preheminences. And like as God has put into your
highness mind, to take upon you, first the protection and defense, and secondly
the whole Souereigntie of the Low Countries and Provinces, which have entered
into league with you, upon hope that the same God, will of his gracious
goodness and mercy, so bless and prosper your dealings and enterprises: as
that they shall out of hand see the effect of that communication in the highest
degree, to the accomplishment of your royal and Heroycall desires, both in the
general, and also in the particular delyueraunce of the Country from the
calamities and miseries of war: whereby they shall have the better cause to
acknoweledge the great goodturnes and benefits received at your heighnesse
hand, and to honor, love and serve you, as the very Protector of the land and
father of their Country.

When Uanderwerk had made an end, and the Dukes heighnes had answered him
conformably to that which he had spoken without the Town: the said Uanderwerk
told the people alowd, yt the Duke was ready to take and receive his oath, at yt
hand of the Magistrate and of all the people and Inhabiters of the City of
Antwerp. And that god had vouchsafed to se^d the^ a Prince of so rare and
heroycall virtues, of so great puissaunce, and the only brother of so great a
king: that they might well hope, that the same God would enable him to rid
these Countries within a while, from the great number of calamities and
myseries wherewith they were oppressed. And forasmuch as his heighnesse had
been received with solemn delyberation of the states confederate, yea and
with solemn resolution of all the members of that City, and GOD had
commanded men to love, honor and obey their Princes: he exhorted the people
to yield him all humble obedience according to Gods commandment. To which
intent, the oath as well which his highness should make to the people, as which
the people should make to his highness, should be read unto the^. Praying God
to give such grace unto his heighnes, as he following the same, might well rule
and govern: and unto the Burgesses and Citizens of Antwerp, as they might
perform their obedience like good, loyal and faithful subjects: that Gods
name might be sanctified, to the benefit, prosperity and safegarde of the
City, and to the great increase of the Dukes puyssaunce, honor and glory.

Then the same Underwerk red the oath which was to be made by the Duke, with
the style of the Duke of Brabande, and all his other tytles. Which oath was red
to his heighnes in French, and received by Sir Philip Schonehouen Lord of
Wan^roe Borowhmayster without the City.

Which being don, y^ said Uanderwerk red y^ oath which the Magistrate and people
were to make which was repeated word for word by the Magistrates and a great
number of people which were within the hearing of it. And this oath was exacted
of the Magistrate and people of Antwerpe, by the Amptman in the name and by the
commandment of the Duke.

Upon the finishing of these solemnities, the Duke himself did cast twoor
three handfulles of gold and silver among them, and then the Herauldes cried
Alargesse, and the trumpettes and drums were sounded every where, and many
instruments of music were played upon, as had been done before at his first
arryuall.

When he was come down from the scaffolde, he went into the Townehouse with
all the Princes, Lords and Gentlemen, which were very many: where he was
received by the Worshipful of the City, and dyned openly at a very sumptuous
and royal feast prepared for him: and so that day passed in great joy,
contentation and admiration, as well of his heighnesse and his company, as of
all the rest of the people. Toward night were shot off two peales of great
ordinance again, and the fires of joy were continue^ much greater, and mo in
number tha^ before.

Thus ended the ioyefull and royal enterteinement of the right noble Prince
Frauncis, Son and brother to the kings of France, by the grace of God Duke of
Braband. The rest of the week and the days following, the Lords of the privy
Counsel, the Officers of the Aids, of the Exchecquers, of the c^ambers of the
accountes, and of the other Corporations, Colleges and Co^munalties came to
visit his heighnesse, and to offer him their humble service, promising al
faythfulnes and obedience. All whom he received very graciously, to their
contentation: aunswering them so advisedly, with so good grace and fitness,
without omitting any point of that which he had purposed: that all men not
only wondered at him, but also were enforced to honor and love him, and to
set forth his praises among the people. Finally the Deputies of the reformed
Churches, of both the languages, being presented unto him by the Prince of
Orendge, were gently heard: and they spoke unto him as follows.

Sir, we be sent unto your Heighnesse by the reformed Churches of this City,
as well of the language of Low Duchland, as of the French, to show unto you
with all humility, reverence and subjection, that we have thanked and still
do thank God with all our heart, for voutsafing too bring your heighnes so
happily hither. And this our joy is matched with the toy of all other folks,
as we hope your heighnes has understood by the glad and joyful receiving
and entertayning of you. Also Sir we hope, that as the great honor and
felicity which these Countries have attained unto (wherein few Countries are
able to match them) have been purchased under the souereignetie and
gouernmente of the right reno^ed Princes, the Dukes of Burgoyn, which issued
out of the most noble house of France: so under your guiding and government
being of the same house, the ancient renoume of the same dignity, shall be
recovered by your prowess, and mayntained by your wisdom. It is little more
than three hundred years ago, that these Countries being governed by sundry
Dukes, Earls and Lords, had not atteyned the renoume which other nations have
since that time so much wondered at. The first that began to give increase to
it, was Philip Duke of Burgoyne surnamed the hardy, who was brothe^ to king
Charles the fifth, the son of king John, and graundsonne of king Philip of
Ualoys: of which kings your heighnesse is lineally descended from the father
to the son. For the first Duke of Orleance, of whom your heighnes is lineally
desended from the father to the son, was the son of King Charles y^ fifth,
and as now there be no more heirs males of the said Duke of Orleance: but only
your heighnesse and the king your brother. Whereby it falls out, that the
Dukes of Burgoyne are great uncles to your highness by the fathers side. And
therefore we doubt not but you will follow the footesteppes of their virtues,
in restoring the state of the Country to her ancient renoume and dignity:
and also maintain and increase the honor whereunto it has been advanced,
by those noble princes your Uncles. The second duke under whom this state has
been greatly advanced, was John the second. Nevertheless it came not to full
perfection, til y^ time of Philip the second. In which perfection it was
maintained by Charles y^ last duke of Burgoyne, so long as ^e lived. The said
Philip y^ second, to whom y^ honor of stablishing that state most peculiarlye
belongs, was one of the most knightlye and val^aunt Princes of his time. He
wan the victory in nine foughten fields, in most of the which he was put to
the trial and hazard of his person, by fighting with his own hands. He was a
very sage Prince, and such a one as had to deal with the greatest Princes in
Christendom: of whom some were his adversaries, and yet he behaved himself
so wisely, that he achieved all things to his honor, whatsoever he took in
hand. Also he was very rich: insomuch that for all his wars, which lasted
above thirty years, he left behind him more substance and ready money
then any other Prince of his time, as the Writers of the hystories of that age
do witness unto us. And yet notwithstanding, for all these great virtues and
qualities of his, he was not named Philip the sage, nor Philip the valiant,
nor Philip the rich: but Phillip the good. So well do al folk by general
consent understand, which is the virtue that best beseems and becomes a
great Prince, and is best lyked of his people: namely that a Prince be good
and loving to his subjects. Surely Sir, all men hope that your Heighnesse will
follow the example of that good Prince, the first bringer of the state of this
Country to perfection, a right noble and renoumed prince of the house of
France. And we praise God, for that as many as have had the honor to come
into your heighnesse presence, yield record that you have very great
likelyhods of these virtues, which we prays God so to accomplish and make
perfect in you, as al his people may to your great honor receive the perfect
and ripe fruits of them. And this do all the rest of the people desire as well
as we. Howbeit, we have a most humble suite to make perticularly to your
heighnes, which we most humbly beseech you to grant. The thing that induces
us to do it, is that you bear the name of Frauncis. For as often as we hear
that name named: the remembrance of that great king Frauncis, your heighnesse
graundfather comes to our mind. He was a right valiant, courageous, noble
and godly Prince: and yet notwithstanding, all the nations of the earth, did
by one common consent surname him the Father of learning. For of a truth, since
that Emperor and great king of France, called Charles the great, there was
never any king of France that so heighly favored learning, as this great king
Frauncis. And as the said king Charles was the founder of the famous
university of Paris: so was king Frauncis the restorer thereof again: and
both of them to their great costs and charges, called men of excellent
knowledge thither out of straung countries, to teach the languages and al
kinds of arts and sciences. The house of this great king Frauncis was as an
university, and his table was a place of conference concerning al manner of
learning. And like as other great Princes of his time following his example,
enriched their dominions and kingdoms with learned men and learning: so we
most humbly beseech your heighnes, to follow the example of this great king
your grandfather, in doing the like, and to make singular account of learning,
and to take the professors thereof under your protection. True it is Sir, that
through the malice of men, war is commonly the ouerthrower of fearning. But if
a great Prince set himself against the mischief, he may easily stop it. Our
desire is not that your heighnes should neglect the exercise of chivalry, for
to give your self to study: but to follow so the one, ^s the other be not
left of and forgotten. For as we have seen many co^monweales flourish so long
as they professed chivalry and learning together: and yet have fallen into the
hands of their enemies, even in the chief flower of their skill in sciences, by
reason of their discontinuing of their former trade of arms, after which manner
it befell to the Athenia^s, to come into subjection to the kings of Macedonie:
so y^ people which have professed arms alone without learning, have always
become barbarous, cruel and utterly destitute of all humanity, as we see at
this day by the Tartars and Moscouits. And therefore to our seeming, a man may
well say, that chivalry is the foundation and sinews of a commonweal: and
that learning garnisheth and beauti^eth the body thereof with liuelye and
fresh colors, serving it for inrichments and ornaments. In respect whereof,
as we meant not to desire your heighnesse to forget those which make
profession of chivalry, whom you ought to embrace as your strength: so we
most humbly beseech you to vouchsafe to succor learning, and to maintain
learned men with your gracious favor. Sir, very needeful causes move us to
make this humble petition to your highness: first for that we being professors
of learning, ought to have learning in singular estimation, and to procure, if
it be possible for us, that the fruit of the things which we have inioyed for
a time, may be conveyed to our posterity: and secondly for the oaths sake
which we have taken at the time of our proceeding in our degrees, which is, to
maintain and further the schools and learning of the university, in what
degree soever we come unto. And therefore we hope that your heighnesse will
do us the honor, to take this most humble request of ours in good part. As
touching our own persons, we promise your heighnesse all obedience,
faithfulness and subtection: and that according to our small ability, we
will do our endeavor toward such as we may have access unto, that they also
may yield obedience to your heighnes, and to the Magistrates whom it shall
please you to set over the people. And here to make an end, we heartily pray
God to preserve your highness long time, in happy estate among this people, and
to give you the grace to rule and govern them iustlye and uprightly: to rydde
them out of the hands of their enemies: to maynetayne them long in happy
peace, and to restore this state again to the ancient dignity, greatness,
renown, and felicity: that after your deceasse you may leave a most blessed
and famous rememembrance among al nations. And for the bringing hereof too
pass, we yet again beseech the king of kings and great prince of princes,
too make you as valiant as David, as wise as Solomon, and as zealous of his
glory as Ezechias.

Herevntoo the Duke answered, y^ he was very glad too see such a consent of all
the people in the receiving of him: and that he hoped so too rule and govern
them, as they should not be disappoynted of the hope which they had conceived
of his government, which he would fashion out after y^ pattern of his
predecessors and great uncles, who had governed these countries so happily. And
he thanked them for their good will and love, praying the^ to continue y^ same,
and promising too take them into his protection^ together with the rest of the
people in general: and that as he had heretofore a singular regard of learned
men, so would he be willing to continue the same hereafter.

After this manner began this great prince ^o govern that people with great
authority and modesty: and the people too yield unto him very wissing and
honorable obedience: And all men hope both generally and particularly, y^ God
will give him the grace so to hold on in that so holy and commendable
government, as that by his example, he shall show too all princes and too all
others that come after him, how greatly the just and lawful government
avails. And that the people on their side, shall show what manner of obedience,
love, and constancy is dew to good Princes, in which vertewes there was never
yet any people that could skill to surmount them, another shall any hereafter,
by the help of the great God and everlasting father of our savior Jesus
Christ, too whom in the unity of the holy spirit, be all glory for ever and
ever,

Amen.
A Sum of the Privilege granted to the Printer by the foremencioned
Mounsire Duke of Braband, Aniow etc, for the printing of the foretranslated
book.
FRauncis of France the kings only brother, by the grace of God Duke of
Lothyer, Braband, Limbourge, Gelders, Aniow, Alaunson, Touram, berry, Eureus,
and y^ castle Thierrie, Earl of Flanders, Holland, Zeland, Zutphen, Main le
Perch, Manutes of Melaun, and Beaufort: Marquis of the sacred Empire, Lord of
Fryselande and Malines: having retained and confirmed Christopher Plantine for
his Printer, has given him power to print all Proclamacions, commissions,
Letters Patentes, Statutes, Ordinances, Placardes, and other things
concerning the common weal in general, or any city in particular: and
specially the discourse of his interteinement and receiving intoo the city of
Antwerpe and the rest of the country thereabouts. And he forbids all other
persons, of what state, condition, or quality so ever they be, too printe or
cause to be printed, to sell or distribute abroad, the same or any the like,
upon pain of forfeyture of the same books, and to be fined at his highness
pleasure, and to pa^e all the said Plantines costs and domages, as is more
largelye declared in the letters Patentes given at Antwerp the xvii. day of the
Month of April. 1582.

Vndersigned I. Van Assehers.

Imprinted at London at the three Cranes in the Vintree by Thomas Dawson for
william Ponsonby, 1582.


