A TRVE DISCOVRSE OF an overthrow given to the army of the Leaguers in
Province: By Messieurs D' Esdiguieres and Lauallette. Translated verbatim out
of the French Copy, Printed at Tours by Iamet Mettayer.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Purfoot, dwelling in Saint Nicholas shambles within
the New-rents.

A true discourse of an overthrow given to the army of the Leaguers in
Province, upon Monday in Easter week, being the 15 day of April last past.
1591.
Our gracious God seems to sleep for a season and to be careless of his
chosen people, that he may be glorified in his wonderful works, by bringing
them which trust to much in humain strength into the consideration of his
unspeakable power, who takes pleasure in ye strength of men, but scatters
the great hosts and squadrons of such as arm themselves contrary to his will,
even as chafe before the wind, and in the twinkling of an eye (as it were)
does so abate their pride, that by the hand of a few of his people he brings
them to naught, making them equal with the dust, and leaving them as a preie
to be devoured of woolues, and such like ravenous beasts.

The enemies had great confidence in the King of Spain (now called out of this
world to render an account before the soueraign Monarch, of the manifold
extorsions and notorious cruelties committed by him) who assured themselves
that he would send so many men of war into all parts of France (as he has
done, though in vain) that in short time he might vanquish and subdue the
king and gain his Crown. For the same cause, upon the death of this
Arch-tyrant king, the duke of Sauoy is gone into Spain, and has given over
the enterprise he purposed against the town of Marseilles, which by sundry
ways and means he had practiced with diverse of the inhabitants who received
into their town some store of corn, causing such men as they suspected and
would not be conformable to their wills, to forsake the town, which things they
had done by so much the more willingly as they suffered the^ to slip easily
into the nets of their rebellion, some of their own accord, some others by yt
help and assistance of a puissant army of the Spaniards, Sauoiens, and
Prouincials which marched within the country under the conduct of the Count
Martine^ga, of Monsieur de Vitelli Colonel of the duke of Sauoies horsemen
leaguers, and of Mons. S. Romani general of the footmen who knowing that
Messieurs D'Esdiguieres and Lauallette, were joined on that side which Riez
lies on, and that Mons. Lauallette was departed for the same intent from
Cisteron the 13 day of April, having caused certain pieces of ordinance to
be brought with their troops, and seeing likewise yt they might greatly hinder
their enterprises, resolved to approach near unto them, not so much to provoke
them to a battle, in that they were four to one, as thinking to keep them at
a baye, and so cause them to retire. But they could not be ignorant having had
so great proof of the wise conduct, singular watchfulnes, and prosperous
success of this valiant Captain Mons. D'Esdiguieres, who being aided by the
venterous champion Seigneur Lauallette, and armed with a just cause in defense
of their king and state, not fearing the great number of the enemies, whom
with courage and resolution he valiauntly charged so often as there was occasion,
as may more evidently appear by this discourse ensuing.

Sparron is a village and a castle in Province, about five leagues from Aix,
the Lord whereof in times past held himself newter, taking neither party:
nevertheless he entertained in his Castle the Lord governor of the party
royal and his troop. A great number of the Sauoien horsemen went to lodge in
the same village of Sparron. Now Messieurs D'Esdiguieres and Lauallette
receiving advertisement of the enemies being there, without delay they marched
thither also with their forces, and on monday in Easter weke being the 15 of
the same month did assail them with such fury and resolution that in a short
space recovering the best advantage, they gave them an utter overthrow: they
took 15 Ensigns, four Cornets from the horsemen, 500 horses whose owners lay
dead in the place, and above 250 gentlemen well mounted were carried away
prisoners by a composition made at the same time in the village. The Seigneur
of Vitelly, collonell of the duke of Sauoies horsemen leaguers, and Mons. S.
Romani, general of the enemies footmen did yield themselves prisoners also.
The Frenchmen of Province were sent home to their houses by the said Lords D'
Esdiguieres and Lauallette with each one a white stick in his hand. More then
500 Sauoiens were sent to Tollon to Mons. Lauallette his galleys, therein
requiting the duke of Sauoy with such measure as he had meated unto some of ye
kings troops before. The most part of the forts and strong holds of Province,
whereof the rebels had commandment, hearing of so great an overthrow to be
given their side, are reduced and brought under the kings obedience excepting
only the city of Aix which ye said Lords have with all diligence environed and
blocked in

The Count Martinenga who had the leading of 800 Horsemen perceiving that there
was nothing to be gained but blows, and that the said Lords and their troops
spared not to lay on load, resolved therefore to trust to their legs and to
save themselves by flight with 300 horse which were al yt could escape from
that encounter: the rest were all either slain or taken: and our soldiers and
men of war, besides many rich prisoners, got in this conflicte about 350.
horses of service, there were also thirtye Captains taken besides the two
commanders. Mons. Lauallette has armed two galleys at Tollon: and these two
noble Lords prosecuting their notable victory have won ye towns of Digne and
Lines, and it is said that Mouglon is now in parle to render unto the king and
to shake off the rebellious yoke.

Thus we see that human forces withstanding the ordinances of God, are in a
moment overwhelmed.

The King of Spain is dead, who was the greatest supporter of the league, and
the rebellion in France. The Leaguers have lost a puissant army of Spaniards,
Sauoiens, and other strangers in Province, which is now God be thanked almost
all subdued. Italy is disburdened sundry ways, by the death of this tyrant.
The King on the other side is provident in his affairs, which the Lord does
daily prosper with his heavenly blessing. Moreover there are two regiments of
VVallons defeated in Picardy. God exercises his justice more and more upon his
enemies, seeing that the clemency of the Prince whom he has given unto us
serves to no purpose to bring them to reason, and that now at this instant
they are so stubborn, that under the Duke of Maines authority, they will at a
certain day of the month have a conuention of all their partisans rebels in
the town of Reins there to hold an assembly of estates to consult of the
affairs of the league, which are in a pitiful taking upon the unexpected
death of the king of Spain, which is so prejudicial to their rebellious
faction.

Mounsieur de Nemours to counterpoise a matter so worthy of regard by the
rebels in Province, and thinking to mende up that which was so torn on their
side, being at Lions a little after this overthrow given, sent into Daulphine
three or four hundred horse, carrieng with them good store of ladders and
Petarts, and having passed the Liser toward la Roche, and leaving their
horses on this side, marched a league on foot being armed, and would have
planted their ladders, and given a skalado to Valence, but they came not within
musket shot thereof: for returning in have being pursued, they left 37
ladders in a barn, within a quarter of a league of Valence. They had so ill
surcesse through their long retreat that they lost 80 or 100 of their horses,
whereof some were worth 800 crowns, and yet were constrained to return again
without doing any service.

The Leaguers being but a few which could escape at the over throw of Sparron
have sent to seek their master the duke of Sauoy in Spain, and are in great
perplexity because they hear no news of his Excellency. He has lost more
by his departure than he shall gain at his return.

We are to give God thanks for so many blessings wherewith it pleases him to
endue the King and his affairs to recomfort in the end his good subjects so
much oppressed, and almost burnt as it were with the fire of civil wars,
kindled by the rebels, who go about to continue it: howbeit the king of
compassion upon the poor and miserable estate of his subjects, more than of
desire to establish himself in that which appertains unto him, does enforce
himself by all means and chiefly by his mildness, mercifulness and
clemency toward the vanquished rebels, to quench and put out wholly this
fire which they sought to entertain, whereby his people and commonwealth might
flourish in an universal peace.

FINIS.

