The Destruction and sack cruelly committed by the Duke of Guyse and his
company, in the town of Vassy, the first of March, in the year M.D.LXII.

IMPRINTED AT LONDON BY HENRY SVTTON for Edward Sutton dvvellyng in Lumbard
street at the sign of the cradell.

The first day of May.

THE DESTRVCTION and sack cruelly committed by the duke of Guyse and his
company in the town of Vassye the first day of March. 1562.
SAterdaye being the last day of February, the duke of Guyse lay at Da^martin
se frank to the which it is two leagues from Iainuille, and from the said
Dammartin to Vassy are other two leagues, both the which make four leagues
distaunce between the said Iainuille (where is the said dukes house and restyng
place) and the said Vassy.

Sunday the first of March the said duke departed from Dam martyn
aforesaid, accompanied with.ii. hundred horse at the least, every horse man of
them, having two or three pistolets, and many of them having long harquebuses.

The said duke of Guyse feigned he would the straight way to Esclaron, without
coming to Vassy: And thereof was made a great brute before he disloged, he
passed by Broussell, a village near to the said Vassy, within one quarter of a
league. And at that time they rang to a sermon in the reformed church of the
said Vassy. Whereupon the duke and his company took occasion to say and
ask, what means this ryngyng?

Whereunto it was answered by many of the Dukes band and some others of the
said town of Vassy, it is to the sermon of the Hugenots. Whereupon they could
not possibly so color and dissemble the mattier, but there escaped out of the
mouths of the most honorable and respected persons among them: yea and others
of meaner degree, these words following, By Gods death we will Hugenote
them by and by of an other fashion.

Others, that were of the basest sort as pages, servants, and lackays, swearyng
also Gods death, said, Will they not give us the spoil* And as soon as that
talk was ended, the said Duke and his troop drew toward the said Vassy, and
so being well appointed, entered into the abbey, and made his horse and the
horses of the best to be helden in hand, without that any of them were put
into the stable.

The said duke being within the monastery acompanied and wayeted on by the
Priour of the said Vassy, called de Salles, having after them a no^bre of
pages and lackeys, with long harquebuses, pistolets, and their gauntlets,
tarried there a very little while. For he could not contain, so long thought
he the time til he might execute his former determined intent, as it is easy
to se and judge. And being there (because his devotion might be seen) he took
only a little holly water, and after went forth with his great company.

Within the market place of the said town were.xl. men of arms and archers,
of the company which were the ordinary garrison there. Who had put them selves
therein, and walked up and down well armed, and had tarried the dukes coming
all that morninge.

The said men of arms and archers joined with him, namely the head of them,
young Brosse, the son of the Lord of Brosse, marching in order to fight. And
went straighte to the place where those of the said Church and reformed
Relygion made their preaching. Which was in a barn that they had made fit for
that purpose, being dystante from the Monastery about one hundred pases.

And coming to the place they found the wicket open, which wha^ they saw,
they caused the said la Brosse the younger, to enter first having.vii. men of
arms with him. And having considered the Minyster and the people assembled,
which were about twelve hundred persons, it was said unto them by some of the
Church, my masters, If it please you, take a rome. Whereunto for answer the
first word they used was this, Gods death let us kill them all.

And having so said, would have gone out, and in deed some of them went
forth, while the rest tarried within: because the people upon this threatnyng
sent to the door, thinkyng to shut it upon them, knowing there was some
business toward, and that they were in great danger, for than they perceived
the duke of Guyse in arms.

Which thing the said Duke perceyuyng, with his people presented them the
harquebouse and pistolet, and shot through the rehearsed wyckette of the barn,
which was yet open, and so were the next unto the door stain and hurt: and
there by the same forsaken, and conseque^ly thassemble delivered to the pray

Then entered in the Duke, with many others, shootyng mightilye at the thickest
assemble of all the people, and stewe and hurt a great number. That done they
went upon them with great slices of swords and curtalaces, and hunted out
the poor men, the women, and children. and when they were out: of necessity
they must pass betwixt two ranks, as well of men of arms, as of others of
his company, and even through the myddest between both, as it were through a
lane, or an alley of a great length. And in passing, every one of them struck
at them with great blows of curtilace and swoorde, in such sort as many of
them went not far, but fell down stark dead.

Notwithstanding some one escaped, one sort being hurt, some other unhurt:
but immediately they were rencountred with an other troop of the company which
slew and hurt with as much cruelty as the others, and that as much as in
them lay.

Those which gat up to the top of the barn sekinge all means to save them
selves were shot at, and overtaken with shot of harquebouse, whereby many
were stricken and fell down dead to the ground, which was an horrible sight
and a dreadful, the same enduringe before it ceased one hour and a half.

After this were the trumpettes blown up in sign of victory and triumph,
after which soundyng, yet they withdrew not them selves in half an hour
more. There died within the barn.xii. men, women, and Children, and many others
that passed through the ranks with some that got as far as their houses.
And there dies daily of the number of the hurt, which is great.

The house of one called Champanion, which was next to the said church was
sacked and robbed, while there was one napkyn left, thoccasion was that it was
said there was armor and weapon therein.

The said Duke took and led away the minister being sore wounded and also the
Captain of the said town of Vassy with certain others of the town for
prisoners: and after that went to dinner to a village called Alanccourt, and
when he had dyned, went to bed to Esclaron.

And because the said Minister was unable to sit on horseback by reason of
his wounds, which were not dressed, he was carried by four men upon a
barrowe unto the said Esclaron.

And or ever the Duke departed Vassy, before he came out of the church, the
wife of a man called Nicholas la Vausse, an honest merchant who was sore hurt,
and minded to go to her house, saw her son in passing through the market
place, whose body one ran through with a sword, wherewith she being moved,
hyed her, thynkyng for pity to save him, but she so little prevailed, as a
horseman ran at her, and after he had thrust her through with his sword, took
from her her purse and girdle with other things she had, and gat him again to
horse.

The tewsday following were buried.xlv. flayne persons, and there remains
hurt.iiii. score or a hundred, whereof a great part were out of all hope of
life.

Thus may ye in a manner behold the full discourse of this unnaturalness,
cruelty, and murder, that the said Duke of Guyse has committed against the
subjects of the French King his sovereign Lord.


