depiction of knight on horseback

A DISCOVRSE OF that which is past, since the kings departure from Gouy, to
pursue the prince of Parma: even til the first of May. 1592.

The last letters thereof came on the fourth of the same month according to the
English computation.

with new additions by later letters.

Imprinted at London by John Wolf, and are to be sold at his shop, over
against the Southdore of Paul's. 1592.

A discourse of that which is past since the kings departure from Gouy, to
pursue the Prince of Parma, even till the first of May. 1592. the last letters
thereof, came on the fourth of the same month.
THe king continuing his enterprise to fight with the duke of Parma, and of the
Main, and to give them battle according to the last order of his deparparture
from Gouy: to the end nothing were forgotten that might draw and force the
enemy to come to a battle: the king without any soiourning, came in great have
to lodge in Netiuille a league, and one half distant from Iuetot, where part
of the forces of the said dukes was quartered, and entrenched. The duke de
Main and the Guise were there themselves in person with the Cauallerie of
Bourgonie, the which Mounsier. S. Paul had brought out of Champaigne, and
Vitry his own Cornet. In the mean time that the marshials of the held were
appointing of the quarters, his Majesty advanced forward with a hundred
horses, and fifty Hargebusiers a horseback, and to the end he might both
discover their intrenchment and judge by their assurance in the combat, whether
they had stomach enough to defend their lodginges, and to come to a battle,
commanded in his prefence a skirmish, in which Mounsier de Contenant then
commanding of the enemies troops, coming out of their village, was taken
prisoner and one soldier of the said Vitry his company: having yielded so
slender a skirmish, that the king did judge by their countenance, the place to
be more assured of it self, for the ditches round about it, then in the force
that kept it. And having appointed the night before that all his army should
march directly the next morning toward Yuetot, his Majesty departed at the
break of the day, with twenty horses accompanied with two hundred more, and
one hundred hargebusiers a horseback, and having placed all them he had
brought with him so few as they were in such places of advantage as served best
to his purpose: his Majesty would have procured a skirmishe, and seeing that
among his enemies there was more fear, then will to fight, and that they were
in amaze yet the army came, which followed the king, his Majesty caused those
that were before the village, to be charged so hotely, that ours entered pelle
melle into the village with the enemies.

There were 18. or 20. of Vitry his company slain, and more then should have
been, if the ennemie had not put the sire into the village to hinder our
passage, further to pursue them. In the mean time Vitry and the young Lord of
Chastres with their light horses, put themselves in battle without the village
seconded by Mounsier S. Paul, and the Caualliere of Bourgonie and Champaigne.
But they kept the place of their battle so cowardly, that as these few troops
which the king had brought with him, did approach and charge them, they had
rather refuge to their spurs and to the quickness of their horses then to
their swords or pistolles. Vitry his horse was slain at that time under him,
and should have been taken if he had not been disgaged again by one of his
soldiers. The young Lord of Chastres was taken prisoner, and thirty or forty
with him, and as many slain. The rest saved themselves by their hasty
retyring, which was so speedy that de Guise, and duke de Main, their horses
were out of breath. They found very fitly to their purpose some of their
forces that had taken the Alarm in battle array near another village
entrenched. They saved themselves from a small number who chased before them a
great number of cowardly runawaies. The situation of the countreye is so
close and aduantagious to them that are first lodged in a place, that the
King could exploit nothing more that day, but quartered in Iuetot and his
infanterie: in the villages where duke de Maine and de Aumale were lodged
before with their troops, which they abandoned after such a sort, that they
left a great part of their plate and all their dinner behind them to retire to
their Camp entrenched and fortified where all their Army is lodged.

The next morning, those that were that night in guard told unto his majesty,
that ever since mydnight they had heard in the Camp the sound of drums and
Trumpets a horseback, the noise of whippes and carts and other great noise,
as is commonly accustomed in a dislodging of a camp, but they could not tell
which way the Enemy had taken: whether of Roan or else of Newhauen.

Insomuche that in this incertitude his Majesty to lose no more of his array,
that was in a fit place to prevent the vaunt-garde of both the ways that the
Army could take: resolved to keep his array in a readiness, to rise upon
his first commandment, and himself to go in the mean time to discover the
truth: which he did, and went only accompanied with four of his gentlemen in
their doublets.

His majesty upon the discovery of the truth, took a prisoner upon the head
of their intrenchment, being a Spaniard of the company of Diego Dauillade, and
having kept the Enemy all that day in an Alarm within their intrenchement,
discovered the lodginges where his camp should be quartered the next day, and
where to place his artillery.

Following this resolution, the last day of April, his Majesty came and
lodged in Variar-ville, and procured some skirmishes of horssemen in the mean
while that the rest of the army was in quartering of themselves, without any
other great exploit done that day of both parties that is worthy the writing.
But betwixt six and seven of the clock in the evening, his majesty being
accompanied with the Duke Longeuille the County saint Paul, the Marshall of
France, and with eighteen or twenty gentlemen all in their doublets, going to
see his guardes and to discover certain things known only to himself: six
score Englishmen pykes and shot, under the leading of Sir Roger Willyams,
began a great skirmish, which grew so hot, that there were of the enemies
about 900 or a thousand shot, as well French and Italians, as Spaniards, and
four hundred horses, who after many a shot bestowed on both sides came to
charge our pikes, but they were by them so valiantly received (Monsier Biron
being then in place, Monsieur de Belle-garde great Esquire of France, and
diverse other Barons, all in their doublets only) that the coronet of
Bentiuoglio was slain upon the place. The Captain, the Liefetenant and
Ensign, and more then sitteene or twenty other notable men slain, and stripped
of their brave and rich attire, with their scarfes of favor, besides the
great number of men and horses that were hurt at that time.

And being not contented with this, as they saw certain regimentes of foot
coming behind the hedges to surprise them, they joined with the Flemings that
were come to the Alarm, and making together about 500. or 600. pikes, and 300.
or 400. harquebushers, went to charge those that came to surprise them so
resolutelie, that they slew about three or four score of them, and drove the
rest before them into their trenches, without any greater loss of the
Englishmen then six men, and twenty hurt.

It was thought that Friday next a day particular to the Duke of Parma for his
enterpryses, and a feast of saint James, whom the Spaniards hold for their
Patron: they would have had their revenge, but being contented with their
loss, without hazzarding themselves any further, their trenches have been
their resting place without any show of a desire of sallyeng forth. Which his
majesty seeing, has set such order in the affairs of his Army, that
victuals are there in great store and abundance and hope will not fail there
hereafter.

Since this victory, and from the next morning forward, his majesty will use
all means possible he can, to draw his Enemy to a battle, with such a
resolution, not to leave them before he has defeated them, which his Majesty's
hopes to compass yer it be long, either by a victory of a battle if they do
accept it, or by necessity which shall force them to abandon their trenches,
which is such already in their Army, that all things are three times dearer
then in our Camp.

And this by the grace of God who is the Lord of hosts protector of the
King, revenger of all usurping powers, in whom at all times the King has
only put his trust and confidence.

Advertisement is given by letters from the fourth of May, that the duke of
Parma is greatly discontented with the Frenchmen that are with him, saying
that they do betraye him. He is very ill of his hurt, and he has an ague
which weakeneth him very much, and forseth him to keep his bed: three bones or
shyuerings are drawn out of his wound.

The Duke Longeuille took the third of this month, many of their chariots and
carts laden with victuals. Their Frenchmen run daily away for want of
necessaries They are not able to tarry there long. The sickness is great in
their camp. In the skirmish that was upon the fourth day of May, the horse of
the young Prince was slain, and he escaped very dangerously and hardly.

The King seeing the Enemies to fortify themselves within a wood, which did
lie betwixt him and the troops but five hundred pases, joining upon their
trenches where they might plant some ordinance, and foreseeing the damage that
might ensue by it, resolved by the advice of his Princes, Lords, and chiefest
captains, to raise them from thence by force with a village thereunto
belonging, being one of their chiefest quarters, and to that effect it was
appointed that all the troops should meet upon the appointed Rendeuous to set
upon that wood in the break of the day: but the darkness of the night
having been partelye the cause that they were not so diligent, it was near
night before al were arrived, which took away all hope to effectuate any thing
that day.

The enemy seeing our forces assembled, it gave them occasion to believe that
it was upon intention to enterprise some exploit upon them.

Whereupon they put themselves in battle array, and used such diligence in
fortifieng of themselves in the wood, besides the Ditches and trenches which
they had cast already, that the king was of opinion to have slacked his
enterprise till another time: but seeing all his troops full of courage and
boldness, he resolved to make a trial of it, causing it to be assaulted on
sundry sides. Where the Englishmen, VVallons, French, and Lanceknightes,
carried themselves so valiantly, that the first that were of the forlorn
hope, forced all the said trenches with a great fight of pikes of both sides,
forcing the enemy finallye to abandon both the wood and the village, being in
number about two thousand men, whereof remained dead upon the place, more then
three hundred Spaniards, with certain VVallons, and among the rest six or
seven Captains, with their Liefetenant, Colonel de la Bolette, with out
loss but of three or four men of the kings and seven or eight hurt.

The king gave at the same time to Baron Biron, fifty horses of those that
were with him, conducted by Monsieur le Vedame de Chartres, who pursued them
that did retire til twenty pases from their intrenchement, where all their
Army stood in battle, and slew yet six or seven score more, with the loss
only of one of ours, and bearing himself so forward that he was slain even
upon their trenches. Some of our horses were slain, and many hurt.

After this we remained yet eight hours in battle, to present then the
combat, where they did us some harm at first with their great Ordinance, which
they had placed in a place of advantage without their trenches, but we took
another place where the Cannon could not do us more harm, and so having
notstaied for them thus long, and the night to approach, that they made no show
of coming forth, the king sent every man to his quarter, till other occasion
were offered to exploit more: having sufficiently showed to the enemy, and that
to their loss that our Infantrie is better then theirs, whereof they have had
the trial oftentimes, and yield that honor unto our horsemen. I hope that God
will favor us, as to continue our good success.

Two days after the king had perforce taken from the enemy the wood that on
his side did cover him, as is aforesaid: the enemies finding no great safety
in their camp resolved to dislodge, and so departed upon Wednesday last, the
sixth of this month before day without sound of trumpet or drum, in a rainie
and windy weather, which in recompense of the hinderance that is ministered to
their march, brought them the commodity to help to cover their departure, so
that the king could not be so ready to follow them, which notwithstanding
he did about six of the clock in the morning, with a thousand or 1200. horse,
causinge also his army to come forward, so that easily he might have
overtaken them, in case they had prosecuted their journey toward Roane, as it
was likely they did intend: But within one hour after his departure he found
them already lodged in a strong place and of advantage, their tail reaching
even to Caudebee, wherefore he also resolved to lodge that day at Iuetot, and
the next day to set forward to get before them toward Roane: but being come to
the Rendezuous that he had given to his whole army, he understood by such as
he had sent to discover the enemies doings, that they made no semblance to
stir: whereupon he took again his former lodging, from whence he was gone,
and made it convenient. For they imagining him to be passed forward, there were
some of their troops found marching to seize upon the same lodging, from
whence they might afterward have easily escaped, and could no more have been
entrapped, but seeing their way still stopped, such as were gone abroad
returned. And since they have kept themselves in their lodgings. Three days
together by reason of the bad raynie wether, the king was driven to let his
army soiourne in their trenches, and could do no more but daily go himself,
his cosens, the Marshals Biron, Aumont and Bouillon. The Baron of Biron,
marshal of che camp, and other the captains to take a view of their feate,
and of the ways to come to the enemies camp, to the end upon the first
opportunity to march and to set upon them. Then having seen and well noted all
that might be done, the king yesterday determined to go and give an onset.

This morning having brought all footmen near, and the most part of his
horsemen, with three pieces of artillery, who came so early to the place
appointed, that about eight or nine of the clock, they struck into a bottom
that made the head of their camp, where were lodged seven cornets of the
ordinances of the low countries, and twenty of light horse, seven of Carabins,
and all their rutters, who all were ouerthrown with the slaughter of two or
three hundred, among others, of sundry Captains, whose names as yet we
cannot learn. The booty amounted unto above 150000. crowns. Most of their
baggage being taken, with almost 4000. horse, some of carriage, and some of
service, with four Cornets that were won. We trust that God continuing his
blessings toward the good and just cause, will shortly make an end of the
Spanish ambition and tyranny, and grant happy peace unto his Majesty, and
all his good subjects, whereof we are daily most earnestly to desire him.

By other letters coming at the same time that these did, and signifiyng as
much as herein is set down, they say also, that in the Prince of Parma his
camp, that a munition loaf, which is of very black bread, and is about the
bigness of one of our halfepenny loaves, is there sold in his camp for two
shillinges and six pence, and that a pottle of spring water, is also sold
there for seven pence farthing.

True news from the kings Canpe, by the Kings own Letters, which came on the
4. of May. 1592.
On Thursday last at night, there was a great conflict upon the horssemen of
the Enemy, wherein were taken, as followed:

Seven cornets of Lances. Twenty Cornets of lighthorsses. Seven Cornets of
carbines. All the Switzers put to flight. Almost all the carts burned. Four
thousand horse taken. Three hundred men of Account slain upon the place. The
spoils worth 150000. Crowns. The Duke of Parma deadly sick at Caudebeck.
Three traitors coming to kis the K. hanged. The kings wife dead.


The Governor of Roan has caused many botes to be brought to the duke of
Parma being in Caudebeck, upon which boats the Duke made a bridge, whereupon
he did pass over the water with his army, but the King followed him so nigh,
that he could have no leizure to break his bridge, by which means the king
followed him over.

There were 500. men of the duke of Parmaes at Lisleboune, which were charged
by the kings men, and were every one put to the sword.

The Duke cannot retire but by one of these three ways: the one, which goes
toward Roan, the which is very dangerous, because there is about seven miles
of very thick wood to pass, and a very foul way besides.

Another way, is going toward Ponteandemer, which is a very strong and well
fortified city, guarded by the Lord Lauardin with two thousand soldiors,
besides the townsmen.

And the third way, is going between Ponteandemer and Pontlesuesque: a way
truly most dangerous both for the deep muds, much wood, and a great many rude
clownes, yet very valiant which are dwelling toward that way.

FINIS.

