THE Conversion of a most Noble Lady of France. In June last past, 1608.
Madame Gratiana, wife to the high and mighty Lord; Claudius, Lord of
Tremoille; Duke of Thouars; Peer of France, and Prince of Talmonde.

A most Christian Epistle, written by her, to the Ladies of France, to resolve
them in the cause of her Conversion from Popery, to the profession of Gods
Gospel: And aduising them to imitate her Religious example. Truly translated
out of French.

Magna est veritas, and praeualet. Esdras. 3. AT LONDON, Printed by Thomas
Purfoot, for Nathaniell Butter, and are to be sold at his shop at S. Austens
Gate, at the sign of the Pyde Bull. 1608. ()

To the right Worshipful, Sir John Swynnerton Knight, Alderman of London, and
true lover of learning. Also to the most virtuous Lady his wife: All
happiness heartily wishes.
SIr, I am so bold, as to present you and your worthy Lady, with a most
memorable and judicious labor of a Lady* lately converted from the dim and
gross errors of superstitious Popery, to the profession of Gods true
Religion and holy Gospel. The reason of her Conversion, and many palpable
abuses, (besides blasphemies and sacriledges) committed in Popery: She has
set down in an excellent Epist le, and sent the same to her wonted friends and
familiars, the Ladies of France, to encourage them in the imitation of this
her godly example. My unfeigned love to your Worship, your loving Lady, and all
yours, I trust shall plead my pardon for this presumption: In hope whereof,
most humbly I commit you all to the heavenly protection.

To those misled Ladies and Gentlewomen of England, whom seducing Seminaries
and Popish Priests have too much prevailed withal, to the great danger of
their souls, if they continue still in blindness.
LAdies and Gentlewomen, this Eipstle of a most honorable French Lady and
Duchess, by me presents it self to your gentle pervsing. I would my prayers,
or ought else in me, could so far prevail with you, as but to read over
this her learned labor, in steed of those other abusing Books, which your
falsely named ghostly Fathers, in secret bestow on you* Then should I have no
doubt, but Gods good spirit speaking by this Lady to you, would open both your
eyes and understanding, to let you see the great danger of your enemies
seducing, and call you home in time to the sheepefolde of faith, even by her
virtuous and religious example, that has soworthily led the way before you.
The Book it self speaks much better things unto ye, then any way I am able
to do: therefore to it, and Gods assisting grace in and by it, most humbly I
leave you.

AN EXCELLENT Epistle, or exhortatorie Letter, written by Madame Gratiana, wife
to the high and mighty Lord, Claudius, Lord of Tremoille, Duke of Thouars*
Peer of France, and Prince of Talmond: To all the honorable Ladies of France.
To resolve them in the cause of her conversion from Popery, and aduising them
to imitate her religious example.
GRacious and Honorable Ladies,
I am sure it has amazed some of you not a little, that I have forsaken the
society, wherein I was wont to meet you, and have drawn upon my self that
disgraceful name of an Huguenot (for so I hear you please to term me) and
other scandalous imputations wherewith you vpbraide me; all which are to me no
mean advantage. To resolve you therefore (at full) of my departing from your
company, and requiring withal, to forbear your daily solicitations to
realter me, peruse but this short discourse which I send unto you, and then I
doubt not but in some measure you will rest satisfied.

After God had determined in his good time, to withdraw me out of the sinck of
sin and idolatry, After her conversion, she wrote this Epistle.
to incorporate me in the communion of his Son, within the bosom of his
sanctified Church, the refuge for all them that desire salvation, (and where I
wish, and desire in soul, that I could embrace you all:) After (I say) God had
thus disposed of my absolute conversion, notwithstanding my many reuoltes and
back*slidings, by your Letters, wherewith I was continually labored, and other
means of no small moment; I fell upon my knees, and as the blessed Virgin
Marie said in her Song, at that heavenly salutation brought her by the Angel
Gabriell, even so I spoke to my God in my soul: Luke 2. 38.
Be it Lord unto me, according to thy word.

And calling to remembrance, that in the last conference we had together, you
stood upon certain points of Religion, wherewith you pressed me very
narrowly, and I could not then so readily answer you: I entreat ye to
receive therein satisfaction from me now, and to persuade your selves withal,
that it is Gods cause I take upon me A virtuous acknowledgment of a godly Lady.
(a weak woman) to defend, and he will thoroughly strengthen me against all
resistaunces. And since it has pleased him to use my poor service if not (in
this clear light of his Gospel) to advance the same as I could wish, yet at
least (like a willing labourer) to bring stones and rubble to supply the
building: you shall perceive what knowledge his grace has confirmed in me,
which I wish were as liberally engrasted into you, that our hearts being
enflamed with the desire of his glory, we might all be of one mind in our
Lord sesus, expecting his coming to enlarge and release us.

Pardon me then (most Honorable and worthy Ladies) if I make plain and lay
open to you, I will not say the simple abuses: but the wicked, superstitious
and blasphemous I dolatries, which are daily practiced and used in your Roman
Church, only thereby to overthrow, the true service and worship of the
everliving God. And alb eit the number of these injuries are infinite,
sufficient to fill a very large and great volume, and whereof some of you have
(in private) told me your mislike: yet at this time, according to my promise
in our last consultation: I will deal with the very cheifest abuse of all,
even that which is intruded by Satan's instigation, into the most excellent and
principal service of God, by you (and by my self heretofore) termed the
Mass. Persuading my self, that when I have (as it were with my finger)
pointed at the blasphemies, idolatry and manifest sacriledges therein
committed: She takes on her, to note the abuses in the Mass.
you will suffer your eyes to be no longer blinded, with the pomp and
exterior devotion of such deceivers; but rather that you will awaken your
better judgments, and look into the impiety and profanation, which lies
masked under so hideous a Monster. And I will shape mycourse and method, Her
course intended in this Epistle.
by every abuse in his succinct place and rank, and according as the nature
of so weak an Epistle will best bear it.

They teach you, that in the Mass, Priests do daily sacrifice, and offer up
the body of our Lord Jesus Christ, to God the Father: to deface and expiate,
not only the sins of the Priest that makes the offering, but likewise of the
people, who are his assistants at the celebration of the Mass. Now we say,
that this is a very great outrage and wrong, done to our Lord Jesus Christ,
and to his true sacrifice. First of all, in transferring to mortal men, or
communicating to them, the dignity of his supreme Priesthood; Christ his
office of Priesthood, transferred to men.
we wonder by what authority or allowance this should be done? For the whole
body of the Scripture declares plainly to us: That he is the eternal
sacrificer, according to the order of Melchizedeck, Hebr. 7 9. 23. 24. 25. 26.
yea, and that in such sort, As he is the only Priest of that order, and
permits not the receipt of successors or Vicars. For, as concerning the
sacrificers of the Law, there were made many to succeed one after another:
Because they were not suffered to endure, by the reason of death. But this man
(says the Apostle to the Hebrews) because he endures for ever, has an
everlasting Priesthood. Hebr. 9. 24. 25. 26.
Which needed not daily (as those high Priests under the Law, to enter the holy
places yearly with other blood) first for his own sins, and then for the
peoples: Otherwise, it had bin needful for him to have suffered many times,
since the foundation of the world. But now in the consummation of the world,
has he appeared once, to put away sin, by the sacrifice of himself. Being
both the offering sacrificer, and the sacrifice offered for sin, according to
the nature of this holy sacrifice of the new Testament, that the Sacrifice and
Sacrificer should be both one.

Jesus Christ is the only Sacrificer, without any successor or Vicar.
To Jesus Christ then only appertains the honor, to be the Sacrificer of the
new covenant: and they do him intolerable outrage, to appoint him any
Successors or Suffragans, in regard the Apostle says: There is one everlasting
Sacrificer, which never cease, and passes not from one to another. Hebr. 9.
26.
Nor can this honor be attributed to any other, but only he that is called of
God, as Aaron was. So likewise Christ took not to himself this honor, to be
made the high Priest: but he glorified him, that said unto him: Thou art my
Son, this day begat I thee. Heb. 5 4. 5.
And as in the former place: Thou art an everlasting sacrificer, after the
order of Melchisedeck.

It is not I (Ladies) that have spoken all this, but Gods infallibe word the
sacred Scripture. The popish Priests must show their warrant out of Scripture.
And now if the Priests of the Papacy, would have us to acknowledge them for
sacrificers: let them show us, how the charge to sacrifice Jesus Christ, is
given them by God in the holy Scriptures, and then we will lend a better ear
to them. But this is not the proposition only, that Christ Jesus is the sole
sacrificer of the new covenant: but there remains a far greater matter. For
his sacrifice neither can or ought to be iterated or performed again, nor can
it be by any other: because he offered himself once for all and it
appertains to no man whatsoever, No man can offer as Christ has offered.
to make the like offering as he has done. Neither could he, as of himself,
offer himself again, for then he must have suffered and died again, as I
have proved before by the Apostle. And the offering which he made of himself,
was once only, and that sacrifice is of perpetual efficacy, for the clearing
and wiping away of our sins. Whereupon the same Apostle says, We are
sanctified, even by the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once made. And by
one sole oblation, which he once only offered, has he consecrated for ever
them that are to be sanctified. Hebr. 10. 13. 14. 18.
And since he has purchased for us the remission of our sins: there
remains no more oblations to be made for sin, but his blood only is
sufficient: whereby he is entered into the holy places, having obtained
everlasting redemption for us And we have daily liberty likewise, by the blood
of Jesus, to enter into the holy places: in regard that he is the eternal
sacrificer, to save all such as he shall present to God, living there as their
continual intercessor. In all which alleged places, the Apostle makes no
mention at all, of any new oblation, or continual offering the body of Christ,
by the hands of men. No mention is made in Scripture, of any new or continued
offering.


Who will not say then, that this is blasphemy, not only in transferring to
mortal men the dignity of the eternal Priesthood of Jesus Christ, who never
resigned his office to any other; but likewise to reiterate and renew his
sacrifice daily, as if the efficacy of the sacrifice, which himself once
offered upon the Cross, were not sufficient to endure, and for our
reconciliation to God? What shall we also think of this saying of the Apostle:
If Romans 5. 1^.
when we were enemies, we were reconcilea to God by the death of his Son:
much more being reconciled, we shall be saved by his life. That is to say,
because he is daily alive, to intercede in our behalf, and procure us grace
and favor, as has bin before declared. Or, as he elsewhere says: In regard
he appears Hebr 9. 14.
now for us before the face of God, to wit, in the powerful virtue of his
sacrifice, to communicate the same to all believers: There is therefore no
need, of any new sacrifice or reiteration thereof.

Understand, good Ladies, that I do not tie my self, to note every particular
which is condemned, She deals not with every particularerror in the Mass.
through the whole passage of the Masle, which is very thick sown with
blasphemies, from the beginning to the end: therein I should tier both my self
and you. As for example, should I speak of the Priests entrance to the Altar,
wherein (you know) I utter no lie. First, the Priest confesses The Priests
confession.
himself, not only to God, but likewise both to he Saints and she Saints, not
so much as naming Jesus Christ. Then afterward, in the beginning of their
Canon, and before he goes to any consecration, he Sacrifice offered before
consecration, for the redemption of souls living.
says, That he offers that Sacrifice to God (to wit, the bread and wine, which
are upon the Altar, and as yet not consecrated) first of all, for the
Catholic Church, next, for the redemption of all their souls, that are
assistant at the Mass. O dear Ladies, what a blasphemy is this? O, that it
should ever be received among Christians; Or that a sinful man should presume
to say: That he offers an oblation of bread and wine to God, and for there
demption of souls. Nay, admit that it were the body and blood of Jesus
Christ: yet (dear souls) you see it manifestly proved unto you already,
that it is not now at this day to be offered again, neither can it, by the
Apostles testimony already rehearsed.

I pass over also manyp rayers full of iniquity, as well before, as after the
consecration. As in the Memento, The Priest in his Memento.
when the Priest requires the favor of God, by the merits and intercession of
Saints: As if the sacrisice of Jesus Christ, which they say they prefer in
the foremost place, were not sufficient to impetrate such grace of God.

Then after consecration, they commit a sin, whereof by no means (I think)
they can excuse The Priests prayer after the consecration.
themselves. For the Priest prays to God, that the oblation which he offers
(to wit, the body and the blood of Jesus Christ, according to the very words
used by the Priest) may be carried by the hands of his holy Angel, into the
high Altar before Jesus Christ. As if Jesus Christ himself had forsaken
Heaven, and stood in need to be carried thither again, and by the hands of an
Angel. O, honorable Ladies, what a blasphemy is this, against him that has
all power subjected under his feet, and sits for ever at the right hand of
God his Father?

The Priests Memento for the dead.
Also in the Priests Memento for the dead, he prays for them, (that already
are sleeping in the very height of peace) that God would give them a place of
peace and refreshing. But to what purpose is this? when the parties are
possessed of such a peaceful place already, why should they move any such
place afterward in vain?

There are many other things (loving Madames) the collection whereof would be
very tedious unto you, and which you may see very learnedly confuted, each point
by point, in the Book which I showed you at our last meeting, called the
Anatomy The Anatomy of the Mass, printed in French.
of the Mass, printed for your more easy understanding* in our own language,
more then thirty years since, and never (all this while) answered by the
contrary side.

But come we now to the especial point, concerning the confidente and perverse
opinion, (wherein I my self have sinned too often, and which you hold as no
mean Article of faith,) That the Mass is a work meritorious, to cancel all
The Mass ameritorious work, to deface all sins.
our sins; Ex epere operato, as themselves use to say. Which is as much to
say* as that by the virtue of that work, the labor is performed, without
making mention of his faith and repentance, for whom the Mass is said, and is
therein assisted. Hereby you may perceive (good Ladies) that the efficacy of
the death of Jesus Christ (whereof by true faith we are all made pertakers) is
now attributed to a work done by man: yea, and may as well be Concerning the
dead.
applied to the dead, as the living. By which means, the Sacraments shall but
profit them only, which communicated in true says and repentance. But then
this cannot be spoken thus of them that are deceased, and departed out of this
world: because they have no more communion with the living, whereby to
participate of their Sacraments.

As for the Sacrifice of Jesus Christ, that is (says Romans 3. 25
the Apostle) through faith in his blood, which makes us partakers of the
propitiation thereby obtained. Now the dead can have neither faith nor
repentance, but are gone as they placed before the end 1. Pet. 1. 9 John. 3.
18.
of their faith, either for the salvation of their souls, or to be punished in
hell, for their incredulity.

Iouerslip a great many blasphemies, which deserve each one to be severally
spoken of: For you have told me, that some things you give credit to, and
others you do not, especially any thing which you conceit to be damnable. But
you being herein governed only by your Priests opinions, you hang your selves
on their sleeves, and are never the nearer, when you shall come to make your
account. And your excuse, concerning Of the prayers said or sung in the Mass.
those prayers which they sing or say in their Mass, that they are in Latin,
and you understand them not, but believe them to be good and holy* Trust me
(worthy Ladies) it is idle and frivolous, for you ought to understand them, and
may if you will, thereby to examine and try the spirits, whether they be of
God or no. You have them published in printed books, and so have had for many
years together: And the Scriptures themselves remain for your further
instruction, which though they forbid you the reading of them, yet be you ruled
John. 5. 19.
by him, that says, Search the Scriptures, it is they that do bear true
witness of me.

But leaving all other, there is one most signal and apparent, and such a
blasphemy, whereof I know you are almost daily partakers, being present at
Mass. For both common opinion and intention, The Priest and peoples opinion
present at Mass.
as well of the Priest himself, as the persons there in place, do run in this
current: That it is an absolute sacrifice which is there performed by him,
wherein all remission of sins is to be sought for, and all prosperity, as well
of the body as of the soul. For they avouch it, to be the self same
sacrifice of Jesus Christ, which they but renew again, to receive a further
fruit thereby, and so they reiterate the same as often, as they do either
sing or say Mass, even according as it was done under the Law. But what says
the blessed Apostle to this? The law having the shadow of good things to come,
and not Hebr. 10. 1. 2. 3.
the very image of the things; can never with those sacrifices, which they
offer year by year continually, sanctify the comers thereunto. And it is
imposisible, that the blood of Bulls and Goats should take away sins. For
would they not then have ceased to have bin offered, because that the offerers
once purged, should have had no more conscience of sins? This is then the
reason, wherefore every Priest appears daily sacrificing, and often times
offers one manner of thing, which can never take away sins. But this man,
after he had offered one sacrifice for sin, sits for ever at the right
hand of God. And wherefore one sacrifice only? Because (says he in the verse
following) that by that alone sacrifice, he has consecrated for ever them that
be sanctified.

There is nothing (dear Ladies) more clear and The meaning of the holy
Apostle.
evident, then these words of the holy Apostle, to manifest openly: That the
sacrifice of Jesus Christ, whereby we were once for all redeemed and
sanctified, cannot, neither ought to be reiterated or renewed. Therefore in
Popery, when they do enterprise, to reiterate, or renew, or continue the same
(for they make use of all these several terms) is it any thing else, but a
mere renouncing of that only sacrifice, remaining fresh, in full strength and
vigor, which Christ once offered upon his Cross, to sanctify all believers?
And the fruit hereof is daily presented to us, in the preaching of the
Gospel, and we reeeiue the same by a true and sanctified faith, in him only.
For to this end was the sacred ministry of Gods word instituted by God
himself in his Church: and not for any novel order of sacrifices, as your
(souls heavy enemies) do make you to believe.

Some particular Ladies, not altogether popish.
I know (honorable Ladies) and have had such particular interest in some of
you, during the time of our often conuersing in this manner together: that (in
heart) you are far off from these gross prophanations, and have assured me (in
soul) you do much grieve thereat. Let me then persuade you, not to come in
such places, where the Son of God is so highly iniuried, be not led by their
outward appearaunce of devotion, which serves but to beguile and abuse the
simple. Even as is used in our ceremony of meeting, and manner of courtship in
the streets or else where: a good look is given, or an affable conge allowed,
when falsehood and treachery lurketh oftentimes in the heart. Make not then your
fair selves guilty, of such foul and polluted behavior, nor be you present
where Christ's name is misprised, erecting another Altar, against the Altar of
his Cross, and renewing his sacrifice, by substitution of a new one: as if
his were but a year old, or like to the sacrifices of brut beasts, lame or
imperfect; Or as if the means which he has ordained, for the application
thereof (as the preaching of the Gospel, and administration of his instituted
Sacraments) were insufficient The fruit of the Sacrifice in the Mass.
to convey their virtue unto us. For this is the fairest fruit of their
pretended sacrifice, that the reiteration and daily renewing thereof, is
branded with the mark of insufficiency and imperfection, as you hear the
Apostle to avouch the same: when he speaks of the sacrifices of the old Law,
which Hebr. 10. 9*
were performed often.

True it is, that they would feign ground their sacrifice upon Gods word: but
(good Ladies) mark in what manner I beseech you, and be Judges your selves,
for the case is very clear. Behold (say they) Jesus Christ making his Supper
with his Some of them say: Make this in my remembrance, and so they would have
it. Luke 22. 19
Apostles, said: Do this in remembrance of me. Do, that is as much to say,
according to their gloss; as make or perform this sacrifice* because that
Christ had said before; This is my body which is given for you. But if it
pleased them to read all, they should better perceive the words and meaning of
our Savior, which indeed are nothing less, then agreeing with their glossing.

The Evangelists do record unto us, that our Lord Jesus having taken bread,
and given thanks; The Eua^gelists record of our Saviors words. Lu. 22. 19.
brake it, and said to his Disciples: Take, cate, this is my body which is
given for you, do this in the remembrance of me. And how do this? why no
otherwise, but even to do it in the same manner, that is to say: To take the
bread, and distribute it among them to be eaten, for no other mention is made
there, either of offering, or of sacrificing. For you see (sweet Ladies) that
Christ himself used no other words, but Take, and eat. And the holy Apostle
Saint Paul does sufficiently show us, that of these words, do this, there is
no other understanding to be made but that which has bin declared already.
For in speaking of the wine at the same 1. Co. 11. 25.
Supper, he recites likewise the same words spoken The meaning of Christ's
words in the Sacrament.
by our Lord Jesus Christ: Do this always and as oftentimes as you shall
drink, in remembrance of me. Which imports as much, as if he had said:
Always, or as often entimes as you shall drink of this wine in this Sacrament:
Drink it, in remembrance of me, that this may be in remembrance of my Death,
or continue as a memorial thereof. Which manner or phrase of speaking, the
Apostle himself adioyneth in the following verse. For always, or as 1. Co*
11. 26.
oftentimes, as you shall eat of this bread, and drink of this Cup: you
shall show the Lords death until he come.

Her admonition to the Ladies, concerning the exposition of S. Paul.
Consider now, good Ladies I beseech you, that these are none of our glosses,
but the very express text it self, where you see manifestly by Saint Paul's
own exposition: what thing it is the Lord would have us to do concerning as
well the people, as the Pastor. For the commandment, Do this, directs it
self to all the faithful, to wit: That we should eat this bread of the
Sacrament, and drink the wine, in remembrance of his death and passion.
According as the words do signify themselves, when he spoke of his body,
which is broken and given for you, and likewise of his blood, which is shed or
dispersed for you. All which he spoke, having regard to that which soon after
should ensue: His body was to be delivered over to death, and his blood to be
shed upon the Cross, for us poor, wreched and miserable sinners.

And the reason why he spoke so of the time present, which is given, which is
shed: is the common Latin verssion or translation, allowed by the Counsel of
Trente; expressing thereby the time to come, which shall be given, which shall
be s^ed, then which, nothing can be more manifest, honored Ladies, if it
pleased you but to open your owneeies. For then you should perceive, that there
Christ made on mention of offering. And if they would press these words, which
is given, to conclude thereby, that even then when Jesus made An excellent
note, and well worth the observation.
his Supper, he offered up his body in sacrifice: Of necessity, and by the
self same reason, they must also conclude these words, my blood which is shed;
that even then he did shed his blood, which cannot be, neither could be, for
his blood was not shed but upon the Cross.

Good Madames, entreat the very learned of your Roman Sacrificers, to show
us but one place in the Scripture, where it is commanded us, to sacrifice
Jesus Christ again. For the place rehearsed, Concerning the Greek word
Poiein, and the Siriaque, Habad.
makes not any jot for them, and they know likewise well enough, that the
Greek word Poiein, used by the Evangelists, reciting the words of our Lord and
Savior, and Saint Paul after them: Also the word in the Siriack tongue Habad,
which our Lord himself used, could never be understood to Sacrifice, or Offer.

Go we on then, to some other proprieties of the Mass. I come now to the
Idolatry, which we Idolatry in holding up the bread to be adored as God.
find in the second part of the Mass, to wit, at the Sacrament, and that is in
this. They propose or hold up a piece of bread to the people, to be adored and
worshipped by them for God saying: That there is the blessed body of our
Savior, hidden under the accidents of bread, although it do not appear to be
so, and the faithful can discern but bread only. To prove their idolatry in
this point, I will go no whither else, but to the direct institution of the
Supper, according as our Lord himself did institute it, which they altogether
deprave, only to confirm and establish their Idol: wherein, gentle Ladies, I
crave not only your patience, but also your dilligent regard.

How Christ promised us to be partakers of his body and blood. Luke 22.19
Behold how Jesus Christ promises us, that we shall be partakers of his body,
and of his blood, At all times, or as oftentimes, as we shall celebrate this
mystery, according as he did celebrate the same with his Apostles. In
distributing the bread, he said, Take, eat, this is my body which is given
for you; do this in remembrance of me. Likewise in delivering the wine, he
said: Drink you all of this, for this is my blood. etc. where we may discern,
that he puts the commandment in the first place, Christ's commandment is
in the first place.
in saying to us, that we shall take, eat, and drink. Then he annexeth the
promise, wherein he testifies unto us, that that which we eat, is his body,
and that which we drink is his blood. To enjoy then the effect and benefit of
this promise, it behooves, that the faithful do take and eat the bread, and
drink the wine which is given to them. In brief, there is the communion of
many faithful, in doing that, which Jesus Christ representing to the whole
Church, did perform in this first Supper: For that which Jesus Christ said to
his Apostles; Christ's words to his Disciples, is to all be faithful to the
worlds end.
Take, eat, drink ye all of this: he spoke the very same to all the faithful,
even to the ending of the world: As that which he adioyneth, sufficiently
declares; My body which is given for you; My blood which is shed for you, so
is his body given, and his blood shed for the faithful.

Hence then ensues, that to all the faithful, appertains the commandment
of taking, eating The promise is made to all and not to the Apostles only.
and drinking: because he made the promise generally to all* and not only to
the Apostles and Ministers of the Church* And we may see this testified by the
Apostle Saint Paul, speaking at large upon this mystery, these are his words.
For we that are many, 1* Cor. 10. 17.
are one bread and one body: because we all are partakers of one bread.
Wherefore (Ladies) it appears plainly that the body of Jesus Christ, and the
communion of his blood likewise, are not to be given to us in this Sacrament:
but when many faithful shall communicate together, according as Christ Take
away the communion, and the promise is ended.
delivered us an example, with his Apostles. Take away then the communion,
which Jesus Christ himself has ordained, he being the heavenly Lord, Master
and Author of this holy Sacrament: And then the promise there unto annexed,
touching his body and blood, which he has given for all faithful
communicants; has no place at all, but is utterly The right use of the
Sacrament, wherein it consists.
void, For it remains no longer a Sacrament, nor as he ordained it, because
the right use of the Sacrament consists herein: that the faithful should
communicate together, according as he has commanded, saying, Take, eat,
drink ye. etc. this must be done upon necessity, if you would have it to be
a Sacrament, or the same which Jesus Christ has instituted; namely, the
communion of many faithful assistants, to eat and drink all together in this
blessed banquet, for this is the essence of the Sacrament, as you may discern
very apparently.

What is don in the Mass
Let us now come to see, what is done in the Mass. Surely (good Ladies) it is
so far off from being any communion: as it may be rather termed, a kind of
excommunication. For both you and I know, and so do all else, that know what
the Mass is, that the Priest separates himself from all therest of the
assembly, to eat and drink (by him self alone) the bread and wine which he
has consecrated a part: and how does he consecrate them? Insted of
consecration, which ought to be How consecration ought to be done.
done, by preaching and publishing openly and aloude, the promises of our Lord
and Savior, directed, not to the bread and to the wine, which are proposed but
as signs unto us: But to the faithful persons, assisting the communion, and
present there to communicate* Jesus Christ being he that (even then)
consecrates the bread and wine* to make them Sacraments of his body and blood
(by his heavenly Priesthood which yet cease not) and when this mystery is
celebrated according to his institution.

But the Priest deals quite contrary, for he as How the Priest makes his
consecration in the Mass.
if he were afraid to be heard of the people, makes his consecration, by
blowing or breathing upon the bread, and wine, and mutters or mumbles very
softly and low, all the words of his institution. As if it could please the
Lord of truth and life, to have his word murmured out of a dead mouth (as it
were) in celebrating his sanctified mysteries, of whose truth (by this
behavior) there justly may Doubt and question may arise upon such privy
whispering.
arise some doubt or question. Or as if it were offense to him, that stands in
fear of no power whatsoever: to have them pronounced with the loudest voice,
to be heard and understood of all.

In the Gospel, the virtue, nature, and use of Baptism, are expressed clearly
and openly. Jesus Christ, making his Supper, did not mutter in any low voice,
either upon the bread or wine, to divine Mark this, good Ladies
or conjure therinto his body and blood. But he pronounced aloude, and
evidently to his Apostles: That he gave them there his body and his blood,
exhorting them to persevere in the self same kind of action, at all times, or
as often as they should meet to reiterate the same, The remembrance of his
death and passion. Even as if he had been then certainly assured, that no
utility or benefit could be had by Sacraments: except whatsoever was
represented to the eye, might be declared and warranted by the word of God.
For otherwise, it were to abuse the people in a fond kind of devotion; to make
a show of ceremonies before them, and never to deliver or declare what H^w
people may be easily abused.
they signify, and what coherence or agreement they have with truth.

Therefore, when public declaration is made of such mysteries, with a
cheerful predication to edify the hearers, entering into their understanding,
and winning impression in their hearts, by assured persuasion of the promises
accomplishment; Briefly, when the grace of Jesus Christ is pronounced unto us,
and his promises exposed: Even then, and in that instant, does his glorious
power descend, to perform the work, and then is the true consecration acted
indeed. Hereupon Saint Augustine says very well; That the word of
consecration, S. Augustines words concerning consecration.
is the word of faith preached: And that word conjoined with the terrene
outward sign, makes the same a sacrament; Adding presently after, I mean the
word of faith, which we preach.

What consecration then is there in the Mass, when instead of all this,
namely, exposing to the people the recited promises, and declaring aloud the
words of our Saviors institution: it is done in a manner of secret
coniuration, and so are the The Priest coniures in sted of consecrating.
words whispered, which behavior is more proper to charmers, then to be used
in such a holy and divine Sacrament. What shall we then think of them, when
they dare forsake the rule of their Lord and Master, to follow their own
fantasies?

No lawful consecration in the Mass
Seeing then it is so, and that in the Mass there is neither any lawful
consecration, nor (as themselves cannot deny) any such Communion as Jesus
Christ has ordained (for one alone does both eat and drink, and that is the
priest, and one man alone cannot make a Communion): It follows then (dear
Ladies) and very necessarily that the body of Jesus Christ is not in the Mass,
where the Priest communicates by himself. And therefore the bread, which he
makes to be adored then, even as if it were the body indeed of our Lord: is no
such matter, but remains still very bread, even as it was before his
consecration, being neither more or less, then as if it were in any other
place, out of the Churches assembly, and the Priests, and whosoever (for his
own pleasure) should speak the very same words of their institution, upon any
other piece of bread.

And although they persuade themselves, that they have and do hold in their
hands, the very body The Priest has not any part of Christ's body in his bread,
which he makes an Idol of.
of Jesus Christ under the bread, or in the bread, and therefore make the
people to worship it; yet it is most certain, that there is nothing else but
an Idol, and which (without any reason they make a mere imagination of. For
the promise, wherein Jesus Christ offered unto us his body and blood, under the
signs of bread and wine: appertains to none else (as has been already
proved) but only unto the faithful, that receive the same by faith, in the
lawful communion of the Euchariste, celebrating the mystery, according to the
manner, as our heavenly Master did ordain it. Wherefore, they which imagine,
to have any other thing then common bread, without the lawful use of our Lords
Supper: are but abused, and believe mere The people are deceived in the Mass.
dreams, as it can be no otherwise, because they fail of the promise. For
seeing that Jesus Christ promised us, to give us his body in the Sacrament,
when the faithful should communicate together after his institution: we may
not be so vain or idle-headed, as to seek it elsewhere, or according to our
fantasies.

Let such men therefore be admonished, that they cannot excuse themselves of
idolatry, both before God and men: when they are made to worship They worship
a round cake in stead of God.
(as if God himself were substantially present) a round cake of bread, which
is lifted up to be seen, above the shoulders of the Priest, and (with exceeding
great devotion) to be reverenced and adored of all there present.

But Ladies, I have held ye somewhat long in this point, because it is of such
maine importance, yet persuading my self to have said sufficient, albeit not
half so much as I could: I will proceed to discover another wicked Idolatry,
which they She proceeds to another idolatry commutted by the ignorant people.
procure the poor people to commit* even without so much as thinking thereon*
And that is, whereas in their Mass* they should observe the communion in that
kind as our Lord Jesus Christ did first institute it by inniting the people to
communicate with the Priest, they fly from his example, and indeed, (once a
year) they are contented to do so, and that is at Easter, for then the people
shall be The people do communicate but in one kind.
permitted to communicate, and yet it is but of one moitie only of the
Sacrament, wherein likewise they intermingle many fond inventions, yea, and all
the accustomed superstitions of their ordinary Masses, without expounding, or
declaring any part of the mystery to the people.

According to the institution of our Lord in the Sacrament, they should inuit
the people, and breaking the body of Christ, after his example, it should be
truly given to the faithful Communicants, according to the promise of our
Savior. Notwithstanding all this, they will observe their own devised manner,
wherein they can no way The Priests are Idolators and make the people to commit
idolatry.
exempt themselves from being Idolaters, and making the people to commit
Idolatry, in their giving worship to the bare sign. The reason is, because
Jesus Christ in the Sacrament, gave his body to be lookte upon with our souls
eyes, and not to be superstitiously adored in the bread, which is no more but
the outward sign, and (by faith) to be eaten to everlasting life. For (worthy
Ladies) Christ did command no worship to the bread.
Christ did not say, look upon this bread, then take, eat, and worship it:
but he simply said, Take, eat, this is my body.

Therefore whereas the Sacrament should be a help, to list up the
understanding, of the faithful unto heaven, where Christ Jesus is, and no
where else, as concerning his true body, and (from thence) gives himself in
powerful virtue, to enjoy and possess the souls of the faithful, under
those forms by himself assigned: your Romanists do abuse the Supper very
vildlie, and take it in a quite The Romanists do abuse the lords supper.
contrary nature, for they are only pleas'de, with looking upon the bare sign
and worshipping it, taking the thing it self, for that which is merely
signified thereby, answerable to their doctrine of Transubstantiation, merely
forged, against the true nature of all Sacraments.

They seek not to eleuate men's understandings, to the place where Christ
sits at the right hand of his Father, but to lift up their eyes to their
Godlike Idol. Whereas Christ (without all doubt) in instituting this
Sacrament, never addressed his promise Christ directed not his promise to the
bread and wine only.
to the bread and wine simply, thereby to make them become his body and blood,
as has been before declared: But to the faithful communicants, and so
thereby to assure them, that he would give them the true participation and
communion of his body, answerable to that which the blessed Apostle S. Paul
says, he being a most faithful expositor of this mystery. The Cup of
blessing which we bless, is it not the Communion of the blood of Christ? The
bread which we break, is it not the Communion of the body of Christ? 1. Cor.
10. 16.


Me thinks (honorable Ladies) these words should resolve you, that Christ has
comprised nothing else under these signs and elements of bread and wine, but
what was behoouefull for the faithful communicants, to whom the plain
signification directs it self, and whereof true faith does make them
partakers, to vnice themselves spiritually (with a marvelous efficacy) into
the glorious body of our Lord Jesus Christ, to participate (in the end) of all
his benefits, and derive from him life and immortality.

The sum of our Christian doctrine and belief
In these few words, virtuous Ladies, you may behold both what we teach and
believe, that our feeding on Christ, is by faith only, that is: in believing
the words of our Savior, in the use of the Sacrament; whereby we are drawn
much nearer to him, and more stricktly united and incorporated (even by the
incomprehensible virtue of his spirit,) to communicate and partake of all the
benefits of his death, and to be renewed by him, and nourished unto everlasting
life: until such time, as he shall put us into full possession, that is, at
the departure of our souls from this world, and when our bodies shall arise
again, at the day of our general resurrection.

The expected benefit of the Sacrament.
This is the fruit which we make account of, and are persuaded to gather out of
this Sacrament, and whereunto faith serves us as the only instrument: Even as
with hand, eyes, and mouth, to behold, take, and eat Jesus Christ, without
any need of his forsaking the heavens, or of his real appearance under the
forms of bread and wine, and so to communicate himself unto us. Wherefore, to
go and adore the sign, as if the sign only were Jesus Christ himself: Or
that he should descend down from heaven, and be newely formed; for one of
these two must needs ensue by their transubstantiation, which we mayntaine to
be flat Idolatry.

How we do adore Christ in the Sacrament.
Nevertheless, we are taught in Scripture, that Jesus Christ ought to be
adored in the Sacrament, and we do daily and religiously worship him: as
being most especially present in the holy action, even in our spirits and
faith, to unite us unto him, and to impart his blessings to us; when the Supper
is celebrated according to his institution, and we endeavor to have it so still
continued and ministered among us. But the manner of our worship and
adoration, is, in having our souls elevated up to heaven, and thither true
faith is our only conduct, there to behold him as our sovereign assurance. We
look not for him in the naked elements We honor god in bread and wine, as
being his blessings bestowed upon us.
of bread and wine: for there we have no commandment to honor him, but we
rather choose to worship him according as we ought, and that is in spirit and
truth.

Judge now good Madames, where reason abides most, on your side, or ours, and
whether your Priests commit not manifest Idolatry in their actions: when they
receive and admit the people to the communion of a Sacrament, which never was
ordained by Jesus Christ. May not we then well and truly say, that they have
no communion at all, but what is of their own inventions? And that which they
carry about the streets, going in a solemn The Priest carries their Sacrament
about the street.
Procession, is but a round Cake, being closed up in a Box, or Pixe* which
they cause to be adored with great veneration.

It remains now, that we come to the third property, which I have observed
in the Mass, The third property of the Mass
to wit, Sacrilege: which already has been sufficiently discoursed in our
former proceeding, and yet we will note a few observations more. This holy and
divine Sacrament, was instituted to make a Communion of the faithful, in the
body and blood of our blessed Lord, and by celebrating it commonly, in
remembrance of his death and passion. But Noble Ladies, your Priests do
convert The Priests rob and deceive the people.
all to a contrary end, not only in that which they do in the sacrifice; but
in mere robbery and stealth beside. For they take from the people, the
Communion in chief, yea, that which is the principal fruit of this
Sacrament, restraining it to the Priests only: And the people there present,
are made no more but silly spectatours, of that which the Priest does alone by
himself, without knowing, or understanding what he says or does.

The Priests answer for themselves.
I know you will answer me, as (God forgive me for it) I my self have often
done, that the priest, being the public Minister, does communicate in the
names and behalfes, of all that are present at his Mass. Why then let me
(fair Ladies) move this question: Where is any such commandment throughout
the whole book of God, that we should see the Priest to have one Supper for
himself first, and then at his leisure, to communicate another to us? ^urely,
as we cannot live by that which A witty comparison of receiving the Communion.
another eats, but of and by that which we our selves do eat: Even so, as
needful is it for us, that we should communicate in this holy and divine
Sacrament, to live in the true life of Jesus Christ, who has given himself
therein to us; Not that any other there should receive it for us, but that we
ought and should receive it our selves, thereby to have Christ make his
dwelling in us.

We cannot be wiser the our master Christ.
Alas, good Ladies, let us not seek to be wiser then our Lord and Master,
for if we do, it is but in vain. And well you know, that he never said;
Behold the Priest or Minister of the Church, be eats and drinks for you,
and I have so appointed it: But he spoke plainly, without any sophistication,
and said: Take, eat, drink you all of this. And after him, his faithful
Servant Saint Paul, writing to the children (by adoption) among the
Corinthians, said: We are many partakers of one and the same bread. And 1.
Cor. 10. 17.
again, Let every man eat of this bread, and drink of this cup. The
countersaite pretense then, which 1. Cor. 11. 28.
they do allege, can no way cover or mask their sacrilege: because the
commandment is precisely to all faithful people, to take, eat, and drink
in this holy Supper.

Chrysostom. Hom. 18. super cap. 8 2. Cor.
And Saint Chrysostom has spoken very well to this purpose. We are no longer
(says he) under the old Law, where the Priest did eat his portion, and the
people had the rest. But here, one body is given to all, and likewise one cup:
And what soever is in the Eucharist Sacrament, is common as well to the people
as the Priest.

And, gracious Ladies, desire them but to satisfy you in this one particular
point, namely, that if they believe, or give any credit to the Canons of their
own Popes, they cannot then but confess The Popes Canons do confess their
sacrilege.
and acknowledge their sacrilege, for these be their own words: All they
that are present at the Mass, and communicate not, confess themselves to be
excommunicated. For their Canons further say, That Can. peracta de
consecra^dist. 2
the consecration being ended, all are to communicate, or else they are
deprived of entering into the Church. For so did the Apostles set down the
ordinance, and we hold the same in the holy Roman Church.

Moreover, in the Canons that bear the title, By Can. omnes fideles de
consecrat. Did. 1.
the Apostles, it is thus ordained. That all they, which continue in the Church
to the end of Moss, and do not receive the Sacrament: ought to be corrected
as perturbers and disquieters of the Church. According to that which was
ordained in the Counsel of Antioche; That all they which entered into the
Church, should behave themselves well, and hear the Sermon; and if they
abstained from the Sacrament: they ought to be excommunicated, until they had
bin sufficiently chastised Chrysostom. in Hom 3.
for that vice. And therefore Saint Chrysostom, in his Homilies upon the
Epistle of Saint Paul to the Ephesians, does reprove them very sharply, that
in his time would be present in the assembly at the Communion, and yet not
communicate. What say you None suffered to communicate, but the priest only.
to this, sweet Ladies, when you see how many are present with your selves, at
their daily Masses, and yet none of you are suffered to communicate, but the
Priest himself only?

Besides all this, the prayers which they yet use to say in their Mass, do
likewise very sufficiently convince them: for when the Church retained her
wonted purity, the people were then received to the Communion, and behold what
their prayers then contained, and yet do.

Prayers in their mass, making against themselves.
Lord thou have filled and satisfied thy family, with thy holy gifts, to wit,
the Sacrament. And another speaks thus. We being filled and satisfied with the
sacrifice of thy precious body and most holy blood, etc. And another. We pray
thee lord, that these things may be carried by the hands of thy holy* Angel,
unto thy high Altar, (speaking of the oblations of the faithful, in receiving
the bread and wine used in the Sacrament) To the end, that all others as well
as we, that shall receive the participation of the Altar, in the blessed body,
and holy blood of thy Son, may be filled with all happy benedictions.

These are the very true words (dear Ladies) used in their prayers, wherein if
you will not credit me, I desire you to read them your selves, for your
further satisfaction. And doubtless, they would never have spoken in this
manner, if the Priest only had then communicated, as now a days you see he
does. Otherwise, it had been to say one They say one thing, and do another,
merely begutling the people*
thing, and perform the contrary, as you may perceive has happened since: for
now they have utterly deprived the people of the Communion. Tell me then, I
entreat ye, is it not a mockery of God and of the people, to tell them, that
they are pertakers in those gifts of the Altar, and yet (all the while) to
give them iustnothing at all?

In like manner they have provided, that the people shall understand nothing
that they say, for They speak to the people in a strange language.
they speak to them in a strange language: but this is most certain, and I
desire you Sister Ladies, to observe it, that the prayers before mentioned, do
remain yet in the Canon of their Mass, to condemn them of impudence, both
before God and men. So that if a more learned judgment, then my weak woman's
capacity, should search into the original of this evil: it would be found
out (as indeed it is very likely) that their enioyning and constraining the
people, to confess and declare their sins to the Priest, was purposely
intended, before their admission to receive the Sacrament.

God will have us confess our sins to him only.
And this do they also, without any ordenance of God, who commands us, to
confess and declare our sins to him, and require pardon* as he promises to
give the same to all that are truly repentant, assuring and certifying us
thereof, yea, sealing it in our souls and consciences, by his own word in his
Gospel, when he is preached unto us, and when we believe effectually;
whereupon, and in regard whereof, the mynisterie of the Gospel is thus termed
by the Apostle: He has given 2. Cor. 5 18
us the ministry of reconciliation.

The people then finding the burden of sin to be very heavy, as indeed it is,
were vainly persuaded to make a particular numeration of their sins, The
peoples growing to number their sins.
to the Priest or minister of the Church: which growing to a liberty and
license by little and little, by ignorance and malice in their Pastors, the
course thereof was not cut off, as it ought to have been. But yet the people
then were thereby granted this benefit, that they might communicate in the
Sacrament once a year, or twice, or thrice for them of greatest devotion, but
all the residue of the people, must leave the Priest alone at the Altar, there
to communicate by himself.

Where God is neglected, one sin begets another.
And thus one error grew to beget another, when once they began to decline
from the direct paths of perfection, and since then, they have made a custom
of assembling the people together (but not inuiting them to the Communion)
only to hear their Masses said or sung in diverse angles of their Temples, for
which they are not ashamed (and Ladies I am sure you know it perfectly) to
demand a price or valuation for each sever all Mass, a thing most horrible, and
the like never heard of. Thus the Communion of the Sacrament, is not only
violently taken from the people, but the The Sacrament is now made no account
of.
Sacrament it self (by this means) is made no account of. For whereas both
Priest and people ought to meet together in one place, there to hear
together) the declaration of his bitter death and passion, and to participate
(in common) in the Sacrament of this union* O dear Ladies, I cannot speak it
without tears, or you hear it without much hearts grief, if you were as you
should be; That that divine place, I say, should now be become a mere fair
or maket* to traffic and merchandise those sacred blessings, which God out of
his own bounty made a liberail gift of, and freely bestowed upon all his
faithful servant, to their singular comfort and endless consolation.

Another sacrilege committed in the Mass.
But not to wander too far from mine intended purpose, I come now to another
most manifest sacrilege, committed likewise in the Mass, to wit, that in
those Masses, where they do admit the people to the Communion, either at the
feast of Easter, or when they command a general communicating: They then
defraud the people of one part of the Sacrament, namely, the Cup. Oh what an
audacious insolence is this? Jesus Christ distributed the wine, as well as the
bread, when he made his Supper with his Apostles, and spoke he not to make
public notice thereof, when giving them the Cup, he said: Drink you all of
this? And after him, the Apostle left the very same instruction, 1. Cor. 11. 28.
to the Church of Corinth. Let eoh man (says he) prove and examine himself;
and so let him eat of this Bread, and drink of this Cup.

But your Roman disciples, under the shadow of some supposed inconveniences,
(imagined only by themselves, as if they would seem to be wiser than the
Master) have ordained, that the people shall communicate but under one kind,
and that is of the bread only. Is not this an enormous sacrilege, They sunder
what God has joined together.
to separate them a sunder which God has joined together, yea, and by his own
express institution? But let them be well assured, that the Authoures and
favorers of a crime so heinous, shall one day yield a most strickt account
therefore.

Concomita^cy, their co^ned excuse*
True it is, that they allege their Concomitancy, in excuse of this matter,
(a word expressly forged, whereby to maintain their sacrilege) and herein
they seem to avouch, that the blood keeps company with the body, and therefore
is always with the body. But when we answer them, that Jesus Christ knew
this Concomitancy as well as they: and yet notwithstanding, he did not
forbear, to distribute both the signs of Wine and Bread; what reply they
then? Why then they further infer in answer (which indeed can carry it self
for no answer at all) The blood separated from the body.
It was Jesus Christ's will, that in his Supper we should consider his blood
separate, or apart from his body, and that we should represent before our
eyes his death, even as his blood was spilt and shed: And therefore in giving
the Cup, he says: Drink you all of this; For this is my blood of the new
Testament, which is shed for many, for the remission of sins. Matthew. 26. 27.
28.


Now, such Concomitance of the body, and of The contrariety of concomitancy.
the blood, cannot agree or consent with the death of Jesus Christ (because, to
be both in the body, and to be shed out of the body, are contrary things)
wherefore, it necessarily ensues, that that can have no place in the Sacrament,
which brings us directly to the confideration of the death of Jesus Christ,
and guides us not to the effusion of his blood. It behooves then, that we
have the effusion or streaming forth of his precious blood, even as if it were
present before our eyes, if we would celebrate the Sacrament according as
Jesus Christ did ordain it, because (above all) it does most assure us in the
Sacrament, that our sins are forgiven us in his blood, which is our cleansing
and 1. John. 1. 7
washing. But if these reasons may gain no place with you, fair Ladies, nor
them that are both Traditions are their only foundation.
your adversaries and ours, who (for the most part) build only upon
traditions: At least yet, will them to allow the Canons of their Popes, which
do manifestly condemn them in this point* and for a president, behold what is
said in one of the Canons Can. Competimus de consecrat. Did* 2.
of the Pope Gelasius: We have understood, that there are some, who taking
only a portion of the blessed body, do abstain from the Cup of his precious
blood. And because it is not known, upon what superstition they do this: we
will that they shall receive the Sacraments together, or that they abstain and
be barde wholly from them both. For division or separation in so sanctified a
mystery, cannot be committed without very great Sacrilege.

Another Canon speaks thus. You are with us Can. Quia. and Can. In Coena de
consecrat* Did. 1. Can. Sacerdotes. 1. qu. 1.
in the Challice, We take this altogether, we do drink together, for we live
together. And another. The priesls which serve at the Eucharist, shall
distribute the blood of our Lord to the people there, (for so he calls the
Sacrament of the blood.) Whether can they now betake themselves, to seek for
purgation of sacrilege, being thus therein condemned by their own Popes?

Now honorable and renowned Ladies, by these gross and most absurd abuses,
which I have been so bold as to lay open to you, in this Popish kind of
service, called the Mass, filled full with notorious blasphemies, Idolatries,
and sacriledges, as I have in some weak measure shown unto you, and in the
order as they are rancked: you may guess what a many more there are beside,
which would ask a larger repetition, then this poor Epistle of mine at this
time can permit me. Let me put the case to your own judgment, She refers
this matter of the Mass, to the censure of the Ladies themselves.
whether the Mass may be thought to be any lawful Communion in your Church,
or no? Surely, were it but in regard of these alleged abuses, (where of there
wants not store besides) me thinks you should abstain from partaking with
such abominations: Considering, that in shaking hands with such foul deformed
sins, you pollute your souls with all impieties, and by your public
profession of them, you consent and adhere to all their blasphemies, albeit you
are utterly ignorant of them. For here they meet in a full crowde together,
They partake with sin, that seek not to avoid it.
and to all of them, you cry your selves guilty, when you seek no way to
escape out of sinful Sodom, though the flames fly daily and flashe into your
faces.

And I am well assured, that some of you are of my mind, in many of these
recited abuses concerning the Mass, though (as I have done) you will not yet
openly express it, yea, and have in private confessed to me, that your
Priests of Roman pollution, do grosely sin in infinite superstitions,
which they color under clouds of devotion and The Apish gesture and behavior
of the Priests.
sanctity, using such Apish carriage and gesticulations, both in the
celebration of the Mass, and their frivolous preachings, as are no way
conuenable with their profession, that are to entreat on the mysteries of God.
And yet in whatsoever they do or say, both you, and the people do solemnly
assist them as spectatours only, but no understanders, and such are the
greater part of the assembly at Mass. And because they shall not see into
their iugling collusions, they can find both their ears, eyes, and other
senses busied, with music, singing, and ensensing, with diverse other
gestures, which deliver some appearance of religious devotion, only thereby to
beguile and retain simple How highly God is dishonored in their churches*
people. And where is all this done? but even in the Church, where God is to
be worshipped in spirit and truth, and where he has ordained the holy
assembly of his Servants, to edify and nourish all faithful souls, in
common and public praying together, according as every one may well
understand, by faithful expounding and interpreting the word of god,
concerning those mysteries which he has established in his Church: To the end,
that every faithful man and woman, may there receive effectual fruit, both
for the guyding of their lives in christian conversation, and consolation of
their souls here and in heaven.

Of Gods undefiled Church.
Into which Church of God, swept clean and purged from all corrupt pollutions,
and reformed by the rules of his heavenly prescriptions: Honorarable Ladies, I
have at length found the happy entrance, where every dilligent Pastor and
Preacher, do there paynefull and laborious endeavors, to expound and deliver
Gods word purely to the people. And that they may easily understand what is
said unto them, both for the edification of their faith, and further
instruction in all piety, and whereof I myself (to my no little comfort) have
found Her desire of their happy union in faith.
a most plentiful increase among Gods servant, into whose fellowshippe, I
heartily wish that you were all combined.

Moreover, among us, there is not so much as one syllable proffered, either in
public prayer, or explaining gods word, but it is heard, understood, The order
observed in the reformed Churches.
and most affectuously embraced. For nothing is here uttered, which has not
his firm fundation, on the express text of sacred Scripture, or what is
thence truly and vnpartiallie derived necessarily cohering and agreeing
therewith: without any repugnancie to the Articles of the Apostles Creed, or
the direct meaning of the Scriptures. For if any of our Pastors shall presume
to do otherwise, he is grievously censured, and reproved according to good
orders established, for preservation of sound doctrine, and prevention of
intruding men's vain imaginations.

Of the Sacraments of Baptism, and the Lords Supper rejecting the other five.
As concerning the Sacraments, of Baptism and the Lords Supper (for Gods
institution allowing no more, we leave your other five, viz. Confirmation,
Penance, Extreme unction, Orders, and Matrimony, to your Roman Sinagogue,
where they were first devised.) And these other before named, I say, are
administered in the same kind and nature, as they were wholly received from our
Lord and Master: without addition of any thing to their words, or cutting off
any part of their ordinance. And intelligence is publicly delivered to the
people, of the end, efficacy, and utility of them, far from those ungodly
courses practiced among you. Nor is there any other consecration here used, but
holy and devout pravers, in the presence of God and his No private whispering,
as is used in the Mass.
heanenly assembly: The Pastor declaring openly, (and not in any muttering or
coniuring manner) what is then done, and how it stands with the words and
ordinance of our Lord Jesus Christ; proposing and delivering the same so
audibly, that it may be heard of the whole Congregation, and so conveniently
in all points applied, that much godly benefit comes thereby to the
assembled souls at the Sacraments. Where Jesus Christ doubtless does
sanctify the Table, and the Bread and Wine there decently present, to make
them the Sacraments of his body and blood, when the form is thus observed
after his own institution.

How the people are admitted to the communion: and who are excluded.
To this Communion of the Lords holy Supper, all the people present (after
exhortation, to prepare their coming thither, in true repentance and firm
faith in Gods promises) are freely and very lovingly admitted. And none are
excluded from this heavenly Banquet, but such as are notoriously known for
profane people, of wicked and vild life, or rebellious to all good orders and
Discipline established by authority, and the Reverend Fathers of the Church,
whose care and diligence for the good thereof, at all times and seasons is very
great and painful. And (Noble Ladies) the Bread and Wine, in all reverend
manner, as our Lord appointed it, is round about distributed to every
assistant, without impayring the least jot of the institution. There is no
request made, that those things may Far from that which is used in Popery,
be carried thence by an Angel, and presented upon the high Altar: Our souls
do assure us, by a lively faith, that Jesus Christ is in heaven, sitting at
the glorious right hand of his Father, and all the Communicants in our
Christian assembly, are so instructed and resolved, and to heaven do they
eleuate both their eyes and minds, contemplating their Lord and Savior there,
and hoping to partake of eternal life there with him, whereof the present
action is a sure pledge and earnest penny. Thus do we pronounce Christ's
death and passion, thus do we acknowledge the effusion and shedding of his
blood, whereof the Bread broken, and Wine delivered in the Cup or Challice
(for we are not Ceremonious of either word, because (in Gods fear) either of
them is to us indifferent) remains to us as a perfect remembrance, and the
fruits thereof (we hope) do continue among us, and so (with thankfulness)
we all receive his benefits.

And worthy Ladies, because (it may be) you would gladly know, what other
obseruatio^s there are in Gods Church, which induced my conversion, Her further
offer to the Ladies.
and in time may draw others: As a very young Scholar, scarcely yet well
intred, I will set ye down a brief summarie, of so many, as my weak
memory, and the brevity of time will permit me.

No invocation upon saints, but on the everliving God, in trinity of persons.
Here is no invocation upon any Saints, no, not upon the blessed Virgin Marie:
yet both of her, and all other Gods chosen Saints, we hold that reverend
estimation, which we are commanded to do. The adoration and worship here
used, is to the only everliving and eternal God, and according as he has
manifested himself in his word, to wit: the Father, the Son and the
sanctified Spirit, or holy Ghost. One only and true God, in these three
persons or Hypostasis, in whose name likewise all here are baptized.

No allowance of images, but that only which God has appointed.
Here are no other Images admitted into our Temples, but that only which our
great God has consecrated to himselse, for his own pecuculiar use, and to
remain for ever. And that is the Preaching of the Gospel, with the true use
of the Sacraments instituted by him: whereby we discern the nature of God,
and his good will toward us, more lively and better figured in the whole
Mysteryes of our Redemption, then they can be described in a million of wodden
or carved Images, or in any other matter whatsoever.

No intercession, but to Christ only.
Neither is there recourse made to any other intercession, for obtaining Gods
favor unto us, but to Jesus Christ's intercession only, he being our alone
Mediator and Advocate. And he 1. John. 2. 2.
is likewise the only reconciliation for our sins, and we present none
other but him to God, in all our prayers either private or public. Nor is
here acknowledged any other purgation or Purgatory, but only the blood of
the self same Jesus Christ: Thus are we cleansed, by undoubted faith in him,
accompanied with true and unfeigned repentance, and that is to be done in this
life only, which is the time both for believing, and of well doing.

No sacrifice but Christ Jesus only.
In like manner, here is no confession made of any other oblation, sacrifice
or satisfaction, whereby to abolish, deface and wipe out our sins: but that
alone, which Jesus Christ made once for all, upon the tree of his Cross to GOD
his Father. Nor do we here hold it expedient or needful, that there should
be any superstitious countenance, renewing or daily reiteration thereof: In
regard, that he never gave any such charge to any mortal man. For we are
assured, that his own sacrifice is daily fresh, and in full efficacy, to
obtain grace for us, remission of our sins, and life everlasting. For though
Romans 2. 3.
he dyed once for us poor wretched sinners, he lives yet again at this day,
and for ever, and sits at the right hand of God his father, to make
continual intercession for us.

What kind of confession is used in this Church
As for the order of Confession, which is here observed, and none other else
acknowledged in this Church, it is in this manner. When we assemble and meet
together, we make a public and solemn confession of our sins to God: who
gives us also true absolution of them, by his h^ly Gospel, when we (being
heartily repentant) receive by faith his undoubted promises, according as they
are davlie (for that purpose) preached and delivered unto us, by the Pastors
and ministers of Gods Church, being congregated in our Ecclesiastical
assemblyes.

Of the means of our salvation.
In brief (honorable Ladies) here is neither taught, or believed, any other
means for our salvation; then that which God himself has revealed in his
holy word. And that is, to embrace and receive in a sanctified faith, Working
by love; the graces and mercies of God Galat. 5. 6.
offered and presented to us in Jesus Christ, by the Gospel: The preaching
wereof we receive, and give attention unto with all reverence, as being that
only doctrine, which is able to save our souls. And we are persuaded, that
to turn aside (how little soever it be) from Jesus Christ's omnisufficient
sacrifice, to our own works, satisfactions, deseruings, or the merits of
Saints and their sufferings, or any other means whatsoever, to confide, or put
any hope at all therein of our salvation: were flatly to forsake the chief
corner stone, and to build upon another foundation, then God himself has
laid. For there is not any other name under Heaven, whereby we can or shall
be saved, but the alone name of Jesus Christ. For be was delivered to death
for our sins, and is risen again for our justification; 1. Cor. 3. 11 Act.
4. 12.
there cannot be (then) salvation in another. If this doctrine be heretical,
as your Roman Jesuits, and Priests stick not to proclayme it: An especial
note to be observed.
they must then pronounce the holy Apostle Saint Paul to be an heretic;
Saint Peter and all the rest of the Apostles, to be Heretics, who preached
the very same, and have left it so to us in their own writings, whereof God
himself will one day be the Judge.

Of the truth and sincerity of this doctrine.
Censure now, discreet and well-iudging Ladies, if the singleness, and pure
simplicity of this approved doctrine, maintained point by point, and
warranted by the word of God, (whereunto it has always submitted it self,
and dare avouch her true title in the face of any Counsel:) do deserve those
slanders and calumniations, which the Devil by his blasphemous brood, does
daily belch forth against it. And in the other Scale of your impartial
opinion, (holding an even hand to poyze the weight, and an upright soul, to
conceive the worth of both rightly) consider the now Romish Religion, the
practices, blasphemies, and abuses therein committed, and then let God direct
and order your verdict.

The pomp and ceremony of Popery.
For I will not so wrong the hope I have of you, rashly to forethink, that you
will be ouerawed with pomp of Ceremonies, thunder cracks of curses, the case
and hollow closure for monstrous impieties: Neither that you will be
scrupulous of spirit, as to let the spacious spreading title of their Church,
without any truth or equity to warrant it, altogether sway you in your
opinion. The nature of the church of Christ.
For the Church of Christ sets not forth her self to sale by the luster and
pomp of exterior ornament, or by antiquity or such like allegations; No, nor
by continued succession of Popes and Prelates, whereof you hear what daily
boast they make. But her glory and triumph is, in the purity of doctrine,
which is as the only soul of the Church, and in the sincere administration of
the Sacraments, all consonant and agreeing, with the voice of her great
shepherd and Bishop of our souls, our Lord Jesus Christ. And he faith; Ioh.
10. 4. 5
That his sheep do know his voice, and they will not listen or follow a
stranger. This (Ladies) is the true touchstone of judgment, whereby to
discern Gold from corrupted metal, to know the true Church from the false:
And not by Crosses by Miters, Cardinals, bonnets, or height of Steeples.

That Reverend and worthy Bishop of Thouars, who having forsaken the Sinagogue
of Satan's, and (by his great learning and industrious pains) discovered such
a hideous heap of abominations, used and maintained in the church of Rome:
he, next unto Gods good spirit (which was the principal and only motive) was
the secondary means of my conversion, as (God have the glory for it) he has
prevailed with diverse other A book of much learning and main importance, which
likewise will be very shortly published in English.
Lords and Ladies beside, and in time may prove to shake the proud Empire of
the Pope. His learned labors so lately printed, wherein he opens all the pack
of paradoxicall Popery, against Bellarmine, and all the Roman faction of
Jesuits, conuincing them by their own arguments and writing: I am bold
(worthy Ladies) to send you with this Epistle. And where I comfarre too short
of such sufficiency as in such a cause as this is required: peruse his pains
for your further satisfaction, being printed in your own native tongue for
your better apprehension, and so plainly set down, as it cannot but be
easily understood of you.

Thus have I, noble Ladies, both briefly, and as the nature of an Epistle
would permit me, declared the gross absurdities and abuses in the Mass, the
blasphemies, Idolatries, and sacriledges therein committed, that God in his
good time may open your eyes, and let you see the way out of that brutish
Babylon. I have also (in a mean measure) showed you the order and government
of our reformed Church, as well for the Ministry and doctrine thereof, as
also for the near affinity and true form, which therein is continually used
and observed, with the example of the chief Schoole-maister Jesus Christ
himself, and confirmed by his blessed Apostles: As if it would please God to
rank you with us, the truth should make more manifest to you.

Truth needs no secret corners.
For here is nothing done palliated, or in secret conspiring, to betray poor
peoples opinions, and deceive their souls: All our actions are openly exposed
even to the apparent view of God and men, yea, even in all things, that
concern the order and policy of Gods*Church. Here, women and the weakest
capacities, may understand whatsoever is done or said: for here is no strange
Language used among us. And S. Paul says: Strange 1. Cor. 14. 22.
tongues are for a sign, not to them that believe, but unto Infidels that
beleeuenot.

Her conclusion to the Ladies.
I confess, honorable Ladies* that my discourse has extended it self beyond
the purposed limitation: but indeed, the merit of the subject handled; may
plead my pardon one way, and the endeared affection I bear to you, with
desire of your conversion (for your souls saving health) I trust will safely
support me the other way. If God have chosen me as his meanest instrument, to
work but the very least measure of your better instruction: his name have the
glory, and his powerful word the deserved praise, which carries much more
weight and efficacy, then men's smoothest eloquence, or the very subtillest
arguments produced to the contrary: whether it be of antiquity, or
universality, of Counsels, of Traditions, or whatsoever else. If now (this
day) you will listen to his voice, and not harden your hearts; If you be not
careless of his gift, by me his unworthy servant offered unto you; If you close
not up your eyes, against the clear light that shines every where; If you
quench not the spirit, which God himself has kindled in you: All will redound
to your endless consolation, and you be renowned to future posterities. Fear
therefore (dear Ladies) this heavy threat of the divine wisdom. Prou. 1. 24.
25. 26. 27.
Because I have called, and you have refused; I have stretched out mine hand,
and you would not regard; But have despised all my counsel, and would none of
my correction: I will laugh at your destruction, and mock when your fear
comes. Then shall you call upon me, but I will not answer, they shall seek
me early, but they shall not find me. etc.

From Thouars this 1. of June. 1608.
FINIS.

