AN ANSWER TO THE CALVMNIOVS LETTER AND ERroneous propositiouns of an apostat
named M. Io. Hammiltoun Composed by M. WILLIAM FOVLER

ROMANS 1.16. I am not ashamed of the Euangel of JESUS CHRIST For it is the power
of God unto Saluatioun, to every ane that believes.

Imprentit at Edinburgh be Robert Lekprewick dwelling at the Netherbow. 1581.

TO THE RICHT HONORABLE FRANCES Earl BOTHVEL, Lord MA^L^, CHRYCHTOVN
LIDDISDAILL etc. and grit Admiral of Scotland. M. WILLIAMS FOVLER wissheth
incres of honor and perpetual felicity.
IT is not without good reasoun, nather contrair commendable example RICHT
HONORABLE, that I presume to dedicat this present treatise, being the first
fruitis of my ingyne unto our Lordschip. For this hes been ane daily practice
and an old custom at all times be them obseruit, quha with grit travel and
eirnest diligence hes profited in letters: that quhensoeuer at any time they ar
myndit to commit their laubours unto licht, they do harbor them under the
countenance and cover the^ under the authority of sum noble personage. mouit
theirto be diverse considerations, pairtly to procure sum defense and
protectioun to their works: Pairtly to purches sum commendatioun to them selfis.

This being thoroughly weyit and dewly be me considerit I have takin the boldness
through example, by the dedicatioun heirof to acknawledge our Lordschip as an
may worthy patroun of my good and Godly meanings.

And as I am encouragit sumquhat be example, so I am not a lytill heirto
inforcit by ressoun. For seeing my self to be wholly addictit unto our Lordship,
al yt then quhilk ather I am willing to accomplisch or able to perform, dois
justly appertene ow. My dewtie crauis na les althoght our commendable vertewis
deserves mair, quhilks if I war of any ability to frame them so decently by
tongue, as our Lordschip practices them commendablie be work, I wald think my
self contentit in my concait. Bot sa it is, that I rather confess my
imbecillitie heirin by schamefast silence, then to impair our Lordschippis
praises by scarcity of words. Thairfoir leuand the rehearsel of thais vertewis
quhairwith our Lordship is adornit to be decorit with gritter eloquence, I will
not cease continually to meruell at them quhilkis now I can not sufficiently
commend.

My houpe mekill ineressis that their my laubours salbe mair freindly acceptit
be our Lordschip, then any wayis disdainfully misly kit. For having understand
both be our Lordschips letters, and be the report of other gentlemen, quhat
grit remembrance ow have daily of me, conioynit with a singular favor and a
may eirnist love: of the quhilk I have na small assurance, I may be certain,
that our Lordschip will als courteously raceaue this present (being the
significatioun of my guide mind and plege of my effectionat service) as I offer
it willingly* And so vpoun the consideratioun of my dewtie, and upon the
considence of our Lordschips accustomit courtesy, I have takin the boldness to
decore this treatise with our Lordschips noble Name. This leaving to trouble
our Lordschip any longer, I commit ow to God, who send ow a goodly increase in
vertow and a prosperous return to our country.

From EDINBVRGH the second day of IVNIE. our Lordschippis ma^^ affectionat to
command. M. WILLIAME FOVLER.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER
Being compelled to leave france, be ye cruel persuit of papists after my
arryuing to this Country, their did cum into my hands an letter derected to
our Ministers, replenished with calu^nies quhilk quhan they had perused, they
thocht it expedient that I should answer thairto, for that the argument of that
letter did concern my self. I not willing to deny their requeist, quhom in
every way I should reverence: and being mair cairfull to satisfy their desire,
then affrayit of other menis reports, have under takin that quhilk I have done.

Bot that ow may understand with quhat ordour we have procedit in this
apology. e sall know that we have in his calumnious letter sum things as being
may false, suppressit with silence: other things as having sum probability,
bot it na treuth we have so confuted yt nothing remanis quhairin this Godles
Apostat may justify him self against me, or falsely allege for farther
defense. And seeing that with his calumnious letter their ar certain erroneous
propositions conioynit. I have refellit the^ be this method. In placing first
his propositioun, to the quhilk derectly I oppone a contrair plat, thairefter I
do come to the probations of his propositions, quhilks are ather for the may
pairt impertinently brocht forth of the scripteurs, or falsely wrastit out of
the docteurs Lykewayis I have adducit the citation of the autorities as he hes
placit them, that his error and ignorance may the mair appeir. In end I
conclude confirming my awin plat.

Now thairfor freindly Reader I beseik ow effecteously that e wald not
miscontrew my guide mening nor mislyke my labors heirin, bot to accept them in
guide pairt. I crave for my dilygence bot a freindlie acceptance of our courtesy
e can give me na less.

I confess in deid yt an Scoller of tender eirs, of waik discretion of raw
iudgemnt, of small countenance, and litil understanding can not pyke mekill
praise for his travel.

Bot good mettels are not to be misly kit, thocht they be takin out from the
dustie earth. The things quhilks I have weill spokkin are not to be reiectit
althocht I want an exterior grauite. If any for my newnes thinks worser of me
the^ I was willi^g to deserve and if yair be sum yt for my youth will contem me,
and it they not being ignorant that nemo repent summus extitit. I am content
(they being abusit ather by malice in detracting, or by lake of discretioun in
discerning) to abide their censeur. Bot as many things cums to pass contrair
the houp and beyond the expectatioun of man, so it may happin heirin against my
fear. My aduersar steared up with enragit affectioun, and be the malicious
mynds of vthers, thocht to bereave me of my life, bot prased be God the success
was better. Through his calumnious and may sclanderous writing, he purposed
to have drownit me in perpetual ignominy: Bot it hes fallin out other ways.
The mair yat his malice appears: my honor farther (Louit be the Lord) is
aduancit. For as he that straik JASON on the stomak thin king to slay him, brak
his impostume with the straik, quhairby he recovered his health: euin sa it hes
hapnit with my aduersare* His horrible cruelty and detestabil wickedness hes
purchest me no small commt^datioun. ANTISTHENES sentence cums weil into mind,
for he said that al persons had ather great necessity of good friends or
enuyous enemies: for freindis in admonishing, and enemies in blaming, ar the
cause that men withdraw them from vice. And suirlye in my awin persoun I have
found this proverb true, Virescit vulnere virtus. For had not the occasion been
offered be this apostat peraduenteur I had not profited sa veil in this study,
nor been sa weill occupyit in this subject, nather had I procurit sa grit
praise of sum, as he is dishonorit of all. Bot I knawe yt he was desirous that
his fame micht be spread, and name knawin in doing evil. as HEROSTRATVS in
burning the Temple of DIANA. And it it may fair with him, as with TR^SIMA^HVS,
both to be put to shame and silence.

Faultis in the answer to his Epistle, escaped in Prenting to be correctit
after this sort.
PAge 1. line 22. grit grit grief, reid grit grief. ly. 29, is reid hes. Pa. 1.
ly. 5. their. R ather page 2. line. 26. rote. reid Root. Page. 6, ly. 3. in
quhatsumeuer. reid in quhatsumeuer company, Line 32. accomplices, reid
accomplices. Page 8. ly. 35. amends, reid amends be word. Page, 10. ly. 16.
preguant, reid pregna^t. ly. 17. though. R. through Page 13, ly. 35, assofiat,
reid associat. Page 16, ly, 2. ignonie, reid ignominy.
Faults in the propositions.
Page 1. lyn^. 9. fermo^s. reid sermons. Page 3. anticedent. reid antecedent.
Page 7. ly. 23. benefeits, reid benefeit, Page 8. line 22. their, reid this.
Page 12. line 22. prositioun, reid propositioun. Page 14. line 7. proposion.
reid propositionn. Page 18. line 9. secta. reid stella. Page 19. line 15.
t^uds. reid tends. deuoaioun reid deuotioun. page 22. ly. 17. follouit, reid
flouit. ly. 22 increditeurs, reid incredulus. Page 23. ly. 30. also laitly.
reid absolutely. Page 24. in the margen in his 13. quest, and 2. chap. ly. 32.
we cannot be helpit. reid we may be helpit. Page 25. ly. 16 this, reid their.
Page 28. ly. 5. verity now, reid verity. Pay. 29. ly. 7. apProbre, reid.
opprobr^ iiii,
ANE ANSWER UNTO THE EPISTLE.
IT is a saying na les commoun then commonly prouit true: he quha passes the
bounds of schamefastnes, and brekes the borders of modesty, may ever afterwart
laufully be impudent. For the nature of ungodly men, be raschful temeritie and
insupportabill audacitie, destitute of the fear of God, not retening in their
actions their honesty or just measure, but willingly despysing reasoun,
searches vicious extrimities, quhairby they endeuoir tha me selves not only to
put to executioun be violent force, all vice and beastly crueltye, Quhilk ather
yairto be perverse men's counsal are persuadit, or be their awin cankred
effectionis preassit, not also fostering their foolish folly with yair furious
fantesies, employes yair haill power, travel and diligence, calumniously to
selander, and sclanderously to blaspheme partly them, aganist quhome iniustly
sic violent beastlines yai haif wrocht, partly vthers be ye like schameles
impudency to quhome sic outrageous mischief, and inhumane cruelty, justly is
displesant. quhilk of lait be example mair nor manifest is ratiseit, And in
experience be an ungodly apostat, an filthy and impure pest of man confirmit.
Sua it is (loving Reader) I being in Paris inhumanlie inuadit, and be this
bouchour (with vthairs accumpaneit) cruelly persecut, quhisk unto yame, quha
did behald sic outrageous dealing gave ane large matter of sorrow: and to vthair
godly men in Scotland, an ampill occasion of grit grit grief, quhairof freindly
being admonishit, and be sum sharply reprouit, despysing ye ane, and
contemning ye vthair, rejecting all admonitions quhairby to repentance he micht
been brocht, now laitly agane his evil will not being changit, nor h^^ malicious
mind appaisit be a doggishe rage and enraged dispite, as for his last despair
geuin a fairweil to al godliness and honesty, nocht only my fame and honor
(quhilk I micht sufferit with patience) bot Gods servants blasphemously is
defamit, and his true religioun sacrilegiously impugnit.

This evidently may apeir by his treatise in notabil act of apostasy and ye
may calumnious that ever was (...)* the injurious superscriptio^ quhairof
gave me not samekil the occasioun of lauchter (being mair superstitious nor
religious) then the contents yairof ministered unto me the matter of meruel,
quhilk men wald belief, him for to have it written be an ardent desire and zele
of verity, then throuch ostentatioun or arrogance, les nor his vicious life,
and vnbridelit behavior war mair knawin, nor his deuot affection manifest. Be
ye quhilk proudly puffed up, and arrogantly inspyrit, mair abundant he is in
detr^cting nor in honoring: and in defaming mair copious, the^ in deuly
praising. Althocht in it nathing he can crave, or justly to him vendicat yairin
That is his, injuries, Lies, calumnies, periories, and dispytefull inuectiues
being exceptit as (rafehe ^ilars, Seditious doctrene, Ve^nom of intoxecat
breists, plattring lyis, reuthles Dogs, calu^nious Impostures Foolisch,
Mischeauous, dangerous Errors, impoysonit breastis, hideous trumpeters of
Seditioun, affectionat ministers of Lies, Rauing headis Abominabill, Damnabill,
Detestabill, Condemnabill heresies, Theaues, Reuars, and Stealers) with vyair
infinite blasphemous wordis almaist the hail contents of his treatise, vnwordy
to be written, and vncumly to be rehearsit, gatherit out of the bordel,
quhairin he ever may ha^tit, to defame Christis servants, and to blaspheme
his kirk. O iniquity of times O corruptioun of manners! O shameless malice that
passis measure! Are their ye fruits of Philosophy? Is this rauing railing
decent for an master, quhais life sold be ane example of modesty and
gravity, it makes him self the mirror of lies, the Trumpet of calumnies, and
ye rote of vanity. shameless Fool, whair does folly force thee yat thou sold
be so immoderat in displaying filthely ye force of thy venomful tongue?
miserabil ar tha Discipillis (monstrous heid) quha by thee are reuled and
instructed, for quhar may they else learn of the yan yat quhilk yai hear? or
how can thou instruct yame verteously, quha fa vitiously dois live? bot
quhair honesty can have na suey: modesty can have na strenth. This thy writing
ye vmbre and shadow of thy actionis is void of wit, and thy railing without
res^un, yat gif be judgment punishment sold be decernit, with torments rather
thou art to be confoundit, then with arguments confuted. Treuth it is indeid that
from all replying my (...) did mekil abhor, willing to quench ye remembrance
of sa immoderit injuries, be forgetfulness, and to bury ye memory of sa grit
offenses be obliuioun. it les, nor throuch my silence, his lies perhappis sold
have sic advantage of ye treuth, yat, yat quhilk maliciously be writ and dead
in effect be hes performit, as rycht sold be receauit. I am forced to enter in
defense, to satesfie be just report thais quhais heartis are not preocupat be
his false narratioun, nor minds preuentit be his feineid falshoode.

How hard and difficil a thing it is unto yame, quha be ye singular mercy of
yair God, hes engrauft in yair hearts, an detestatioun of erroneus doctrine, and
superstitious idolatry, quyetly, without dissembling grit cummer and perrelous
danger, to remain in Paris ye tresonabill treasons, ye bloody massacars, the
unnatural slauchters, and horribill murders yair co^mittit will testify, and
ma ages yan yis will beir record. for Satan with sic cruel rage, hes swa enragit
and enflamit his seruantis aganist ye members of Christ, yat nayer yair
vntowardenes can be assuagit by ye fear of Gods punishments, nor malicious
minds repressit, be his fearful threatenings, nor yair wickedness coolit be his
terribill judgments, ea yair ungodliness hes sa far increassit, yat ye hope of
saluatioun can not alure yame from it, for sa grit hes been yair vnbridelit
ferue^cie to pleis yair master, and sa lytil yair thochtles cair to pleis our
God. Sa vehement hes been yair thrist after ye blood of Christ's people, and it
not quenchit: sa grit is yair drouth, but it never slokned: seeing yat daily ye
devil mouis ye minds of his awin to all horrible impiety, and ye hearts of
sic wood tigers to commit al wyld cruelty. Paris, Rouen, Toulouse, Orleane,
Bordeaux with vyair innumerabill Touns in France, may (allace) serve for
ouercertane proof in yis matter, and my self for a witness. Sua ye case is
(gentill Reader) and so ye matter stands.

That fervent zeal in professing Christ's Euangel, and contemption of
Idolatry, quhair with God of his mercy from my outheid endeued me, procurit
aganis me ye envy, and indignation of idolatrous Papists quha perceuing yat
nather yair friuole arguments, nor alluring promeissis, micht peswade me to
abjure Christ's true religioun, and embrace yair feineit fantasyes, and forgit
inventions, took at lenth counsall to follow yair accustomit course, and in
place of christian admonitioun to let me feel sic stripes, as of their
foirfathers the people of God rasauit of before, quha seikand the occasioun how
under pretense of particularities they micht color their cruelty, and cover
their hatred kendled against me for the cause of religion, The whisperings
whereof not being unto me secreit, nather the takins obscure, I auoidit warly,
and from sic matters willingly absteanit, as might have mouit them to execute
yair enterprise. quhairthrouch their rage being for a space deserrit mair then
degestit, at last an Hammiltoun (a modest man) be sum Scottis papeists
co^mandit, and be others requeistit, following yair advise to accomplish their
desire, and persewing his awin determinatioun to execute his tyranie, be their
monis fulfillit it.

To my Lord ARBROITH master IOHNE HAY a Iesuist presented an buik composed be
him contening certain questions proponit to our ministers, I entering in my
Lords Chalmer (quhairin also this apostat was present) raceauit of master
Iohne Hay another likewise, and sum of the articles thairof being disputed
betuix us, and be him mair querrelously discussit nor modestly rasonit, We fell
after this prolixt disputatioun, into that article quhairby the autour of the
Buik affermes the making of Images not to be contrair unto the command of God.
my Lord (mouit be ane constant zele of religioun) replyit, that not only it
was derectly against the command of God, but also the making of them was
expressly contrair his Majesty, he sophistically be a vain distinctioun of
representatioun and adoratioun, confuslie confounding altogether, eludit Gods
co^mandiment. My Lord desiring me to ansuer: be a familiar argument I insistit
in the contrair. that cumming from S. Germains port, I did sie blind men
praying ^ reverent prostratioun of their bodeis, and discouerit headis unto the
Image their placeit. And thairfoir been inforcit freindlye to demand of him, I
did require if any thing could be represented to the blind men? na thing, in
respect that nather the sensles Image did them behald, before quhilk they war
prostrat, nather their eyes being blind and destitute of sight, could regard
it. Restis then yt quhilk conveniently of this argument insewis, that this
their actioun can not be cailit representatioun, bot adoratioun and
worshipping, expressly and derectly contrair to the command. My Lord glaidly
considerit the force of the argument, and seeing thairby our blind rabbi, so
suddenly overcome, that to vex his lordship with farther disputation he micht
not, nather be ausuer to molest me, courteously rais^out of his Chyre, and as I
had triumphit, embraced me: quhairat our master apostat hauelie commouit, and
raging within him self, immediately came running from the otherside of the
Chalmer, desiring me again to receipt my argument. I in place of praise and
victory, desiring only the treuth to haif place, fulfillit his desire, he then
in this privy conference, thinking that he might boldly injury me, nane being
present to beir record yair to, na other wise answerit to the consequence (the^
away damnable heretic, I sal pluk our Luggs, I sal ding out our harnes,) to
ye quhilk brauling quyetlie I replyit, that he wald offend in performing his
promises, nather wald I with patience suffer sie bragful bosting if he alane
wald discharge him self of the same. This querrulous conference thus being
endit, I taking my leave of the company, departit. And their after did conuene
with him, and as he couartlie performit, that quhilk with baldnes he promised:
I on ye other part sumquhat commouit tuik leave at my awin hand of acquentance
to visit his ear. Quhairof our country men (I mean thais yat ather wilfully
hes abiurit their Faith, or be a blind zeal impugnis the faming) being
advertised, and grittumlie rejoicing, that heirby occasion commodiously was
offered, to perform that quhilk befoir was deuisit, neglectit a time, bot their
hail wittis spedely imploiit, to cause this apostat to put their counsel to
execution. To yat end diverse conuentionis were halden, declaring how I contemnit
their religioun, and micht not by any moyen persuade me to embrace it. And how
they micht peradventure brokin my Lord Arbroith of his constancy, and sindrie
times easily persuadit him to their faction, if yat I had not by insisting in
the contrair withstand their purposis, and to agrauat the cause, and to make me
ye mair odius, yai forgit infinite leis and falls accusations aganist me. Finaly
to persuade this burrio to tak the matter in hand thai laid befoir his eyes how
grittumly al Catholikkis should be obleist unto him, and how far his auin name
yairby sold be aduancit. Bot it was not hard to consel hi^, quha in ye matter
was redier to obey then yai air to command or requeist: quhair of he gave
evident signs in quhatsu^euer he come in, of ye quhilk I not being ignorant,
and thinking yt Dogs rather barquet throuch custo^e the^ throch cruelty mair of
use than of wildnes, secuirly I contemnit his brauling and lichtlye regardit
his boosting, seeing gif yat querrell war to be debaitit (In ye quhilk al men if
occasion require, sold spend yair lives) or yat controversy decydit, betuixt
me and him only, air be disputatioun or vthar extraordinar means: nather
should he find me fant in ye last, nor sluggishe in ye former. Neueryeles his
malice encressing, diverse times be deceat he awaitit on me, accompaneit with a
grit number of young men, of ye quhllk sum gentil men having knawlege, socht ye
way to stay his enterprise (wisely considering yat it was easy to him with grit
force to overcome me in Paris, quhilk in friar places and alane had perhappis
not been so facill) and purchessit ten dayis abstinence, it he observing the
reul approuit amongs yame, yat na Faith sold be kepit unto yame quhome yai
esteem as heretics. The third day after quhilk was ye 18 day of March. 1580.
I not weil instructed in yat point, yat mistrust was ye Mother of Security,
suddenly was onbeset and at vnwaris inuadit be him and 13 debauchit scollers:
quha violenly casting yair hands all with one preis upon my body and thrawing me
to ye ground, tred me under yair feite. The pepill astonyit at sic lawles
outrage, be sa money persounis aganist me alane execute. Demandit Whisperingly,
quhat menit sic horribill ha^dling and cruel demaning of me? quhat was ye
occasion yairof? yai esteming yat ye pepill wald have succourit me to hinder
yair help, cryit out yat I was a Huguenot, a Heretic, a contemnar of ye
Saints and a blasphemer of ye virgen Marie. quhairat yai war sa commouit, yat
enragitly yai conioynit yair force with yair fury, presing fordwart every on to
strike me, and to plague me mair yan to release me of my pane. But wald God yis
had been all, quhilk was over mekill, or ye rest a lie, quhilk is to monstrous.
For yis Butchour with his accomplices backwart trailit me through ye rewes, with
their feit and edges of their Muiles batit on my face, with pennerinkhornes and
batons upon my head, to the effusion of my blood in grit quantaty,
disfigurating of my visage and wounding of my body. And albeit that from the
college of ^orteret throuch the rue d' amandeis be the head of the place
Maubert shamefullie thai trailit me, every man and woman running from the
market places to behald sic a spectakil, it thai never desistit in raiing fra
injuries, nor in persewing fra cruelty. For be oppin force they drew me in the
college of Nauer, and their shamefullye in the presence of sax hundredth
dischargit their beistlines. ea his cruelty with his accomplices tyranny, sa far
extendit, yt my breist was na m^ir sparit nor my bak, my craig nor my face, and
being by my bluid quhilk fell in my throt, almaist wirried, the power of my
body rather overcome and strenth tyrit, the^ my courage faileing, how I
dispysit his creueltie sa far as my voice micht extend. ( Composito ad
hilaritatem vultu subridens dixi excute excute tyrannidem apostata, corpus
habes in hoc saeuito animum tamen inuictumgero, nec me un quam huius supplicij
ob Christi euangelum pudebit.) To count the sorows quhilk I sustenit, and
reakning the pleagues quhilk I receuit, I am certane wald rather breid an
admiratioun, then an belief. But I mean not (gentle Reders) to offend our guide
and modest minds with the rehersall of sic immoderat injuries, quhose ears I
am assured dois glow, and haertis alreddy greuin at that quhilk I have vterit,
And it I know that sic horrible and monstrous beistlyncs is hard to be credeit
of them quha knawes not the nature of their cruel tigers. But the Lord is my
witness befoir quhais justice sait I most compeir, that in this hail discourse I
haif not excedit the bounds of treuth. Nather I think yat any manis tongue is
abill to atteine to the hundredth pairt of the particularis, quhilk at that
present this poor carcage suffered.

I have likewise many noble, leirnit, wise, and godly countriemen to beir me
record heirin. Sic as The Lord of ARBROITH. The Earl of CRAVFVRD, The Master
of MARCHAL, The Lord of LENDORS, and Sir JAMES BALFOVR, quhome I name all to
their grit honor, quhairof for their courtesy, christian love, and freindly
confort shawin unto to me in my hauie distres I am co^pellit of deutie to be
cairful sa lang as my life sal lest. Quhair foir referring this matter to their
testimony I will be short, seeing they are worthy of credit in a gritter
matter nor this alreddy bel^uit. It is not my purpose cairfully to refell,
quhatsoeuar this filthy apostat falsely in his vennemous and godles letter, hes
writtin, seeing the honorable gentilmen befoir namit have alredie conuictit him
to be a shamful liar.

Now I can not sufficiently meruel how this feinit Wose, dar be so bauld as to
cover sic cruel dealing with the Gabart of the Rectoris command. Truly if the
matter war weil tryit in ye maturinis, he wald be found an unthankful suppost
to staene the honnour of his chief Magistrar, with sic outrageous tyranie. This
I am able to prove, how boldly I can not tell, how truly I know, that the
executioun of this beistlie fact came sooner unto the Rectors ears: then any
complaint maid aganist me. not geuin at the requeist of this unnatural Dog, a
vndiscreit Rector wald sa far have extendit his authority, I wald know of this
impudent lier, quhat color the Rector could pretend to sie suddane commands.
In matters of Religion he is na ordinar judge: for sic cases are referrit unto
the court of Parliament, befoir the quhilk willingly I wald have comperit,
knawing assuredly that be the King his edict of pacificatioun, quhilk sic vnbry
delit and debordit Brigans dois contem, and by the cleirnes of my conscience
void of crime, I wald esilie been absoluit: If he will allege that in
particular iniureis the Rectors authority was justly interponit. it be na Law
he can make it just to condem a man befoir he be ather hard or seen.

As concerning the injuries quhilk faslie he aledgis to be done unto him be
that may modest godly and leirnit man Master NICOLL DALGLEISCH. in that
point he hes als leudly and lounlie lyit, as in all ye rest. For as this
apostats debordit and vicious life, bent to contentioun and strife, ever
farther from modesty, then from vanity did abhor: sua the manners and good
conuersatioun of Master NICOL DALGLEISCH war adornit with sobriety and
wisdom. ea be the contrair it is not unknown to many in PARIS how proudly
this unnatural scoffing fool, iniuryit yat godly man, and bow impude^tlie his
arguments being in a lauful form proponit, admittit the two former sumptionis,
and the conclusion ansuerit, Ergo glaikis, with other injurious words, quhairof
he was compellit be his chief to make ame^^^^ althoht in heart he retenit still
his auld venom.

I pas of purpose many railing words, quhilk be his vntamit tongue he blastis
out against Gods servants with out occasion, for sic an obscure Harlot yai never
thought worthy to be namit from that place, And returning unto those, quhilks it
with blawen cheakis, riftingly he speuis forth against me, specialy in braiding
unto me unthankfulness as if yat I had maid guide cheir with him, in his house,
thairby giving to understand how familiarly he leuith with them, quh^ hes
zelously professed the treuth. I beseik ow (gentil reader) to have me in this
point appardonit, quhilk he wald have importen sum mystery, seeing for ye
justification of my cause, and for ye discharging of my honor, I am forcit to
discover yt quhilk glaidly vtherwise I wald conceal: and vrgit to reuele mair
than my modesty wald permit, or my honestye allow. It chanset me indeid at my
first arryuing to Paris, for certain private business, to seek a cousing of his in
his chalmer. at quhat time he being at his parisien brekfast, offered unto me
sic coursly common courtesy, as na man almaist without ruid and ungentle
churlishnes, can neglect. I being inforcit be his inportune requeist, drank
with him in deid, bot sa far from ryatous surfeiting and grit gluttony, as I
micht weil have receauit my part of an other disione, now seeing he is not
aschamed to object unto me sic small triffils, vnwordy to be rehearsit not sa
mekil proceading of love, as of common custom, thou may easily (gentle Reader)
consider the man's nature.

As touching the familiarity betuix him and others of our religioun: I wald
know quhither it were of love, or of hypocrisy? of love he can not say, seeing
he professis him self a deadly ennemie to al them that steadfastly mainteanis
the cause of God. And thairfor promisis to provide new matter to our Ministers,
meaning thairby, to slaye hurt or persicute sum man. Besides that commonly in
his drukkin lawings, he brags bosts and threatnis, that I sal be the last
protestant, that ever sal lycht a candil in Paris. And thairfoir by necessary
consequence we may conclud yt it is by plain dissimulation, that this suppost
of satan Iniyres him self in the company of them that fears Cod, wating
thairby the occasion to cut their throttis.

It is sumquat of verity, that I have seen sum, and heard vthers qu^ he (...)
familiar with him bot only for this and siclyke (...) his (...) in his words
(...) and his oftentation in his learning (...) exit (...) my Prince and my
gounlynit ^ith (...) mirrily to mock his folly. For I know my self that his
(...) pend for (...) space of half (...) did in weary (...) meruelling that
^mbitiosly (...) his (...) to compose some epigramins in the commendatioun of
him in philosophy^. that they might (...) put in the first leif of his (...)
cipil being als (...) versit in poesi^, as the master yairof is altogether
ignorant, gatherit yth^r men's epigramias in praise of poesy. The (...) eir
master thinking the verse to have a good trot* and ^ophing them r^ther by
their sounding, nor ^cansing them be just measure, approuit them althocht
impertinent to the purpose, and thocht they w^^ ^greable to be placit befoir
his buik, until my brother master IOHME GIDD^^ (quhome for our tend^r love and
for the good expectatioun of his preguant spirit, I name) reiding the vers^^ be
ye master though oftentatioun to him of^^ed did admonische him, that they war
not congruant unto the matter nor agreeable unto the subject. For the discipils
intentioun being to (...) his master, Hammiltou^ in philos^phy gave him the
commendation of a poet: sa far yat he did say in him numina quinque latent.
quhen rather december furiae.

^ Thairfoir Hammiltou^ unto quhome my pen now I derect, v^ nocht insolently,
favor not thy self, vanely ^ot consider that (...) for thy good conditions,
gentle qualities, or grit wisdom (...) thy society or do embrace thy
company, quhen sum only to remarqu^ thy shameless vanity, and vthers is
possible be to ^in the agan^ and d^lyuer thee from the devils claws ar bot
with the familiar, desist th^^ from thy calumnion railing and leave of
Hammiltoun thy (...) calumnies, make an end at last of thy (...) and measure
thy (...) by thy awin soote. It is ambitioun that gydes thee, and (...) blinds
thee. A^end by correctioun rather, th^n fail be pers^ueran^^ malice, estemit
not solid loving or cumly commendatioun, that yair to thou may espyre by the
detracting of my learing. For albeit far from any on the an part, my youthful
age t^rough her course for a (...) (the (...) of my birth (...) on the other,
thou gross cre^^ure, of (...) then of knawledg, (...) been in the Schools of
philosophy befoir my (...) it pra^^t be God we are not of (...) my side
(without arrog^ncie be it spok^n (...) that will be d^^^^it by thy sophistie,
or stainit by thy calu^nie^.

A^ concerning my predicesseurt. Quhat may thou charge the^ with quhairof can
thou accuis the ^^^half they b^ne traitors unto their Kings; couspyrit tha
iyair slaughters^ or have they slain the Kingi^ Majesty's Roge^^^^ not. For
other wayis al Scotland wald convict the of a lie. My ^randfather, culd shir
and Father: e and before the their progi^itours on both the sides, sa lang as
they had the usury of this lif^ hes been obedient subjects unto their Kings,
and borne of^ices as magistrat^ in the Town of Edinburgh, their honesty and
gu^d behavior toward all men, were alsu^il kna^in togidder with their
faithfulness toward their Superiors as the treasone cruelty and murders of
thy nerrest blood is manifest. culd thy brother (the Chappelier) absolu^ him
from the cruel murder of the Kings (...) guhen he being at his cruel
slaughter in Striuiling lay stikk (...) in a gutters but allac^ the death was
over honorabil that should preuentit the gallous, yairfor Partius ista viris
tamen obiectate memento. To return to the purpose, Amangs my forbear^, thou
art not able to name any, that ever was attemptit with sic crimes as thou falsely
layis unto their charge. If I wald give place unto my affections, or in
referring evil words wald with thee contend, from the qhuilk debait my will
dois mekil abhor, I might iusty paint thee in thy awin couleurs, and (...)
thy ^win manners odious unto thy (...) nor in so doing I wald peradue^tur offend
the ears of the ^odly, being yairto enforcit by thy selanderus railing. For if
ather honesty might mouit the, or re^^oun had possessit th^e, besid^s the
tinsal of thy estimatioun, thou should no^ causit ^ther men's honors to cum in
hazard, rather by irreue^^^^ scuffing and i^^ting tants by malice speuit forth
against Gods predestinatioun, maid it als foolishelie, as ignorantly, a defense
for thy mischief ignorantly I say, because to quhome significations of words are
not knawin, th^gs be them signified are not veil understand. For in place of
prescience and fore knawledge, scoffingly thou vsis predestination, being of
the significatioun may ignorant. To the quhilk I ansuer (correcting the in
the word quhairin lourdly thou hes errit) yat God did not compel thee to
execuit sic outrage against me, nather by fatal destiny driu^^ the (as thou
ieasts) to selander his Ministers, and to impugn his tr^uth (for thairunto thy
wicked will and cankred affectioun was bent) is because God did foirknaw and
has fortald, that his servants sulde be persecut be trubles and suffer ignomie
for his saik: It was not contrar unto his will that thou should sua have done.
Albeit heirfoir thou is not fry from crime, seeing sic excusis Judas micht have
vsit in betraying Christ* For wicked men do not obey God, how soever they put
to executioun tha things quhilk the Lord our God him self has appointed. For
obedience proceadeth of a volunti^r affectioun trusting to please him. And it
thou persistand in thy foolishness, fearing to for get thy vanity vnaduyslie
maks thy self guilty of trasoun, in ratefiing and approving the murder of the
first Regent. For in scorning me, thus wayis thou writes. that I rather
demereit to be put in the Calendar of our Bybill, seeing that I was persecuit be
thee as an enemy to Religioun, nor vthers quha war slain for particulare
feid, etc not for Religioun. We are not ignorant of quhome thou wrytis: defame
him baldly, Inuy his honor desist not from thy railing, approve mair nor
regret his murder, the dome is decernit, the sentence is pronuncit: the
gallous is abiding thee.

Alwayisas it is the leist portioun of my will to ansuer to sic scuffings: sua
it is not ye may part of my deutie to repres thy scandaleux tongue For as
thairin na end culd be had: sua y is writing thairby s^ld excres to an grit
volume. it for eschewing of prolixity quhilk may procure tidiousnes, and for
the pretermission of thy calumious railing, quhilk may breid offense, I will
end. Protesting alwayis we be hard concerning the ancient Docteurs. quhais
autorities nather we contemn nor dois reject, hot willingly them embraces.
prouyding that thai be co^form^ble to the word of God, agreabil every an with
other, and not dissenting from them selfs.

Attour quhair m^trimonie thou improuis, and chastity wald persuad because
that thou hes set down dissimulation as a settled sentence, esilie I can not be
persua dit, that thou hes discommendit in the Ministers that honorable band of
Matrimony, be God autoriti^, be Christ decorit, and by the haly Gaist in the
mouth of the Apostle honorit. For as it war a wolrd to creddit that Clodius
earnest^ye reasonit of pudicitie: sua it is a wounderful thing to hear
Hammiltoun a common harlot commend Chastity. Thy harlatrie is als oppinly
knawin to us in Scotland and in France: as thou art thairof in thy awin
conscience privy. ea mair assuredly I affeirme that our Ministers als modestly
vsis their awin Wyffes, as thou have filthely abusit vthers. Look, inquyre and
search the hail estait of the Ministry of Scotland, n^ne sal thou find quhais
life and conuersatioun is not als mekil to be commendit, as thine with the hail
pasturs of our Cacolyke kirk is to be dispraisit In this matter na other proof
I will use than bring our awin Writars for confirming of the same. Quha
testifies that our Kirks was as bordels, our Altars as beds for Whordome, and
the Priests with Froiris under pretense of confessing, ather seruit as
Pandaroussis to corrupt W^men* or as Adulterars to abuse them. This halynes (I
will not say opin wickedness) was not in private pasturs on lie, bet also in
Abbots Byschops, Cardi^ils and Paps, the fauorisiers, permitters and defendars
of sic ^normities. For Pape sixtiis gave full dispensatioun for fornications
and adulteries that was fifthely vsit in Italy in his time: sua they fell not in
the horrible crime of Sodomie* all Hoores for the tollerance of their bordellis
as ^^ufull tributairs payit him monethlye in Gold. The Epitaphes of their
libidinous lust and lycherous lives ar it extant as a monument of their
commendable chastetie. As of Pape Sixtus.

Sixte iaces tandem, deflent tua busta cyno^di,
Scortaque Lenones, alea, vina, venus.
And of the innatural incest of Pape Alexander.
Hoc iacet in tumulo, lucretia nomine, Sed re
Thais, Alexandri filia, Sponsa, nurus.
Their ar the signs of the chastity of the Roman Prelates quha thinks it les
sin to enterteine Harlots than to assofiat them self in the band of
Matrimony. Their at the takens of their grit continency, and the (...) or
their e^poysoned doctrine quhilk being but a mas of (...) As abusi^ the vogue
of christian Religioun. it n^n^ their is of s^ little judgment, that will their
eyes open: or sa expert of knauledge, that can not perceive it to be only an
heip of trumperies, deceits, and superstitious abusis. In confirmatioun
quhairof, as our ministers courageously racea^is thy vnaduisit offer: sua they
being assured of victory, cryis prouokes and appels ou all to disputatioun.
And for ya^ effect I on their behalf, desires thee (if be thy behavior thou
may come in sic creddit) that thou requeist thy Prince, that license may be
impetrat fra the King of France and his counsel to our ministeris to cum to
France, quhairthrough sall ense^ tua grit commoditeis besides many vthers, the
an in saving of expensis, the other in releauing of our bodies from travel.
Providing ^lwayes that we saife condu^t pledges be grantit for the security of
their bodies and preseruatioun of their lives, because they have plain proof
and daily experience of our falls promises and deceatfull treasons; that without
grit danger upon naked promisis and ane bair letter, they can not hazard them
selfs. For the grit malice e haif conceived against them: and the cruel
murder of JOHN^ HV^ and I^ROME of PRAGA shamefully betryit at the counsall of
Constance, with the iressonable and horrible massacars daily committit with the
violatioun of our faith contrair the seruands of Christ; makis them at last to
become mair wise and mair circumspect than of before. Neuertheless, I think
that this offer of disputatioun be not be the rest of our Scottis papists
proponit, bot vanely and vousteously be o^ offered. For then diffidently and
may dispairitly they wald do, if they wald commit to sic an ignorant asne the
may vnlearnit am^ngs them all any argument yair of. Delight not Hammiltoun
in thy pregnant wit I will not say thy folishe vanity? bot a small prick of a
praine may sca^l the wind in blaw in bleddars

In end, as void and eruptie vess^ls rings may and tattels loudest^ even so
thou of gritter ostentarioun then of doctrine, of arrogancy then of knawledge,
of rasher railing then of solid reason, bosteously after thy blasphemies thus
wayis co^cludes, if thou prove not Christ's ^uangel, or our true Religioun
quhilk truly we profes, an^ heip of (...) condemn it her^sies thou with the
rest (...) without mercy being execut) to suffer the (...) aduent^re thin^ tha^
zealously thou hes this (...) thy dissimulatioun and conscience in Religioun by
thy intercepted le^ter veil instructed. can (...) dence unto thy promisis then
thy (...) in Religioun (...) besides thee (...) prefer rit not thy particulare
utility befoir Gods (...), and thy private commodity before his worshipping.
Bot if it may be demed be thee, and judged by vthers, that mair by accusatioun,
then through just reason I sa suspect thee. let thy awin settled judgment give
proof heirin. and that thou sold have na cause ayther to accuse me in
depriving thy dytement, or in wrais^ing thy words. I have set down a portioun
of thy letter directed unto ane. quhais name for sindry respectis I have
conceald.

I pray ^ow heir the saying of a fool. ^ kn^w the answer of the wise King of
France, (qui neseit distimula^e nescit regn^re. And Cicero say is, meant
^uivsque est quisqu^, as have ^ne ^^ of paragraph is of the ^it. De dolo m^lo,
and how it differs fra the (...). To win a Baronie of land e will find out (...)
to the preser^atioun of our s^ul My he^d raues after (...)

How can you defend thy impiety masquet hypocreit ^hou canst^y remove from us
that persuasioun that thou art not an (...) and epicurien^ is their any sa far
from knawledge, or sa dotish? sa sensles, o^ sa ignorant, that may not
manifestly and by plain confessioun, decerne thy ^odles conscience? Whether if
I suspect the wrangfully, or nocht: let thy awin words beir record and the
indifferent reade^ Judge.

I will not use sarder writing, either in reproving thy foolish^es, refelling
thy calum^ies, or in brydling thy venomous tongue. bot ending, return unto
that, from the quhilk the ground of this apology hes flowit. That albeit the
wicked nature of godles men, enemies to all true Religioun, travels be al moyen
to oppres the professors of the same it earnestly we call unto God that
thairby we may nocht be discouragit calling to remembrance, we are aduertisit
our condition to be, for to awake by approbri^, ea in doing good calumniously
to be accusit. And that God hes this Law imposit and inioynit unto his (...)
beleues in him* (...) not only (...) molestit, tro^^^^, (...) also with ignomie
and infemie condemnit to the death. And seeing our conditioun is not (...) the
Apostles, quha war ^st^mit as superfluities of the w^rld, we think it ^a shame
howsoever for the (...) of the (...), persecuit, or to be co^figurat with our
Master and Savior (...) qusin was (...) for us, and to (...) ^n (...) ingloir
that in his persoun all quhilk we for the testimony of the tr^uth endure, sal
be turnit to our joy, and conuerrit to our comfort. To whom be everlasting
gloir, with all honor, and praise, for ever.

S. LVKE, XVII. It can not be auoydit bot that offenses will come, but woe be to
him through whom they come. It war better for him yat a grit milstons war
hangit about hit neck, and that he was cast into the Sea. etc.
HEIR FOLLOW IS YE CONFVTATIOVN OF HIS ERRONEOVS CONCLVSIONS WHAIR OF This is
the first.
^Thair it only a^ haly and Catholic Kirk dispersit on the face of the hail
earth, out of the quhilk their can (...) be sa^it.

SEEING thy purpose and intentioun is: partly to acqueir vain gloir, and to be
reputed leiruit amangs the ignorants; and partly by opponing thy self
maliciously contrair the verity, to impugn impudently Christ's euangel. I
meruel not a lytill qnhat spreit sold have mouit thee, that iniustly thou
sold hane traducit our Ministers, and be sic propositiouns traualit (if thou
micht) to conwict them: as if they ather in their sermons has teachit, or in
their doctreine denyit, to be ane holy and Catholic Kirk. throuch the world
dispersit, out of the quhilk, their is na saluatioun. Bot ever constantlye to
hais affirmit, that they quha wald be heritours of the Father, behouit to be in
the fameil and housald of the mother. In the quhilk it hes pleasit God to
regenerat them whom he has designed to be coheritours with his son Christ
Jesus. Bot let us expend the consequence quhilk of this proposition thou dois
attex, and of the places impertinently brought forth of ye scriptures and
confusly out of the doctors for probatioun.

ADVERSAR. Then if ^hair is ^a saluatioun out of the Catholic Kirk necessarly
it dois follow what ather the Kirk of Scotland, laitlie erectit be Knox and
Paul Methuer, and vthers of their sect is not the true kirk or else all our
forfathers quha dyit in the Roman Kirk ar condemnit in s^ull and body to the
eternal fire of hell, because they never embraced si^ a religioun as this
caluenisme.

ANSWER. I answer unto this desperate conclusioun, that our forbears were in the
same Kirk. that we are now. And albeit they vnderstuid not sa weil sindry heads
of Religioun as was requyrit: Cyp lib 2. cp. 3.
it with S. Ciprian I say, that although they by ignorance and simplicity
offend it; it the clemency and mercy of the Lord may have them app^rdonit.
Quhairvnto we their Children can not aspyre. seeing we may not pretend ignorance
for our defense, being of sic superstition and abusis admonished, and at this
time faithfully in the verity i^structed. it thairto nocht the les resisting
by a deliberat malice.

THE SECOVND. The Kirk of Christ is the sure rock of ver^le, Sa it is
impossible Scho can err in on^ thing pertenand to men's Saluatioun.
Quhat is the meaning of this apostat I sal schortly expone The papists
affirms that the Kirk of Christ, euin in sic thigs as it decreits or decernis
without the word of God, can not err. Our assertioun upon this head is this,
In admitting sa far the Kirk dois not err, quhen her awin wisdom being
remouit, sho suffers her self through the haly spirit, be ye word of God to be
gouernit. the controversy remains in this point we will have the authority of
the Kirk annexit to the word of God, and subject to the voice of her Spouse:
they will have it above the word, and consequently above the halye Gaist: (...)
14 ^ 16.
because inseperablie they ar co^ioynit. Bot to our probatio^s.

ADV. This conclusioun is confirmit in S. Matthew, quhair Christ promisit to
Peter that the gates of hell sal not preuail against his Kirk.

ANS. We confess that Christ hes promised that the ports and gaits of he sal not
preuail against the elect. That is, that they sall not alluterly overthrow
them, albeit in sum things and for a time they may fall.

Ioh. 14.
AD. And S. Iohne say is I sall pray the Father and he sal give them the haly
Spreit to remain with them for ever.

AN. I answer that this promeis of Christ is maid unto the elect and chosin
children. nether it so to them, but they leaning vpoun their awin judgment ar
often times suffered to fall, both in doctrinee and manners. Quhilk insirmityes
notwithstanding sal na way preiudge their saluatioun. As by monye hundereth
examples of the seruands of God is prouin. Sa yat the Spreit of God is never
alluterly remouit from them. Bot it sumtyme they feil the weight of their
imperfections where in nevertheless that Heuinly seid of regeneratioun do
thar^fter utter the self.

AD And be S* Paul to Tim calling the Kirk the pillar and sure ground of
verity.

AN. I answer that it is not so called absolntly, and without all respect so
pronuncit by the Apostle, for then Christ war not the sure grund and corner
stane thairof, quhilk is not only may absurd to affirm: bot contrair the
Epistle to Corinth, and Ephesi. thairfore to ansuer directly: in this respect
ye kirk is the sure ground of verity. Because Gods word, and haly scrip teurs
quhilks are the verity, vphalds the Kirk.

AD. Of this conclusioun it is notoriously knawin to al vneffectionat me, that
the ministers of Scotland a^ blasphemous against Gods promeis* quhen they
teach and preiche that the Kirk of God may err in any head of Saluatioun.

AN. Blasphemous mouth, thy foolish judgment and blindness conioynit with
extreme malice heirby mair suffiaiently is discovered. Our minds we have
declarit upon this matter, unto to the quhilk we adioyne, that Christ hes left
his word unto his Kirk, even as an compass in an Schip. quhairunto if the
Mariners have regard, the Schip dois not err nor go astray. Let in lykewaise
the word of God suffice for an Compass quhairby the Kirk may be reulit that
sho err not.

THE. III. PROPOSITIOVN. The members of Christ's Kirk in the earth are not only
the guide quha as inheriteurs of Christ's Kingdom in heaven, bot also the evil
sa lang as they keip vnttie with the rest of Christ's flock.
I confess that the visible Kirk of God dois consist of good and evil men.
quha be Christ ar comparit to cauff and corn heipit in a barn together. bot a
may absurd opinioun it is, and damnable in the self, for to affirm the
wicked to keip unity of faith with the Godly, or that they ar the members of
Christ. For seeing Christ's flock be faith ar fauit: the wicked retaining with
them (as thou hes written) the unity of Faith: most necessarlie be sauit.

AD. Of this the c^ft of the Ministers may be discouerit, quha perceauing
themselves condemnit by the vesible Kirk. feineis to themselfs an ^uuisible.

AN. Be quhat kind of argumentatioun is this cons^quent inferrit? I requyrit
better judgment of a xx eirs dialectatiner the^ in his anticedent he should have
repugnantia in adiccto and of the saming scoffing calumny is brought in, rather
then a formell conclusioun. I afferme that our Kirkes are veseble, their
doctreine hard, and obedience sa far as our corruptit natures may suffer geuin
thairto, and themselves are seen.

THE IIII PROPO. The Kirk of God ^n the earth of necessity man be veseble and
knawi^ through ye w^rld.
I sall convince be just and force bill arguments that quhilk thou wald obtrud
unto us to wit, visibelitie to be an true and essential note of the Kirk of
God. For be diverse ways the visible kirk may be obscured. of ye quhik w^ laik
not sufficient examples both in haly scripturs and profane histories. Quha
knawes not that under the days of King Achab, the Kirk of God was so obscurit,
that the Propheit Elias he^uely complainit, nane was left on life except him
that did honor God? And quha is ignorant of that cruelty in the dayis of Nero
(Domitian, Dece, Diocletian, Maximilian, Valerian, Aurelian, Valentian,
Rhedaguse, Gersorich, Attill^, quhairby the persecutioun of the faithful was
so feirfull that the haill number of the Christians being almaist deuourit by
the sword, the remanent had na Kirkis to assemble themselves to the service of
their God? In constantinus age the resident of the faithful was so small: that
the Empriour mokking Athanasius and Liberius said, that they only perturbit the
peace and tranquillity of the haill earth. Unto whom Liberius ansuered, not
because O Empriour we are few in number and alane, the worser is our faith.
Moreover as the Kirk of God may be oppressed be persecution: sua it may ba
obscured by the darkness and clouds of superstitious errors, brought in be
corrupted pasteurs, subject unto ignorance and malice, quhairthrow the Euangel
of Christ ^^uely may nocht appeir. For S Paull him self testifyis that in the
latter days the Antichrist sall sit in the mids of her.

I micht use in this argument money ^autorities of ancient writers for
probatioun, les nor I sold seem to be tedious. Thairfoir I return unto the
rest of his reasones. and to that of Isaias, Isai. ^.
quhilk he abusis, restoring that place corrupted be him to the a win puretie.

In the last days ^he mountain of the house of the Lord sathe prepari^^^n
(...) ^ontains and exalted above all h^^^, and all nations fall come unto it.

I answer that the excellency of the mount Sion, quhairof thy Prophet speiks,
pertains little or nothing unto the perpetual visibilitie of the Kirk. Bot that
in this respect it was prefeirit befoir all vthair mountains. Because that
their christ was first preichit be his Apostles. To quhais doctr^ine ^fterwart
the hail world gave obedience. And their for it is said, that all nations sall
flow thairunto. Not that al men come rinning to Jerusalem; M^^. ^.
bot that forsaking their errors, returned unto the truth, quhilk at Jerusalem
first was preichit.

AD. And S. Matthew saying that an eytie puildi^ upon an montain^ can not be hid.

AN. This place nathing establisseth thy error. For he yat hes a spoink of
judgment may perceive, that Christ only speaks in that place of the m^ners
and conuersatioun of the Apostil^. Mat. 10.


AD Christ commands also to have recours vato the Kirk and s^haw unto it
[quhilk war impossible. les nor it war visible) if that he quha has offendit
the man na satisfaction for p^iuat admonitioun.

AN. Demanding of the, I answer with that Godly and lei^nit man Master THOMAS
SMETOVN. whether heirfoir should we have recourse to an universal or particular
Kirk? To an universal we may nocht, because nather it nor the members thairof
can be conuenit togidder in an place. And a particulare be the process of time
may decay and be obscurit, And thairfor not visible, sa be this argument thou
may prove little, seeing Christ in that place alludis unto the Senate of the
Iewis, quha Inquyrit of the manners of every man.

AD. S. Augustene promis this cl^irly saying, ^. Augu. devn^ ^ccl^.
^ is against the promeis of Christ that ather his Kirk be vnuesible or only
knawin as ours in Gene^^ and in Scotland in certe co^ne^^ of the wa^ld.

AN. I grant that in S. August. age the Kirk of God very much did floorish.
And justly he reprouis the donatists, quha did rejoice in their fewnes,
afferming that the Kirk of God be only in a corner of Aphrica, and that they
for the sinnis of v^hers, war s^parat from the communioun of the ^arld. it if
thou speaks of our age, without grit shame thou can not defend the Kirk of God
to be visible all whair, for small and lytill is the part of the world, few ar
the regi^uns of the earth, in ye quhilk Christ is visiblie proffessit, his
words preachit, and his Sacraments deuly administratit. And gritter is the
number of hethens, Chrisi^^. 4 in Is^iam.
Jews and Turks, than of Christians.

AD. S. Chrysostom sayi s that it is als impossible that the Kirk of God be
hid, as the Sun^ to be destitute of his light.

AN. Bot quha daily dois not see Apostat that the light of the Sune is obscurit
and darknit be the thikness of trublit cluds and heirof thairfoir a better
consequence, with gritter reason may be collected: Euin as the brichtnes of the
Sone by troublit motions in the air may be hinderit and darknit: sa the kirk of
God either be external persecutioun of ennemyis, or by the in wart corruptioun
of pasteurs for sum space appeir not, until God of his grace repress the fury
of his enemies, and abolische by the brichtnes of his Word the ignorance and
corruptioun of pasteurs.

AD. Of this we gathe^ that since the Ministers are constranit to conf^sse
their Synagog to been v^uesible at the leist mair nor an 1000, eir it is*
impossible it can be the true Kirk.

AN. I will answer thy blasphemyis with silence, resraning from replying evil
words, les unwittingly I be conuincit of that quhilk I have alreddy condemnit
in thee. to the matter I affirm our doctrine not to be new, for it is als
ancient as y^ faith quhilk we profess nor our Kirks vnuisible^ this 1000. eir.
For we baldly defend, that in na age sense the Pape (the sone of perditioun)
hes usurped sic tyrannical power, that their hes not been sum, quhome God
steare up in opponing them against his tyranny And althoght this lang time as
S. Paull has forespokin, he hes sittin in the midst of the tempill. His
antiquity of possessioun, sold not turn the verytie in a^use. Seeing ane
hours prescriptioun, may sufice to anull his papedome.

THE V. PRO. *In the true and Cathol^k Kirk their hes been and sal be ever an
continual successious of faithful Docteurs and Pasteur^.
That the confutatioun of of this conclusioun the mair easily may be concaued,
and for eschewing of tha things, quhilks may retain the lecteur in suspense,
we mind shortly to intrreat of the matter it self. We planely deny (quhairof
we fall assign guide reasons) that the Kirk of God is decernit by personal
successioun, a note convenient to al Kirks, Grecians Assyrians, Armenians, and
Ethiopians: quhilkis the Pape hes condemnit in money heads of heresy. And mair
proper, to indaisme, and turcisme: then to the Kirk of Christ, as afterwart
salbe briefly declarit.

AD. This is prouit by S. Paul to the ^phesi. 4. chap that Christ gave to his
Kirki^ sum Apostlis, sum prophets, Evangelists, Pasteurs and docteurs.

AN. We acknawledge Hammiltoun Christ's gifts, and benefeits, be the quhilks
cairfully and beneficially he hes indeuit his Kirk. Bot it is far socht to
collect heirof, an continual sue cessioun from Pape, to Pape.

AD. And in S ^ath. quhair Christ say is to his Apostles I sathe with ou to the
end of the world. of the quhilk this thou infers Sua that gif the Apostlis did
not remain in their a win persons as they did not. it is necessare that they
ramanit in their successeurs unto the latter d ^ y.

AN O profound judgment! Bot seeing I will not tak upon me, to alter thy words,
I leave them by thy self to be corrected, and thy mind farther to be
explained, quhilk of it self is vain, dark and obscure. For I wald thou
fatiss^it my petition quhilk is necessar. Whither did the Apostles remain in
their successors bodily or spiritually? spiritually they micht not: Seeing it
is the Spreit of God, and not of the Apostles, that should remaine*rests then
that bodily and substantialie, quhilke is false.

AD. August, S. Augu. epist. ^65
prouis be this argument the Donastis to be Schismatiques because they ^culd
shaw^ na ^successioun of lawful pasleurs sen Christ's dayis.

AN. Treuth it is that augusteine e^teames it to be ane grit benifites of God
and solid praise and commendatioun to the Kirk, that from Peter's days, and the
Apostles, they war unto his age, a successioun of lanfull pasteurs. but he
never repu^it personal successioun, to be an may proper, necessare, and in
fallabill note of the kirk, for he him self affirms the contrair s^ying (...)
^ill not prove our Kir^s, De v^it ^^cl. ^^.
^ther by successioun of Bishops, autoriti^s of councels, or be the number of
miracles and visions, but be the prescriuit ^ords of the euangel. For if it ^ar
an necessar and may propre not of the kirk; whairlyneall successioun war,
their also should be the Kirk of God. This reciprocatioun most be, for thou
ea^teamis it to be proprium quarto modo. The Scrybes then and Pharisees
personally and lynealie discending from Aaron and Moses(in quhais chyre
ordinarily and successively they sat) quha crucesyit Christ should be the true
Kirk. I do not approve this reasoun but our for-argument standing true, it is
inuincibill* in end, if ever the authority of any kirk micht been aduancit by
personal successioun, it was Jerusalem: seeing it was promisit, that the Lord
for ever should inhabit yat ^empil. and thairfor be this word the ^e^pil the
Temple of the Lord, they opponit the^ unto the Prophets. bot we read in the 7
chap. of ^eremie quhat was answerit. Finally granting (without prejudice to
the verity) lyneal sue cessioun to be an true note to the kirk, we acknawledge
it to make mair for our defense, then for our poursuit considering that our
pasteurs succeadis personally to quhatsume^er hes b^rne office in Christ's
Kirk: and in doctreine, unto Christ and his Apostels, and unto all vthairs,
that after them treulie hes professed the same word.

THE VI. PRO. Am^ng^ all the pa^t^ar^ of the Kirk the preacipall hes been the
Bischops, sense Chri^te^ day^^. 6.
Their propositioun dois utter thy shameless ignorance, understanding not quhat
the names of BYSCHOPS and ELDAR^ means. Quhilk sumtymes both by the Scripteur
of God, and ^ncient W^ytars, war sa confundit, as the ane was indifferent lie
takin for ^he other, as leirnitlie prouis Hierome vpoun the first to Titus*
Esterwart the names war so deny dit, that be the word BYSCHOP they only
vnderstuid the quha laubor^t in preaching the word. And by the ELDARS tha, quh
h^d the C^nsure of maner^. In this last sense if the word be t^kin It is true,
that the BYSCHOPS a^ chief amangs all Pasturs and that the Elders ar subject
unto them and sua ^nderstands Ignatius ad Philad. and Augusteine ^ryting of
Aerius. but I pray thee good master ^ammiltoun, quhair red thou that by the
scripteur of God they should be inequal^tie amangs true By shops, that is, the
faithful preachers of Gods word^read over, consider the m^ter a litill b^tter,
and yairefter give me an degest answer.

THE. VII. PROPOSITIOVN. Among^ all Bysh^p^ the Bishop of Rome (...) ^^toritie
and iurisdictioun. 7
This propos^tioun verry of be ^odlie men hes been discussit and now l^^the by
that singular leirnit man Master THOMAS SMETOVN lear^itlie ref^ted: that to
travel in this treatise in the desoluing of the same, wald appear almaist
superflous, if his malicious mind war satisfyit and ^alumnies repressit.
Quhilk althocht it be hard to do, seeing by reasoun it can not be contentit: it
^a far as in writ, by sum objections it is decla^it, with gritter modesty I
will answer, then he with injurious words hes obiectit. Bot of a thing I wald
admoi^she the ^e^er or I proceadit farther, seeing the probations of this
propositioun ar sa confus^^e patchit together, that scarcesi^ d^stinctlie they
can be confuted, for tha pl^ces quhilk sold been befo^r, this apostat hes
placit behind: and tha quhilk sold have been placit behind, ^r placit out of
all ordonr b^foir: and ^aking that for the secound member of his probatioun,
q^hilk is the next conclusioun follo^ing (...) sal ind^uour my se^fe derectli^
to answer to all, and first unto that place of the ^u^ngel misconstrued be him,
and wrang ^itllie thrawin f^t the supremacy of P^ter. For Peter in that place
confussed Christ to be the son of the leuing God, M^^t. 1^
unto ^ home Christ promised that he was Peter, and upon that rock q^hilk ^e
confessit he wald buyld his Kirk. that is, that confessioun quhilk Peter maid,
or Christ be Peter confessed. was the only foundatioun* and sure rock quhali
upon the kirk should be buyldit, as S Paul^ witnessech saying, 8. Co^. 1.
na man can lay an other fundatioun then that quhilk is alreddy said, JESUS
CHRIST. Unto this expositioun the Ancient fathers nocht only accords, bot also
they approve it vniformaly, Chrisist. 55. s^p^r Hieto in Mar. ^ Augu. tractat
12^, sup. John.
Chrisost. Ambrois Hierom, and August. quha affirmis that Pet^r was callit from
Petra the rok and nocht Petra from Pet^r; as Christ is not namit fra an
christian, bor an christian from Christ, under the name of the Rock, Christ
is signified: and under Peter, all christian pepil* and mair planely this
reverend father wryts, that Christ wald say be tha words. I will build ou Peter
upon me, and not me upon* ou. For if the kirk war buildit upon Peter, it wald
hau^ a waik fundatioun, and the ports of hell should preuail against it. in
respect the voice of a woman maid him to abjure and deny Christ.

AD. Secoundly Christ promised at that time quhilk befoir was performit, bot
the Kirk at that time, wa^ biggit upon Christ him self. Heirfoir he means,
not the buylding of the Krik upon him self bot upon Peter and his successeur^.

AN. I regret mair thy ignorance, nor thy foolish vanity. for a thing that is
performit, neids not again after the performing, to be promised. Bot when it
is promisit, it is requiseit to be performit. Christ then Hammiltoun, performit
rather that thing quhilk before he had promisit, then promisit that quhilk
before was performit.

AD. Thirdly Christ^ promeis was that he sold confirm the rest of his
breathere^ quh^n ever they s^ld f^ll in any doubt.

AN. Treuth it is, Christ commandit Peter to confirm his brethren, and sa
should al true pasteurs. Bot quhat of this? Nathing.

AD. Last of all it is ^otoriously k^awin to all q^ha r^i^s the E^an^elists,
that Peter was called (...) first of the Apostles.

(...). 1^.
AN. Asinus port^t misteria. and it is a grit pity Hammiltoun thou want ^
pulpet, having sa weil preachit over the Pot. I think this reason was maid in
the MAR^ET our head being weill a gait in the west. In the rehearsal of the
Apostles namis beginning is maid from Peter. Ergo sayis our ^o. eirs
dialecticiner. Peter is the head of the Apostles, I ^ns^er that the consequence
is not good, quhairvpon sic vsur ped tyranny should be establishit. for the
spreit of God is not scrupulus in placing of words before, or after, seeing the
names of the Apostles ar rehearsit in Mark, and Luk, bot the saming ordour is
not obseruit, And in the 2 chap. to the Galla. James is preponit before Peter,
the son also before the Father, Gal. 1. rather then it is ^o be estemit that
as the Apostles war chosin and callit. Sua in the 10. chap. they ^ar rehearsit.

AD. The other part is that the Bishop of Rome h^^ succedit with like a^toritie
and Iurisdictioun a^one all Bishops because the orde^ that Christ institut s^uld
remain for ^uer.

AN, An perplex method and confused ordour in disput^tatioun, for this is
nathing different from the nixt proposition to the quhilk mair conveniently I
sall answer then I wald in this place.

THE VIII. PRO. Euse. lib. 5. cap. 4.
The Pape of Rome in the primitive Kirk hes ever sensyne exereysit his
jurisdiction abonet all other Bishops.
AD. We prove this by Victor quha being near the Apostils dayis excommunica
^he hail Kirks of Asi^ because they wald not agrie with the Kirk of Rome
concerning ^he obseruatioun of ^asche day.

AN. Thou art far ouerschot in g^uing ouermekill credit to the report of
vthers, or to much liberty to thy a win judgment. for nathing is writtin of
Pape Victor in Eusebius 4.5.6. or 7. chap. of his 5. buik, always I with mair
travel and diligence, hes searchit Eusebius volums and hes red in his 22. and
23. chap. of sum litill controversy amangs the Kirks of Rome and Asia; bot so
indifferent, that he testifies that by the discr^pant and various observation
of the manner of fasting, the concord of of the efficacy in profe^sing the
Euangell, and the unity of faith, was very mekil commendit. Bot Victor (sayis
our apostat) excommunicat the haill Kirk of Asia? treuth. bot by quhat
authority? for rather it was by proud ambicioun, then by laufull reasoun. For
Policrates referrit the custom of the Apostles and Martyrs to quhome he
succedeth anents the obseruatioun of ^asch day. And wald in n^ wayis sub^it him
self to the Bishop of Rome; quhairfoir Victor mouit be an ambitious spreit
excommunicat him. Bot Eusebius Adionis verum ista ceteris omnibus p^rum
placebant Episcopis. in sa fa^ that IRENEVS heuely inuehit against hi^.

^^p lib. ^ ^pist. 1^
AD And b^ S. Cyp quha writs to Stephan^s Pap^ o^ Rome to depos^ Mar^ian^^
because h^ was au Nouatian.

AN. eschaw weil haith by the citatioun and euilgatheri^ sentence that thou
never saw S. Cip. work, for he in the 1^. epist. of his 3 buik wrytes to Steph.
that he derect letters to the province and people of Arles, desyring them to
depose Martianus and place another in his room. Quhairin he plainly declairi^
that it perteins na mair to Stephanus nor to any other Bysho^ saying, Si quis
ex Collegio nostro heresin facere, et grege^ Christi lacerare et va; tare
tentauerit: subuenie t ceteri, and quasi pastores v^iles, oues dominicas in
grege^ colligant. whairby w^ may pl^nie vndrstand yt quhe an Minister of God
dois fail, all the rest hes power to depose him,and to provide for that flock.
This far faithfully of Cyprians letter, quhairin if their be ani^ jurisdiction,
rather it is Cyprian that vsurps the saming, commanding and inioyning to
Stephanus to write, then Stepha. quha did obey. Moreover it was not Cyprian nor
Stephanus quha did depose Martienus: bot the other Byschops i^ the prouence, at
their requeist. Bot all is good aneugh that may^ serve for our Papis power.

AD. And also by the Fathers of she (...) of Carthage and Mi^^eria^.

AN. In this confusd prositioun thou hes never it brought ^ richt authority for
the confirmation yairof. and in this thou lies impudentlie. for the council of
Carthage resisted oppinl^e to the Paps leigats, (...) C^l. 4. b^ik 7 (...)
quha affirmit that supreme iurisdictioun was grantit to the Pape of Rome by the
Synod of Nic^. And producit the acts thaiaof* quhilks war feineit. the coucell
resisted thair^o, thinking that the Pape of Rome should not have credennce in his
a win cause, quhairos they sent to Constantinopil and to other Touns of
Graecia, that they micht ^cquere mair veritabil examples of sic priuilegis. In
the quhilkes n^ other thing was fund, bot that quhilk did abrogat the hail
authority of the Roman by shop, quhairby he was deprehendit to have lyi^
impudentlie, in supposing the council of Sardice, for the concel of Nice.
Moreover by that saming council they w^r excommunicat that appellit to the
pape of Rome. For in the sixth canon of that samin council is expreslie
commandit: tha^ the Bxshop of Alexandria sal have the reul over certain kirks
and the Bishop of Rome over certain, and the Bishop of Antiochia lykwayis over
certain. And that it be not laufull ^o^ any one of them to inuaide another
iurisdictioun: and if any an be not conte tit with his a win, crave dominion
over vther^ he aucht of richt to be callit a bre^kar of the customs,and also
of the haly canons. GREGORY will have him repute to b^ the verry Antichrist,
quha styles him self supreme pasteur of pasteurs,and universal Bishop. saying*
I speak it with baldne^, whosoever caleth him self the universal Bishop, ^reg.
(...) his 4 (...) and 10.^^.
or desiris so to be called, he is in his pride the forerunner of Antichrist:
because in his pride he setleth him self above vthers. And in ane other epistle
thus Way is writing to Eulogius. Behold euin the title of our letter. e have
^ritin the proud poesy, naming me the vniuarfall Pape, Greg. l^ his 7 (...) and
10 ^^.
notwithstanding I have forbiddin it. I beseik our halynes to do so na mair,
for what soever is geuin to any abone reasoun, the same is takin from our
selfs.

THE IX. PRO. Na man ought to be (...) or haldin an rrew Minister or pasteur in
Christ's Kirke^ ^e ra^. ue the Sacrament of ordour'he impositioun of hands.
I confess indeid that they* are not to be estemit laufull Ministers in an w^ill
reformit kirk, quha are not ordinarily callit. ordinare vocatioun consists
first in the inuart working of the halie spreit in the heart of him, quha is to
receive that burdene, quhairby he may be assurit of an vpricht zealous meaning,
and that also God has indewit him ^ith sum gifts for the discharge of the
^ffice quhairinto he is appoyntir. Secoundlie besides the motioun of Gods
Spreit, the Kirk of God ought to take trial both of his man^ris and
qualyties. sufficient to discharge a good conscience, to the edificatioun of
the flock. quhilks being found, we deny not, bot the impositioun of hands with
solemn prayers was ane ceremony* vsit in ordaning of pasteurs, both since
Christ's dayis, and long off befoir, and it be us is may diligently obseruit.
Sua that na pairt of this proposion being weil understand, maks any thing
against us, except only the nam^ of Sacrament quhilk improperly is heir vsit,
without warrant of Godis word or any guide reasoun.

AD. Of this we evidently may infer that Ca^uin and Be^^, with Taileours and
Skinners and other mechanics quha hes intrudit them self in the office of
Ministry never rasauid sic ordours are not to behaldin laufull Pasteurs bot as
theauis and reuars quha h^^ (...) in amangs Christ's flock not by the dur bot by
the window.

AN. Sententias loquitur carnifex And a fearful sentence without all reasoun
pronuncit. And althoght condemnit appostat they fere not the force of it, it
they man appele to ane mair indifferent ludge. Quhairfoir should they be reput as
theauis and halden as reuars? Is it because their heads are not shauin? Is it
because they are not ordanit be the vsurpit papisticall power. If sa be, nather
ware the Apostles Euangelistis etc. to be reputit lauful because they war not
ordaned by the hie Preasts quha had the ordinar ecclesiastical power. ea by the
like reasons and saming arguments, they did exagitat the ministry of S. John
the Baptist together with Christ's doctrine, saying who give the this authority.
Bot as to Calvin and Beza and other Godly learnit men, quhome e comprehend
under the name of Tailours and Skinners, they had a laufull and ordinar calling
in the flock unto the quhilk they preachit. As at mair lenth may be declarit,
and is writtin be many vthers.

THE X, PROPO. The intercessioun and imun^tioun of the Saints and Angeli
derogate nothing nor is not contrario^s to Christ's mediatioun.
I p^s the contradictioun in the propositioun, with the friuol distinctioun of
mediatioun brought in by ow for proof of the saming, to cut of many words quhilk
I may neadis have vsit, gif I wald accurratlie examine all the points
thairof. for I am certain thou can not tell quhat thou means by the
distinctioun of mediatioun, thy purpose being mair to convince the truth, and
obscure the verity: then any ways to establische the saming. For Christ is
our Mediator in both the natures, that is, as he is God and man in one
persoun. and not acording to his humane nature only, as S. Ihon 14.16.
witnesses. I am the way, the treuth, and the life. No man cummeth to the
Father bot by me. And quhatsoener e ask the Father in my name 'he will give it
ou.

AD, we reid in the ^ of Zach. that the Angel prayit unto the Lord desyring him
to have pitis on lerusalena and the Touns of judah and likewise in the 12.
chap. of Tobias.

AN. Unto former obiectioun I answer, that sclendrouslie thou hes red that
place, for under the name of Judah and Jerusalem is understand the Kirk of
Christ, for the quhilk christ the Angel of Angels makis intercessioun. Unto the
Secound I say, that the buik of Tobias is not sufficient to prove any head of
doctreine. Thridlie althoght the Angel pray for us, i^ it followis not be na
guide Logik: that we sold pray un to the Angel.

AD. And be S. Ioh. 6. Revels. saying the reik of the incense of the eraisons
of the Sancts ascendit out of the hands of the Angel kefoir the Lord.

AN. How so ever thou wreast this place, it hes the like Ergo with the former.

AD Quhau the pepil of Israel war plagued for their rebellioun God wald not
resaue their prayers bot said let Moses pray for thie pepill and I will hear
him.

AN. Treuth it is that moses was their principal pasteur and Propheit,
familiar with God, be quhais voice God spoke unto his people* Bot it followis
not that Moses should been inuocat or worshipped, and to be haldin as their
refuge, or that he was intercessour, bot only Minister. Job. 4^ Job. 5.


AD. ^ykewayis God luikit to the pruitencle of Job quhan he pray it for his
friend. and in an other place it is said call if their be any that will answer
the, and (...) to sum of the Sancts.

AN. Na questioun is ^ot an faithful man may pray for another, bot not be
called his intercessour.

ADVERSAR. Gene. 4^.
Alsomen in earth praying the an for the other, as the Corinths did for S.
Paul, derogat^ to Christ's mediatioun, as lykwayis testifies lak^b^ benedie.
(...).

AN. I ans^er unto the former place ^ith S. August. tha^ Christien men in their
prayers do pray ^^e for another, and so we are commandit: bot he for whom no
man dois pray, bot he for all men, Aug. lib. ^. cap. 8, (...).
is only our Mediator. To the secound like. way is I answer, that the
children of Joseph sold not pray to Abraham Is^ak and lakob, for the blissing
in this manner is pronuncit. God before quhome my fathers Abraham and lsak did
walk, God quhilk fed me al my life long unto this day. And the Angel quhilk
hes delyuerit me from all evil, bliss the bairnes and let the names of my
forfathers Abram end Isak be namit in them. quhairby Ephraim and Man^sseh
Joseph's sons and lakobs nepheus soul^ be accountit in the family of Iakob,
and rekned to be the sons of Isr^ell, and to retain either of th^me equal
portioun with the rest of the sons of lakob, as gif he had begottin them him
self. I his expositioun agrees prope^ly with that pla^^ quhilk is conteanit
in the 4 cha. of Isai, psophecie, quhain the women requyrit that the men's names
micht be^e callit upon them, that i^, according to the Hebrew phrase ya^ they
micht. be called the W^ffes of an man, and n^mit after their Husbads. So if
this phrase in this place imports na mystery, nather should the former. now
seeing it w^r tedious to dilate lang ans^ers upon friuol reasons, we mind to
contract our arguments i^ schortar fo^me. Of the quhilks tua ar brocht forth
out of the reuela of S. Iohne the 1. and 6, chapter thairof Unto the quhilk I
answer, that ye sancts are said to desire God to seuenge their blood: P^^. 2 ^p
^ ^^^p.
even as the blood of Abell, cryit for vengence ^o the earth. And so dois the
murder of PARIS cry for the like r^waird, with the death of many vthair
Saints of God.

AD. S. Peter said to his flock that he sul not only admonis^h, the sa l^ng, as
he (...) on life to i^mbr^c^ ^l Godlin^s and ve^te w. Bot als^ wald labo^^ that
aft^^ his d^^th they sold ha^^ t^^ memory of the thin^^ quhilk he could not do
being dea^ bot only by hi^ i^tercessio^^ for them.

AN. Peruershe sophist. for that quhilk he he^ promisit tu^ manner of wai^s he
hes performit. First be his Epistles, quhilk (...) his death dois remain, be
the quhilk is flock wa^ pu^i^ rem^mbrance and the posterity after them in
memor^e, that he followit not dissaitfull fabils, when he openit unto th^me the
cumming of our Lord. Secoundlie that he hes taken pain and travel in prouyding
to his flock faithful M^nisters in the Kirk after ^is death, y^ his memory and
the remembr^ce of the things quhilk he teachit unto the, micht be refreschit in
their hearts. For other way is if Peter w^r leuand or Paul, I dou^ not ^ot they
wald ryfe their claithis in geuin them y^ worshipping and assigning unto them
that office quhilk is proper unto our Saluiour, A^, 14^
as BARNABAS did with S. PAVL in the Town of Lystre.

AD As* (...) cap. 8
God has (...) same with miracle (...)

AN. Put on thy spectakils. For by miracles only without the testimony of the
scripteur, the inuocatioun of Sancts can not be ra^auit. nather dois S. Aug.
words any wayis confirm^ the saming. For he ^ryt^s so, I^la de gradu descendit
^t ad fanc^i martyris memoriam orare perrex^rat* It is not faid be S August^n,
or abat sancti martyris memoriam. Na mair nor he ^ald say or^bat Templum,
quhilk war ver^^ improperly spokin. I ^ppin thy error th^n, thou ignorantly
refers the word dr^re to ad martyris memorlam, quhik only sold be per^exerat.

AD. This also (...) (...)mit be, Ba^^l, h^. de 40. Ma^^. S lhere. con vigi.
Ba^^l, Hierata, Origines, Chrisost^me, Nazi^^^^n with Cipria^.

AN. To al their sorgit autorit^es I answer with Hierom yat ^uhil^ of the
scripteur h^s na autori^^^ (...) the ly^e facility it may be rei^ctit as it is
adducit. quhilk Aug. plainly dois co^ firm writing to Mier. in 48. epist.
hear not this, Donatus ^aith, Rogatus says, Vincens^s says, Ambros^ says,
Au. says Bot hearken and give ear unto this the Lord says, For instead of
all thairs lear^ed fathers, or father abone the al, cums unto my mind the
scripteur of Godg, uhairin is an exclusue seutence pronuncit, na man cummeth to
the Father but by me. Lib, 2. (...) 2^. co^. cr^fo^^^
To it I appele from all manner of wrytaris that thinks other vai^* For the
docteurs of the Kirk, as mest are often deceived. Althocht their autorities thou
hes rather brocht for ostentatioun, then substanciallie to prove our purposse,
for na man of sound judgment will think that Bas^l and Nazianzen wald call
upon the sancts, Oirge li^. con ^^. se^.
althoght they playi^ sumquhat with gritter liberty, then either b^came the
gr^uitie of the persons, or sincerity of Christian^ Religioun. Origines buik
is falsely supposit in his name, for he dois planelie deny thi^ consequence,
NOTE
the blissit in the Heauins pray^. for us, thairfore they should be inu^cat.
Cyprians buik de secta and magis is adieterous, and Chrisost mess is
attributed wr^ngfully unto him for amang^ the Sanct their mentioned, Chrisosto.
is countit him self quha expreslie in all his warks reiects the invocation of
sancts. As in his 12 homely upon the woman of CANAN, tell me O Woman, since
thou art a wicked and sinful woman, HO^ durst thou go into God? I know, says
scho, quhat I do. Behold the wisdom of the woman, she prays not to JAMES she
e^tre^teth not JOHN, she goes not or PETE^, she did not get her self to the
company of the Apostles: she soght for na intecessour: NOTE
bot for all thais things she took r^pentance for her companioun, quhilk did
fulfill the room and place of an Aduocat, so she did go to the hych^
fountain. Let this authority suffice to confute thy error, and for an
strenthie Bul^ark^ and For^r^sse to subvert the inuocatioun of Sancts.

THE XI. PROPO. It is ^ot against the command of God to make the Imagi^ of our
Saluiour Christ and of his Apostles.
As the inuocatioun of Sanctes is to be banischit out of the heart sa Imagis
quhais use tending to deuotioun ^r to be abolischit from the eyes of men the
Tempil. 9 Augu. in (...) 11^ (...).
for as ^^il sai^ Aug. althog^t they be sensles, it for that the very
proportioun of men set a loft and in honorable hicht after they one begins
to be adored and honored of the multitude breadeth and ingendreth in every man
that most ^^le affectioun of error that althoght their he sind na natural
moving or ta kone of life, it h^ thinks sum God or Godly thing is with in it,
and so being dece^ued, partly by the form^ that h^ seth and partly by the
example and devotion of the p^piil quhome they sie obedient to the saming he
thinks that the Images being so like lyniug bodeis, NOTE
can not be without sum lyuinge thing underneath them.

AD This conclusion is pr^^i^ because (...) place of the scripture can be
produci^ wh^ (...) i^ forbiddi^.

First I answer be the contrary seeing i^ is na way commandit by the scripteur
of God: it can not be na wayis laufully vsit.

AD. And gif it had b^^e forbiddin i^ the 2^. ^^^p. of ^xodus wit^^ut al
di^^i^c^io^ ^s the Ministers falsely allegis he had been c^^trarious unto him
self because in the 25. ^h^p, he commands to make the Image of the Ch^r^bims.

AN. I answer unto this quhilk is mair an calumny the^ obiectioun. That they
condemn not all Images without distinctioun. for they kn^w that Christ him
self did not condemn Caesar's Image in the money. For painting and grauing ^r
things indifferent nather guide nor evil, in sa far, that quhen their use teuds
not to deuoa^oun bot to decoratioun and ornament. Bot euin sua, that God can
not be repr^sentit be na Image. As to the Cherubims they war set up to cover
the Arc or the Mercy seat^, to the end that the pepill micht understand that
the nature and Majesty of God quhome they worshipped was altogether hid and
covered from them, and na wayis culd be seen, Number. ^1.
nor be any visible thing represented* As for the brasin Sepent it was set up
for the present necessity, as ^ sacrament only for a time to endure, as by the
fact of Ezechias was manifest. 4. reg 18. Bot their examples can na wayis serve
for your Images, unless thou find me a sure warrant out of Gods word,
commanding them, as we lie of the Cherubims and Serpent.

AD It is provin also by Christ's a win ex^mpill quh^ as te^^i^^es Eusebius in
hi^ 7. b^ik of his ecclesia^^ history sent hi^ a win Im^ge unto the King
Ab^ga^^^.

AN. Read quha will Eusebius 7. buik, they ^all d^prehend thee to have falsely
lyit.

AD Also i^ the premiti^e Ki^k ^emorrhi^^e quh^ was ha^lit by Christ did (...)
a^ image ^o him quhilk as Christian did rep^^if as contrair the command of God.

AN It appears (...) how our cause itendeth, quhen it is confirmit by sic
sutill probations. That image was only historical maid for an declaratioun
and monument of the hail^ng of the woman by Christ. And that it sold not be
thought that Jesus Christ or his Aposti^es did command the same Eusebius
subiounds. It is na meruell that the heathens receiving sic benefits of our
Saluiour did these things, for, we have seen the Image of Peter, of Paul, and
of Christ drawin in coleurs and preserved. And it may weill be thought that men
in old^ times being not it removed from their superstitioun vsit after this
sort to worship them by an eathnisch custom^ as their sauiour^, ^ Au. ^ib ^.
de cu^ (...)
etc.

AD. S. August. declaris it was the cu^^om^ in his dayis to have the Images of
Pe^^^ and Paul with Christ.

AN Contrary ways it is plain that he alluterly reiects them as it is
evident in his 49. epist. and in his Catolog heresi, 7 amangs the rest of the
^nrpocratians errors, he notis a certain woman namit. Marcellina quha being of
that saming sect, ^orshipped the Image of Jesus and Paul, Homeir and Pythagoras
In the place be o^ cytit, he approuis ^a Imagis specially maid for Religiouns
saik, Bot declares be quhat occasion the enemies of Christ feineit certain buiks
in his name, written to Peter and Paul of magik and witchcraft, because says
he they saw in si^drie places peter and paul paintit upon the walis with
Christ. nather dois heir August. approve sic paintrie, na^her deny we for
beauty and knaweledge picteurs may be maid.

AD. And the v^iuersalt traditioun of all ^gi^ (...) in the Kirk to have the
sign of the cross as Tert^lian witnesses (...) c^r^^s militis.

AN Bot sic an sign was not as now is vfit, in his time the Christians held up
their hands in the air, and by their fingers transuersly puttin, formit a
figure of the cross, quhairby they declared their professioun that they
beleuit in our Saluiour crucefyit. and it their is a grit difference of the
sign of the Cross that incontinent eua^ishis a way, and a material Image
substancially existin. The sign is ancient, bot the figure laite. By the
quhilk Christ is abominablie fixit to ane galow tri^, quhilk e honor with
reverence, and worschipps with prostratioun of our bodies, as it is evident by
the words of our Mass buik. O crux aue spes v^ica, Blissed be thou O cro^ our
only esperance. Auge piis iustitiam reisque dona veniam. Incresse justice to
the Godly, and sch^w mercy to the culpabil. Heirby our impiety mair nor
beastly is discovered: for Hab. in his 2. cha. pronuncis this sentence,
malediction above him that sayis to tree, stok, or stane, a walk and teach
me, and ^ esteem them as books of the Laics and commoun pepill, be the quhilks
they are callit to remembrance to serve Christ. Bot an unhappy memory is that
quhilk stands in nead of a sightfull conceat, and miserabill is that man quhilk
na vtherway is can have the presence of Christ with him unless he have his Image
paintit on the wall, NOT^
or express it in sum other matter, for sic a memory that is nourisched by
Images proceeds not of ha^ty love: bot of necessity of eye sight.

AD. Of this we (...) the fraudfull interpritatiouns of the command of God he
the Ministers, and how they follow the futsteps of Iulianus apostaza in
destroying the images of Christ, as the Turks causes the renega^ Christians to
spit upon the crucifix quhilk the true Christians he^ for an ensig^e and baner.

AN. Quhen sall we have an end of thy calumnies? I think never, bot I leave
them unto thy self; and the unto thy awin wickedness. Quhat Iulianus the apos^^t
hes done against the Christians, quhat the Turks lykewayis we knawe, all that
to have procedit of plain malice against Christ. Bot that quhilk our
Ministeres hes done in destroying the Imagis placit for Gods in our kirks, that
I say hes follow it from a good zeall to praise God, for the quhilk they have
sufficient assurance by the command of God and example lykewayis of the
ancient fathers. For EPIPHANIVS wrytis to John Patriark of Jerusalem in the 2.
tome of Hierome. In that I hard certain did grudg aganist me, for that when we
went together to the holy place, quhilk is caled Bethel, to make a gathering
their with me according to the manner of the Kirk; and come to a village caled
ANABLATHA, and as I passed I saw a candil burning, and asked quhat place it
was, and quhen I learned it was an Kirk and h^d entered into it to make my
prayers, I found their ane veil hinging at the entry of the Kirk painted
having the Image as it war of Christ or of sum Sanct, NOTE
for quhose picteur it was in deid I do not remember, thairfoir quhan I saw
the Image to hing in the Kirk of Christ, contrary to the co^mandiment of the
scripteurs, I rent it in sondre, and gave counsel to the kepars of the Kirk to
bury sum poor body in it. I bes^ik o^ charge the priests of that place, that
they command that sic painted claiths as be contrary unto our Religioun, b^ no
more hanged up into the Kirk of Christ, It behouis our reverence to have cair
heirof, this is snperstitioun vnmeit for the Kirk of Christ, and dangerous for
the pepole, and thairfore oght to be removed.

THE XII. PRO. ^It is consonant to Gods word to pray for the dead. 12
If that be consonant unto Gods word or convenient unto the Scripteur, quhilk
ather from ignorance of the benefits of Christ hes followit, or fra unbelief
or incredulity hes procedit: or fra an humane affectioun hes cumit halelie
disteulit having but the name of charity, the prayers for the dead ar then to
be halden agreeable to Gods word. Bot seeing in the blood of Christ our sins ar
waschin away. Be it far from us, that so ignorant of this benefeit we should be
^r s^ increduteuis in esteming that the prayers of men may mair awaill then the
mereits of Christ, or that we sold think God to be so inhumane that he wald
have payment estet the obligatioun is rent I mean, that he hes forgeuin us in
Christ our debt and not the punischemen thairof, quhilk rather the Papeists
teaches sold be remouit be^praye^s of men, ringing of Bellis, offering of
silver, and to be extenuat through passing unto pilgramagis.

AD. This is prouin by the ^. buik of the Macah. the (...). chap, quh^irin it
is said yet it is an haly and hailsome prayer to pray for the deid that they
may be (...) from their sins,

AN. Bot quhat authority should be geuin to that buik, it is evident by the
hinmest verse of the saming, qnhairin the author crauis pardoun quhair he
failleth, nath^r is the haly spreit to be aseryuit unto it, NOT^
quhilk the author ascryuis unto his awin diligence, for in it their are many
contrarieties. First as concerning the death of Antiochus. Seeing in the 1.
buik, and 6. cha It is writtin that he dyit of a fewer. In the 2. and 1. chapter it
is said that he was slain in spuileing the Kirk of Nanea. and in the 9 chap.
of that same buik, it is writtin he was strukkin miraculouslie be the hand of
God in the montains. Bot in the 1. buk it is said he dyit in Babylon. the eir
of his death in the 1. buk and 6. chap. after the grecian calculatioun is. 149.
In the 2. and 1. chap. 148. Lykewayis Lysias governor of Eupators army maid
peace with Judas Machabeus, unto quhome Antiochus Eupator (sone to antiochus
the tyran above specifiit.) wrytes concerning that matter. the eirs of the dait
of the letters are 148, ather then most Eupator be haldin King before his
fathers death, quhilk is may falls, as in the 9. chap. it may apear or else
Antiochus dyit not the 149, Aug. lib. 18. ^^.3^ de ciuit. dei
eir of the Grecians, quhilk is contrair unto the 6. chap. of the 1. buik.

AD. Albeit perchance the books of the Match. war not ^as^uit in the Synagog of
the Jews a ^ canons it S, Aug witnesses that the Kirk of God ^asauit them as
cano^i^.

AN, I deny not Hammiltoun that in them are not thingis contained profitabill
for edificatioun, Bot I affirm that they war not writtin, that our faith should
be established upon them on that they may serve for confirmatioun of doctreine,
or to have flow it from the haly spreit. For the Spreit of God never vsis in
the scripteur to be suppliant unto men, and for his imperfectioun to beg
pardoun at their hand., for nathing ought to be impute to the Halie Gaist,
quhilk becomes not the grit Majesty of God. And althoght that S. Augu.
approves them it he dois not also laitlie, bot rather with two provision
admits them. First if that they be soberlie red, nixt warlie hard. Bot sa
conditionarlie he pronunces not of the rest of the canonical scripteurs. ea
GREGORI^ him self in the 19. book, upon the 17, chap. of Job, testifies that
they war^ not canonical.

AD. S Paul also affirms this, that quhair he sayis they that buy de upon
Christ trayle hay or stu^bill salb^ sa^it hot as by the fire quhilk place can
not be vnder^tande of the fire of hell because fra it their is na redemptioun.

AN. A far soght, obscure, and confusd probatioun, and nathing pertinent to the
purpose. For rather he confirms purgatory, that is ignotum per ignotious:
then directly prouis the prayers for the dead. Nevertheless I sall endeavor my
self to answer unto that quhilk inderectlie is obiectit. Be the fire is
understand the trial of the halie Gaist, be the Stubil and Hay courious and
vnprofitabill doctreine, quhilk be the fire, that is, be the halie Spreit salbe
tryit, be the quhilks men's inventions and traditions with vnprofitabill
doctreine not groundit upon the word of God salbe consumed. Bot seeing upon this
place be falsely builds Purgatory, I am glad that it is bigged upon hay and
stubbil, that in our age now the fire of God being kindlit, it is all burnt
away,

AD. And ^ortulia^ counts the prayers for the deap amangs the tra^latio^^
obser^^ in the Kirk in his age.

AN. If this authority of Tertulian be thee alleged be tre^ thou dois
maliciously, falsely, and wickedlie, wraist the Scripteur of God in
confirmation of that quhilk is not writtin, bot as an uncertain traditioun
rasauit. Unto S. Aug. thou dois ar^ grit injury, that wald hane him establish
thy error, althoght he prayit for his Mother MONICA. quhairin he erred by an^
luising affectioun and humane compassioun toward her. for he him self in his
euch. ad laurent. 67. chap. in an word he slokkins purgatory and condems the
prayers for the dead. saying, Qui hoc credunt sunt et catholici qui humana
quad^ beneuolentia mihi falli videntur, tha quha beleuis Purgatory for to be,
are not only Herityks hou also catholyks, qu^a be an human benevolence appeirs
unto me, to be deceauit, and after he subioynes, (...)
post enim hanc vitam, nullus est penitentius locus. After our Saul's be
desoluit from our bodies, their is na place of repentance. This also is
confirmit by ^erom saying ^e kna^e that in this world we can not be helpit an
of another ather with prayars or with counsalls b^t after we be once befoir the
judgment sait of Christ, nather Io^ DANIEL nor NOACH, be abil to pray for any
body, but every man fall beir his awin burden. I might use many other
autorities for the confirmatioun of ^his matter, but their I think are
sufficient.

THE XIII. PROPOSITIOVN. In the Sacrament of the Altar under the form of bread
and wine the body and blood of Christ is reallie and substancially co^teaned.
AD. This conclusioun is confirmit ^e thrie Evangelists, quha testifies that
Christ i^ his latter supper said ^ak eat this is my body quhilk fall he geuin
for ow, the quhilk words are so cleir and evident that no ^^n can doubt unless
he wald give mair credence unto his awin sense and judgment nor to Christ's
infallabill words.

AN. I answer with S^ Hierome that the Euangell stands not in the words of
the scripteur but in the meaning, I^r. upon 1. Galla.
for gif in sic wechtie matters, we wald pretex the simplicity of words Christ
then should be ane Lamb, an Port, an Way, the true Wine, and an husband man,
Quhilk form of speaking only is figuratyue.

AD. Justinius the marty^e to Antonimis says that euin as we believe Christ had
fl^sch and blood so we oght uo believe that breacnd wine quhilk he con^ecrat was
changed in his flesh end blood.

AN. I answer that their words are misticallie and sacramentallie to be
understand, for in that secound apology, he proves against ye heretics be ye
sacrament of the eucharist Christ for to have had verry body and verry flesh,
and not phantastik as they did think, in this manner, if Christ had never tre^e
flesh this Sacraments should be false, seeing they never culd represent nor
signify that thing quhilk was never extant. Bot I wald not thou assumed him
for ane patroun of our transubstantiatioun, quhen he teachis in that saming
apology the bread and wine after consecratioun to be changed in our body and
nurisch the saming, quhilk plainly Ireneus aprouis saying by the bread and
Cup quhilk ar the sacraments of the ^odie and blood of Christ, ex quibusa^getur
et consistir car ^is nostraesubstantia, of the quhilk the substance of our
flesh and of his precious blood never institute be him nor obseruit in his
kirk, les nor thou wild willingly close the eyes of thy conscience against the
treu^h. Bot I know thy stubbernes, that although good reasons may make the
acknawledge the verity, it thou rather will consent with our superstitious
mesmongars, nor say treuth with the verity now. (...). 14.


AD This conclusioun is prouin because Christ has callit himself a Priest for
ever after the ordour of Melchisadek: we reid in the book of Genesies that
Melchisadek offered bread and wine thairfor Christ being presigurat be
Melchisadek of necessity man hau anelyke manner of sacrifice to w^ttrubl^die.

AN This confusd reasoun is saxtymes repeted be ow, bot fa often to answer, it
w^ld be countit superfluous, thairfoir I will contract the sum of all in an
form that I may derectlie answer their unto. OBIECTIOVN
The figure of Melchisadek behouit in veriritie to be accomplishe^ in Christ's
preisthood. Bot Melchisadek offered to God the Father bread and Wine. Thairfoir
it behouit Christ not only to offer that, bot that the verity of the figure
might be performit in his body and blood also. I admit the propositioun, and
denyis the assumptioun, because that in the Epistle to the Ebrewes many
conferences and diverse collations ar maid of Melchisadeks preisthod and of
Christ quhairin na mention is maid of bread and Wine. ANS.
To be short ye figure of Melchisadeks preisthood dois consist in tha things
quhilks are not common with Arons preisthood; bot the offering of bread and wine,
was daily in the sacrifice of Aaron, thairfoir Christ's preisthood rather should
be after the ordour of Aro^ nor Melchisadeks, if the offering of bread and Wine
ware the principal things in Christ's preisthood. NOTE
Bot all this controversy flows from the ignorance of the Ebrew word, for in
the 14 of Gene it is writin, that after Abraham returnit from the battle with
his soldiers being werie, Melchisadek quha was King causit bread and wine be
brought forth quhairby Abraham and his army micht been refreschit. The same
King also being hie Priest blissit him the error of our aduersar consists in
this word (brought forth) quhilk be sum is exponit obtulit, bot wrang and be
vthers as be Iero. pro^ulit, and be vthers, educi fecit, causes bread and wine
to be brocht furh to refresche the stomaks of the weary soldiers, quhilk he
did lyberallie being King, and being hie Priest deuotelie he gave him his
benedictioun.

AD. Of this we collect that tha quha lawbours to abolich the sacrifice of
Christ's body and blood in the mess ar blasphemous against Christ and his
eternal preisthood after the ordour of Melchisadek.

AN, I affirm bold^y that that quha embraces sic horrible prophanatioun of
Gods glory, dois defile their soul with Idolatry, and sa far as they may,
not only puts Christ to shame and approbre, bot also dois him crucesie. For
inrespect if the sacrifice be iterat, Christ must be crucifyet, quhilk was bot
on and singulair sacrifice. For S. Paul writing to the ^brews 6 chapter witnesses,
that nane can be offrit except him that dies.

THE XV. PRO. ^It is contrarius and repugnant to the custom of the primittu^
Kirk to institut and command any publict f^sting on Sunday and to man bankets
on Friday.
AD. This is prouin be Tertulian quhan he wrytis of the constitutioun of the
Kirk, saying we hald it as a sacrilege to command any fasting on Sunday.

AN. Since by the scriptur y^ art not able to confirm this, we are not
constranit to obey men's inventions, for Tertulian in that same place says, it
is altogether unlawful that upon y^ Sunday in worshipping God, to fall upon our
knees the contrair quhairof notwithstanding his authority, is rasauit be al
christians, and thairfoir we may als easily reject this superstitloun in
fasting upon the Friday, Te^ ^ psych.
as not kneling upon the Sunday, and it he wryts other wais in his buik contra
PSYC. saying we man hencfurth fast without co^pulsion, of fre will not be
comandime^t of this new disceplin, acording as every man sal se time and place

AD. Epipha, sha^s that Aerius was conde^nit as a herityk because he eats flesh
on friday

AN. I think that the probation of this, is, that thy asser^io^ most suffice
for authority, shaw me the place, and I will pr^pare the an ansuer, NOT^
always to satisfy y^ present I ask of the as S ^y. writing to Pomp. against
the Epistle of Ste. from whence have we this tradition? ^hither cumith it from
the authority of ye Lord or of the Euangel, or else fra the co^mandiments and
Epistilles of the Apostles? yairfor if it ather be co^mandit in ye ^ua^gel or
co^^enit in the acts or epi. of y^ Apostils, let ^s keip ye same tradi^io^

AD. (...)
S, Aug, says qu^osomes fa^^eth upon the ^onday selanders the hall Kirk.

AN. Bot he after his awin manner modestli^ tra^ellit to reduce all sic abusis
to the fundatioun of the scripteur, that h^ reprouis not si^ superstitioun
s^ueirly, he randers the ressoun in his 119. epist. to casulanu^ in the quhilk
he writs concerning them that absteanit from flesh. Si de hac re meam sent
t^m quaeras, eteni^ huiusmodi multa propter nonul^arum v^l sanctarum vel
turbulentaru^ personarum scandala, liberius improbare non audeo. that is, if on
this matter my sentence zo require. surely si^ many things for the sclander of
halie and trubilsum persons, frelie I dar not improve, and after hend in that
samin epistil. Ego in Euangilicis and Apostolicis literis animo reuoluens video
preceptum esse ieuinium quibus autem diebus oportet ieiunare, et quibus non
opor^eat non inuenio esse definitum. I reuoluing in my mind do find that in the
letters of the Euangell and Apostils fasting to be commandit. bot I find not
determined and appointed by the command of the Lord or of ye Apostils, quhat
day we must fast, and quhat day we must not fast.

AD. Of this conclusioun is manifest that the Ministers instituting their
publict fa^^ vp^d ^onday and making their banquet^ upon Friday, ar ^ot only
selaudrous to the hail^ k^rk bot also followis the firsteps of the Manicheans
and other condemned herityks.

AN. Thou hes begun with blasphemyis as posessed with foolishnes, and endith
with injuries as bereft of wisdom. I appeal thee (blasphemous mouth) to thy
awin conscience, if thou hes by reportevnderstuid of any; or being present,
had knauledge, that they maid bankets on any day: bot ever sharply and
vehemently to have improuit the same. To the matter. Di^^. 61, qu^a san^onia.
First I ansuer with Pape Stephanus and conform to his command, quhairof the
tennour is this. If syndrie of our predicess^urs have done certain things,
quhilk at that time might weil have been done without hurt, quhilks afterward
are turned unto error and to superstitioun: NOTE
let them be distroyit and abolished by the successeurs. Secoundly according to
this re^l ^ confess that the Kirk in hatred of the Manichea^s (quha wald bring
in perpetual fasting upon Sunday as a law,) and in detestatioun of other
heretyks, thought it na^ wayis expedient ^o fast upon Sunday fearing that
thairby men sold have f^llin in the Manicheans error, Bot now that cause is
remouit, and the error als weill by our fathers as by us presently condemned,
and altogether the memory their of buryit. N^ther do we appoint our fasting
upon the Sounday as any^ way agreeable with them, bot as a manner indifferent of
it self, and may convenient for the estair and necessity of o^r time, NOTE
seeing na other day the people can be sa commodiously gathered to join their
prayers with fasting. Nather do we make any l^^ of it, bot quhen sic
extraordinar dangers appears, as requyris extraordinar humiliatioun. And to
concluid the matter in few terms and mair expreslie seeing that fasting is
apointit for prayer. and upon the Sounday na man will deny bot we may pray:
their is na cause then quhy we may not use that, and upon the Sounday, to
steare us up to mair fervent prayer. The Lord of his mercy geu^ us his grace,
that both upon Soundaye and other dayis, we may so fast and pray, that our
flesche being huimlbit befoir God by vnfeineit faith and earnest prayer, W^ may
obtene mercy at the hand of our God, through I^SVS CHRIST our Lord and
Saluiour. To quhome be al honor Praise and glory world with out end AMEN.

Imprentit at EDINBVRGH be ROBERT LE^PREVVICK, dwelling at the NETHERBOVV.


