OF THE MOST Auspicatious Marriage: BETWIXT, The High and Mighty Prince,
FREDERICK; COUNT PALATINE of RHEINE, chief Sewer to the sacred Roman Empire,
Prince Elector, and Duke of BAVARIA, etc. AND The most Illustrious Princess,
the Lady ELIZABETH her Grace, sole Daughter to the high and mighty JAMES,
King of great BRITAIN, etc.

IN III. BOOKS:

Composed in Latin by M. IOANNES MARIA, de Franchis. And Translated into
English

AT LONDON, Printed by G. ELD, for William Blainchard, and are to be sold in
Fleet-lane, at the sign of the Printers Press. 1613.

TO THE MOST EXcellent Princess Elizabeth, the only daughter of JAMES, King of
great Brittan, and wife to the most Illustrious Prince FREDERICK the Fifth,
Count Palatine of Rheine, Arch-sewer of the holy Empire, first Elector, and
Duke of BAVARIA.
Fair Heaven of Graces, Haven of content,
The Worlds great Hope, and greater Ornament;
Grace these my labors, with your heavenly eyes,
In whose mild Haven, my Hope at anchor lies;
Where (may this ship with your safe conduct ride)
She will not fear a world of foes beside:
Say that some Rouer, who my lading spies,
Shooting to make me his unlawful Prize,
Call me a Pirate of another wit,
That cannot make me stoop: I Will answer it.
The Goods at first, they were bequeathed to me,
At my dispose, to change the Property.
So that I wasted not the Principal,
For that be you my Judge imperial:
Where, find me guilty, punish not my will,
But rather pity mine vnured skill.
Besides (dread gracious Princess) this I vow,
By me they would never been altered but for you;
Presuming, native clothes of Brittany,
Would better please then silks of Italy;
Say they are not good, yet have I done my best,
To please your Grace, be pleased, and I am blessed:
Your Highness most humbly devoted, SAMVEL HVTTON.

TO THE HIGH AND Mighty Prince CHARLES Prince of Wales.
THe desired and happy marriage of that Illustrious Princess, with that
magnanimous and Heroical Prince, of so great blood (but of greater merits) has
bin generally celebrated among all the subjects with such an unaccustomed joy,
that some of them, being not able to contain themselves, and yet desirous to
show their devoted affections, have strained their Muse to sing a joyful Hymen
to their Highnesses nuptial rights: Among which company, I being one of the
number, although inferior to them all in every thing (my love and affection
only excepted) commanded my Muse, though in a hard and unpleasing style, yet
as well as she could to express my vowed service and obedience to their
Highnesses. At the first I intended to have made only a short and ordinary
Epithalamium; but afterward having considered better of it, I found it much
fitter to divide it into three books. The first Book I sent to the right
Reverend Father the Lord Archbishop of York, who presented it unto the King.
By this means I did think that if my first book might have a charitable
censure of the wise and learned sort of men, I might then, with less fear and
with more spirit, presume to present this my book, with the other two, unto
their Highnesses. Notwithstanding, I had no such good conceit, either of
myself, or of my labors, to think them all three worthy to be exposed to the
judgment, and censure of all men: and yet to have put forth the one part,
without the other, would have made my Poem imperfect, which had been a greater
inconvenience. At length, some of my friends having received this Poem printed
it, being delighted with the novelty of the matter, and desirous to show their
affection and my congratulation to that happy marriage. At the first it grieved
me a little, that my book, being not fully perfected, should be printed: but at
last having no desire to have it printed again, after that the solemnities
were ended, some of my friends began to importune me that I would impart my
book unto them. I being easily overcome with their urging yielded unto their
requests: This book they have now translated into English, to the end that the
Ladies may be partakers of this curious symetrie. This book I offer up unto
your Highness of whom I have heard many honorable relations at the right
reverend father in God my lord Archbishop of Yorkes house; and now I do partly
know your Highness to be of such a Princely disposition, that you will not
refuse the protection of the first fruits of a Scholar, but rather cherish and
maintain them; especially such a one that prostrateth himself and his labors
at your Highness feet, humbly beseeching your Highness not to survey the
book with a curious eye, but to accept of that good mind which offers it.
Last of all, I do wish such a Spouse, as is described in these Hymns, to be
matched with your Highness; and I beseech thee, O God, to add so much time to
my years, that I may live to see it; to the end, that I may write a nuptial
Hymen of your Highness marriage, in a more judicious and acurate style.

Your Highness most affectionate servant, Io. MARIA.

The Argument, or Epitome, of the whole Poem.
IVpiter, by means of Mercury his messenger, summons a Convocation of the Gods
to confarre and dispose of things here below; at this Synod, Religion (being a
power amongst the heavenly deities of no small repute) made her appeara^ce,
being full of affliction, and deprived of that accustomed celestial pomp, and
divine ornaments with which all the other Gods then assembled in the Consistory
of the highest heavens did most gloriously shine: which moved all the Gods to
marvel, and father Jupiter himself to require the cause of her grief,
whereof in her actions and habit she gave such woeful remonstrances. To whom
she answered with tears, and sobbes, that this happened unto her, because she
was so torn and persecuted in the world, by wickedness and superstition, and
other of Pluto's firebrarnds, that she had scarce any place there safely to
rest her self, farther intimating, what barbarous and horrible torments she
and her followers had, for many ages past, suffered, and still did endure.
Which complaint of hers, moved the Deities to compassionate her, and caused
them (being inkindled with a just wrath against the infernal Furies) to begin
to muster up, and bend their celestial forces to succor her: But then the
ruler of the Gods (having with his most maiestick awful beck calmed their
indignation) most lovingly comforted his afflicted Daughter; telling the
deities that this was not to be remedied with fury and the destruction of men,
but with fatherly and long sufferance to bring home to his flock those strayed
sheep, by good counsel and exhortation, as in his eternal decrees he had in
this case determined; and that the chief means for the effecting hereof was,
the linking together of two royal families in amost profitable marriage, long
since preordained by Fate, for the reformation of these corrupted times: And
then he repeated the ancient oracle of the goddess Themis, now upon the point
to be performed, in the persons of the most illustrious Lady, the Princess of
great Brittany, and of the most noble Prince PALATINE, the virtues of which
excellent couple, even Jove himself collanded, and foretold the many
blessings that should proceed of these royal Nuptials: whereby Religion, and
the whole Quier of Heaven, were with great hopes appeased.

THE II. BOOK.
THe Gods, with their recomforted Sister, do congratulate each other, and she
returns them thanks for their so great favors, and they allioine, and move
Juno, the president of marriages, and Venus the mother of love, to assume the
Embassy and the effectuating of this disseigne of the gods.

Juno sends down upon the earth Iris her Embassadress, clad with most
artificialluestiments, in which the reforming of Religion, and the occurrences
of greatest consequence in the world for many years past were inwoo^en; and
with Iris, Venus joined as colleague Cupid her son, with a troop of other
Immortal personages: who being repleat with joy, and prophesying, thorogh the
regions of the air, the greatness of this most happy union, arrived at
Heidelberg, being the Metropolis of the Pa^atinate, where they entering secretly
by night, Cupid with golden dart, and amorous, fire in a dream, struck and
inflamed the young Prince, not yet knowing the object of his desire till
afterward walking in his gallery, entraunced with those amorous thoughts, his
eye lighted on the picture of the L. Elizabeth, the only daughter of the most
puissant King of great Britta^, with whose portraiture, amongst diverse others
of the greatest Princesses in the world, the said gallery was beautified. At
the first sight of that fair picture, of a more fair substance; the Prince
was supprised with a new flame, acknowledging that that was the beautiful
form which Cupid represented unto him, and with which he stirred him up to
love; and hereupon the Prince causes the picture to be taken down, and placed
in his own chamber, and to this shrius of his Goddess, he daily offers many
truly inamorated and devoted Orisons: But his love more and more continually
increasing* his excellency could not be satisfied with this liueless
resemblance, but after many co^sultations resolves to go in person into
England to see at the life, the Mistress and owner of that fair form, which had
captiuated his heart; whither at length with a most auspitious success, and a
most noble retinew, he happily arrived.

THE III. BOOK.
WHere being honorably received of the King, and his whole Court, the Prince,
with the excellency of his endowments of nature and art, and by the invisible
assistance of the supernall powers, in kindles no less flames of love, in the
virgin breast of the royal Princess toward him, then were in his
Excellencies toward her highness: And whilst each of these two, most loving,
and most lovely lovers, did day and night severally meditate of this their
first love; Consus the lord of council, in the shape of Philon, late his
Majesty's tutor, appeared in night to the sleeping king, telling his highness,
that the coming of the Prince Elector into his kingdom, was by the ordinance
of heaven; to the end, that by the aliance made between them, by the Princess
his daughter, the state of Religion should he established by this most wished
for marriage. To this heavenly Counselor the king consented, with this prouiso,
that the Prince should first (as it was fitting) request it at his highness
hands, which his excellency afterward willingly performing, his Majesty, at the
first motion, graciously condescended. The esspousalls are prolaimed, and at
the report hereof the whole kingdom revels and keeps royal festiualls, and
the father of waters Oceanus, having by Triton his Trumpeter assembled the
Maritine and fluuiall powers, does out of the clear brow of heaven, and the
most temperate season of the spring, prognosticate happy success, highly
praising in this match the judgment of the foreseeing sapient King, and
therwithall prouokes every thing to rejoice.

Now comes the Bridal day, in honor whereof Vulcan, the God of fire, at the
intercession of Venus his wife, does with his element play his masters prize,
in presenting strange and delightful fire-workes upon the Thames: And Mars in
competition with him, to content the Queen of love, shows valiant and various
feats and stratagems of war; and the City, to show her love and legeance to
her Sovereign, with many sorts of stately shows disembowelleth the inmost of
her heart: and the king himself, because there should be nothing wanting in
this high solemnety, keeps an open Court full of all royal delights; In the
midst whereof the marriage is consummated, and the most loving royal pair
obtain the height of their amorous desires.

A MARRIAGE HYMN IN THREE BOOKS.
The Argument of the first Book.
In the Gods council, wronged Religion
Complains of injuries: Infernal DIS
Had sent forth legions from deep Acheron,
Who world her truth defeat, prevent her bliss:
JOVE seeing, and pitying her incessant pains,
A Marriage for her comfort praeordaines.
1.
MY mind replenisht with full hopes and joys,
Cannot contain it self in thoughtfull silence
But it must utter, both with pen and voice,
The royal marriage of high consequence:
Betwixt a German and the Britain State,
Where Peace and Honor met, Fortune and Fate.
2.
Come Juno, Goddess of true marriage love,
Come (called by charm) sweet Muses from your Mountains,
Come Nymphs, fair daughters of high thundering Jove,
Who govern Thames and Rhine, woods, waves, or fountains:
Inspire my aspiring spirit, while it indites,
This heauen-blest bed-league and connubiall rites.
3.
Let it be lawful for an earth-bred essence,
Passing in thought Olimpus crystal gates,
T'approach the Pantheon of your glorious presence,
And there behold your euer-blessed states:
Then on your altars, crowned with myrtle-bowes,
I Will offer He catombs and incense vows.
4.
Jove resident in his Imperial Towers,
Built on the pillars of Eternity
Calls for a Senate of celestial powers,
By which he gouernes with stability
Th'instable world, the ways of Sun and Moon,
And whatsoever in Heaven or Earth is done.
5.
From hence the Pleiads, Nyads, fierce Orion,
Arctophilax, the great and lesser Bears,
The Dolphin, Goat-fish, and fierce-hearted Lion
Take the full influence of their flaming spheres:
From hence all heavenly constellations
Derive their orders, influence, operations.
6.
Hence Nature takes her turns, plants their increase,
Matter takes form, Form beauty, Beauty fall,
Number beginning, Motion work and ease,
Place bodies, Bodies measure, Time takes all:
Hence Cause her causes has, Fortune her course,
And Fates which never yield their mighty force.
7.
Hence came the generous kinds of every beast,
And whatsoever swims in Seas quick tide,
And whatsoever lies on Earths rough breast,
And whatsoever flies or far or vvide;
Man more then others has attained Gods feature,
As being the chiefest, wisest, holiest creature.
8.
On him Jove placed his dearest love and care,
His everlasting pleasure and content,
Made him his creatures, graces, glories heir;
And made for him Seas, lands, aires large extent,
Keeping in form and strength he guides all right
For his defense, use, learning and delight*
9.
Therefore when Hermes called the starry peers,
As he was wont by mighty Jove's decree;
This holy Conclaue in full state appears
Clothed in new stately robes for their degree,
Passing the Firmaments bright Galaxie,
Striving who should exceed in Majesty.
10.
First heavens great King takes his Imperial stall,
His Queen and sister, Juno then has place,
Grandame Cybele sits next, feared of all;
Then Sol being past the Zones and Zodiak space
Lights from his Coach, drawn by fowrfire-breath'd steeds
Puts off his beams, puts on his Council weeds.
11.
Iuy-crown'd Bacchus from sweet Hamus vines,
Yoking fierce Leopards arriues with glory,
Castor and Pollux feathered Laedas twins
Met (who meet seldom) in this consistory:
Hither Alcides with his Lions trame,
Came borne on frosty Boreas bright-beam'd waine.
12.
Cynthia left hunting on Arcadia dovvnes
And wel-kept woods, to grace her golden sphere;
Brain-bred Minerua laid aside her frowns,
Although then armed with snakie Gorgons hair:
Rough Mars, grown mild, came clad in complete steel,
Ceres forsook her since, Fortune her wheel.
13.
Hither came Venus, Beauties graceful Queen,
Accompanied with Cupids dreadful power;
Near her was Hebe, Juno's daughter, seen
Adorned with scarlet robes, and Youths fair flower;
Chloris that crowns the spring, Maia the bright,
And she that brings well-formed babes to light.
14.
Aeole that pens in prison the rude wind,
Proteus which here does his firm shape retain,
Neptune with his aged Parents welny blind,
Fair Cimothe with all the sea-gods train;
The Nymphs of trees and hills with neat-kemd hair,
Here merry Pan, swift Fawnes, bold Satyrs are.
15.
The Mountain Pales and the Syluan God,
Vulcan though lame, yet quick in fliut-found fire;
Silver tong'd Hermes with his golden rod,
The spirit of rest and plenteous peace drew nigher:
Honor and Reverence with humbled eyes,
And sun-bright Majesty which never dies.
16.
Still cheerful Concord, Faith which never feigned,
Well-meaning soone-entreated Honesty,
True Justice, which by wrong-doing never gained,
With Phoebus Heliconian company
New-rich-attired: All took their several places,
And gave right oracles in doubtful cases.
17.
At last, (who should be first in Parliament)
In came Religion, with sad look, soft pace,
Deep sighs, moist eyes, pale cheeks, hair and clothes rent,
Submissiue gesture and deuotest grace:
Her followers were Sins-grief, Shames-feare, Worlds-pain,
She leaned on Truth, wan Hope held up her train.
18.
Like Cynthia smothered in a dropping cloud,
Or Sol when Phaeton Earths-face did burn,
In cole-black night his glorious beams did shroud,
So did Religion look, so did she mourn:
All-seeing Jove beholding her vexation,
Scarce held from tears in Fatherly compassion.
19.
Yet hiding his hearts grief with pleasing cheer,
Bespeaks her sad care, saying: Daughter what ailes thee?
Whence come the tears I see, the sighs I hear?
How chance thy comeliness, thy color fails thee?
Who durst wrong thee or thine, the Giants it may be
(Sweet say the cause) have risen from earth to fray thee?
20.
She welny sinking in a deadly swoune,
When sorrowing sobs would let her tell her moan,
Begins, yet weeps, lifts up her eyes, looks down,
Then said. And is my cause as yet unknown?
All wonder-working Jove hear, help, relieve us,
(Only thou can) and punish them that greiue us.
21.
It is not Grandame Earth, nor that huge brood,
Sprung of thy seed and hers, which wrought mine harms:
But worse, far worse: Dis, which did never good,
With craft and force his foul-mouthd legions arms,
And will not let me reign or barely rest me;
Orbide on earth, so much does he detest she.
22.
No sooner can I drive him out my soil,
But Hydra-like he comes with greater forces;
And grows more spightfull ragefull with his foil,
More dangerous politic in devilish courses:
So that, although my words renew my pain,
Yet is my grief so great, I must complain.
23.
At thy command you Gods that guide this round,
Attend with gentleness my doleful tale;
Mine adversary driven from off the ground,
Where he had raingd by wrong, and wroughting bale,
Madded with pride and hate could not endure
Himself so banished, my throne so secure.
24.
But fuming, foaming, gnashing, breathing flame,
He testifies his rage with open jaws:
He chafes and snuffs, he roares and howles for shame,
He beats his poysned breast with both his paws,
He bites his lips, and rends his ougly locks,
His cries at heaven, his ghosts at hel-gates knocks.
25.
His pride-swolne spleen, more fierce then his own fire,
Could not but bellow thus in vawtes of night;
Wa'st not enough that I which once was higher,
Then any creature both by birth and might,
Should first be cast from heaven, then driven to hell,
In everlasting darkness there to dwell.
26.
But that I should be thrust from out my chair,
Purchased by war and long in peace possessed:
What title, reason, right can they declare?
Although for vprightnes they would be blessed,
Their word's their law, their will's their equity.
Dis will not suffer this indignity.
27.
While wit or sword will serve I Will claim earths throne,
To move mine anger thus it may repent them:
Being more they got the field, the right's mine own,
Where then war could not, wisdom shall prevent them,
It never shall be said the Devil assaild,
Gave ore his cause, his heart or weapons faild.
28.
Let pitious Piety look unto her part,
Revenge adds force, I Will make a second venture;
My smart shall cause more then my self to smart,
The more she drives me thence the more I Will enter,
Such is my will: Jove keep thy firmament,
Thou shall not keep in peace Earths regiment.
29.
This sai'd he stayed and called the damned spirits,
The Goblins, Faeries, Furies, and their Dam,
Exaggerates his false pretended rights,
Dilating his dear loss and far-spred shame,
Go forth, said he, my brave Tartareons elues,
My shape, my pride, my guard, advance your selves.
30.
Make iulstre-entrance in your former states,
Recover your lost honor, wreak your spites:
Regaine your subjects, open our wide gates,
Restore new altars for your ancient rites,
By strength or cunning make my power some way,
Do good or ill so that I win the day.
31.
My victory shall judge their cause the worse,
Let Fate obey my words; Fortune my lust:
Let me but conquer: Let heaven, earth, Jove curse,
Scarce heard the furies this, but in they thrust,
And light their Ebon torches in hot limestone,
Flaming salt peeter, all-consuming brimstone.
32.
Adding the foame of Cerbrus triple iaw,
The most ilsauoring sink of Lernafen,
The venomus vomit of Chimera's maw:
Which burning bred annoy to Gods and men.
Mustring their hellish-ranks, an hundredth plagues,
A thousand hel-hounds with ten thousand hags.
33.
Tisiphone threw snakes and fire brands,
With whips of steel to move their fierceness on,
So that all cried, arm, arm, none doubtful stands,
But fly from hell to camp in Babylon,
And there in spite of truth which all controlls,
Will either loose themselves or win men's souls.
34.
There meager Couetise is general,
The standerd-bearer superstition:
Chief-gunner Pride, casts many a wildfire ball,
Error their purueyer wanders up and down,
To get them food while weak Hypocrisy,
Sits watching all their tents with heedfull eye.
35.
Yet that success may sort for their desire,
They cover their sore threats, keen swords, pale death,
And will use fraud before they show their ire,
Changing the titles which they took beneath;
Framing false rights, hel-fire bred soldiors,
Would now be known for heauen-bred Sauiors,
36.
For sons of Jove Earth took the slaves of hell,
Babell was termd a Reverend Sanctuary:
Idolatry Devotion, high pride Zeal,
Rash error a religious credulity.
Hypocrisy was called laws complement,
Thus every vice got virtues ornament.
37.
The other furies got them other Vestures,
The Cruel Wolves were clad with sheeps fair clothing,
Look lowly, seeming plain, with courteous gestures,
Outwardly prasing God, inwardly lothing.
Their speech was pleasant without murmuring,
Their hearts all ragefull hate and slaughter breathing.
38.
They sought the ruins of Nobles, kingdoms, kings,
If they deny them tribute, or contradict:
Or but refuse obedience in bad things,
Or not submit their crowns, they will afflict,
And curse them down unto the deepest hell,
False Menedemus was their Sentinel.
39.
Aye me, The Infernal Dragon did more harm,
By close dissemblance, then plain cruelty:
And therefore did not hiss, breath flames, or black troops arm,
But as old fishers catch the silly fry,
Covering their manly shape with goats rough skins,
So Dis by seeming fair, foul meaning wins.
40.
Aye me, so subtle was his craft and slight,
Not Pallas learned, not gold-tong'd Maias child:
Nor sly Vertumnus could unfold it right,
He meant such wrack, spoke so fair, looked so mild,
Doing most injustice yet he seemed most just,
This got him greatest honor, power and trust.
41.
He seems as not refusing heavens firm laws,
Neither thy new, nor ancient Oracles:
Thy fathers, nor they childrens old-said sawes,
And that which most confounds his practizes,
He takes as making most for his estate,
By this men's minds are most intoxicate.
42.
As cunning painters put their marble stayning,
On rotten cloth: He with contorted senses
Turns and ore turns all truth, all rights destrayning,
And straightning crooked things with his pretenses,
Sends forth new sects, new honors, golden showers,
To them that guard his sacrilegious Towers.
43.
These use all means to lift the patron higher,
All supreme titles and subordinate
Are given him better then he can desire,
Hence dares he what he list and thunders at
All earthly powers, as having thy power high Jove,
Takes and gives crowns as't please him hate or love.
44.
He pardons and lays guilt on absent men,
He claymes a sovereign rule on flesh-freed souls:
Fains a purge-fornace in his filthy den,
To cover his neuer-quenched brimstone holes,
Greater prevent less fears. Now men surmise,
His death life, hell arie, fire warmth, serpents flies.
45.
How often have sin and shame-bred ougly fiends
Spread errors far from thought, crimes from belief,
And sown profanenes in men's pregnant minds,
Which they no sooner knew but put in priefe
Their lessons; went beyond their teachers; taught
Others far worse; at which Megara laughed.
46.
How often his pild Priest offering, rash-vow'd gifts,
Applauds his own conceit, when like a player,
He crosses, kisseth, stands, goes, turns and shifts,
Mocking our powers with timeles senseless prayer,
As if our honor were tied unto the stage,
And we were naught, but what pleased this late age.
47.
Oh gods! can men so soon forget good rites?
Is this their faith and love, their holy zeal?
Are Temples thus unhallowed with lewd sights?
Think they to please, when in such wise they deal?
Worshipping blocks for us, they think us blocks,
And bowing to stones, they make themselves but stocks.
48.
They keep, and creep, and weep to gilded lead
Or wooden sticks, or dead-mens cloths or bones,
All that us worshipped, must be worshipped
Themselves, their carcases, their burial stones
Tendering to death, who neither can hear, nor see,
Those prayers that should be made only to thee.
49.
How often when any does resist their will
Swelling they snarle, and send forth dangerous wars?
Such was these Monsters boldned love of evil,
That mingling vitre, pitch, brimstone, steel-bars
(The matter bred near, the skill brought from hell)
Would feign have drawn, and driu'n us thither pel-mel.
50.
Digging the bowels of the wondering earth,
And laying their diuel-found engines in her veins,
They would have opened wider gates to death,
To pass in shorter time with sorer pains:
Their chiefest mark was my wished overthrow,
With all my better worlds by one fierce blow.
51.
Oh mischief worse then any spoke in fables,
Exceeding Danaus bride-beds, and Busiris,
Or Euxin Dians altars, Tantalus tables;
Pluto now cannot worse, whose fell desire is
To root out all my stock, unless he killed,
My choice Defender with heavens favors filled.
52.
For his destruction, who from infancy,
Because a nourishing Father to my seed
They would have slain his Queen, Lords, Commonalty:
For one all should have perished (oh foul deed!)
To drive all true devotion out my land,
They would not let Towers, Temples, Cities stand,
53.
Then might the world have known the deeps of Stix,
These mischiefe-broachers might have seen their place.
Who (could they with one blow, heaven, earth, hell, mix
With all their force) would all my rites deface:
Justice, with shame-fastnesse and modesty,
Fled Earth and would not see this cruelty.
54.
Poor I, so much and often amazed with grief,
So sore pursued with inquisitions,
Escaped scarce their hands and took me to relief,
They raised so many persecutions;
Only the care of mine me fortified,
For whose dear sake I would (if it might be) died.
55.
Why should I reckon all those grievous crosses
Thy children undergo: let heavens bear record,
No light or night can pass without some losses,
The night for dreams, the light for pains abhord:
These prove those true, so no where peace I find,
Fear pain, pain breeds more fear in my marred mind.
56.
Thus I that once brought forth so many people,
To multiply thine heavenly family,
Now dry, weak, old, can hardly get a steeple
But must lament their ruins and misery:
I that spread once my light as vvide as day,
To th'Prince of darkness am now made a prey.
57.
I which once raised my trophies in each land,
Made wholesome laws, ruled Nations with my rod;
Behold a vvretched fugitive here stand
Despised: and can thou suffer this great God?
Is this my power, my kingdme promised?
Is thy poor daughters dovvry thus demised?
58.
Shall I thus wander having no certain cell,
When other Gods can have their thousand shrines
Of gold, high-built, and free from dangers fell,
While thy loved offspring without lodging pines:
Yet would I not my brethren should have less,
Proud envy fits not my forlorn distress.
59.
Only let my poor deity complain,
(If thus I may be called, not being hence banished)
That the cold Sauromate and Scythian,
Who wander up and down, least they be famisht,
Driving their vvhole-built coats from place to place
Are, being more sure of seat, in better case.
60.
A vvretched mother, gods and men may call me,
Still must my sons be fighting for their own;
In every place and time strife does befall me,
For pains long past I will not now make moan:
My present fears expecting yet far more,
Make me forget what I endured before.
61.
This plague's not all extinct: hels malice boiles,
His mischief-plotting brain deuiseth worse,
Our holy writs he burns, and Saints he broiles,
Destroies whole countries with a blasting curse;
Appoints new laws, and sets new gods on hie,
All that gainsay by force or fire shall die.
62.
He still prepares more and more punishments,
For such as well profess my truths pure faith,
I see the massacres and banishments,
Prisons and poisons which in store Dis has,
Unless you quell their pride (blessed povvres divine)
We cannot escape: help then my self and mine.
63.
If any piety or pity move you,
(All Gods, in wisdom, should each care for other)
Forsake not my faint hopes and them that love you,
You which defend all creatures, do not loath her
Which is your friend and sister, though much grieved;
See my true harmeless children soon relieved.
64.
Father, if I have ever praised thy power,
And spread thy mighty name through Earths vast ground;
Deliver me and mine from this sad hour,
By thy right hand with which thou rul'st this round,
Thy Godhead, and my safe-gard I Will inuoke thee,
If neither thy care, nor my laments provoke thee,
65.
Yet pity thine own glory, thine own brood:
For if I perish, or my face must hide,
Thy fame and subjects, which thou boughtst with blood,
Will fail from thee which thou should not abide:
If yet thou vvilt not help yet grant this boon,
I may prevent all griefs by dying soon.
66.
Thus did Religion speak, and staid her speech,
Winding her arms and casting down her eyes,
As if she death did rather then life beseech,
But as when haruest-winds rush from the skies,
The leaves in vvoods a rustling murmur make,
Such a soft vvhispring did the Gods ore-take.
67.
This Goddess being so near a kin, so grieuing,
Moved much compassion in their tender spirits;
They thought high Jove too mild in governing,
Themselves too calm to Dis for his demerits:
They mean to comfort her with heavenly force,
And stop the Furies in their bloody course.
68.
So much were all incensed with her true tears,
When all-ore-swaying Jove commands them silence,
Shakes Heaven and earth with shaking his gold-haires,
And then speaks thus with dreadful excellence:
Daughter, my praise and greatest power below,
Free thy fair cheeks from tears, thy thought from woe.
69.
We nere did yet, nor ever will for-goe thee,
Thy love so deeply settles in our breast:
Our care and providence nere shall be fro thee,
Heaven is thy friend: My self with all the rest,
And if thou would the fates and me conceive,
What we determine, I Will declare, give leave.
70.
Hearing the boisterous threats of Dis foul jaws,
And seeing him loose his furies from stix flood:
T'infect th'erroneous world, they might break laws
Of Gods and men, confounding what is good,
Perceiving darkness ouer-spread this age,
And mankind much degenerate from our image.
71.
The primitive pureness all corrupt with lust,
The truth ore weighd with fond inventions:
Vice boasting over Virtue laid in dust,
The Dragon conquering by dissentions.
We saw (which moved us most) our children dying,
And heard their guiltles blood for vengeance crying.
72.
Often my wrath did burn to thunder-strike them,
But that the beauteous order of all creatures
Made me repent: for though I did not like them,
Yet for them would I not dissolve all Natures.
I knew their hour of horror was not come,
Wherein they should receive their damning doom.
73.
To be still bound in chains of dismal night,
Eternally to suffer grief and death;
Mean while how ere they deal by craft of spite,
He works himself more pain and shame beneath,
More glory to the Gods: No marvel then,
If they corrupt the lives and hearts of men.
74.
So soon so fin. He formerly possessed them,
Tempting but once he made them thoroughly evil*
Since when iniquity so much oppressed them,
Their Virtue easily yields unto the Devil,
The Crime of their first fathers concupisence*
Polluted all his childrens conscience*
75.
I see and suffer this: for to strike all,
Would void my treasure-house of thunderbolts,
Besides the vulgar often in errors fall;
Calling evil good, good evil, and so like dolts,
Thinking to merit, deserve their own damnation,
Hoping to save themselves, loose their salvation.
76.
I grieve indeed, and feign would help with signs
The faith of men, but that my words are plain:
Though they remember not my sacred lines;
Pitying I put them to no further pain.
For thus has heaven decreed from this high chair,
Faith is not forced, free will admits no fear.
77.
It is our grace that enters men's soft minds,
And there informs, reformes, conforms their will:
It neither draws or drives, but as it finds;
It shows here heaven, there hell, here good, there evil.
What so ere men do, being dead, they shall sustain,
The more they know so rer shall be their pain.
78.
When heaven and earth shall pass with horrid cry,
And all abused creatures plague their sin:
Yet I, that made all, would have nothing die,
Least mine and their foul adversary grin.
And therefore counsel rather use then strength,
That men knowing me might come to heaven at length.
79.
And with such order will I guide success,
Virtue shall nere so fail, nor sin so grow,
That every fury shall their wish possess,
As when they made all fit for that foul blow;
I suffered them to choose, devise, prepare,
Men, matter, place, yet all defeated were.
80.
They could not bring to pass their policies,
The good were guarded by mine hand and eye:
For I disclosing their deep villainies,
Brought them to death, which would have others die.
Who keeps his heart from guile, his hands from crime,
May now securely pass his peaceful time.
81.
And if sometimes the tempest of mischaunce,
Hinder his ease, heaven will thus breed his crown:
So (daughter whom I study to advance)
Full often thou findst my help being often cast down,
Nor could thy weakness have endured so long,
Unless my might had made thy faith more strong.
82.
Remember I did often thine honor nourish,
When men against thee threatened sword and fire,
I made thy Children more and better flourish,
Whom neither force could fear, nor meed could hire,
Hell strives in vain against thy power divine,
Thy kindgom shall remain as long as mine.
83.
What thou give other Gods, men shall give thee,
Thou shall have sinceere worship, sacred orders,
(Doubt not, chere up thine heart, hope, trust on me)
With comely temples and enlarged borders,
Thou shallt be Queen on earth, and Queen in heaven.
Judgment shall right thy wrongs and make all even.
84.
Though much is not now given, or seat secured,
Yet shall my Love augment thy precious name;
In minds and mouths of men, be still assured,
Behold thy primitive pureness, free from blame
Returned restores true joy: See Babel cries,
Because the ruling Dragon thence fast flies.
85.
His Crest is laid, fire quenched and sting rebated,
Dear love, sweet peace, sound faith, and virtue springs;
The furies and their terrors are amated:
Now Time his daughter Truth from darkness brings,
Remember but the Calydonian maid,
Thy fear, care, grief, pain, shall be soon allayd.
86.
Her name and manners great Eliza left her,
Her knowledge came when she became thy daughter,
Such grace I gave as near shall be bereft her,
So much I loved the former, that the later
Shallbe more blessed, and bless thee with more peace,
Making thine hopes and honor still increase.
87.
The fates agreed with me we should appoint her,
To be created of two Princely lines,
Before she came to light I did anoint her
With such a name and fame as ever shines:
No sooner had her blessed mother conceived her,
But into special favor I received her.
88.
I planted Virtues seed with gifts of grace,
Such as were nearest mine original image;
Love gave rare beauty shining in her face,
And comely parts that would augment with age:
Being borne, Ambrosia fed, while Venus washed her
With dews, which Dian dried, my beams refresht her.
89
Euphrosine left Cyprus to give Nectar
Nurse-like (at my command) this Babe to keep,
Nais (Calesto frowning) did affect her
And daunc'd about her cradle to bring sleep;
While Philomela sung, Nape brought flowers,
And strewed them on in parti-colored showers.
90.
Soft Erithrea put garlands on her head,
Fair Phione brought pearl-full cockle-shels,
Calipso came with many an amber bead,
The Nymphs played music with sweet silver bells:
All wundred at, kissed, honored, blessed, embraced
This pretty child: she them with smiling graced.
91.
Her countenance was cheerly amiable,
Bearing sure marks of a more graceful spirit;
Her eyes were comely, lovely, admirable:
No sooner did her feet the ground inherit,
But she trod under pride and ignorance,
And did her self to better things advance.
92.
How often did she clip her Parents neck
To witness her dear love, which they perceiving,
A thousand kisses give, a thousand take,
Ofher soft rosy lips fit words conceiving:
Such was her face both Parents might be known,
So gently, yet so royally it shone.
93.
Her cheer was pleasing yet with majesty,
Which drew the Graces nearer to direct
How she might speak and move her pretty body,
With grave decorum yet with mild aspect;
To temper all her thoughts, looks, gestures, motions,
With honest seemlinesse, holy devotions.
94.
Her smooth-large forehead kept fair shamefastnes,
Her tongue was guided with sweet eloquence,
Laughter sat smiling in her cheeks with gladness,
Eyes, lids, ears, hears, each had their excellence:
To dress her self she took light care, short leisure,
Grace, like a die, cast any way gave pleasure.
95.
Her goings were guided with a modest measure
Of all her moving parts: yet often she sat
And red her duties in my sacred Scripture,
Or heard while her blessed mother wisdom taught:
Her wisdom often abstained from childish toys,
Virtue to learn and think on heavenly joys.
96.
Such was Elizabeth in tender age,
Going beyond her years in Wisdoms lore,
Her Parents hope in grace, her sex in courage;
Thus did I cherish till I gave her over
To learn sound manners under thy tuition,
Pure Virgin thoughts with Princely disposition.
97.
Thou may record how soon she did conceive thee,
And practice rules of thy perfection,
Mine hopes are great of her, which nere deceive thee
For late inflamed with deep affection,
In clouds I past her friendly fathers court,
To look and vvonder at her stately port.
98.
I fixed mine eyes, mine eyes, my thoughts not filld
With seeing: the more I see, the more I gazed
How sweet her youth, how Pallas like her smile,
Her speech, looks, carriage: I was much amazed
Beholding beauties all agree to grace her,
None going before, nor following can surpass her.
99.
At her side stood with fair congruity
Truth, Peace, Faith, Simplenes, mild Honesty,
Justice and Love, with Ingenuity,
And marriage-making lovely modesty,
Suitors throng thither, Nobles did aspire,
And Kings of boundless kingdoms her desire.
100.
Dukes rich in treasures, titles, auncestrie,
Worth, arms and friends, with force and hope importune
Her sweetness taught them hope, fear majesty,
Not knowing to whom we will grant her good fortune:
Yet neither mighty Kings, nor famous Princes,
Whom power or pleasure called, were thought fit matches
101.
It is not worldly wit or will composeth
A due conjunction of so royal states;
Such marriages our Council here disposes
According to the fore-fight of their fates:
It was not flesh and blood, but heavens high breath
Ordained a bed-mate for Elizabeth.
102.
For I remember it was once my pleasure,
To search the depth of all antiquity
Concerning this: when Themis from her treasure
Of true praesages, spoke this verity;
For since this fear affrights thy thoughts, I Will tell
The Fates full ordinance, hear and mark well.
103.
When I first moved his child-eater from hence,
That Gods might better see their blessed offspring
Flourish for ever in glorious excellence,
He being exiled could hither no mischief bring;
Yet what he could he did,, and lurk below,
In hate of us devising men's deep woe.
104.
To work revenge against us, he ioyns his wagon,
With cunning malice, envious pride, and rage;
Yoking the Fox, Woolfe, Lion, Viper, Dragon,
He whips them round about the worlds wide stage:
They more by this incensed, with poysnous breath,
Mortals infect with sin, care, sickness, death.
105.
Not satiate with corruption of all natures,
He would have ouer-turn'd Earths axle-tree,
And ouer-whelm'd it headlong in the waters,
His right hand should and moved it horribly:
Which we soon feeling from our heavenly Tower,
Our saving arm stayed his destroying power.
106.
And forced our self condemned for to fly,
And chained him up in deeps of horrid night;
For though he spoild not all, he had wel-ny
So tainted all, that nothing stood upright:
Shook order out of joint into confusion,
Driving place and time to dissolution.
107.
Al Elements and their compounds broke their course
Both evils of guilt and pain were much augmented,
The golden turned an iron age or worse,
Men's bodies were (the cause unknown) tormented:
The spring began to fade from plants and flovvers,
East, West, North, South, did rage on Thetis bovvers.
108.
And dashed high ships against huge ragged rocks,
Quasht all earths beauties with rain, hail, snow-storms
Drove leaves frem fruits, fruits from their rebrentstocks
Hence Colchick poisons came from filth-bred worms;
Lernean Hydra, with Numidian snakes,
And venomous toades which bide in loathsome lakes
109
At first there needed neither plow nor harrow,
Cattle were free from drawing, men from driving:
Til Saturns gall sucked up earthes fruitful marrow
Which now scarce find the toyling hind his living,
Thistles ore come the thick sown thin-skin corn
Instead of grass weeds rise, of roses thorn.
110.
Then men most loved of us began to perrish,
Their native health and strength grew less and less:
No balm of Gilead could their heart so cherish,
But vnaccustomd grief would them possess,
Their blushing guilty cries though they dissemble,
Sighs fill their breasts, fear makes their bones to tremble
111.
Their cheeks were mard with tear^^ their voice with crying,
Their smell with stench, their taste with noysom^ food:
Their hair would stand upright, vain terrors flying,
Continual toil and age dried up their blood,
To this were added Rheumes, boiles, fluxes, fevers,
Every disease that soul from body seuers.
112.
Their inward, more then outvvard, man did sicken,
So that not Zeuxis art, nor Midas crown:
Nor Musicks harmony their spirits could quicken,
Nor stately palaces, nor beds of down,
Nor health, nor wealth, could mittigate their sorrovv,
Which each day thought extreme, was worse next morrow.
113.
Man differing from himself no rest can find,
Flesh fightes with spirit, and sense with conscience:
This hinders them from having a settled mind,
Or knovving what they resolve: Concupiscence,
Would thrust out reason from his native rights,
All thoughts and parts have iarring appetites.
114.
Then virtue was oppressed, and vice grevv bold.
To send abroad her filthy plagues, snakes, snares,
Fell malice and the insatiat thirst of gold,
Envy with lust which naught in public dares,
Hence brethrens blood profaned, the cursed ground
Iniquity did all things else confound.
115.
Heaven to restrain this punished them by waters,
By fiery meteors and hot thundering strokes,
By plagues that spared no man, or other creatures,
By mutual swords, which each vvrong speech prouokes
Yet left they not their sins, which I grieved at,
Sought how to mend their miserable state.
116.
And did enquire of Themis, if man's fall
Might be recur'd without such grieuances;
She sighed, and holy-fury caught vvithall,
Said, that albeit there were great hindrances;
Yet were the means appointed long ago,
That should recomfort men's increased vvoe.
117.
When Honor from right honesty shall perish,
The laws of Holiness and Virtue cease:
When men with worse faults will their former cherish,
And least hope is to call back truth and peace:
The Palatine with Britain joined shall bring
Earths golden days again, Times blessed spring.
118.
Then I considering every name and fortune,
Fit for performance of these high designs,
To hasten them the stars did much importune,
That either sex being borne of blessed loins
At the same tide might meet in marriage,
Restoring this long-wisht-for golden age.
119.
This true presage is now accomplished,
Black Dis has done his worst that he can do,
The worlds huge frame had welny perished;
But now heaven may rejoice and virtues flow,
Learning may flourish, mortals clap their hands,
Either in age and honor equal stands.
120.
Nobles, Dukes, Kings, give place, the Mayd's decreed
For the Count Palatine (oh blessed youth)
Before thy birth both Fates and stars agreed
In heaven to seal, on earth to show this truth,
Elizabeth should be designed thy Bride,
In equal worth, profession, love allied.
121.
Such is thy royal power and excellence,
That neither in multitudes or cope of lands
It yields to Dukes, or Kings magnificence,
Whether in birth, or arms, or style it stands:
The Auarian progeny was nere known private,
But with great honor kept an ancient state.
122.
The Palatines did not first raise that flood,
Though they may boast of high-bred auncestrie,
Which among the Germans has long noble stood,
But from the Trojans famous Pedigree,
On valiant Hectors true Nobility,
They ground the root of their blessed Family.
123.
Amidst their ancestors was Charles the great,
The greatest Conqueror which lived of late:
Adding brave spirits new grace with nobler heat,
And with him they can reckon many a state,
As Henry's which loved peace, Oath loved praise,
Phillip religion, Conrade walls did raise.
124.
Ruperts were ever studious, Lo^owics strong
Frederics invincible in bloody fieeld,
Their offspring held rich Empires wide and long
Which their strength, wisdom, justice, did well weild:
The Duke domes of Baviere and Franconie,
Most fruitful Brabant, Swethland, Saxony
125.
Hence warlike De^^myrh, populous Bohemie,
Hence large Pannonia chose out mighty kings,
The Roman Empire, every vacancy,
Relies on their known power t'vphold all things,
These ruld the tottering world, restores truths right,
And tamed proud rebels with comptrouling might,
126.
Beyond all these is Fredericks noble courage,
His manly mind, and wisdom in young years.
His virtues far exceed his tender age,
As in his valiant exercise appeeres,
When he bestrides and makes his bounding steed,
To run career or stop his headlong speed,
127.
At long race, rouud ring, or cross tournament,
He bears his arm, lance, body with such art,
His wand, spur, bridle, with such complement
Of strength and state adorning every part:
He bounds the ball with such dexterity,
So right he shoots, and that so smooth and swiftly.
128.
With force and quicknes he can throw steel darts,
And thereby pierce the Bore, Bear, Stags, wild Bulls,
Their Iauelin makes an entrance to their hearts,
And fixed on back and sides their bowels forth pulls,
So much he longs for well deserved renown,
He dares assault and often strikes the^ down.
129.
Meleager like near Calydons low lake,
He seeks and drives the wild beasts from their den:
Making the mountain woods and champion, shake,
With hunters music, here like Philopaemen
He gathers rules of war to camp or fight,
And dares meet foes as well as those excite.
130.
When full growth ripens his firm strength he shall,
Follow express, excel his ancestors,
In all his exercise he so does all,
As easy sports of earnest acts be mirrors,
Yet there is one-thing worthier then the rest,
Which fills with hope and joy my careful breast.
131
He favors wits yields Virtues their due meeds,
Encourages good scholars with reward:
Th'vnlearn'd may learn of him how to proceed,
For wiser books and sayings he does regard;
Searching all causes and their consequence,
How nature imitates our providence.
132.
The Liberal Sciences and histories,
As much as higher affairs will give him leisure*
All civil manners and state policies,
He reads, remembers and therein takes pleasure:
His tongue takes temperance, courage guides his heart*
VVisdome his hand, Justice each other part.
133.
As far from rashness as base cowardice,
From lust as from contempt of womankind:
From Prodigality as couetise,
As far from self-conceit as errors blind,
His pure white soul observes the virtuous mean:
Free from all pride, hate fraud or thoughts unclean*
134.
His life beseems men elder, wiser, higher,
Who for the most part have not such a spirit:
His people fear, Ambassadors admire,
All think his fortune far less then his merit,
Though that be rich and good, his worth is better*
His crown and honor great, his mind is greater*
135.
Over Stiria, Bipont, Newburg he well reigns,
With many Cities, mighty, wise, and healthy;
Which Neccaris with her clear streams sustaines,
And Rhenus with his current makes more wealthy:
Brurenia, fed with corn and wine, adore him,
Nortgoia, rich in mettalls, kneels before him.
136.
The nimble Vindelicians, hunting Licates,
With many more, too many to recite,
That willingly submit their potent states
Unto this Prince Elector, styled right,
As being the first of them in their election,
And could their counsels guide unto perfection.
137.
For I shall still guide and accommodate
His good endeavors: till with famous fate
He prove a semi-god in our high State;
Nor shall the following times obliterate
The worthy name, which fame shall spread beyond
The Northern Ise, and Southern fiery strond.
138.
Fret Babel, now defeated, rage and kick,
Thy superstition and idolatry
Falls much confounded by this Frederick,
Whom Fates ordained with British Crown to marry,
That both professions being joined in one,
Might bring thine errors to confusion.
139.
Their Crown and heart united, shall unite
Their love and faith, as long as heavens endure.
Daughter be comforted: Gods take delight
In Fates decree performed: Our hopes are sure,
The Palatine with Britain joined, shall bring
Earths golden days again, Times blessed spring.
THE SECOND BOOK.
ARGUMENT.
Loves Goddess and the Queen of marriage,
IRIS and CUPID send, with many more,
The nuptials praeordain'd wisely to manage,
They flying from Heaven with joy walk here below;
And kindly move great FREDERICKS affection,
Who swiftly sails to perfect his election.
1.
ALmighty Jove (while other Gods attended
His words) thus made their heavenly joys exceed,
No less then if a woman having lamented
Her sons or husbands death, should with good speed
Behold him safe-return'd from Countries far,
In sickness, want, or age, to comfort her.
2.
The present gladness put away past moan,
This whole celestial Senate was well pleased;
So that each rises from his golden throne
Embracing their dear sister now full eased:
Rejoicing at her honors new restored,
So that all sung this Oracle with concord.
The Palatine, with Britain ioin'd shall bring,
Earths golden days again, times blessed spring.
3.
But the Gods father bids his daughter dear,
Put on the crown and robes best made and died,
And change her countenance from heavy cheer
Then she with smooth-faced majesty replied,
O blessed Gods which govern earth and skies,
Whose wisdom, power, and justice never dies:
4.
You that make new from old and good from sin,
From out my sorrows have now brought forth gladness:
It lies not in my worth your grace to win,
To think to recompense with words were madness:
That either I live, or breath, or have my due,
It was, it is, and must be still from you.
5.
But since your promise my sad grief alaies,
Let me desire performance of the deed,
Let me no longer languish in delays,
Conioyne the means ordaind; the Gods agreed,
Consulting who might accept this office,
And speedily work this business for man's bliss.
6.
Who should reveal heavens will to them unknown;
And draw their parents to acquaintance kind,
Binding this league with adamantine stone,
And with affections move their tender mind,
Then Juno which has charge of marriage rights,
And Venus, Queen of lovers, joined their mights.
7.
Jove smiles, commends them, and commits this charge,
That every thing in order might succeed
He likewise other Gods commands at large,
That they should lend their helping hands at need:
Venus determines down to send her son,
This work might with his quiver be soon done.
8
Juno would Iris should accompany,
And therefore sent a messenger to cite her:
Who being called came from below the sky,
To see what work her mistress did behight her,
Lowly and lovely like a pure handmaid,
She stood attending while Salmona said,
9.
Deck thy fair head with orient pearls, put on,
Thy particouloured coat, pass with swift speed,
My region air, direct thy motion
Unto the Germane Empire and proceed,
Unto the shores of Necaris clear flood,
There for me thou shall work exceeding good.
10.
There the Bowarian Prince of royal blood,
A stately palace keeps, himself more stately:
Worthier to live in heaven then on earths mud,
This man the Gods assign considerately,
To wed Elizabeth and cause thereby,
Earths peace, heavens joy, men's true felicity.
11.
He shall repair the loss and ruins of time,
If thou can but affect his tender spirit:
Cupid will help thee with his powers divine,
With worthy love which grace and beauty merit,
Hence take thy course to Seas-encompast Britain,
Lying under the bright sunbeams of Charle his wain.
12.
Unto the Chambers of great Arthurs court,
Where pious James reigns and maintains our laws
Of holy truth and right, make thy resort,
His daughter move to love, her youth now draws,
To marriage, being of most, esteemd most worthy
For beauty, virtue, birth, and chastity,
13.
Let either of these conceive just estimation,
Of others work, let this good liking breed:
Let liking bring forth wedlocks combination,
Make all their parents to this match agreed.
Then Juno leaving Iris flies amain,
To do the business of her Sovereign.
14.
Venus mean while gathered her heavenly bands,
As peaceful concord Hymen ever merry:
Swift fame, flow counsel, who devising stands,
Chaste faith, good fortune, which will never vary,
The Gods of dancing, feasting, kissing, bedding,
Graces, and Muses came to make this wedding,
15.
Cupid, great Captain of this amorous host
With golden Darts which bred equal desire:
Was leading them from Jove's courts utmost coast,
To whom fair Iris with her troops drew nigher:
With beauty borrowd from the suns reflection,
And all fit colors for to move affection.
16.
Her clothing was not precious pearls nor gold,
Nor vvol, nor silk, nor any mixed of all:
But both exceeding vvondrous to behold,
There was invvouen religions rise and fall,
How first hels devilish fiends wrought her vexation
And then how heavenly Saints brought reformation,
17.
Her skill and art had curiously distinguished,
Th'euents of many years in many colors:
How when the Roman Empire was extinguished,
From that foul monsters head with extreme dolors,
Arose ten greater horns, and then a less,
Having face and eyes like man with mickle feircenes.
18.
Three of the former horns did soon disgrace,
And therefore spoke presumptuous blasphemies,
Not far from thence it shevved a vvomans face,
Mother of vvhordomes, Nurse of tirranies,
Sitting upon a scarlet colored beast
Bearing seven heads, ten horns on his foul crest.
19.
Her monstrous body was in purple clad,
And ruddy garments intermixed with gold:
Her ears rich pearls and precious pendants had,
Her forehead S^igian mysteries enrold,
A cupfull of Saints blood was in her hand,
Which drinking she was drunck and could not stand.
20.
Yet she calls neighbor Kings to deeper draughts,
Who madded with her fornication wine:
Follow her errors till they come to naughts,
She ore their Shoulders, does seven mountains clime,
Where sitting in Gods temple she decrees,
Laws to procure her power and golden fees,
21.
With policies attracting many a nation,
To worship her: Not far thence men may see,
Great Kings debased in adoration;
To kiss her whoorish feet bending their knee,
Nor yet with earths vast Empery content,
She would fame thrust Jove from his regiment.
22.
Usurping power in heaven and hells deep flood
Perverting all with superstition:
She will have Images compact of wood;
Of smooth clay, shining metal, wel-squard stone,
Made Gods, with hallowd incense burnt before them,
Oh Gods what fury makes her thus adore them!
23.
Can true religion be so bold and blind:
To think that in vain Idols Gods do lurk?
Or that the Carpenter has Jove assignd;
To dwell in trees, the potter in his work?
Or caruer wiser then Pigmalion,
Can call an heavenly power to dwell in stone?
24.
Oh shame! can men in such deep darkness walk,
As that their spirits should worse then spirits obey?
Can their fense, deities in pictures Chalk?
Will high-bred souls their bodies bow to clay?
No. God is greater then we can believe him,
No stock or*stone or body can receive him.
25.
Naught can contain his power containing all,
Behold the spears encompassing each creature:
The Sun and stars lightning this worlds huge ball,
Are all but shadows of his all-bright feature.
What can we see but footsteps of his mind,
Far greater, better, fairer are behind.
26.
Farther then heaven does earth, Jove heaven exceed*
To whom the sacrifice of prayers and praise:
With truth and vprightnes in words and deeds,
Offered on hearts as altars does best please;
To worship senseles trees is times old error,
Received of this huge monster for men's terror.
27.
Yet multitudes bewitchd with her would feign
With superstition and sedition
Their blindfold hearts and wicked hands profane,
The Lords and commons join in inquisition,
The devils deep forge, the slaughter house of saints
Which best and worst, yet rather best attaints.
28.
As many twinkling stars appear by night,
When Boreas blowing rough storms makes winter cold,
As hony-sucking Bees in thick swannes light
When Flora Tellus beauty does unfold,
So many men, wives, children, poor and rich,
All run to serve the will of this proud witch.
29.
Some were deceived with her hypocrisy,
Some came for fear of danger, some for gain,
None durst oppose himself (Oh misery)
To her that had so many martyrs slain:
So that more furious every day then other,
She grows, and truth with cruelty does smother.
30.
Makes merchandise of souls, sells sin for meed,
Tecelius was her her factor for these wares:
Giving indulgence for each heinous deed,
More then God would or Satan durst, he dares;
All men were mute, but Luther could not quiet
His pen and tongue seeing him so proudly riot.
31.
Has God (quoth he) given life to spend in sloth
And sullen fear? shall they so tyranize
In shameless error? I remain so loath,
Truth to defend with my poor faculties.
Both wit and speech from Gods free grace are given,
And therefore should maintain the laws of heaven
32.
They were not worldly wise which taught me first,
Stoics or Accademicks they might err:
But from truths ho^y fountain with deep thirst,
I drew the doctrine which I Will now deliver.
For truth and all that love her I Will adventure,
To see whether Gods or men this grief will cure.
33.
And sure but from some heavenly institution,
This holy zeal comes not: away vain fears,
I Will pass the pikes of persecution:
He seemd to say thus much, while trickling tears
Bedewd his reverend face: his eyes bright flame,
Showed, Others sin mooud him to greef and shame
34.
Religion made this hungry monsters prey,
Made him to pity men so much oppressed,
So that he seems to think what he would say,
To curb her madness and reform the rest:
Yet humane weakness ouertakes his mind,
Conceiving those great perils he should find.
35.
It may be thus he thought; how rash am I,
When all dissembling sleep, to rise alone?
Yet right religious love with sacred fury,
Knowledge with zeal drew faith and boldness on,
When he beheld such was their impious guise,
The Temple made a shop for merchandise.
36
Thus being incensed with diuinest heat,
Which could not see and suffer such profaneness:
He shakes the Tyrants falsly-grounded seat,
Opens her cunning plots, reprooues her vainesse,
His flock but hears and yields to what he said,
His adversary stands astonished,
37.
Next him did Zui^glius, full of holy courage,
Rise, casting seeds of truth in men's pure hearts:
Using Gods sword which bears a double edge
He batting brings to nougther arms and arts,
He tought and fought, he fair and hard means tried
Till for his faith and countries cause he dyed.
38.
Next him stood Calvin clad in sacred arms,
Thundering out vengeance against Romes usurpation:
His heart and pen a zealous anger warmes,
His words were followed with much approbation,
You might behold the beast fearfully shaking,
And her selfe-guilty troops the field forsaking.
39.
As Turtle-Doues on some high trees and Towers,
With wanton murmur seem to kiss and speak,
In their kind language testifying loves powers,
When they shall hear Jove's thunder-beare break
The clear air with strong wings, forget their sport,
And with swift speed unto their nest resort.
40.
So fled the fiends: On the other side with art
Iris had wouen the surgefull Ocean streams,
In which the British Island stood apart
From all the world: In midst whereof, high JAMES
Sat on his ancient Adamantine throne,
Trampling the neck of crowned Babylon.
41.
She mad, with grief and shame, writhes her foul train
Hither and thither to get liberty,
And with fell poison does her place distaine,
And sliding thence at length, not furiously;
As heretofore in threats or arms does rise,
But mischief plots and treasons does devise.
42.
As when the Plow a big-swoln Snake sore squeeseth,
She writhes and slowly draws her loins along,
Her body faints and pants, her lifeblood freezeth;
Yet her heart rages, and her three-fork't tongue
Hisseth out spite, her eyes and mouth flame fires,
Babell when she can least, most evil desires.
43.
Wit in this web had other works invented,
As racks, swords, flames, prisons, strange instruments
Of death, wherewith good-liuers were tormented,
With sundry kinds of dreadful punishments:
Princes at length find out this Tyrants pride,
Pluck all her plumes, her nakedness deride.
44.
The light of holy Truth, seemed then to shine
About the borders of this wondrous clothing,
Where likewise embroidered with gemmes fine,
A Canticle that all heavens quire should sing:
The Palatine with Britain ioin'd shall bring
Earths golden days again, Times blessed spring.
45.
Which when the immortal squadron had well seen,
All rancktin order leaves th'Emperial Towers,
Moving their nimble spirits the spheres between,
Iris then leads them to the Planets bowers,
Inuoking their asistant influence,
To bless their proiects, with due consequence,
46.
Her feet, whom wings and purple buskins grace,
Slide through the milkie paths which Gods often walk,
Then rainbow like she winds her circled race,
That this fair company no stars might balk,
Then all the fixed and wandering stars consented,
To make men by this marriage full contented.
47.
On their left hand they left the upright scale,
Which measures equal time twixt even and morn:
The Scorpion threatening both with tongue and tail,
Chiron with his full quiver and Capricorn,
The flood Eridanus, with fierce Orion,
Perseus and Hydrae's constellation.
48.
On the right hand, Calisto with her son,
Europaes bearer, Cassiopeias throne,
The Ram which Hell too much trusted on,
Castor and Pollux, the Crab, kingly Lion,
Arions Dolphin, Ariadnes Crown,
And Hercules with his all-daring frown.
49.
As when the King of stars, the God of day,
Apollo with his euer-burning globe,
Puts off his cloudy winters cold array,
And in the lively spring takes Floraes robe,
His flaming horses pass with iollity:
So went fair Iris and her company.
50.
She first began, they followed in their order,
Making their longest way seem short and sweet,
In passing heaven, fire, airs upper border,
To chant their Oracle with music meet,
The Palatine with Britain joined shall bring
Earths golden days again, Times bllessed spring.
51.
As when on clear Meanders crooked banks,
Or on Caysters flood, or through the sky,
The milk white Swans, pass on in lovely ranckes,
Such beuteous order had this company,
But sweeter music while they wau'd the wing,
Each other mooud with heavenly voice to sing.
52.
Then part they quires, and with redoubling voice,
Make Spheeres resound Fredereck, Elizabeth,
Let him have her, let her in him rejoice,
Let both unite their hearts in love* til death,
The Palatine, with Britain ioin'd shall bring,
Earths golden days again, times blessed spring.
53.
As violets excel the bramble briar,
Lilly the violets that the rose disgraceth:
Eliza so does Virgins: As Stars fire,
Moon stars, sun moon; so Frederick all surpasses,
Both pass all others of like age or birth,
Yet each of both does equal others worth.
54.
Now Jove determines to unite all nations,
Unto himself in spiritual amity:
Stopping the loathsome inundations,
Of Dis and his outrageous rascalry,
The Palatine with Britain joined shall bring,
Earths golden days again, times blessed spring.
55.
Let mortal men acknowledge this free gift,
Remembering Jove the cause, these two the means,
Which them from hells mouth to heavens throne vplifts,
And they with us, and we with them sing Paeans,
Apollo comes atir'd in mortal flesh,
To calm the troubled world and men refresh.
56.
The miracle of ancient years reuiues,
The boy that lying in cradle crush the Snakes:
And tamed the monster in our Frederick lives,
The Infernal Dragon and his lernian shakes,
The Palatine with Britain joined shall bring,
Earths golden days again, times blessed spring.
57.
This German state, old Room in state out strides,
The peaceful days of Numa time recites,
Who having a Nymph his wife, Muses his guides
Religion taught, increase her favorites.
So shall this Prince devise, endeavor, act,
What ere can peace and piety compact:
58.
Aegeria turns Eliza, who by any
Consulted shall give oracles of peace,
As we instructed her, she shall teach many,
How shrewd contention and stern war should cease^
The Palntine with Britain joined shall bring,
Earths golden days again, times blessed spring.
59,
Harpies with maiden face and Lions claws,
Changed into Locusts rising from hell smoke:
Would have devoured all with open jaws,
But that this marriage did their malice choke,
Princes may feed on delicates in quiet,
And rest at home in peace, these cannot riot.
60.
These two like Boreas children shall hence drive them
Back whence they came to the pit bottomless:
That catch men's house and land, and say they shriue them,
Earth shall be comforted, they comfortless,
The Palatine with Britain ioin'd shall bring,
Earths golden days again, Times blessed spring.
61.
Now Laedas twins descend from their high throne,
To visit land and Seas with doubled rays,
Cheering the plough-swaines and the mariners moan,
While their bright luster threatened storms allayes,
Their earthly honors are already greater,
Their state with us hereafter shall be better.
62.
Such is their faith and love, such are their beauties,
Such is their virtue to drive evil away:
Mortals with praise and vows perform your duties
To heaven: hels instruments pack while you may,
The Palatine with Britain joined shall bring,
Earths golden days again, Times blessed spring.
63.
Thus had these glorious Nuncios past the spheres,
Fit mansions for the free or fixed lights,
Whence this world (whom we count so vast) appears
As here a barly-corne in their clear sights:
Yet coming nearer they discern the Mountains,
The Champain, vales, woods, rocks, seas, floods and fountains.
64.
They seeing men show like Ants, kingdoms like fields,
Cities like Cells: more nearly shape their course
Toward the land which Tuisco's godhead shields,
At first with manly, now with heavenly force:
There they saw Rhene receive Neccars clear flood,
On whose high banks the Palse-graues palace stood.
65.
Which once was but an homely shepherds coat,
Till Conrade built it in so gorgeous frame,
It may compare with Cities of great note,
For people, buildings, orders, traffic, fame:
Hither they take their flight, and silently
They pass the confines of this territory.
66.
Then entering this brave Court, not better grounded,
Then kept with Iouiall hospitality,
With one consenting voice, which never sounded
In mortal ears, that place they sanctify,
Saying: oh dear gods that keep and guide these rooms,
Blessed be your powers, bles your Prince, nobles, grooms.
67.
Oh mansion which with Babell may compare,
In that thy walls contained an honored Youth;
That in his power and courage can and dare
Relieve the oppressed world, restore the truth:
The Palatine with Britain ioin'd shall bring
Earths golden days again, Times blessed spring.
68.
Now Phoebus red with heat and burning haste
Had left our world, and drencht his fiery throne
In Hesperus warm waves, now had he past
With his bright beams to the Antipods unknown:
And there vnbridling his flame-breathing steeds,
From toil, with Nectar and Ambrosia feeds.
69.
Now night with duskie chariot past the skies,
Filled heaven with twinkling stars, earth with dark silence,
Fanned sleep on mortal creatures wearied eyes,
That staid all business, buried each offense:
The Palatine forgets his Princely cares,
With grateful ease which crept on him unawares.
70.
His Nobles had given over themselves to rest,
Naught could be seen and heard in all the City*
Then Cupid, seeing his time, (as he knew best)
Began his ancient art and charming dittie;
With poppie-seed he does all senses dim,
That mazed with sleep they might not hinder him.
71.
He setting then his fellows each in place,
Where they might soonest further his design,
With lantern wisely closed, and stealing pace,
Visits the chamber of the Palatine:
Carna the Goddess which of doors takes charge
Unloosing hindge, and lock, makes entrance large.
72.
And that so softly, that no mortal hears;
The God of love seeing this, goes till he came
Where Frederick took his rest, void of all fears,
And then discloseth his before-hid flame:
He might behold his Princely limms and face,
Which even in sleeping could not loose their grace.
73.
Beholding, he much wonders at his fairness,
In every part so well proportioned,
With such maiestick form, such pleasing rareness,
As few by nature are like fashioned:
Then envy taints his heart, as if high Jove
Had in his frame showed greater art and love.
74.
For if in sleep he such affections move,
His forehead, ey-browes, cheeks, lips are so pleasing
How will he waking, speaking, looking prove?
How comely shall his body prove with dressing?
Oh worthy, blessed Youth, do not grow proud
Of that which liberal nature has allowed.
75.
Fortune has given thy person good success,
Fate orders all things for thy further good,
All heaven consults how it thy State may bless,
And match thee fitly both for worth and blood;
This said: with a loue-causing golden dart,
He softly bares and aims at his dear heart.
76.
Yet aiming he beheld so sweet a breast,
He smooths and strokes, but could not wound, or strike;
My darts (he said) are dangerous, let them rest
They Phoebus pierce, or those I do not like:
Thy feature so near mine moves my remorse,
Thy tender soul needs no such violent force.
77.
I will not use my wonted arts to thee,
So laying aside his arrow-breeding-smart,
He noints his breast with juice of myrtle tree;
And laying his mouth to mouth, and heart to heart,
Embracing his firm body with both his arms,
And with divine heat his pure entrails warmes.
78.
Then with sweet kissing takes and gives him breath,
And in that breathing does infuse desire;
Applies his torch the Princes lips beneath,
Who panting for cool air, drew loves quick fire:
Which being breath-carried, swifter then an arrow,
Had quickly pierced his heart, head, spirits and marrow.
79.
Which the Prince feeling sighed, and sighing waked,
Sleep vanished from his eyes, and with him Cupid:
Yet so that his infection nothing flaked,
And made him with admiring welny stupid:
That he should sweat and burn (the cause unknown)
His mind was mazed, himself was not his own.
80.
Not otherwise then if one thunder-strooke,
Lives yet uncertain whether he live or no,
Tries whether he sleep or wake: So did he look,
Whether they were dreams or truth, which vexed him so:
Yet while he looks, his heart shut up the passion,
Which being enclosed works deeper inflammation.
81.
He, though but little understanding love,
Yet understands his thoughts are deeply changed,
Not knowing it end, he knows it so far move
As that himself is from himself estranged:
First he loves not, yet would love instantly,
Then loves, yet sees not either whom, or why.
82.
He thinks how sweet a thing it were to marry
An equal bed-mate: dreams would not so fear him,
Nor cares arise by lying so solitary;
Or if they did a Comforter were near him:
On the other side his vnexperienc'd age,
And much-loved liberty such thoughts assuage.
83.
The tender simpleness of honesty,
The bitter cross of an unequal yoke,
An inbred shamefastness and chastity,
With awful reverence of his Parents, choke
His former youthful thoughts, yet love commands,
And who the force of conquering love with-stands.
As Rhine increased with brooks, more tosseth
A laden ship, the more men shall resist;
So loves fire fiercer grows, when reason crosses:
Now Phoebus beams had banished nights dark mist,
Aurora cheered and cleared all mortal eyes:
The Count leaves bed, yet could but weakly rise,
85.
For knowing no cause of this uncertain fit,
The less he knows, the more he stands astound;
As a fierce horse refusing the first bit,
Snores, fomes, and stamps, as if he skorn'd the ground:
His hoof strikes up, his nostrils breath out fire,
So Frederick would, but could not leave desire.
86.
His passion every day does more increase,
The more it wants satisfaction;
No study, sport, or time can it appease,
So small his comfort, such was his distraction:
His cheeks grew pale, his lims did thoroughly languish,
His life was loathsome, with continual anguish.
87.
Thus while afflicted with loue-doubts and fears,
He finds no fit mark for his hearts affection:
At length accompanied alone with cares,
Walking he spies by chance, or by election,
The lively picture of Elizabeth,
Among other Ladies whom she far surpasses.
88.
No sooner did he look but like: for cold
His body shook, his knees began to tremble,
His heart and sense to fail. Then love him told,
Being loath his purpose longer to dissemble:
She was the Paragon whom Gods assignd,
For his content he should no better find.
89.
His eyes assured him her proportion
Was such as Jove beholding might affect:
His tongue (late mazd) had now got use of reason,
And could not choose but thanks and praise direct
Toward heavenly powers, that seeing him lover prove
They would allot him such a worthy love.
90.
Who would not seek thee (says he) so fair a prise,
When you dread gods) call me though much unfit:
Only let not mine hopes in vain arise,
As you began my purpose, prosper it,
This non pareil for beauty, virtue, state,
Shall be my first, my last, mine only mate.
91.
So favor you my love. While thus he said,
He could not waiue his looks from the fair table,
Nor thence remove his wits astonished,
Until this object wondrous amiable,
Removed into his chamber, night and day,
Being near his lover, did his grief allay.
92.
For this, which he reputes his only treasure,
He thinks his lodging dearer then all places,
In this he takes his most delightful pleasure,
Here he spends all his time, no sport embraces,
Neither the theater, nor bounding horse,
Nor following heart nor hare with darts or course.
93.
Hunting the foaming Boar with spears or Snares,
Or catching birds with nets or slimy birch,
For these, or home-vsd games he little cares:
His mother and kind equals wonder much,
And offer comfort: like Pygmalion,
He woes his Image with devotion:
94.
This upper face of colors him deceiues,
Changing his wondering thoughts a thousand ways
Sometimes her person present he conceiues,
Offers to touch, draws back, fears to displease
Then pardon begs as if he were too bold,
His eyes from shedding tears themselves scarce hold.
95
As if it spoke or heard, he speaks, replies,
And sometimes kisses, adds, as if it felt,
And to those looks his looks do simpathise,
Drinking deep love he does in fancies melt,
This gladded Iris in a whirlewind lurking,
When she saw Cupids first attempt so working,
96.
Therefore she noints his temples, with spike-^ar:
To cool his love with due consideration
Truth might be known and reason might be heard,
Her absence fully found now stirs more passion:
How far (quoth he) was my poor sense bereau:
When for a substance it a shade conceive?
97.
Why burn I thus in vain, unknown, (...)
Why send I not the Virgins father word?
And marriage crave? It may be theil'e be^^^^^^
With my nobility got first by sword,
Neither in length, nor strength of provinces,
Nor honors, I need yield to mighty Princes.
98.
Suppose my country less, my people fewer
Then his: my portion should not be disdaind:
Mine ancestors have been great kings; I am sure
Kings have their daughters, they kings daughters gaind
Why should I not then write, writing ^s (...),
Why go I not and speak my mind at full*
99.
Then shall I see what I so much admire,
Yet wherefore should I go? Cupid may flatter,
She seems too fair, I may too much aspire,
Kings would with Kings unite, perchance her father
Already has espousd his gracious maid,
To some great Prince, and then mine hopes are laid.
100.
Why should I follow such uncertainties,
O venture where I cannot well prevail,
Oppressed peers maintain their auncestrie,
And titles, much more such: why should I fail?
The Gods I think) affected me to love her,
And therefore they will help I hope to move her,
101.
They first prouok'd me by fair Imagery,
What shall do? shall I be known so light?
Or dye not known? unless I love I die,
Yet rather dye then be despised quite.
Shall I not follow love, who tells my mind,
The fates her for me, me for her designed?
102.
Surely the picture calls and proffers grace,
If I should err, it is but love and youth
Which erres, this is esteemd a venial case
My books declare how Cupid has no ruth,
But makes men follow by fire and swords, and floods,
Forsaking their own parents, lands and goods.
103,
You powers divine if any love true love,
Or have inspird me with affection:
Let me protest the same, and humbly move,
Your help to bring this business to perfection:
As ere my parents in heart honored you:
As I them imitate with service due.
104.
As I hate sin and would live pure til death,
(...) your good speed I Will pass the narrow Seas,
Further joy Journey toward Elizabeth,
Who beautifies great Britain, there I Will please,
Myself atleast, with seeing, hearing, kissing,
Though like a stranger) all contentment wishing.
105.
She Will know percha^ce and answer mine eyes language
Thus being resolved he calls his counsel sage,
Bids them prepare a navy for his passage,
With all things fitting such a stately voyage:
And showing the cause does ask his mothers leave,
Least his unknown departure might her grieve
106.
The heavenly consort seeing so good success,
And well foreseeing this blessed marriage near:
Rejoice, and for this journey soon adresse,
The Seas of winds, the air of clouds to clear*
Fame ran before this happy news t'impart,
Moving the Kings, and his fair daughters heart.
107.
No sooner shone the day prefixed for going,
But his brave ship with golden garlands cround,
Well rigd, and dressed, her owners honor showing,
Was drawn into the river from the grownd,
Earth smild, though loath to leave them, when it was lancht
The Water glad of such a burden danced
108.
The rainbow Goddess did alay the wind*
East, North, and South were quiet in their caves:
Only the Western gently came behind,
No storm exciting star troubled the waves:
When the Prince Palatine with German Gentry,
Into their barck prepared first made fair entry.
109.
Then Hymen loosed the cable from the shore,
Fortune with good luck spread the silken sails:
The graces each in order take an oar,
While pretty fancy the ship foreward hales,
Cupid as chiefest Pilot at her helm sat,
Giving smooth way that waves and winds orewhelm not
110.
A multitude of well mand' Barks attending,
This expedition slice the smooth faced flood.
But the brave Admiral more swiftly wending,
Proceeds like Argo made of AEmon wood.
Leaves Heidelberg of old men called Budor^^,
With Neccars silver streams and fruitful shores.
111.
Emers with hopeful speed, the flood-swolne Rhine
Salutes the City Worms once Baugious ground,
Ancient Mogunce where printing did begin,
Drusus toumb, Bachreck, many a neighbor town:
Goar with hundreds more which are his right,
Mosellas current then appears in sight.
112.
Col^n first built by Nero's Agrippine,
With cloud-high Towers; and Temples threatening stars;
The famous Inlish, Champion Gelders, Grigne,
Holland ennobled with sea-search and wars,
Containing within three score miles short bounds,
Twenty nine Cities with four hundred towns.
113.
The right hand of the now-enlarged River
Leads them unto the lower Belgic banks,
Which waters driven by winds often cover;
And when they took the seas with ordered ranks,
The gods allayd all storms, winds, waves, and rain,
So that they smoothly ran along the maine.
114.
Then by fair Iris instantly besought
A troop of Sea-gods led these gallants on,
Palaemon on a Dolphins back was brought,
Neptune by chariot, Phorcus and Aegeon
On tamed Whales, Neptune with his old Queen,
Swimming on sea-borne horses might be seen.
115.
Shrill Triton, Glaucus, each Nymph thither trips,
Speio thought fair for eyes, for hairs Thicaea,
Nerine for brows, Thalia for her lips,
For white neck Leu^othe, for paps Nicaea,
Thetis for feet, and Panope for hands,
For shoulders Melite most admired stands.
116.
Slender armed Galathe with hundreds more,
Begot by Ne^eus and made complet fair,
The Sirens which Vlises tempted sore,
Showed their fair beauties, used their voices rare:
Each had a several fashion of disport;
Yet all in mirth and music well consort.
117.
One seems to stand at gaze, another swims,
Some show their face, some lift their bodies higher:
Some turn their sides to view, some all their lims;
Some seem to come, yet fly when you come nigher,
Some leap, some diue, some walk whereas men could not,
All would be seen, yet seem as if they would not.
118.
First one, then other shows their hides, their head,
Then altogether turn, a circle making:
Another follows when before she fled,
Now their fine hands, now limber arms are shaking,
Now rise they right and then fall on their backs,
Then on their breast, each way no beauty lacks,
119.
Their bodies turning in so many shapes,
Cut furrows in the main, make bubbles rise,
Seeming to fly like hares, they play like ape
Casting salt water each in others eyes,
They sprinkle silver drops on every ship,
Like lambs in April they bound, wind and skip.
120.
Part sits on fish to trim their moistened hair,
Drawing it forth and drying it by Sun:
Combs it with ivory teeth and lays it fair,
Binds it with Coral, flowers and Indian stone,
Part with a watchword calls for Glaucus flocks,
And taught them how to dance amidst the rocks.
121.
The Daulphin swift, the Sea-calfe hugely throted
The Lobsters bold, the mullets nimbly running:
The Turbuts soft and Scaves for fatnes noted,
With all the scaled fish in waters wonning,
The greater now left eating up the less,
The less came forth to grace this business.
122.
Part of the Nimphs, divided with much joy,
To several quires applied their voice and heart:
In praise of Sea-borne Venus and her boy,
While Tritons cornet sweetly bore a part,
All showing his company so gracious,
Made Fredericks journey not seem tedious.
123.
Albion appears ere they were aware,
And then the Mariners amain cried land;
The Prince with hope increased, with lessned care
Said: heartily welcome to mine eyes dear sand
Thou Region loved of God, mother of love
Speed me with swift success, and happy prove.
124.
While thus he spoke the Navy sailed along,
Entering the streams from Them and Isis flowing;
Then he commands those that were young and strong,
To leave their other works, and fall to rowing:
Until they came to London, where the band
Of Germain Youth, with many welcomes land.
THE THIRD BOOK.
ARGUMENT.
Britans receive with joy triumphantly,
The Princely Suitor, Rhein's great PALATINE,
CONSVS by night moves JAMES his Majesty;
ELIZA love by CVPIDS power divine:
A match is made: the heavens and earth rejoice,
And FREDERICK enioyes his royal choice.
1.
NO sooner tidings to great Britain came,
Of Princely Fredericks arrival there,
Whose Virtue mounted on the wings of fame,
Flies through the world admired every where.
But straight our gracious King to grace him more,
Thus welcoms honored Honor to the shore.
2.
Wales royal Prince attended with a train,
Of worthiest Nobles, and of chiefest blood,
With many a gallant ship cuts through the main;
Making the Sea seem like a stately wood.
The while her shore was hid with people standing,
So closely troupt to see these Princes landing.
3.
Where our great Prince with kingly curtefie,
Gives this great German royal entertain:
Inuiting to the Court of majesty,
His princely self with all his honored train,
Extending to those Lordings whom he brings,
Such Iouiall welcoms as proceed from Kings.
4.
Forth with a stately steed with sparkling eye,
Whose all proportion nature beautified:
Adorned with richest arts Ephippirie,
Is brought this brave Bauarian on to ride,
Whence with their Lords in honor through the throng
This royal pair of Princes trots along.
5.
Where the promiscuous people, all contending,
Whose eye should first and most be fed with sight
Of these two Princes, to their Palace wending,
Stopped their fair passage: There observe you might,
The beggar placed before the rich behoulder,
And young boys climbing on the grave man's shoulder.
6.
Here careless runs the scholar from his book,
There hurles the Smith his hammer from his hand:
Here leaves the Merchant shop, and all to look,
And there the Suitor lets his mistres stand,
Here the suspicious Maeck leaves wife at Venture,
With millions mo to see this German enter.
7.
Mo were not seen when proud Romes Consuls went,
In pompous triumph to their Capitol:
Nor when to grace their Captains, who had spent
Their bloods their countries honor to extol,
The potent Romans in triumphant sort,
Received their victors at their Latian Port.
8.
Then when our greatest King, our gracious Queen,
Our mighty Prince, with troops of royal states:
Whose outward graces made their inward seen,
Received Prince Frederick at their Courtly gates,
Whose curious eyes employed with observation,
Of what he sees, strike him with admiration.
9.
The places yield him more then most content,
(...) ^^^^ers, habits, gestures of our men,
(...) as vncouths, all the way he went
(...) meaning, and then praises them,
But with so sweet a tongue, so comely grace,
As seemed an offspring of imperial race.
10.
Perhaps (but scarce believe I) such an one,
Was the fair lovely Phrigian Ganumede:
Whom rapt from Iila to the Gods being sho wne,
By mighty Jove, the Gods all wondered.
His speech, grace, beauty, then perhaps excelld,
But now by Fredericks more then paraleld.
11.
Thus the beholders this great Prince commending,
The Prince beholding and commending all:
From their fair steedes in royal sort descending,
Approach great Britains court imperial.
A Court repleat with greater majesty,
Then in great Caesar's ever mortal see,
12.
Walls decked with rich Meonick Imagerie
Wrought with Arachnes best Pallaclian hand.
A cloth of state of Thebane tapestry,
Where our chief Caesar's throne of state does stand,
Seelings compact of Tellus purest mould,
Garnisht with bosses of Opherian gold.
13.
Here sits our Monarch on his lofty throne,
And hither he admits this prince of wonder,
Who to his highness was no sooner shown,
Bnt straight discends to this Bauarian under.
Where after Kingly gracious embraces,
Thus gins a speech to give him further graces.
14.
We joy (great Prince) with thanks to you and fate,
For honoring our Court and Country thus,
Wishing we could your Grace remunerate,
Yet toward requital this receive from us,
What ere our countries yield, command as free,
As our apparent heir to Brittanie.
15,
Here Frederick Count Palatine of Rhine
Thus makes reply. Greatest of greatest Kings,
To render thanks for your high grace is mine,
Who is it that loves heaven or heavenly things,
To whom Fame shall report your Godly zeal,
Your gracious rule of Britains Commonweal.
16.
But straight is mooud like Shebaes royal Queen,
To seek the place where Salomen does live:
That he may see the like was never seen,
And hear those lessons only you can give,
That he may learn aright to serve his God,
And rule his contries with a Princely rod,
17.
Its this (high Monarch) has Rheins Palsgraue mooud
To hear and see your Princely Majesty:
With your fair offspring whom my heart has loud,
(With that his cheeks receive a rubie die,
There stays: where straight as to their royal brother,
The Prince of Wales and Rhine salute each other.
18.
With that our regal and resplendent Queen,
The happy Mother of a hopeful spring,
In gorgious robes most glorious to behold,
Presents her self before the potent King.
Where with respect repleat with Majesty,
She bids the Prince welcome to Brittanie.
19.
Next with her golden tresses dangling,
Which sweetly sport them with her sweeter breath,
Clad with rich Tissues all with gold bespangling,
Comes beauties mirror fair Elizabeth,
This Jove deserving Princess, nows adrest,
To welcome this imperial German guest:
20.
With such a speech as Pallas might give place
Such Majesty as Juno might amaze:
Such beauty as fair Venus hide her face,
All to Eliza yielding all their praise.
Ercinia never saw so fair a feature,
Among all her Nimphs as this celestial creature.
21.
Struck with amazement of this heavenly sight,
Was lovely Frederick, trembling cold as ice
The mighty Prince now wants his manly might,
And like he is to fall down in a trice,
(Strange metamorphosis) nor had he stood,
Had not her rosy lips revived his blood.
22.
A modest maiden kiss Nectarian sweet,
Deigns faite Eliza to the danted Reine,
In whose pure cheeks when both their lips did meet,
The roses with the Lillies did combine,
No marvel for the kiss no sooner done,
But straight loves fire to kindle was begun.
23.
She feels a spark but knows not whence it came,
Her virgin breast nere knew what Cupid meant,
The spark increases til it proves a flame,
Yet ignorant withal of loves intent,
The person, birth, and gesture being seen,
Of Princely Rhein do please this beauties Queen.
24.
Nor rests it there, but what she likes she loves,
And what she loves, desires to obtain,
No less then he, she lovers laws approoues,
And feels no less then he a lovers pain,
To look at what she loves she lifts her eye,
But dare not look for fear some other spy.
25.
Again she opes her two caelestiall stars,
A little twinkling on this princely mirror,
Straight shuts them up; within herself at wars,
Love hearts her eye, maids modesty strikes terror,
Thus in loves conflict with chaste modesty,
She loves, and fears, she sees, and dares not see.
26.
But yet so closly could not this young lover
Move the fair Orb of her Siderian eyes,
But straight the louesick Palsgraue could discover,
And meet the turn with due obseruancies.
Hundred eyed Argus Io nere so tended,
As he Eliza til these greetings ended.
27.
This thus and more performed in princely sort,
Dark sable-coulor'd Nox, comes trotting on,
Mounted upon Allaster, from the port,
Of black Cymmerian pitchy Acheron,
Phoebus with fiery chariot flies away,
Post have to give Antipodes the day.
28.
Mean while a guard of gallant Gentlemen,
Addressed in skarlet liueries every one,
With Cognizants first drawn with Pallas pen;
Then wouen with silver, gold, and pretious-stone:
In which, Palladian art did vive appear,
King JAMES his arms, great Britans Monarch there.
29.
These worthy Waiters, worthy of their places,
Present their burning tapers before the King,
Who with the Queen, and all those Princely graces
Addressed himself to Ioviall banqueting:
Which being done (as fitteth Princes best)
They all retire them to nocturnall rest.
30.
King JAMES no sooner pressed his lofty bed,
And Somnus comes to close his Princely eyes;
But Morpheus his fancy wakened,
And Consus counsels god, he straight espies:
Who softly comes with grave and ancient pace,
Comely, though old, with reverence in his face.
31.
With his fur'd night-gowne, shoes, and cap for night,
In his right hand he brings a golden book;
Thus he presents himself to JAMES his sight,
Much like old Philon both in speech and look:
Who, for in younger age he taught his Grace,
His Highness therefore knew him by his face.
32.
Who mildly standing at our Sovereigns feet,
He thus begins to speak with gravity:
Great Britans Monarch, give me leave to greet
Thy mighty self, and then to question thee:
Why'mongst so many do thou toss thy mind,
A match for fair Elizabeth to find.
33.
Behold great Jove by heavens own direction,
Has sent thee one, the mirror of his time,
Whose Auncestry next, under your protection,
May with the best compare of Kingly line:
Whose regiment increases with his years,
In aequi-pollence to the mightiest peers.
34.
More wise he is then young age can afford,
Whom mighty Jove both loves and offers thee;
He does profess the same religious Word,
And linked in Christian league of amity:
Make this thy Son, this Prince will only prove,
He worthy hers, she worthy of his love.
35.
Th'emperiall heavens command me tell thee this,
Which promise thee and them a royal strain;
Who shall (for heavens intentions cannot miss)
Restore the golden ages back again:
This said, Mirh-breathing Consus goes his ways,
Leaving the King half sleeping in a maze.
36.
He with mature deliberation,
Who 'twas was sent, and who it was that sent him,
Together with his pleasing grave relation
What good Jove offered, and what good he meant him:
These reasons force (quoth he) our full consent*
Being such, as one had been sufficient.
37.
But most of all, Religion she does move me,
Which all Kings ought to strive for to the death;
It Is that great German makes us most to love thee,
And hold thee worthy our Elizabeth.
Thus Britans Caesar in his thoughts revolved,
And thus he spoke, and thus he them resolved.
38.
But do you think Eliza's rest was peace?
Think you the Princely Virgin was not troubled?
Hersleep was lessened by her thoughts increase
On Frederick, thinking straight her thoughts were doubled,
To him no sooner thinks he to be kind,
But straight her Princely self comes to her mind.
39.
Aie me (quoth she) what sudden motion's this?
How is my breast clogged with a bitter sweet?
Cupid has surely taken his shaft amiss,
Elce how could Fear and Hope together meet:
I know not how but yet, methinks, I see,
Such uncouth passions both at once in me.
40.
Love shall not trouble us, were love so bold
To enterprise our royal Vigin breast
In vain it straue to win our maiden hold,
That nere shall yield let Cupid do his best,
Not though loves fire within me were as great,
As that Octaean or Trinacrian heat.
41.
Unless my father give his full consent,
Unless my King appoint me whom to love:
Loves arrows are in vain but idly spent,
And of no force should all loves forces prove.
He Is worthy Love, but aie what boots to like,
Unless my father do the bargain strike.
42.
Love? love would sure but wither in the blade,
Prove barren, fruitles, langvish and so die;
Ah Frederick (but that is it makes mee'fraid)
I wish my father held the as great as I,
Great God of Love as thou have played thy part,
To make me Love, so move my fathers heart.
43.
Procure him get a marriage worthy me,
It is not far his highness need to seek,
Fortune presents fit opportunity,
Do Cupid and I Will kiss thy lovely cheek,
But yet in all be sure thou draw a dart,
That shall not miss Prince Frederick to the heart.
44.
Mine eyes are only plea'sd with his fair brow,
Me thinks and he should Love to, by his face;
Yet and perhaps the German loves me now,
If outward gesture show the inward grace,
Why should not I then answer Fredericks Love,
Whose were enough an Empresses to move.
45.
Answer (quoth I?) what answer shall I give?
A virgin, Princess, daughter to a King:
Except my Father, under whom I live,
Say to me This is he whose nuptial ring
Thy Princely self must wear, this is the man,
Love him: then could I answer soon, I can.
46.
Thus with a sigh her speech she smothereth,
But love so would not close her waking eyes,
Which way so ere the Vergin turns, vimeth,
She could but think she Frederic espies.
And more she thinks (such thoughts can fancy move.)
The lovely Prince is suing for her love.
47.
Nor yet when radiant Phosphorus appearing,
Vshers Aurora banishing the night:
The tawney livery of bright Phoebus wearing,
Can all-harts-conquering love be put to flight,
The less her love she seeks to bewray,
The more it is seen by seeing every day.
48.
How often would she unto her mother Queen,
Sweetly commend this Princes pedigree:
How often would she have blushing ready been,
To tell the titles of his Emperie,
His manners now, then is godly youth relating,
And then his hopes of age prognosticating.
49.
Her mother Queen observes her speeches well,
And smiling says; Our Daughter is in love,
She likes it tho, and to the King can tell,
Her passions, which his Highness does approve:
Yet least she should perceive they did rejoice,
They ieasted with the Virgin for her choice.
50.
But afterward the sapient King perpending,
Great Jove's commandment, Rheins great family;
His Virtues, Kingdoms, and Religion tending,
All to advancement of true piety:
What fear 'twould strike to foes, to hell what terror,
What love both Court and country bears this mirror.
51.
Admiring and rejoicing in his mind,
We see in this (quoth he) Jove has his hand,
Our vision was none idle dream we find,
Wherein we did receive the heavens command:
Since heaven and Earth and all do promise us,
This Princely marriage shall prove prosperous.
52.
When therefore royal Rhine sollicets me,
(For that befits his errand and our state)
I will obey Jove's heavenly deity,
And knit that knot which heavens make fortunate:
Be bold to sue, and feareles to receive,
Rhines lovely Frederick shall but ask and have.
53.
Now as the Caedar or Semelian vine,
Hourly increases in the vernall spring,
Spreading their branches with a tender twine,
So love increases in this loue-sick King;
His eye inflames his heart, his heart endures
Love flames, still feircer, which his eye procures.
54.
No marvel for the eye procures the flame,
Feeds it procured, his eie's both fire and fuel;
No sooner looks he on this beauteous dame,
But by reflection feels a heat more cruel.
Hers do the like, whose cheeks, with ruby die,
Bewray her heart, his spies she by his eye.
55.
Sometimes (but who can write the art of Love?)
Their lovely eie-browes speak one to the other;
Sometimes a beck, which secretly they move,
Maks known the thought which silence seeks to smother,
And often withal when they assunder be,
They sigh for sorrow that they cannot see.
56.
But Frederick more impatient of delay,
Casts with his Princely Self what best to do,
How he his thoughts may to the King bewray;
And won the Lady, love incites him to.
The former favors which the King had shown,
Making him hope Eliza was his own.
57.
Whose speech presented to the King and Queen,
They grant fair passage to his Princely shute;
Love hid before now is in the Lovers seen,
And now has got a tongue which erst was mute,
Now reuells court, now royal festiualls,
London prepares against their nuptials.
58.
And now my muse since many winged Fame,
Does with as many tongues as Argus eyes
The wisht-for Hymenaean rites proclaim,
Of these two great Imperial Majesty's:
Help me to nurse that more then Pean mirth,
In heaven conceiud an'd brought forth on the Earth.
59.
Now moist Aquarius with his gelid vrne,
On Pisces poures his cold AEdonian waves:
Now watered drops to ysicles do turn,
And AEol brings his armies from the Caves,
But all to show sure signs of good to come,
The times are altered by supernall doom.
60.
Aquarius to Aries gives place,
Pisces to Taurus, winter to the spring,
AEol within the Cauerns hides his face,
Nor can feirce Vrsa (wonder at the thing)
Squize the hoare snow from twixt her horrid nails
Nor vex our Climate with tempestuous hailes.
61.
Warm Delius packs hence the frosty cold,
Whose fair approach calm Zephyrus ensues:
With violets be decking Tellus mold,
And fostering her Infants with his dewes,
Fau^^ius likewise in green liueries,
Adornes each field with flowers of sundry dies.
62.
Which, of the mountain Nymphs no sooner seen,
But admiration enters at their eyes:
To view earhs frosty mantle turned to green,
And Summer thus with Winter simpathize.
Contending who should first trip to the flowers,
And fill their skirts to deck their pretty bowers.
63.
Here get they Roses, there Pinckst Daffadillies,
Sweet- Marierum, Carnations, Camomel,
Primroses, Crowfoot, Marigolds, and Lillies,
Venus-hayre, Sothern wood, Daisies, Pimpernel
Rosmarie, and Time, Cowslips, with thousands mo.
Of diverse sorts whose names I do not know.
64.
They cannot tell for their variety,
Which first to crop, where first to lay their hand:
So thick the flowers in every meddow be,
They know not how, where, or whereon to stand
Variety gives Earth so great a grace,
With Natures store enricht in every place.
65.
They cannot tread but on the herbs they rush,
Nor on the herbs but press their leaves so sweet:
Nor on the leaves but their sweet flowers crush,
Nor crush the flowers but gild their harmful feet,
Nor gild their feet with their depressed dewes,
But savor odoriferous ensues.
66.
Now Phillis with new tresses wantoneth,
And Princely Poplar shades the hollow brook:
Now Philomela sweetly warbleth,
Among the branches glorious on to look:
The heavens aspiring Lark begins to sing,
In welcome of this unexpected spring.
67.
The Naiades all laying mantles by,
To bath and sport them to the rivers bound them:
Where weauing Garl^nds on the Gowlans nigh,
Before they leave the lovely fountains crown them
Th'vnfrosty streams run by the warm bank side,
Checkquerd with ornaments of Floraes pride.
68.
The Rhenist husbandman with axe in hand
To lop dead branches and to dress his vines:
Seeing their Spring, struck with amaze does stand,
To view in winter such right summer signs:
But seeing new sown corn shot to the blade,
He blessed himself, supported with his spade.
69.
True birth-exploring Rhenus hearing news:
Forth from his Limphane waves the match was done:
For which both heaven and earth made joyful shows,
With Heaven and Earth to make a third begun,
His Reinish waters turned to Reinish wine,
And all his sands like golden Tagus shine.
70.
Fair Heidelbergian Neccaris runs tripping
VVarlik Germania hops and leapes for joy,
With all her nimphs Ercinia falls a skipping
All, all their best to show their mirth employ,
Men thought to see the frisks of Sea and Land,
Orpheus again had taken his harp in hand.
71.
To orient pearls his pretty pibbles turning:
Oceanus puts forth his Seagreen head:
Al rapt with joy (no place was left for mourning)
He curls his locks his beard begins to spread,
When straight for silence becking with his rod,
The winds are whisht and thus begins the God.
72.
Great Neptunes nephew Monarchs of the flood,
Your silence and attention is required:
That which the Fates foretold us for our good,
What Heaven, and Earth, and Seas so long desird
Now comes to pass, the Palatine of Rhein,
Is linckt with Britains blessed, most royal line.
73.
From whose fair loins the heavens have promised us,
An issue hopeful, happy, fortunate,
Who to the world shall shine most glorious,
Restoring age her former golden state,
Now wartes shall cease, Envy shall be bound,
And cast in darkness, never to be found.
74.
Now shall the Smith of swords a mattock make,
And darts to culters turn, the Earth to carue:
The martial halbert shall be made a rake,
Bucklers for scuttles, fauchions for sickles serve.
The Soldiers Arms shall be the husbands now,
And fierce wars yield unto the peaceful plow.
75.
The Ox shall hold the Demi-lance in scorn,
The drum and fife shall henceforth cease to sound:
Our trumpets now shall be the Hunters horn,
Whilst silly Wat runs panting fore the hound,
No poisonous VVolfbane now springs in our field,
No stinking Hemlocks shall our meadows yield.
76.
The Serpent Elaps shall no poison keep;
The Dragon Amphisbana dwine away:
The Wolf no more shall vex the silly sheep,
The Lion on the Ox no more shall prey,
The fatal Raven, and the ougly Owl shall fly,
To Athos, Babes and those deserts by.
77.
The Olive branch now crowns the head of Peace,
The Bramble yields the savor of the Rose;
The Thorns drop mirh, wild Vines with grapes increase,
The Cork tree honey, the Willow pepper grows,
The Alder sugar, the Beach-tree Cinnamon,
Where Acorns grew, sweet Balsam springs thereon.
78.
Ginger, Cloves, Saffron, Spiknard all do grow,
And spring with plenty in the untilled field,
And from the Rocks does sweet Ambrosa flow:
The Winds do Aromatic odours yield;
The watrie places spring Malobathrum,
The Fountains milk, the floods pure Nectar run.
79.
Seas native pibbles gild the glorious shore,
And the salt foame to Amber does convert;
Rich Plenty now presents her golden store,
And unto Mortals does her gifts impart:
Old yields to New, Quarrels to Peace's might,
Impiety to Faith, and Wrong to Right.
80.
Vain Superstition vailes to Piety,
Deceit to Truth, Doubt unto Demonstration,
Darkness to Light, Pluto to Jove's deity,
Hell to bright Heaven, Damnation to Salvation:
All shall be brought to pristin aequipage,
While to the world reuerts the golden age.
81.
Rejoice Germania, joy to see this day,
And thou possessor of the light most clear;
The worlds admired great Britania,
In honor of this change let joys appear:
Such happiness attends this royal choice,
As equal cause nere had you to rejoice.
82.
Nay all be blithe, let plows keep holliday,
The Ox refuse his yoke, let harrows rust,
The lopper leave his vines half lopt to play;
The Clown cry hoigh, with points of lether trust:
For vines vnlopt shall yield a fruitful store,
And earth vntil'd shall spring as't did before.
83.
Let hearts want hatred, wrath be banished quite,
And hasty words of modesty bereauen,
Let suits so cease that Clarks have naught to write;
In stead of these sing Carrols to the heaven:
Let Courts be scaffolds for Clyents to gaze,
While Common Pleas be turned to common plays.
84.
Let Caesar's self descend to see this sport,
Great Lords be merry with the lowly Lowne,
Cry helter, skelter, let the laws come short;
Crafts-men leave work, May-games in every town:
Let Courtiers act some amorous Comedy,
With Iigs at end on it, to the Plow-iaggs by.
85.
Let Soldiers lay by Arms, yet sleep secure,
Let only Love be held a Warrior;
Let beds be fields where they the fight endure,
The conquered being pleased with loss by war:
Let never cloud dare to approach the day,
But let the times with pleasure pass away.
86.
Let all the world be filled with Hymen's voice,
The world in wished Vacuna's government,
At good to come let Britans all rejoice,
And every year in Happiness be spent:
Let every month, each day, hour, minute be,
Crowned, blessed, succesfull and from perils free.
87.
But Thee, the best of Kings, heroic JAMES,
The true Defendor of the sacred Word;
As now this world thy royal worth proclaims;
So ever let all worlds the like afford:
Ever extolling thee with golden phrases,
Who gilds the world with thine immortal praises.
88.
Thou mighty Offspring of Imperial Race,
From whom great Kings do claim their greatest blood;
Yet thy known virtues give thee higher grace,
Thine Offspring great, thy virtues make thee good:
Thy speech, thy prudence, wisdom to foresee,
In all assayes to all apparent be.
89.
Thy royal breast scorns worth by mere opinion,
Nor holds chief honor to possess a Crown,
Thy honored thoughts are how to raise Religion,
And in thy kingdoms pull Abuses down:
In thee gods fear, with innate Piety,
And mild aspect, is mixed with Majesty.
90.
God-like thou art slow to wrath, swift to reward,
Iuditious to rule and help the right;
Thy Subjects to thy laws have due regard,
Won by thy favor, vnconstrain'd by might:
By thee, the Gospel, from thy Temples rent,
That true-light-giuing word has government.
91.
By thee the Sheep escape the jaws of Hell,
Without thee Faith would scarcely find her name,
Thou manst her cause, and do perform it well,
For which the world eternizeth thy fame:
Thou amongst thine own art set in Honors top,
Amongst faithful Aliants held their chiefest prop.
92.
Thou art what heavenly gifts can make thee be,
What Subjects prayers, what Art can fabricate,
What Fame can yield thy sacred Majesty;
What can be added to thy glorious state:
If ought, then this thou do prefer it is known,
Religions cause in all before thine own.
93.
Kings were denied thy royal sons to be,
Because they did not hold their faiths aright,
Thine end was how to establish piety,
And on that end most blessedly have light:
To happiness now nothing does remain,
Unless the same be acted over again.
94.
Be Iouiall then (great King) cast care away,
Rheins blood is not inferior to the best,
With whom thou have confirmed a league for ay;
And given the Gospel an eternal rest:
In which there is more cause of wonder shown,
Then when was made the Scots and English one.
95.
Wherefore again be Iouiall great King,
And thou blessed Queen, of Denmarks royal line;
Thou fairest fair, thou beauteous, Beauties spring,
Thou humane pattern of the powers divine:
Be Iouiall (sweet Queen) cast care away,
In honor of this happy Nuptial day.
95.
And you (choice pair of Princes) join your hands,
And with your hands your hearts, with hearts your loves,
And with your loves, speech such as love commands;
With speech join kisses like to Paphian Doves:
From whose fair loins, heavens grant a royal line
To reign for ever Rheins great PALATINE.
96.
You speckled Glaucian Nymphs, you flesh-fish Elues,
Come from your creeks, skip from your pumice pores,
With rishy haire-laces trick up your selves,
And with fair flowers bestrew your flood-gate doors,
To get the Topaze stir your little bones,
And make your shoares to glitter with the stones.
98.
And you pure floods, skud with your crystal streams,
And crown your Founts with flowers of various sorts,
Sing, but let Io be your merry Theames;
And let your hearts be cogniz'd by your sports:
All help to grace the Nuptials with us,
And so left speaking great Oceanus.
99.
From every chink skips out a Nereiad,
Old Nereus, their father, being first,
With all the rest: All of these tidings glad,
It was the thing for which they long did thirst;
With joyful acclamations one by one,
They kneeling, make this hearty Orizon.
100.
For ever live great Britains King and Queen,
For ever live Rheins Prince and royal bride:
For ever may their Ofsprings both be seen,
Long wished for, hoped for, Heavens ever be their guide,
Nor let us ever cease to pray for them,
To which they all devoutly said Amen.
101.
Amen quoth Thames, Grant, Dariom, Owse and Rheine,
Skern, Scurfe, Swale, Seuerne, Humber, Iske, and Clun,
Wisk, Weer, and Wharfe, Nid, Tease, Tweed, Trent and Tyne,
Air, Sheld, Tay, Calder, Ure, Danow and Dun,
Wa^me, Cald^e, Peterel, Frith, Lune, Ments and Chain.
With hundred others whom I cannot name.
102.
While Neptunes brood thus triumph on the Seas,
Venus must needs have Vulcane play his part:
This royal match does so the Lady please,
In show of honor, he must show his art,
Which to obtain she kindly comes unto him,
And like a suitor thus begins to woo him.
103.
Love, to my self, then is my self more dear,
The heavens Protector, and the Gods defender:
To whom Jove owes those bolts make Mortals fear,
Who to my self thy Love did ever tender.
To whom I owe for kindness done at Troy,
And for the Arms thou made my warlike Boy.
104.
Yet ere I pay my loving Vulcane know,
I am constraind to sue to thee for more,
Thou Wilt not deny thy wife and Goddess now,
Thou never did deny me ought before,
It Is not for martial Arms (sweet heart) I sue,
W'haue done with those, we will hence bid wars adue.
105.
Indeed I once was forced for that to woo;
But not so now, And it is for my self beside:
Nay and a thing befits thy Venus too,
I must not, nay I will no be denied,
For if you do indeed i will hang the lip,
And never with thee more to meadows trip.
106.
Sweet thus it is, I hear by heavens design,
A royal Nuptial shortly like to be:
Twixt Frederick the Palatine of Rhine,
And fair Eliza of great Brittanie.
And how King James bestirs him every way,
To make great Triumphs against the wedding day.
107.
Londons great Thames they all in have prepare,
Where ore they build Briggs, Chains, and Fabricates
Of Art, which well with Pallas may compare,
To entertain these high imperial States.
Where they in honor of this day desire,
To show on waters, powers of subtle fire.
108.
Wherefore (Sweet Chuck) for my sake, ready be
To help these fire-workes, do a masters part,
Thou art the God of fire, then ouersee,
And teach the English thine Ignean Art.
I would not for the world that Art should miss
For want of Thee, and then she gave a kiss.
109.
Now as the waxen Torch no sooner feels
The scorching heat of Lemnius fire approaching:
But straight's on low, even so this Suitor steeles,
Her Lemman Vulcan with alures incroaching,
He bristles up, and turning white o'th eye,
He thus to Venus gins to make reply.
110
(Sweet Duck) what need you to entreat me so,
You may command, and I must needs obey,
You know I am yours whether I will or no,
Fair Venus will is Vulcans lock and key,
Besides for this, trouble your self no more
I heard what hand Jove had in this before.
111.
Kind mouse and (then he knept) lo heeres my hand,
For thy sake I will do them what I can:
I and my forge shall be at their command,
Or never hold me for an honestman.
As I Am a God, (and then again he knept)
Turned white of the eye, and so the Clubfoot slept.
112.
No sooner did this Nuptial day adproach,
And Trumpets warn them of this glorious sight:
But some on foot, some horst, some in their coach,
Repare to Thames with all their maine and might.
Where Barges, Oars, and Scullers did appear,
Aweight for Atlas big enough to bear.
113.
Troopt with his peers great Britains King ascends
A lofty stately Turret made for view:
Vith whom Queen Anne, Prince Charles, Prince Frederick wends,
With fair Eliza (oh that heavenly show)
So rich, so grave, Maiestick, are they gone,
As if great Jove ascended to his throane.
114.
With that lame Vulcan from the lofty Tower,
Straight falls to work and gins to stir his stump:
Where with a peale of ordnance for an hour,
Gives them fair welcome all with many a thump:
Who yet before his thundering fires were shown,
Makes one good leg (God knows) he had but one
115.
Next after this the squibs skip up the air,
Makes clouds by thousands, spread them like a net:
Such like as when the Titans durst to dare
The Gods above, and they on Phlegra met,
Such were the flashes, cracks, and heavens face,
As when the Gods had Giants in the chase,
116.
But no such fear, withal the nimble fire,
Gives ears contentments, pleasures to the eye:
The cunning squibs while they the Heavens aspire,
Make twenty shapes on house and casements nie:
They skip, they run, they fall, and keep a quoile,
While all the Thames was ready for to boil,
117.
Scarce this was done, when by Vulcanian arts,
A sell, fierce, fiery Dragon gins to mount:
Who with his tail the air so swiftly parts,
As makes a thunder, Teeth withouten Count.
Whet, gnash, and crash, his Irish Dart tonguethere,
Threatens to kill and poison who comes near.
118.
Saint George on horseback with his spear and shield,
Confronts the Serpent, and with martial looks
Makes toward the Dragon in the airy field,
And with undaunted spirit his spear he shook,
The Dragon, in whose scales laid heart and might.
Prouokes this worthy warrior to the fight.
119.
Both with like courage and with equal force,
They first aloof charge each the other there:
Saint George being mounted on his warlik horse,
Assailes the Dragon with his conquering spear:
The furious Dragon fiercely does assail,
To meet the encounter with his scale armed tail.
120.
Where he attempts with twining circling rounds.
To graspe the Warrior and to tear his skin:
George with his spear preuents those murdering wounds
And gives the hurt the Dragon meant to him:
When mad with ire he makes a horrid yell,
Spoutes thundering fire, earth trembling at the knell.
121.
Now careless of himself not dreading ill,
The Dragon flies to fight near hand to hand:
He fears not death so he his foe may kill,
The battle doubtful for the while does stand,
They slice the air with blows on either side,
Till light and thunders through the Regions ride.
122.
At last these doubts Saint George the valiant
Puts out of doubt, and has the Serpent killed:
The puissant victor up the air does vaunt,
While Earths below with acclamations filled.
Thus bravely ending this Vulcanian fight,
Another show presents it self to fight,
123.
On Thames a steepy mountain Vulcan founds,
Where bushes, thickets, herbs, and flowers appear:
VVhereout a kennell of wel-mouthed hounds,
Do rouse a stately stagge, who flies for fear,
He wheels, imbosts, and runs for fear to dye,
They follow chanting with a heavenly cry.
124.
At last, so hotly they the sttagge pursue,
They pinch the haunches of the fearful Dear;
Air reboating thunders out a new,
He strives to escape, but still was near the near:
Forcelesse at last, seeing no way but death,
He brayes, he weeps, he dies and vanishes.
125.
Next after this a work of admiration;
For Art, Devise, Nouelty, and Wit
Whose true description passes my relation,
Is show'n these royal Princes as they sit:
A seeming Martial Navy, bravely manned,
Fraught with rich spoils, coms sailing toward the land
126.
Thames groans to bear the burden of the weight,
Their Oars do make the water seem to rore,
Their glittering streamers daze the lookers sight,
Their drums and trumpets deaf all near the shore:
Thus the brave warlick Britans do assail,
A Turkish Tower which they attempt to scale.
127.
The Trumpets sound defiance to the Turk,
The Turk defies the Britan to his face,
On either side the soldiers fall to work;
Turks to sink ships, Britans the Tower to race:
The Tower the Britans batter from the Main,
To sink the ships, the Turks shoot back again.
128.
But yet at last maugre the Scythians might,
The valiant Britans have attained the land,
Provoking of the miscreants to fight;
And while the Turks on wall and Turrets stand,
With Scythian purfles, steel Tartarian bows,
And forked arrows to resist their foes.
129.
Yet in despite of these the Britan enters,
Trumpets, and drums still heart them to the battle,
Darts like to snow-flags fly in thousand splenters;
Cannons make waters, air, and earth to rattle,
Cast from Phalarrick instruments of wars,
The wild-fires fly in number like the stars.
130.
Look how when Aquilo in caves ypent,
Aeol unwitting, breaks his prison doors,
And boisterous Auster has the Cauerns rent
To front his Adverse, whilst the welkin rores:
So fares it with the Mountains and the Valleys,
The while the Britan, against the Scythian sallies.
131.
Thus long they combat still with fresh supplies,
Both pel-mel meeting make their armors clatter,
Turks from the Tower fall thick as hail from skies,
While warlike Britans do their Turrets batter:
So fast they fall, as scarce was one remaining,
Of all the Turks their lofty Towers maintaining.
132.
With that, the warlike Britans Mars-like bold,
With ladders strive the Turrets top to wend;
First at the scout-holes taking nimble hold,
Thence battlemets, and thence to top ascend:
Where the Turks vanquished Britans do display.
St. George his Cross in honor of the day.
133.
Thus was the first day spent, where Britans make
Their hearts appear, by their apparent shows;
Where Lipareius for his Venus sake,
Presents these uncouth arts to Princely viewes:
Now Mars withal to please his Cyprian Dame,
Next day prepares a chief Olimpian game.
134.
A stately place within the Court is built,
Smooth as a die, round, empty, spacious,
Prepared for Martial Knights to run at tilt,
And try in arms who was most valorous:
In glittering armor every Gallant's bent,
To try his warlick force at Tournament.
135.
Where on great horse with rich Caparison,
Th'heroick Britans long the Tilt-yard ride,
Who bravely, ere the tilting was begun,
Themselves into two equal troops divide:
Where to his lance, his Horse and armor trusting,
Each Knight prepares in order for the iusting.
136.
No sooner silver trumpets gin to found,
But straight two Champions one at other fly,
Their furious steeds make furrows in the ground,
Their shiuer'd spears pir, whistling up the sky;
Thunders and lightnings from their Arms and spears
Fly, while their plumes be fired about their ears.
137.
Thus each in Order with his horse and lance,
His martial foe seems stoutly to defy,
Where with such fury they themselves advance,
As fear and wonder strike the standers by,
Such warlike feats of arms and Chiualry,
As mighty Mars himself, admired to see.
138.
Next after this they do erect a Race,
To which the swiftest coursers should repair,
With proclamations made in every place,
A goulden Cup should be the winners share,
The prize, day, hour, and place known every where,
Unto the course repair they far and near.
139.
Where, when they came each leads his nimble steed
Ore the fair course, scarce can the keepers lead:
They champ their golden snaffles, while they bleed,
They foam, they neigh, the earth they proudly tread,
They prank, they fret impatient of delay,
Each hoping 't is he shhall bear the cup away.
140.
Being at the start and all in order set,
Says George pronounced, the dust begins to rise:
Now happy's he can from his fellow get,
Their nimble feet outstrip the lookers eyes,
While soon the swiftest gains the golden prize,
With thousand praises and ten thousand cries.
141.
Next this Palestrian wrastlers in the field,
Their bodies suppled by Ceromatists:
To try by force, to force each other yield,
With naked arms and breasts approach the lists,
Where the behoulders all admire to see,
How ably agile these Luctators be.
142.
At first encounter, cunningly they set
Their stable nimble feet, next with their hands
This seeks, that strives, how surest hold to get,
That he may spoil his Adverse as he stands:
Where arm with arm, and foot with foot combining,
They trip, prevent, chip, fall with inturns twyning.
143.
Others (for joy) with great dexterity,
In Tuthill fields at Goaff play up and down;
Where the balls mount with such celerity,
As air makes Echo. Others at Ballowne,
With wooden bracers make the bladders fly,
With much contentment to the gazers by.
144.
Soon after Phillis with her Nimphs attended,
Calls forth the Forest, her Windsorian fawnes,
To dance, who dance, that dance cannot be mended,
So gallantly they frisk it ore the lawnes:
The groves and valleies echo with the playing,
Of Harps, and Bag-pipes while these Nimphs be maying.
145.
In honor of these Nuptials all rejoice,
No Town, or City, but congratulates,
No Temple but it filled with Hymen's voice;
No bells but ring, no one but bless the Fates:
No street, no entry, no man's windows seen,
But's strewed, decked, trimmed, with flowers and rishes green.
146.
But that Palladian Palace built for Kings,
That spaceous beauteous, White-halls joys surmount,
That glorious Court with heavenly music sings;
Sweet as the Muses 'bout their amber fount:
The Citizens (like swarms) conglomerate,
To see these Princes and their Nuptial state.
147.
Comic Thalia here ascends the ^tage,
Here Corybantes with their Cimbals dance,
With Lydian Pageants like the former age,
Where upon cords their bodies they advance;
With such, so great, so rare dexterity,
As King and Queen, and Princes come to see.
148.
With Saelings, Hangings, Pauements all excelling,
The place prepared is decked in curious sort:
The fire with Aromatic sauors smelling,
While these imperial Princes view the sport,
Naught was vnshown, unsaid, worth sight or hearing
In honor of this nuptial day appearing.
149.
Now if Apollo and Mnemosine,
Should change their daughter, Muses help my verse;
Till I but told you what mine eyes did see:
Yet what I saw we could not all rehearse,
I saw a banquet that my self can say,
Describe the sight can neither I nor they.
150.
Served up in golden dishes bring they thither,
What Britain, Denmark, Spain, France can afford:
Arabs or Persia, put the world together
The world nere saw so sumptuous a Board.
Think what was wanting to their geniall cheer,
What Sea or Land can yield that all was there.
151.
Nor that alone, the gods by joint consent,
Present them Nectar and Ambrosia:
Nor want they ought can give their hearts content:
With princely mirth to pass the time away,
All this I see, and only say I kno'e it,
But how it was set forth some better Poet.
152.
Ne yet with these can th'amorous Palatine,
Content his ears, or eyes, or appetite,
Among all these plenties Frederick would pine,
Were not for one dish above the rest condite:
On which to feed impatient of delay,
He wishes day were night, or night the day.
153.
And see, at last that day so long desired,
A day, no day was ever seen so bright:
The day of days now is happily expired,
Fair Phaebs hasting to produce the night,
A Night, no night was ever equal seen,
Wherein the Prince enioyes his virgin Queen.
154.
Sweet Venus to thy golden Chariot have thee,
Drawn through the regions by thy silver doves:
Hymen, the wonders of the world have graced thee,
Why hasts not thou to grace their bedright loves?
Light Tapers Hymen, beauties Queen is wed,
With Io Pean sing the bride to bed.
155.
Have honored God of vnpoluted lovers,
Thou royal Lord of lawful propagation:
Thy royal wedlock to the world discouers,
Thy sacred power and care for procreation.
Bring (only thou can bring) the Virgin Bride,
And lay the Princess by the Prince his side.
Chaste Vesta yields to thy connubiall powers:
And Cypris self accknowledgeth thy might,
Withal confessing all her dallying hours,
Only by thee legitimate and right.
Light Tapers Hymen, beauties Queen is wed,
With Io Pean sing the bride to bed.
157.
Thou honourer of that Thessalian mountain,
The heauens-aspiring Pindus have thee hither:
Forsake thy Phocis, and Castalian fountain,
Britain out-peeres them, put them altogether,
Greece yields thee naught but Britain yields thee more,
And what Greece wants great Britain has in store.
158.
Here have the Muses fountains of their own,
Here mountains woods and patrons to defend them:
Here is the Temple of true wedlock known,
Here therefore rest thee, Hymen here attend them,
Light Tapers Hymen, beauties Queen is wed,
With Io Pean sing the bride to bed.
159.
Each aged Sire no sooner knits the knot,
Betwixt his daughter and some good man's son:
But thour't a guest, thou must not be forgot,
Its thee they most desire, when all is done
The Virgin yields trusting no one but thee,
Her maiden girdle to thy custody.
160.
Haste thou great Offspring of Urania,
The Muses glory, and Pernassus pride,
The knot is knit, confime the same for ay,
FREDERICK entreats thee with his Princely Bride:
Light Tapers, Hymen, Beauties Queen is wed,
With Io Paean sing the Bride to bed.
161.
Now, now is the time when thou must play thy part,
Rhein for a wife, ELIZA has procured,
More sweet by Nature, then Venus could by art,
When she Adonis to her love allured:
Her sweetest perfumes never could compare,
With sweet ELIZA'S breath, which sweets the air.
162.
Now Swan-like Jove when he to Ledae wended,
Or to his Danae in a shower of gold,
With FREDERIC for pomp could have contended,
When he espoused this Queen of heavenly mold:
Light Tapers, Hymen, beauties Queen is wed,
With Io Pean sing the bride to bed.
163.
Fair Virgin, flower of all Diana's train,
Offspring of Jove, and of Mnenie sine,
The Goddess-graces all in thee remain,
To make thy Earth, the heavens Epitome:
To thee does golden Ceres give her hair,
Diana cheeks, and Juno forehead fair.
164.
To thee Minerua gives her chastest eyes,
Pomona paps, Latona lilly hands,
Astraea arms, Venus lips, rosy dies,
Tethis thy pretty feet whereon thou stands;
Gratia thy gesture, what creature's like thee living,
Whose every part is of a Goddess giving.
165.
Hermione was never half so fair,
No though Orestes were the Judge of beauty;
Ne yet might Hellen with this Queen compare,
Make Paris Judge, to Hellen bound by duty:
Light Tapers, Hymen, beauties Queen is wed,
With Io Paean sing the Bride to bed.
166.
Thou flower of youth, Son to the Gods above,
The heavens delight and earths felicity:
To thee the Gods each one to show their Love,
Present their gifts worthy eternity.
To thee great Jove gives an heroyck heart,
And mighty Mars his courage does impart.
167.
On thee Apollo does his wit bestow,
Vranus form, Cyllenius eloquence,
To thee God Cupid has bequeathd his Bow,
Neptune his treasures of magnificence,
Saturn thy manners; what mortal can compare,
With him whom all the gods have framed so rare.
168.
Theseus was never half so brave a creature,
Though Ariadne judged betwixt them two:
Hyppolitus nere had so comely feature;
Make Phedra judge who did the yongling woo,
Light Tapers, Hymen, this heavenly couple's wed,
With Io Paean sing the Bride to bed.
269.
If ever for heroic nuptial rites,
In the delight or honor did appear,
This Nuptial both for honor and delights:
Out strips the best and all that ever were;
As far as floods outstrip the litte springs,
Or seas the floods, or mighty meanest things.
170.
So sweet a pare no age did ever see:
No age shall ever see them paraleld,
No love, night Court was or will ever be,
That linkt, attended, such sweet Princes held,
Light Tapers Hymen this heavenly couple's wed,
With Io Paean sing the Bride to bed.
171.
The Bridegroom now has cast his nuts about,
As Casting thoughts away in nonage weaker,
The bride-cake's broak and hurld the prease throughout,
In sign of future Plenty to the breaker:
Gold in abundance give they to the poor,
Betookning bounty, Majesty and store.
172.
Grave Senators, chaste Matrons, do invite thee,
Young lovely Lords, fair Virgins do entreat,
These may and wish for marriage that incite thee;
Deny their suit? 't were sin and pity great.
Light tapers Hymen this heavenly couple's wed,
With Io Pean sing the Bride to bed.
173.
See, see they come, Hymen has tapers light,
Britans and Rhein^sts let your hearts rejoice:
And you that now profess your faiths aright,
With hallowed Hymus to heavens lift up your voice,
Here toward her chamber comes the Virgin Bride,
Drawn from her royal fair Queen-mothers side.
174.
See with what state Hymen his Tapers brings,
You Virgin Ladies that attend along:
List likewise how melodiously she sings,
Help Hymeneus sing his under song,
Hymen O Hymen, beauties Queen is wed,
With Io Paean sing we Bride to bed.
175.
See where fair Concord comes sweet garlands weaving
And love her lovely flowers before her stro'ing:
Neither, their places or their office leaving,
Till they have crowned the Virgin as she is going;
Venus and Juno on either side instruct her,
The Virgin blushing while the Queens conduct her.
176.
Half nilling-willing with her eyes demisse,
She forward steps, but with a backward pace:
With a blush her beauty wrapped is,
Like Roses shut which promise greater Grace,
Hymen O Hymen this beauties Queen is wed,
With Io Pean sing the Bride to bed.
177.
Like as bright Cynthia in her golden shine,
Attended on with many aglittering Star:
Whose radiant Beauties though they be divine,
Yet Cynthya's praecedes the fairest far,
Even so Eliza among her Nymphs most fair,
Exceeds their most with more, past all compare.
178.
Her tresses eurl'd by Lydian art she wears,
With Emralds, Rubies, Amathists bedeckt,
With Diamonds dangling at her Princely ears,
Her neck adorned with pearls of best respect:
Topar and Berill; who is it can number them?
No Jewels wanted to adorn this Gem.
179.
Thus rich attired, but richer far in beauty,
Eliza meets her worthy PALATINE;
Whilst all the Court in show of love and duty,
Cry, Heavens preserve the Princess and the Rheine:
Hymen, O Hymen this heavenly couples wed,
With Io Paean, sing the Bride to bed.
180.
Against this mirror to her chamber came
Aglaia had prepared her Princely bed:
Where, laid no sooner this imperial Dame,
And purple curtains bout the Princess spread
But all retire, leaving to wait no other,
Save lovely Cupid, and his louelier Mother.
181.
Propitious may the Heavens for ever be,
Propitious Earth with all they both contain,
Propitious prove for ever Jove's decree,
The golden-age reducing back again:
Now Hymen cease thine hymenaean voice
For Frederick enioyes his royal choice.
FINIS.
THere is great strife twixt death and love,
Which of them is the stronger,
And which of them can strike the stroke,
Whose wound endures the longer.
HENRY FREDERICK, said they both,
Shall be our mark to try;
Which of us twain can do the deed,
To get the victory:
Death HENRY strikes, God Cupid strikes,
Fair FREDERICKS strength to prove.
So HENRY dies a sudden death,
So FREDERICK is in love:
We know Love is as strong as Death,
But Death to Love must yield:
For Death is past, love still remains,
God Cupid wins the Field.

