The copy of the French Kings privy Counsels Sentence: given at Moulyns in
Bourbonnois between the Lords of Guyse, and the Lord Admiral of France the
29. of January. 1566.

Translated out of French into English, by John de Hennot Normand, at the
request of certain Gentlemen.

Imprinted at London by John Day, dwelling over Aldersgate beneath saint
Martins.

The copy of the Kings privy Counsels Sentence given at Moulyns in
Bourbonnois between the Lords of Guyse and the Lord Admiral of France, the
29. of Ianuarye, 1566. translated out of French into Eng^yshe, by John de
Hennot Normand at the request of certain gentlemen.
THe Kings majesty calling to his remembrance, diverse supplications presented
unto him sondrye times (as it appears by the date of the said supplications)
by the Lords of Guyse and by the Ladies the Duchesses of Guyse, the mother and
wife to ye late Duke of Guyse, to be permitted of his said majesty to sue into
the courts of Parliament against all those which shall be charged and guilty,
of the murder committed on the person of the said late Duke of Guyse, and
namely against the Lord of Chastillon Admiral of France. And where as the
rehearsing and declaring of every word of the said supplications and evidences
should be to tedious, the translatour hereof uses as much shortness as may be to
let every man understand brieflye, how the king spent for both parties to
appear before his majesty, at Moulins in Bourbonnois, for to be examined
until the trial of the truth of the cause should be known, to the end to
give a full sentence as right reason and justice shall require. Whereupon, the
king assisted with ye Queen his mother, and in the presence of the princes of
the kings blood, Lords, Knights of his order, etc. Whose names are
underwritten.

AFter the declarations of the parties above mentioned have been well
considered and their causes well examined, the kings majesty with the advice
of the princes, Lords, and of his counsel, has declared and pronounced, the
Lord of Chastillon Admiral of France, to be purged, clearly discharged and
innocent of the death of the late Duke of Guyse and of all charges and things
that have been imputed unto him heretofore, or should be imputed unto him
hereafter, touching the said death: Did likewise command a perpetual silence
to his general Attorney and to all other, forbidding as well ye said parties as
all other to do hereafter any search or suit one against an other: Be it by the
way of law or other wise, and to all judges to take any knowledge of the same:
And the said sovereign Lord has taken the said parties in his tuition and
safeguard, and enioyning them to live lovingly under his obedience without some
enterprise of any act one against an other directlye or indirectlye, Declaring
at this present to the said parties, their parents and friends, or
acquaintance, which will be disobedient to this sentence to be guilty of his
majesty's displeasure as breakers of the peace and perturbatours, of the
tranquillity of the common wealth and their bodies and goods confisked, the
which (for such offense) he has as well at this present as for the time to come
united and incorporated, to the dominion of his crown. Also the said
sovereign lord forbids, under the pain above declared, to all persons of
what quality soever they be, to disobey to this present sentence nor to put
any doubt, controversy, and disput to it. And willed the same Sentence to be
sent to all his Courts of Parliament, etc. for to be red openly and registered
to the end no man should be ignorant of the same. Given in the said
Counsel, to the which were present my Lord the kings brother, the Lords the
Cardinal of Bourbon, Prince of Counde, Duke of Montpensier and Prince
Doulphyn, Princes of the Kings blood, the Lords the Dukes of Longueuille, and
of Neuers, Peer of France, the Lord Duke of Montmorency also Peer and
Constable of France, the Lord Chauncellor, the Lords of Vieilleuille and of
Bourdillon Mareshals of France, the Lords of Moruillier and the bishop of
Valence, the Lords of Crussell and ye Gonnort knights of the order, the
bishop of Lymoges, the Lords of Lanssac of Chaulne and Baron of the Guard also
Knights of the order, Master Christofle of Thou first President and Peter
Seguier also president in the Court of Parliament at Paris, the Lords of
Laubespine and of the Cazedieu, all Counsaillors in his said privy Counsel,
and master Baptiste de Mesuill likewise his Counsaillor and advocate in the
said Court of Parliament. The 29. of January. 1566. in the Castle of Moulyns
in Bourbonnois and pronounced to the parties the last day of the same month.

Signed Bourdin.

If God be on our side, who can be against us.

Romans 8.

