The Maidens Blush: OR, JOSEPH, Mirror of Modesty, Map of Piety, Maze of
Destiny, Or rather Divine Providence. From the Latin of Fracastorius,
Translated; and Dedicated To the High-Hopefull CHARLES, Prince of Wales. By
IOSVAH SYLVESTER.

LONDON Printed by H. L. 1620.

TO The High, Hopefull-Happy Prince, CHARLES Prince of Wales, Duke of
Cornwall, and Earl of Chester.
AMong the Preace that to Your Presence flows,
With Ioy-full Honors, as this time requires;
Instead of costly Suites, of curious shows,
Of precious Gifts, of solemn Panegyres:
Accept a Heart which to Your Highness owes
Whole Hecatombes of Happy-most Desires;
Praying, All prosperous to your blowing Rose,
In All, to equal, or excel Your Sire's:
That in All Virtues of a Prince complete,
All Princely Glories may attend you still:
All ehat may make a KING as Good as Great.
All JOSEPH'S Blessings (from the Eternal Hill)
Whose Happy Legend comes to gratulate
Your High Creation, and Your Birth-dayes Date.
The better Day,
The better Deed.
Look the next leaf,
And so proceed.
Prince ARTHVRS CASTLE, Chiefest ARTS CHASTE LVRE; Now, Now, or Never, Daign My
HEARTS LAST CVRE.
LIke sad Arion on his Dolphins Back,
Amid the Ocean of my Careful Fears,
Nigh stripped of all, Now slept in hoary hairs;
Sit I (poor Relic of Your Brothers wrack.)
My Harpstrings quauer, while my Heart Strings crack:
My Hand grows weary, and my Health it wears;
To stir Compassion in some Powerful ears,
At last, to land me, and supply my lack.
You, You alone (Great PRINCE) with Pities grace
Have held my Chinne above the Waters brinke:
Hold still, alas! hold stronger, or I sink.
Or hale me up into some safer place,
Some Priuie-Groom, some Room within your Doors:
That, as my Heart, my Harp may all be Yours.
In Effect, as in Affection, To Your Hignes service, Ever humbly devoted,
IOSVAH SYLVESTER.

The Maidens Blush: OR, JOSEPH.
CHaste Muse of Muses, that in sacred Lays,
With strains unwonted, do delight to raise
From black Obliuion's sad and silent Tents,
Th'Heroick Gests and Noble Monuments
Of antike WORTHIES, and their fames revive,
Through every Age to All that shall survive;
Now, Now reuolue th'Authenticall Records
Of the Holy Nation, whom the Lord of Lords
Chose for his Own, (Whose Line directly came
From Princely Loins of faithful ABRAHAM):
And sweedy tuned to th'sacred voice of Truth,
Sing That Religious, That rare-Modest Youth
(Good Isaac's Grandchild, and great Jacob's Son)
Whom God indu'd, (by Dreams) of things yet done
To tell the issue: Tell, o! tell Thou All
That He endured through swelling Enuies Gall;
Till at the last, tryumphing of his Foes,
Through Pharao's grace to Princely Place he rose
(As Egypt's Viceroy) by divine Decree
Fore-sent, a Friend and Founder there to be
Of the happy People, and the holy Seed,
From Whence, should Hope of future Life proceed;
And Whence Salvation should be freely given,
Through th'heauenly Key that should re-ope^ Heaven.
And, O! Thou Glory of Great STVARTS stem,
Great Jacob's Heir, Great-Britaines Joy and Gemme,
CHARLES, King of Hopes, and Hope-ful Prince of Men,
My great Mecoenas, to encheer my Pen,
Assist Thou also: and with gentle Gales
Of Help-full Favor, fill my Hopeful Sails:
That maugre Enuie's Rock and Fortunes Storm,
My sacred Voyage I may safe perform,
To the only glory of my Ghostly Guide,
His Churches Profit, and Your Praise, beside;
While, under IOSEPH's Wondrous Temperance,
His Piety, His Prudent Governance,
I prophecy Your Princely Virtues Crop,
(Your Parents Prayer, and Your Peoples Hope)
God say Amen. But, Tide for none does stay,
I must aboard, I must mine Anchor weigh.
Away to Sea: the Wind is wondrous good,
Spread all our Canuas: O how swift we scud!
Through all the Western, and the Mid-land Seas,
Arrived already to descry (with case)
The Coast of Ioppa and Samarian Hills,
With wealthy Sichems goodly Groves and Fields.
Already (running twixt his winding banks)
Jordan begins to wash our wel-come Planks,
Where Hebron's valley our glad Welcome sings,
And even Mount Tabor with the Echo rings.
The Old Serpent knew (for Much to know is given
Unto that Hell-god, by the GOD of Heaven)
It was decreed by everlasting Date,
And promised, that there should propagate,
From Abraham's happy Stock, a holy Stem
Which should confound the Infernal Diadem.
In doubt whereof, perplexed and vexed sore,
His Jealousy of Jacob grew the more.
The more he enuies Sichem's Shepheard-Prince,
As well because, with duer Reverence
Did None observe and serve The Eternal Lord,
Nor iuster lived, nor righter him adored.
As for the goodly Blessings of his Bed,
(Twelve lusty Sons) likely alone to spread
Into a People holy and devout.
Therefore he labors, and he layes-about,
With all the Engines of his hellish Hate,
That, That dear Issue to exterminate.
Especially, that lovely Lad (whose Birth
Had happy Stars, presaging holy Worth;)
JOSEPH, the darling of his Fathers age,
Borne of his (first-lou'd) second marriage:
Whom, Nature-grac's, the Graces nurtured fine
In liberal Arts, and love of Law divine;
Inspired his Soul with skill of future things;
His mind aspiring with celestial wings:
To Elders Modest, to his equals mild,
With Piety and Prudence past a Child.
Now, as from flowers whence Bees their honey make,
The loathsome Spider does his poison take;
Hence did the Fiend in the other Brethren hatch
Close deadly Hate, him harm-lesse to dispatch:
Nor would He let the first occasion slip
That might advance his wyly workmanship:
For, for the most, to each man's Inclination,
He knows, in time, to offer his Temptation.
It happened then, upon a Summers day,
When as the Sun had with his parching Ray
Driven all the Brethren all their flocks to drive
To the cool Covert that the Woods would give;
Themselves set round under a shadie Oak,
Young JOSEPH thus gently the rest bespoke.
Brothers, I Will tell you my strange Dream to night,
Hear it, I pray (what ever mean it might,
It was an odd one.) Early, when the Stars
Were all called in (excepting Lucifer's,
Days daily Usher) slumbring sweet this Morn,
Me thought We all were in a field of Corn,
All binding Sheaues; and when we each had One,
My Sheafe, me thought, stood bolt upright alone,
And all your Sheaues did instantly incline,
And lowly bow their bended tops to mine.
Then Judah, nettled with no little hate
Against the Lad, began him thus to rate:
Why, saucy Boy, What phant'sies do thou fable?
Is this your Dream, you deem so admirable?
Has not perhaps some Spirit inspired you so?
No doubt there has: the spirit of Wine, I trow.
But, pray, What Augure does your wonder bring?
That you (belike) shall of us all be King.
Good King of Crickets, line thy Crown with Baies,
Lest drunken Vapors some Rebellion raise.
The rest concurred to gird the harmless Boy
With flouts and shouts of O God give you joy:
God save your Grace. Your Majesty to come,
And tell, in Scorn, their Father all the sum.
He, good old man, (not without God within)
He ponders all that he had heard and seen;
As if discerning somewhat in the Lad
Of higher strain, than every stripling had:
Yet, to conceal it from the rest he seems,
And bids the Boy beware of guilefull Dreams.
But, He, to whom GOD greater Honors meant,
Soon after dreamed of grauer Argument.
Him seemed, that, set in stately Eminence,
Before his Feet, with humble Reverence,
The Sun and Moon and Eleven Stars he saw,
Stooping unto him in obsequious Awe.
Which well recording (for by heavenly grace
That Gift he had) within a little space
He tells his Brethren of his second Transe:
Who, re-incenst with ragefull Arrogance,
Soon show their Father, with his fatal Dream,
Their rancor, spleen, and cank'red spite extreme.
Jacob, at first amazed, calls his Son;
And, as interp'ring, thus to chide begun:
What! Sir; shall I, and your Mother too,
And all your Brothers bow our Necks to you?
Shall you be mounted on your Chair of State,
And We come All base Beggars to your Gate?
If such a folly have befum'd your brain,
And filled your phant'sie with presumptuous vain,
With idle Hopes: away with those Conceits;
Trust not to Dreams, list not to such Deceits
So reason-lesse, ridiculous, and light;
Monsters, Chimaera's, shadows of the Night:
Which (if not good) it is not God does send,
But some Illusion of the subtle Fiend,
To train our Weakness to some sinful Trap;
Or, to betray us to some dire mis-hap:
As from his Cells false Oracles he wrests,
From flight of Birds, and Tripes of mangled Beasts.
Have thou not heard of Belus, Anubis,
Ops, Hecate, and other Deities,
Whom the blind Heathen in their Temples have,
Frequent their Altars, and their Rites observe;
Waiting their Answers with the humblest Awe,
All which is hateful to our Holy Law?
Therefore be Wise: and look henceforth we hear
No more such Dreams of such phantastike gear.
He thus dismissed, the rest he mild bespake
To calm their storm, and kindly bade them take
The Flocks to Field, and drive them soft and fair
To Sichem Woods, to feed in cooler air.
Their Fathers bidding they eft-soones obay'd,
(Young JOSEPH yet at home with him he staid)
Passing the fruitful Vales and flowery Greenes
Of plentious Hebron, to those shadie Screenes.
But, nor the Verdure of those Hills nor Dales,
Nor song of Birds, nor shade of Woods, nor Gales
Of whispering Winds, could kill or cancel quite
Those odious Dreams they dream-on day and night.
Rather, they gather daily more Disdain,
Sharpen their Envy, give their Rage the rain,
With Threats and Vows; while the evil spirit too nigh
Still stirs and spurs their hateful Jealousy.
Now, twice the Sun had run his Iourny swift,
When the next morning they prepare to shift
To Dothan's pleasant Downs for fresher Feed,
And to be further off from home (indeed);
And so the longer ere they could reuert,
Which they even loathed, and hated at the heart.
Wherefore (night after night, day after day)
When, past their wont, their Father saw them stay;
In musefull care his JOSEPH calls he quick,
And bids him Thus: I pree-thee Boy go seek
Thy Brethren out (on Sichem Downs they feed,
Or near about) and bring me word with speed,
What uncouth Reason of their stay there is:
My mind mis-giues me somewhat is amiss
With them, or with their Cattle: hye thee, Lad.
Away scuds JOSEPH (no less swift then glad)
As far as Sichem: but there looking round,
Neither his Brethren, nor the Flocks he found.
Perplexed then, he calls them one by one;
Hoaw, Brothers! Ruben! Leui! Simeon!
Then, whoops and hallooes with his Treble throat,
So loud and shrill, that, to his warbling Note
With doubled Echoes, Woods and Caves reply:
But, not a Brother answers Ear or Eye.
By chance, a Wood-man that an Oak did shroud,
Hearing the Lad, and knowing, called him loud,
And told him thus; I heard your Brethren say
They would to Dothan: Thither, that is the way,
There shall you find them with their Cattle safe,
In better Pasture then is here by half.
Thanks thinks the Lad: and Sichem out of sight,
As swift as Roe he runs to Dothan right.
When, from a Hill, his Hateful Brethren spied
Him yet farre-off: O! yonder comes (they cried)
Our King to-come, whom both the Sun and Moon,
And all the Stars must serve and worship soon.
We, We base Hindes, borne but for Herds and Neat,
Drudging all Day in the Suns scorching heat,
Lodging all Night in holes or hollow Trees,
Clad but in Lether, or in coursest Freeze,
And meanly fed with Bread and Water, most;
While He is set-vp with his Sod and Roast,
His Mess of Goats-Milke, and his fill of Wine,
In change of Coats, pranked and painted fine;
Snoring all night upon his ease-full bed,
Where, from the Forge of his phantastike head,
He feignes these Dreams in mere disdain of us:
But, Brethren, shall we, shall we suffer thus
Him and his Scornings? Shall we be so blind
T'indure him still, till grown a Man, his mind
Grown big withal, and bearing proud upon
His Fathers fondness, He supplant anon
Our Haps and Hopes, usurping All our due,
And so (in fine) fulfill his Dreams too-true?
O! We are Buzzards, Blockheads, Cowards all.
Why rather here, where none descry us shall,
Where all things sort, where he is come so pat,
Shall we not kill him, and make sure for that?
For, in this Pit we may him deep interre,
And say (at home) some hungry Wolf or Bear
(Whereof the Deserts, not far off, have store)
Him quick devoured, and to pieces tore.
While these dire Counsels they together cast,
Ruben (who all, in years and pity, past)
Cried, GOD defend, o Brethren, GOD defend,
Against our Brother we should so offend:
O! in his blood do not your hands imbrue,
Lest Heavens drad Vengeance that dire fact pursue
On Us and Ours. Though no man witness be,
GOD, GOD himself is witness, and does see
And hear us all: from him is nothing hid,
He Is all an Eye that never closes Lid.
But, if you needs will of the Lad be quit,
Sanz blood or slaughter, put him in this pit,
There leave him to his Fate. This he advised;
That, resku'd thus from present death devised,
He, late at night returning to the Cave,
Might hale him up, and the harmless stripling save,
To bring him safe unto his aged Sire,
And calm at length his Brethrens envious Ire.
Their Elders Words them All a little moved,
And his advice they all at once approved:
Him down unslain, into the pit to slide,
His worse or better Fortune to abide.
Then Ruben said; be Witness GOD for Me,
How clear I am from this your Cruelty:
And as he spoke, him from them far withdrew
Into the Woods, to wait what would ensue.
By this, was JOSEPH (full of lively cheer
For having found them) even arrived near;
When, fell and furious, they enclose him round,
Lay hands on him, his tender hands they bound,
With brauing Threats; Now shall you see (say they)
Your Dreams fulfilled: Must not we all obey
Your Mightiness? Our Sheaues must stoop to you:
Yea, to your State, Sun, Moon, and Stars must bow.
Wondering, and frighted with their uncouth guise,
In vain (alas!) in vain he calls and cries
To them for pity of his Innocence;
While inly Rage, with more Impatience
Still egged them on, with fell Erynuis brands:
And hellish Pluto (who too-ready stands,
Weening to cross the Destinies Divine)
Does all their Edge against him alone incline.
When he perceived (poor Boy!) no vows, no tears
Could mollify those stony hearts of Theirs
To hold their hands, already heauing him
With violence unto the Dungeons brim;
His Eyes lift up toward the Empyreall Pole,
Thus, loud he groned from a grieved soul.
Great GOD of Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, too,
Who kennest all things, and can all things do;
If I sincerely have adored thee still:
If I have gladly done my Parents Will:
If I have lived pious and upright;
Lord look upon me in this woeful plight.
Or, if it please Thee, that I here expire;
Yet spare, o Lord, o spare mine aged Sire.
And, o! my Brethren (whom, with due respect
Of Eldership, I ever did affect)
How-euer Me you pity not, I pray
Pity our Father (lest untimely gray
His hoary head come to the grave for grief)
Let not him hear it: rather say some Thief,
Or knot of Thieves, Me (by the way) bereft;
That some false hope may of my life be left,
To lengthen his: though here (alas!) I lie
Dead in these sands, and hid from any eye:
And as he spoke, his Tears so fast did fall,
They stopped his speech, and almost staid withal
His Brethrens rage; till Ruth-lesse Isachar
Re-fand the fire. Nay, having gone thus far,
We may not now, We cannot safe desist;
For why? whereon I need not now insist;
Your selves (said he) can quickly guess, I trow,
Mischiefs enough, if now we let him go.
Let us therefore go on as we decreed,
Let Us let him down: Heereto they all agreed,
With heart and hand, and did it instantly;
And then Remorselesse, on the Grass hard by
Made no more bones, but sat them down to dinner.
O! the dull Conscience of a hardened sinner!
But, from the Empyreall, through the Ethereal Pole,
GOD looking down upon the harmless Soul,
In tender Pity, and eternal Love
Toward his Own; among the Troops (above)
Of winged Heralds, that are ever pressed,
Expecting gladly his Divine Behest,
To one he beckens, and he bids him Thus;
Right Trusty, hy thee, hy thee down from us,
Toward Samaria, well thou know where,
And whom thou know one day o^dain'd to bear
A glorious Part, in honorable Place,
Good Isaac's Grandchild, now in pitious case,
Crying for succor from a dark deep Cell,
Against his Brethrens envious Fury fell:
Go comfort him, poor heart; but in what kind,
I need not say. Thou see: thou know my mind.
So, with his gracious All-directing Nod,
Th'Angel, dis-mist, in the instant spreads abroad
Aethereall wings on his Ae^reall sides,
And through the woundless Welkin swifter glides
Then Zephyrus; or, then (when mounted high
With many Turns, and towering in the Sky)
The stout Ger-Faulcon stoopeth at the Herne,
With sudden Souse, that many scarce discern:
Such was the speed of this Celestial Bird
(To prosecute, and execute the Word
Of his great Master) toward Dothan Down,
Alighting first upon Mount Tabor's Crown,
Amazed to see his Groves so sudden green,
And Lawnes so fresh, with flowery tufts between.
The Hill-born Nymphs with quauering warbles sing
His happy- Well-come: Caves and Rocks do ring
Redoubled Echoes; Woods and Winds withal,
Whisper about a joyful Madrigall.
But the Heavenly Herald, from the Mountain eying
The Vale about, sees there the Brethren lying
Along the Grass, and busy at their Vittle,
And, from a Hill (thence distant but a little)
The Arabian Merchants with their Camels, hard
(As God would have it) driving thither-ward;
Thence instantly he casts his gentle Eye,
On woeful JOSEPH, and immediately
Descending swift, stands on the dungeons brim,
Now shining bright with sudden light from him.
Wherewith the Lad at once dismayed and joyed,
The sacred Torch-man (to that end employed)
In lovely Shape, with sweet and lively grace,
Thus cheeres the Lad (himself a Lad in Face).
Fear not, dear JOSEPH, dear to God above.
Thy Fathers GOD, who All does guide and move,
Has sent me hither from his heavenly Throne,
To comfort and confirm thee, in thy Moan.
First, Hence thou shall be fre'ed: yet, behold,
Twice, as a Slave, thou shall be bought and sold,
Transferd to Memphis, and for many a year
Shall live a Servant and a Prisoner there.
But if thou still have in abomination
Strange Women's Love, and strange gods adoration:
If still with all thy strength, with all thy heart
Thou serve the Lord, and from him never start:
If in his Ways thou walk, and do his Will,
He will be with thee, for thee, in thee still:
So that where-ere thou go, what-ere thou do,
Favor and Fortune shall attend thee too.
And that thou may with greater confidence
Contemn thy wrongs, and trust his Providence,
Know for a certain, he has destined thee
A high Estate, and glorious Emperie;
And time will come, when Thou with me shall view
Thy former Dreams in every part prove true;
When as thy Brethren with selfe-guilty brow,
And thy good Father shall before thee bow:
When thy Compassion, paying good for ill,
Shall save their lives that meant thee first to kill:
Shall feed their mouths that thought thee once to sterue
And buy the^ seats that sold thee forth to serve
And not alone receive themselves to grace,
But them and theirs within thy Kingdom place;
That grown at length in number like the sand,
Thence the Almighty with a mighty hand,
(In spite of Envy and Ambitious sway)
May bring the^ dry-shod through the Crimson Sea.
Directed safe in all their uncouth Way,
By Fire by Night, and by a Clowd by Day;
Through the dry Desert, plentifully fed
With Quails from Heaven, and Manna (Angels bread)
Into a Land where Milk and Hunny flow;
The happy sign of happier substance though:
Where, in due Time (o haste ye Times away)
A Golden Age shall see a glorious Day;
A Day full often to be fore-typ't, foretold,
Fore-promised by Prophets manifold;
When from the Bosom of The Eternal SIRE,
The Eternal SON (What may we So admire!)
(The SPIRIT o'reshadowing of a Virgin Mother)
Shall take Man's Nature, and become your Brother;
Old ADAM's Guilt, and Yours to expiate,
And wide re-open Heavens long-locked Gate.
Concluding here, to Heaven the Angel hy'd.
JOSEPH, though first distract and stupefi'd,
With such a Glory (and confused a-space)
Him re-collects, and re-erects his Face;
Inlie rejoicing, deeply rumining,
All in his mind maturely pondering.
And future Hopes confirm him passing strong,
Against present fears, and all his Woes and Wrong;
That cheerely thus, with heart and hands erect,
His holy Vows he does to Heaven direct:
Great King of Kings, that rulest All-abroad;
My Fathers, Grandsires, and Great-grandsires God,
Almighty Guide and Guard, still gracious be
To Us and Ours, whose trust is all in Thee.
Especially, thy favor, Lord I crave
Toward my Father, ready for the Grave:
And as for Me; how-euer please thee, deal
Me sour or sweet; or send me Woe or Weal,
It shall be welcome, and I well content.
Only dear Father, if that Death prevent
Mine eyes (unworthy) of that wished Day,
That long long-hoped, happy Holy Day:
When from thy Throne (whose Glory has no End)
Thine only Son shall into Flesh descend,
At least vouchsafe me, though in shadow dim,
As in a Glass to see and knowledge Him;
And (thorough Faith) to feel the saving Savor
Of this thrice-sacred, gracious, precious Lauer.
So, with an inward and deep sigh, he ceast.
The while, Arabians (Merchants of the East)
With Camels laden with their Country Ware,
Myrrh, Storax, Incense, the most choice and rare,
Coming from Madian, toward Egypt bound,
Were passing by, where on the grassie ground,
The Shepherd Brethren sat to eat and talk;
And busy yet, their Teeth and Tongues did walk,
Till on the sudden they descried the Men.
Whence Judah thus begins: O Brethren,
Behold how GOD does better far provide,
Then we could plot (more safe for either side).
For, to these Merchants if we sell the Lad,
First, a good piece of Money will be had;
Next, of our Brothers blood we shall be clear;
And last of all, be sure no more to hear
Or news, or noise, or name of JOSEPH here,
Whether to Memph's or Marmorid's they wend.
Therefore, forthwith one to them let us send,
The Mart to offer, and the Price to make,
As of a Slave; and bring their answer back.
They all agree, and one is sent away
To drive the Bargain; while the rest assay
About a Tree-trunke fastening fit a rope,
And letting 't down, to hale their Brother up.
And up he comes as fresh as Maying Rose,
Or Daffadill that in a Garden grows;
As lively Form as yerst, as lovely Face,
Shining with signs of GODS assisting Grace.
By this, the Merchants with their Broker came,
To see the Ware, and did so like the same,
They stood not hucking, of the price to bate
(So good, and so good cheap, who would not have it!)
But, who would ween (good God!) that ever He,
That was prae-destin'd to such dignity,
To whom such Wealth and Honor should befall,
Should thus be sold, and for a price so small?
(Save that my Savior, Heir of Heaven and Earth,
That God-begotten, holy Virgins Birth,
Whom Angels serve, whom Cherubins adore,
To Jews his Judas sold for little more;
(Woe to His Soul, Woe to my Sins therefore!)
As, Twenty Pence. O base and cursed Thrall!
But, both sides pleased, Joseph must suffer all.
Now must he mount on his new Masters pack,
Upon his Camels double bunched back;
To trot to Nile-ward (never heard of Nile)
As proud and glad of such a Load, the while
His gentle Beast, now easiest of the Troop,
Aptest to stop, humblest at need to stoop
To this new Rider, with a cheerful Neigh,
Lifts light his feet, and still he leads the way.
Well: Now the Brethren have their Brother rid,
How shall his Fate, how shall their Hate be hid?
Who, to their Father the sad news shall bring?
This is the doubt: This they are hammering.
In fine, they iump; first to send home his Coat
(For they had stripped him) and in blood of Goat
Deep dipping it, Dan is instructed fit
In this sad manner to deliver it
To aged JACOB, doubting nothing less,
Than His mis-hap, or their so Hatefulness.
Father (said Dan) ranging within a Wood,
Our Cur did find this Coat, thus stained with blood.
Not knowing therefore, whence, nor whose it is,
Nor how it came, we thought it not amiss
To show 't you first; and after harken further,
As you think fit, in case of Maime, or Murder.
But, Father JACOB had no sooner spied
The spotted Coat, with blood and dirt bedy'd,
But, drowned in Tears, he tears his hoary hair,
With Ashes sprent, and rent his garments there,
And cries, Alas! decre JOSEPH, staff and stay
Of all mine Age, so sudden taken away!
O! O! My Son, Who? How? What did befall,
To murder Thee, to murder Me withal?
Doubtless, no Man: some savage Beast it was,
Some hungry Boar, some hairie Bear, alas!
Where are your Brethren? Quickly all of you,
Through all the Woods, go take a through view:
You may perhaps at last yet light on him,
Or find at least some Part, some mangled Lim,
Some woeful Relic, which I pray bring home,
That I may give it his last Rites, a Tomb:
Or rather, let me go my self to seek,
And find my dead Son, or a Death, his Like:
And saying so, down in a swoune he slid,
With much a-doo to be recovered.
On the other side, sad Ruben toward night,
When th'Euening Star began to twinkle bright,
When Sheep and Shepherds to their Cotes were gone
All but himself, himself comes all alone
Unto the Cave, and calling twice or thrice,
Why! Joseph, Joseph; when as none replies,
Dismayed, and doubting, lest in their disdain,
His Brethren there the silly Lad had slain;
He makes a shift to cut a Holmen Pole,
And by that help, gets down into the Hole,
Looks round about; but finding nothing there,
Gets up again, as full of grief and fear.
Then, hopeles, leaves that search to seek the others;
And by the Sheeps tracke, tracking of his Brothers,
Soon finds them out; and out of them will know
Both how, and where, they JOSEPH did bestow.
They tell him truly how it did befall.
A little cased (though little pleased withal)
To hear the Lad was yet alive and safe,
(Though for his thraldom he did inly chafe)
He thus aduises: Brethren, let us hye
Home to our Father, and our best apply
To comfort him; Let us inform him this,
That the Arabians (as their manner is)
Spying the Lad alone upon the Way,
Pursued him, took him, stole him quite away;
And while he strugled from them to have got,
With a light hurt he bloudied all his Coat.
Which let some Shepherds boy or other bring
(As having found it) to aver the thing:
For there be many can affirm (no doubt)
They lately saw Arabians heere-about.
This fitted thus, together home they go,
And do their best to cheer their Fathers woe.
But though perhaps with some small hope relieved,
Perpetually (alas!) he mourned and grieved,
Nor could the Torrent of his Tears retain,
Nor outward Solace inly entertain;
But day and night a bitter life he led,
Mostly alone, although alive, as dead.
Meane-while, the Merchant well content and glad,
Holds on his Journey, bears away the Lad;
Wondering to see all things so suit his will,
Weather so temperate, and the Winds so still,
The Ways so dust-lesse, and so durt-lesse fair,
The Sun so friendly, and so fresh the Air;
Above their Wont: for, having Heaven to friend,
With JOSEPH, Graces, Hope, and Hap do wend.
Now, having past Iudea's confines quite,
From a steep Hill, they have anon the sight
Of stately Memphis lofty Towers and Walls,
With glittering roofes of high and sumptuous Halls
Amid a rich and pleasant Plain, repleat
With goodly Herds of Cattle, Sheep, and Neat,
With goodly Corne-fields, here and there between:
And, near the City, on a spacious Green,
They might behold, as in some Martial Muster,
Thousands of Youth in several Troops to cluster;
Attending all, Some, manly Exercise;
Some, light and speedy, running for a prize:
Some, strongly active, wrestling for a fall,
Some, hurling Sledges, till they sweat withal:
Some, on swift Horseback to out-swim the wind;
Some, to shoot backward at their foes behind:
Some with their Lances ready coucht in Rest,
Wheeling about, to charge in Flank or Breast:
Some, at the Tilt, in strong and steady course,
To break their Staves, or bear down man and horse
Whereon the Arabians, with the Isaacian Lad,
(Now very near) stood gazing, as right glad,
And all most greedy of so various sorts
Of Manly Poems, of so warlike sports.
An Eunuch of the Kings, one much esteemed,
And Master of those Martial Games (it seemed)
Seeing those Strangers, with so much delight
Stand still so long in viewing all the Sight,
Sends to inuit them kindly to come near;
And then perceiving that they Merchants were,
Began to ask, What Ware, what rare device,
They had to sell? Nothing, said they, but Spice,
And this young Lad; Whom if Your Lordship like,
Accept as Yours, and freely, we beseek:
Or, if you nill accept him gratis, prize
As please your self; your favor shall suffize.
Yes, said the Eunuch, I accept your Love,
And of Your Present I so well approve,
And prize it so, You could not bring me better:
The more my hope, the more am I your debtor,
Such grace his Face presageth to my mind;
So shall you never me ungrateful find,
Said Potiphaer: and then he takes the Lad,
And causing him to be right seemly clad,
In Silken suit, gives him a Liuory
Of Purple, guarded with Embroderie.
Then on a goodly Horse he sets him up,
The stillest, yet the stateliest in the troop.
JOSEPH right joyful, from a bashful Brow,
Returns dumb Homage, with a graceful Bow
Unto his Lord: then, re-erect, appears
Taller and trimmer then were all his Peers.
Him, home before (thus furnished) with a Guide,
Sends Potiphar unto his lovely Bride.
Now Hesperus the Evening on did bring;
When, leaving Fields, the youthful troops do ring
About their Captain, and attend, in State
To guard him home triumphant to his Gate.
And lovely JOSEPH, having had by this
A view of his fair Lady-Misteresse;
And of his Office, tutured at large,
What him belongd in his Lords Chamber-charge,
Him humbly ranked (of his own accord)
Among his fellows to go meet his Lord.
As burnisht Gold amid a heap of Sand,
Or Orient Pearl among the Pebble Strand,
Such seemed He, among ten thousand Squires,
Whom Men and Matrones, young and old admires:
His pase so grave, his Face so gracious,
His eyes and Feet still so officious
About his Lord, as fixed still on Him,
With steddie Looks, and with as ready Limb:
No less within doors then he was without,
Active and apt in all he went about;
On all occasions, in what-euer kind,
Of Body's Labor, or of Birth of Mind.
But above all, his faithful diligence,
And mature Wisdom in all Managements,
So well accepted and admired are,
That not alone unto his Trusty Care
His Lord committed what before he had;
But, over All, him only Steward made.
For, Potiphar percein'd that under Him,
What-ere he had did thrive and prosper trim:
His Fields and Flocks more fruitful then before;
His Favors greater, and his Honors more:
All which, inspired by some secret Test,
To his young JOSEPH he ascribed, as Blessed.
And the Oracles of Egypt, then a-foot,
Seemed even to point at, and persuade unto 't.
There was a Peach-Tree growing then amid
God Camosh Temple, to him consacred,
Which, brought from Persia long ago, they say,
When Isis yerst did all the World suruay,
By her own hand was planted, for Posterity,
To be a famous Monument of Verity.
Heereon, arriving from far wanderings,
Bright-shining Apis, with change-colour'd wings,
Fair Apis settled; after whom did muster
A mighty Swarm, which hung all in a Cluster
Upon one Bough. This wonder blown abroad
Among the Bards, they vouch that it did boad,
Some Stranger should from foreign parts arrive;
And after him, a mighty people hyue,
Through whom the house of Potiphar should rise
To wondrous Wealth and goodly dignities.
Weening therefore these Augures all fulfild
In JOSEPH now, him every one well-will'd,
Him every one accordingly respected,
Him every one for this the more affected.
But fair Tempsar (wife of Potiphar)
Above the rest, his Parts did high prefer:
Him more then All she inlie did admire,
And still beholds him with a young desire.
Yet, ignorant what fury would ensue
The pleasing Passion she did so pursue:
What wily Godling to beguile her, sought
To snare her freedom in a servile thought;
As yet she vented neither Sigh nor Tear:
All yet was sweet, no bitter Fit, no Fear.
Which the envious Prince of Styx and Acheron,
Malignant Father of confusion,
Man's deadly Foe, observing; and beside,
That Isaac's seed still happy multiplied:
In fell despite, and full of desperate rage,
He calls a bird of his infernal Cage,
A cruel Harpy, full of wicked Wile,
A thousand ways, the wisest to beguile.
Go, hye, says He, my darling, hye thee quick
To fair Iempsar; she is Phantsie-sicke
Already. Therefore so insinuate,
That more and more thou her intoxicate:
Breath in her bosom, blowe-in new infection,
Kindle the Tinder of her light affection
To such a flame, that neither Gods nor men
May be of Power to put it out again:
And, do thy best (for that I most desire)
If possible, set JOSEPH (too) a fire:
But, if on him, thou nothing can prevail,
Return to her, her Phantsie re-assaile,
Fill her with Phrenzie, and with Fury double
Still burn her fell, till all her Friends she trouble:
Till with disgrace, disdained, and desperate,
She turn her dear Love to as deadly Hate:
Till then, desist not; but persist and ply
To play thy Part with Art and Subtilty.
He, glad and ready for the worst of Ills,
With Stygian puddle half a Vial fills,
Blending some bitter, sharp-sweet wine withal:
Then snatching quick one of the snakes that craule
About Alecto's grim and ghastly Brows,
Away he hies to Potiphar his House,
Within his bosom hiding what he had,
And formally just in the Form him clad
Of Iphicle, the Lady Iempsars Nurse;
With better credit, to beguile the worse.
Then, to her Lady having made a ducke,
Sweet Madame (said she, fie on all ill luck)
What sad disaster, what misfortune rife,
Has made poor JOSEPH weary of his Life?
My self, of late, have seen him often, forlorn
Sit sole and sighing, and have heard him mourn,
Wishing for Death. And when I sought to know
The secret cause of his exceeding woe:
O! Mother (said he) whether I conceal it,
Needs dye I must, or whether I reveal it.
Inquire not therefore; for, it is better end,
With my sad life, my sorrowe's cause unkind.
Not so, my Son (said I) for often a Wound
Discovered, is recouer'd, and made sound;
Which, hid a while, would gangrene to the bone:
Tell boldly (Lad) art thou in love with none?
If that be cause of thy distress; Why Boy
Be of good cheer, Thou shall thy Dear enjoy.
Hope well, and have well: So shall thou; or else
I Will charm Loves Passion with some stronger spells.
With bashful Blush, then said he, yes, I love:
Be witness, Gods, how earnest I have strove
To strangle it! How I have labored long!
How loath (alas!) my Lord in thought to wrong!
More wishing Death: Death now make good my trial,
Happy were I, to live and dye so loyal.
And, saying so, on his fair Cheeks he powers
A Sea of Tears, in Pearl and Crystal showers:
So that, I see, without quick Remedy,
For love of you ( Madame) the Youth will dye.
Alas! then said the Lady, Woe is me,
For his Misfortune and his Misery;
To me right tragic is the tale you tell:
For, truth to say, I love him but too well,
And would enjoy him, if I could or durst;
But o! I cannot, o, I may not: first,
For sacred Laws, for Hymen's secret yoke,
(Which never any yet, unpunished, broke)
For fear of danger, and dishonors brand,
And dreadful vengeance of my Husbands hand.
Why, my dear Daughter, damned Nurse replies,
The Gods do laugh at Lovers injuries:
And with thy Wedlock thou may well dispense,
On so good ground of so great consequence,
As is the saving of a Life so young,
So innocent, that never yet did wrong;
Unless it be a wrong to love too much,
Or die for Love (Who would not die for such!)
Lovers must dare, and wisemen must not dread
The worst of Dangers that is threatened:
For, even the Gods have Lovers in their guard,
And Love and Pity they will still reward.
I have a Water of a sovereign use
(The extracted Spirit of many a Chymick Juice)
Which inlie ta'n, in a perplexed Case,
Expells the Doubt, and shows Truth's naked Face;
That, far from ambage, the vndistract affection
May of the better freely make election.
If therefore, Madam, yet you stand divided,
What Part to take; to have your doubts decided,
I Will give it you: and as she spoke, she gave
The hellish philtre made of Stygian wave.
Thanks, dearest Mother, said her Ladyship,
And taking all, not with a fearful sip,
But full Carouse, lifting her hand on high,
Quaft off the poison, drew the goblet dry.
This done, the Demon with a Beldams face,
Toward Joseph's chamber hies with hobling pase;
Where he was praying, and devoutly praising
The God of Gods, for his so gracious raising:
But when the false Fiend in his Portall spied
A heavenly Warder (both his Guard and Guide)
With threatfull brandish of a shining Blade,
More speed the^ good, headlong he downward made
In dreadful Maze; and, as the fowlest Foul,
Transformes him quick into a Scrieching-Owle,
Night's horrid Monster, houering long aloof,
At last pearcht on Iempsars Chamber roof.
The wretched Iempsar, having quaffed up
The brim and bottom of the Stygian Cup,
Now all alone, she feels her all a-fire,
Blood, Bones, and Marrow, burning in desire;
Sad, silent, sighing, in a wondrous Fit;
And all for Joseph, nigh beside her wit,
Now on her bed she falls, and by and by
Flings up again; and to and fro does fly
From place to place; soon weary of the best,
Runs every where, and no where finds rest;
Like one whose breast a burning Fever fryes,
Or whom some Serpents sting does agonize.
At last she breaks out; and Alas! quoth She,
What, what is this that thus tormenteth me?
O! is it Love? or was it not the Drink
I took right now? No: it is Love I think,
It Is surely Love, Love in extremity,
And but fair JOSEPH gently help, I dye.
Then help, Sweetheart, come, be thou boldly mine:
Come be my Love, and I will still be thine.
Both living loving, we 'll die guiltless both
Of eythers blood: be witness Gods how loath
I would incur so fell, so foul a stain,
To kill such Lover with unkind disdain.
Duly and truly, while I ought and could,
I served Hymen, till (alas!) contrould
By higher Godheads more Imperial Right:
He favor me, as now I feel his might
Far, far exceed weak Woman's opposition.
He will no doubt; and daine us both Tuition.
Since wont, himself, to love, he as a Lover
Will pity Passions, and our pleasures cover.
Thus having said, impatient of delay,
Efren she calls (Efren a Maid, that aye
Used, as most trusty, diligent and charie,
Her Mistress Errands to and fro to carry)
Go quickly Efren, seek me JOSEPH out,
And if the business he is now about
Be not too earnest, and too instant too,
But what he may as well hereafter do,
Bid him forthwith to come and speak with Me.
Wingd with her words, about it straight runs she:
And, after summons, JOSEPH comes anon
Up to his Lady; who then all alone,
First with a Blush, and bashful glanse among,
From quiuering bosom, with a shiuering tongue,
Thus breaks the Ice (still bidding him come nearer)
Dear, my dear Joseph, then mine own Eyes dearer.
Shall I entreat thee, what I might command,
To answer truly what I shall demand?
Madame, said he, Should I be false to you?
What ere it be, I swear to tell you true.
I hear (quoth she) that thou art deep in Love:
If it be true (thou must thy Truth approve)
Thou may not hide it; though my self were she,
For whom thou suffer, thou must tell it me:
Confess it freely: and I must confess
As much to Thee; for, Thee I love no less:
So, loving Both, we shall have matuall Fuel,
Nor Thou to Me, nor I to Thee be cruel:
Join hands, join hearts, how happy manifold!
How great! how graced! how will I heap thee gold!
Thus she protests, and with a sudden kiss
Upon his Lips she seals her Promises.
He, red for shame, selfe-sadly ruminates
His Heavenly Angels sacred Caueats
Against Temptations and Attempts unjust,
Of Idols service, and unlawful Lust:
Internal praying for supernall Strength,
In modest manner Thus replies at length:
Madame, what ever of my Love you hear,
How-euer fervent, or how deepely-deere;
If you have heard it, as (perhaps) impure,
Unchaste, dishonest Love; I you assure
None love I so; nor wish I (I protest)
So to be loved: and of my Lady, least.
My Lord, you know, has nothing from me kept,
I all command, only your self except:
And shall I then, disloyal, Traitor prove
Unto my Lord; and to My God above?
No, God forbid: No, rather let me dye;
And in the sands unburied ever lie,
A prey to Birds and Beasts: and as he spoke,
She and her Chamber did he quick forsake.
She, seeing then her Hopes so sudden dashed,
Her self deluded; as with Lightning flasht,
Stands first a while mouelesse, amazed and mute;
Then grindes a Groan, and many sighs pursue't:
Then wrings her hands, falls backward on her bed,
Distract in mind, her color pale and dead.
All which observed by that Diuell-Owle,
Upon the Roof, he puts off the Foul,
And re-puts-on Nurse Iphicle a space,
To visit Iempsar in so pitious Case.
Alas! quoth she, What ailes my Lady dear?
My tender Nursling, What has happened here?
Why are you daunted and dejected so?
Be of good Cheer; be of good Comfort: Lo,
I, I am here; look on me, look, my Lamb,
Your help at need, your loving Nurse I am.
At name of Nurse, her somewhat she erects,
And with these Taunts a frowning glance reflects:
Nurse, once a Nurse, or Mother more then Nurse,
But now a Step-dam, or some Fury worse.
Thou, thou have killed me, thou have quite undone me,
Thou toldst me Joseph was enamoured on me,
Deep, to the Death; and when I come to prove him,
Alas! he loves not, nor will let me love him:
Nay, Prayers, Proffers, Presents cannot move him
Thou, thou have made me make my self a mock;
To shame my Name, to stain my House and Stock,
To wrong my Lord, to break my Faith, to fall;
Thou were the Author, thou the cause of all.
What wants more, but with a murderous blade,
This guilty Soul to send to endless shade?
False Iphicle does her as sharp reprove;
Ah, foolish woman, inexpert in Love:
What wonder was it, if a bashful boy,
Vntraind, untouched (as Virgin) first were coy
To hear of Love, a Nouice, yet a Stranger,
Doubtful of you, perhaps; fearful of danger.
'Twas not the course: you have miscarried it.
Then be not hartlesse, neither hopeless yet,
For I will once more undertake the matter,
I Will chide his rudeness, and instruct him better
How to behave him: Have you Patience
But for three days, and on the fourth from hence
Will reign a gracious Star, whose mild Aspect
On Love and Lovers gently does reflect;
Under whose Radiance, in Conjunction sweet,
Hymen and Cupid in one instant meet.
With these her Words Iempsar, part re-cheard,
Her sinking heart again a little reared:
Then Go, said she, the Gods grant better speed:
And that we may the better now succeed,
We will the while the sacred powers implore,
Frequent their Altars, and their Shrines adore.
Next morning therefore, by what time the Sun
With glittering Rays had gilt the Horizon,
Iempsar decks her, goodly to behold,
In Scarlet, set with Jewels and with Gold
(But much more goodly for her lovely grace,
And native Beauties of her Form and Face)
And to the Temple with a Train she tends,
Of Matrons, Maidens, Servants, Neighbors, Friends.
Among the rest, the Steward also went,
Faire-featur'd JOSEPH, with his Eyes down bent,
As inlie pitying with a grief vnshowne,
His Ladies Passions as he did his own:
For, he supposed her gaite to Church had bin
To seek for Mercy, and forsake her sin:
But, nothing less; She all the gods requires,
To friend her love, and further her desires:
And so the next day, and the next ensuing,
And every day still greater Gifts renewing,
The reaking Entrails of her Offerings viewing.
But, when the fourth, long-wished, wel-come day
Titan 'gan burnish with his burning Ray,
Hail happy day (said she) hail holy Lights,
That favors Lovers, and that love delights:
And by your power and gracious Influence,
Preserve the Worlds perpetual Increments.
And then she sends for the beloved Lad:
Who, selfely good, suspecting nothing bad,
Supposing now his Mistress mind reclaimed,
At least from daring what before she aimed,
Comes instantly: She, by the Nurse seduc't,
Presuming All to her content conduc't;
Nor sooner spies him, but she springs for haste,
About his neck her Iuory Arms she cast:
She holds him, hugs him; saying, Welcome Mine,
Mine, Mine thou art, and I am only Thine:
Then, Why delay we? Why defer we thus
Our joint delights, since none can hinder us?
Why burn we Daylight? Hence with Fear and Sloth.
Let Us mix our Loves. This Bed will serve us Both:
She leapes upon it, and like a Nay-lesse Wooer,
Holding his Cloak, she pulls him hard unto her.
The goodly Youth, as beautiful as blameless,
Amazed, ashamed, to see his Lady shameless,
Roplyes, Alas! (Thus sharp reproving her)
Late Noble Wife of Noble Potipher,
What mood? what madness has obdur'd your mind,
To dare these Pranks, uncomely and unkind?
To shame your Self, your Sex, your House, your State,
To wrong my Lord, and me unfortunate?
These are the fruits of Ease-full Idleness,
Of wanton Pride, of wastfull Pamprednesse;
From whence the Fiends (our foes) advantage cull,
To kill our Souls, and fill our Sins-sacke full:
For, it is not Iphicle, your Nurse, your Friend,
As you suppose: no, it is a hellish Fiend,
A Hag, a Fury sent from Sulphury Styx,
That thus deludes you with deceits and tricks:
She dared, and did attempt to tampt me too;
But, God forbad: she me no hurt could do.
I saw her shrinking out, as I came in:
I know the fained form she masketh in:
I feel the Sulphury fume, the filthy Sent
She left behind her, when away she went.
He having spoken; from behind the door,
The subtle Fury (lurking there before)
With sudden rush did crush the posts in sunder;
And coming in, fills all with fear and wonder;
When ghastly squinting, griezly, Thus she spoke
With hellish voice: Indeed you do miss-take,
False, Iphicle I am not: I am one
Oh the Odious Sisters, sent from Acheron,
I Will make you prove it now: then forth she drew
A poisonous Snake, and it at JOSEPH threw:
But, the Heavenly Warder still repeld it back,
And all the endeavors frustrate still did make:
Unable therefore Him to hurt at all,
Toward Iempsar does it softly crawle,
With slippery windings, wrigling to and fro:
Into her skirts at length it twineth so,
That up it creepes, and quick into her gets,
Gnawes all her bowels, and despitefull spets
His hellish poison in her inmost heart.
The Lad, thus frighted, quick away did start,
To his own Chamber; and perplexed in mind,
Forgetful he had left his cloak behind.
Seeing him fled, and feeling in her womb
The fretting Venom; wholly overcome,
In ragefull fury, suddenly she falls,
And, Help, Help, Help, with a loud Cry she calls,
So loud and shrill, that all the Court it heard,
And all the house, and neighbors near it scared;
As if within had ^^^ne some sudden fire
Which instantly would to the roof aspire.
Help, Women, Help, quick, quickly. O! the Slave,
The Jew, the Rascal, the young Hebrew knave,
Even now (o Gods!) finding me here alone,
(O the bold Villain! Has the like been known?)
Dared to have defiled great Potiphar his Bed;
And, but my Nurse me timely rescued,
Had ravished me (O, horrid thing to think!)
But hearing Help, away the Slave did slinke,
And left, for haste, his Cloak behind him here.
With Hue and Cry, pursue him far and near,
Lay hold on him, and lay him fast in Hold;
And let my Lord of his Abuse be told.
Thus fell Iempsar her complaint prefers.
All which, and more, false Iphicle auers,
And aggrauares, adiudging him exempt
From pity, fit to hang for such attempt
So insolent, so impudent; and whets
The hearers hearts. Then close away she gets,
Unseen, and Owle-like in a Clowd inuolv'd,
Her borrowed Body into Air dissolved;
Descending swift from whence she came, to tell
Her good-ill service, and success, in Hell.
Poor JOSEPH then his fellows felly seize;
And, hasty, hurry him toward Little-Ease:
Feign would he speak, but none would hear a word;
None, none at all, and least of all his Lord,
Whom the Report already had incenst;
Yet not with Death to have him recompenc't:
But, in a Dungeon (worse then Death) to dwell,
For worst Offenders the most loathsome Cell;
There, kept Close-Prisoner, to be barely fed
With puddle-water, and with Barly-bread.
But, better kept by his supernall Keeper
(Yet, more his dear, the more their woes be deeper)
A winged Watchman shining heavenly bright,
Is sent to JOSEPH (when the first sad Night
With sable Courtin had beclowded all)
Who entering (through the Wicket and the Wall)
Into the Prison, with a new-come Ray
Lightning the dungeon, driving Night away,
With spiritual Comforts, and with speeches kind,
Cancels his fears, and well confirms his mind.
This, from a Tower the Egyptian Keeper spied:
Some God, some God is in the Light, he cried.
I know, such Splendour, and the speech I heard,
If it be God, it must be needs inferd
This Lad is guiltless of the crime pretended.
For, Innocents just JOVE has aye defended.
Thenceforth, to JOSEPH bare he great respect,
A kind of Reverence, with a kind Affect;
Took off the Irons from his hands and feet;
Fed, lodged him better, made his prison sweet;
Visits him often, entreats him friendly fair,
With loving Comforts; lets him take the Air.
Now, twice four Roundels Phoebe had complete,
When, on suspicion of some treacherous feat
Of poys'ning Pharao's Bread (as went the Fame)
Two were committed from the Court (by name,
The Kings chief Baker, and chief Butler, too)
To the same Gaile where JOSEPH has to do.
For, now his Keeper trusted him so deep,
He made him Keeper, and of naught took keep.
In short time after, Either, in one night
Dreamed a Dream; whence the next morrow light,
Pained and perplexed, what they might portend,
Too sadly serious seemed they to perpend.
Which JOSEPH noting: Gentlemen, I pray,
How hap (quoth he) you are so sad to day.
Tonight (said they) we dreamed each a Dream,
But none we find that can interpret them:
And that is our trouble. Can you tell them me?
Come, let me hear them, if you can, quoth he;
It may please God we may have sight therein.
Right gladly, said the Butler, I Will begin.
Me thought I saw a green and goodly Vine,
With three fair Branches, budding, blowing fine,
Then flowring fresh, then swelling Clusters blush,
Whose spumy Juice in Pharao's cup I crush,
Which with my hand into his hand I raught,
Whereof the King tooke-in his wonted Draught.
Then, thus the Lad: I Will tell your Dreams Portent.
First, by that goodly Vine your Life is Meant;
The Buds, Flowers, Fruits, be fruits your self have bore,
Your Services, your Virtues here-tofore,
Which shall be guerdon'd, you restored to grace;
The three fair Branches are but three days space,
When in your wonted manner you shall bring
The wonted Cup unto your Lord the King.
Then, when with Pharaoh you shall gracious be
(If I be worthy) but remember me,
And that unworthy I am here detained.
The Baker, hearing This thus right explained,
Said, let me also, if you please, I pray,
Report my Vision; and your Verdict say.
Me thought I had three Baskets on my head,
Two full of Flower, the third of finest Bread,
Made with most Art and Cunning that I might;
But, all anon the Birds devoured quite.
Then said the good Interpre'r: Things to come
Are known to GOD; Men often fail in some:
Yet, what I guess and gather of this matter,
I Will tell you true: I cannot, may not, flatter.
That which you saw the Baskets filled with,
Of diverse kinds, your Life betokens:
The Flower your former, simple and sincere;
The Bread, your later, compound (as it were)
Of all deceipts, Theft, Plotting, Poisoning,
Treason, and all discovered to the King;
Who, for reward of these foul Crimes, by Law
Will hang you up: and then the Birds you saw,
Rav'ns, Vultures, Eagles, Kites and carren Crows,
Shall eat your Carcass, peck your Eyes and Nose.
Within three days, your Baskets number notes:
Yet I may err, and you may change your Lots.
For, GOD does change, when Men do change from ill,
His mediate Work, not his immediate Will.
This past, their Parts both diverse pondering,
On the third day came Warrant from the King,
To clear and to declare the Butler Quit,
And hang the Baker, at first sight of it.
Accordingly, from Prison both are brought;
But, to a diverse End, with diverse thought:
The one with reproach, the other with good report;
The one to the Cart, the other to the Court;
The one to the Gallows, the other to be graced
Of Prince and Peers, and in his room re-plac't;
With Caps and Claps, with cheerful shouts and songs
Wellcom'd, rewarded, honored for his wrongs.
Thrice through the Zodiak had Hyperian pranc't,
And fourthly now his fiery Teeme advanced,
When quiet stretched upon his Iuory bed,
In sweetest sleep, well toward Morning-sted,
To mighty Pharao the Almighty sent
A double Dream, of so deep Consequent,
That wondering much, the King awoke withal,
Conceiving it some high Prognosticall.
Wherefore, forthwith he summons far and wide,
Through Egypt and Chaldea, from each side,
All that had knowledge in Astrology,
Cunning in Spells, or Skill in Prophecy,
Or could foretell by Magic from below;
Or from above, by Oracles fore-show;
Or by in-sight of Sacrificed Herds;
By Fire, by Water, or by Flight of Birds,
Or by their Songs; by Sand, by Geomancy;
Or by what-euer Heathen Feat or Phantsie.
Then swarmed the Court with Sages of all sorts,
Of diverse habits, and of diverse ports.
Some on their Heads wore Horns, hairy and horrid,
Some with thick Turbands did surrou^d their forehed,
Some with high Miters, some with trayling whoods,
Some with rich Garlands, set with precious Studs;
But, broad long-bearded all, adown their Chinne,
With sad aspect, and of a sallow skin.
Whom when before him Pharaoh had admitted,
He tells his Dreams, first; then (as him befitted)
Propounds Honors and rich Recompense
To whom-soeuer shall expound the sense,
And sets them days, and nights, and times, and hours,
To bring their Answer: But (beyond their powers)
Days, Nights, Times, Hours, they break, none does appear
T'explane the Dream, or the Kings doubt to clear:
Neither their Spheres, Spells, Circles, Sorceries,
Birds, Beards, nor Miters, could decypher This.
Angry therefore, and thenceforth grieuing deep,
The King would hear none, but did private keep.
The Butler then remembering (at the last)
During his Durance what before had past,
(Which hitherto, as Courtiers, yet, for most,
Good Turns received, he had forgot, or crossed.)
How truly JOSEPH by their Dreams did tell,
What to the Baker and himself befell;
Fell on his knees, and cries unto the King,
Pardon, My Liege, my stolid lingering,
To tell your Highness, in this manner moved,
What (late) in prison I both saw and proved.
Your Majesty (no doubt) remembers yet,
Your Baker and my self you did commit
To your High Marshalls Tower; where then we found
An Hebrew Youth, a Prisoner (on false ground,
As may be ghest) late Page to Potiphar.
Both grown in time with him familiar,
Both of us dreamed in one very night;
Both of our Dreams to Him we did recite;
Both he expounded; and both did succeed
To both of us, as he of both did reed.
To me, said he, Thou shall in three days space,
Return to Court, recover Place and Grace:
But, to the Baker; Thou (said he) that day
Shall be hanged up, for ravening Birds a Prey,
Unless thy faults thou can so quick repent,
That change of life thy threatened death prevent:
(For, GOD does change, when men do change from Ill,
His mediate Work, not his immediate Will.)
All which, for True, before your Eyes is clear;
The Baker hanged: and I your Butler, here.
Upon my Life, my Lord, your hidden Dream
That Lad will read: he has some Spirit supreme.
Herewith the King re-cheerd, and inly glad,
Commands him straight, Go, quickly fetch the Lad,
And in Our Name him instantly enlarge.
Forthwith he hies him to perform his charge;
Gets forth the Prisoner, shifts him, suits him pressed,
Of his own cost, and has him barb'd and dressed;
And then conducts him, bashful, to the King;
Who well beholds the Lad, likes every thing;
Then questions thus: They tell me, Youth, that you
Interpret Dreams; now, tell me, Tell they true?
My gracions Lord, said JOSEPH, God alone
Immediately knows Dreams; and other none,
Save only such to whom that sacred Gift
The Almighty daignes: I may my Prayer lift
Unto my GOD for you, my Lord, and shall:
It may be, He will grant this grace withal.
For, ay with special care he guides the things,
That long to Kings; as only King of Kings.
A while then inly did he meditate:
Then, prays the King his Visions to relate.
Me thought, said Pharaoh, by Niles bank I stood,
And suddenly from out the silver Flood,
Came seven fair Kine, which ranging far and wide,
Fed in the Meades along the Rivers side,
On Oxe-lips, Cowes-lips, Trifole and the rest,
Which for the Altar fat our Beasts the best.
Scarce had I turned mine eye, when on the shore,
Me-thought in the instant came up 7. Kine more,
With staring hair, too-weake to stand alone,
Ill-fauoured, lanke, and lean, bare skin and bone;
As poorly fed, With Holly, Broom, and Heath,
Anatomies, or living Forms of Death.
Amazed with this, yet was I more anon,
When these (me thought) for hunger, set upon
The former seven, and so to work did fall,
That suddenly they had devoured them all.
Heerewith I waked: and anon again
Sweet slumber caught me, and I dreamed then
I saw seven goodly full fair Ears of Corn,
Rise from one straw, scarce able to be borne:
And by and by, seven other Ears there sprung
Light, chaffie, blasted, thin and closely clung,
Which in like manner greedily did eat
And quick consume the 7. full Ears of Wheat.
These were my Dreams, which I have often propounded
To many, yet by none can be expounded.
Now, if for Thee this Honor be reserved,
If Thee alone my deeper Dreams deserved;
Then, happy Youth, rejoice with all thy heart,
Eternal Fame shall trumpet thy desert:
And, with Reward we shall so richly store thee,
That in all Egypt none shall be before thee.
Great King, said Joseph, both your Dreams be one,
Sent down from God, to be revealed by none
(How-euer wise, how ever full of Parts,
How-euer complete in all depth of Arts)
Save by some Vessel of his own Election,
To whom he daignes the grace of his direction:
And therefore could your Sages nothing show,
Not knowing God, though All-thing else they know.
Know this, o King: God by This Vision sends,
To let you know what shortly he intends.
Your seven fat Bullocks are seven fruitful years,
Which through all Egypt shall oreflow your shieres,
While Nile, far fatter than to-fore he wont,
Shall farther spread his slimy Sweat upon it;
When happy Memphis shall such Plenty see,
That your old Barnes shall, all, too little be:
Your Riekes, your Garners, and your Bartons, All,
Too narrow for your Crops, too short, too small!
And, to confirm it, that it shall be so,
Your seven full Ears but the same thing fore-show.
Now be you pleased, my great and gracious Prince,
To hear the rest with heed and Patience:
For, 7. poor years these 7. rich years shall follow,
Whose Penury their Plenty soon shall swallow;
When Nile shall shrink into his Channel, nigh
Leaving the Ridges and the Furrows dry,
Fields scorched, parched, burned even to dust,
Both Solstices like deawlesse and adust:
No Torrents gushing from the Mountain tops,
Nor (under Cancer) on the Aethyops
Any return of Winter's Moist again,
Nor any help of sweet and timely Rain:
So that the Husband cannot plough his Land;
Or if he could, he should but plough the sand,
And cast his Seed amid the same to burn,
Without all hope of any Crops return,
Or of increase: but rather pressed, for need,
To quit his Plough, and on his Oxen feed.
Your seven lean Bullocks, and seven slender Ears,
Devouring, show these seven devouring years.
This is your Dream, o King; and doubled Thus,
That, more assured, more solicitous,
More speedily you may provide before
(Thus warned by GOD) a Salve unto this Sore.
Which, how to do, (of me if you demand)
I would advise you first through all the Land,
To build new Garners, long and large enough,
From time to time to store up all the stuff,
That may be spared thoroughout your State,
During those Years of Plenty fortunate;
Allowing only for each Households need,
And for their Land, a Competence of Seed.
You must have also Treasure ready still
To buy this Store, if well proceed you will.
And to this end, let there a man be sought
Discreet and wise, to wield it as it ought.
Let him have power, as in your Royal Name,
Through all your Kingdom to dispose the same;
And underneath him to subordinate
Sub-Officers, to serve him and the State.
Thus JOSEPH counseld: and the while the King,
With silence all maturely pondering,
At last breaks out in joyful admiration,
There is (no doubt) a Divine Inspiration
In this young man. Without a spirit Divine,
Of future things, none could so deep define:
There is none like him, none to match him near,
In all Chaldaea, nor in Egypt here.
Then, on his neck, shedding a shower of Joy,
The King embraced, and kindly graced the Boy;
Then, thus bespake him: Seeing God has given
Thee this to know, and to foreshew, from Heaven;
I know not one so wise and so discreet,
Nor for this Office than thy self more meet.
Thee, next to me, shall all my people serve,
And call thee Savior: Thou do them preserve.
Then, on his back a Purple robe he dons,
Embossed round with rich and Orient Stones;
About his neck a massy Chain of Gold,
And on his finger (as they wont of old)
A royal Signet, a most precious Ring
(Not to be worn by any, but the King,
Or his Vicegerent, whom he does esteem
And will have deemed Second unto Him)
Which Pharaoh there then plucked from his own,
To put on IOSEPH's, that he might be known
To be the Second to Himself, in all.
Then, on a Steed, the second in his Stall,
(Or second Chariot) in this solemn Pomp
He makes him ride; and with the sound of Trumpe
Proclaims, before him that they bow the knee
To his Vicegerent, to This Second He,
To this Preserver of their State; or rather
To this (adopted Son) their Countries Father;
This Prince of Worth, this more then Man, this Miracle,
This happy, holy, Heauen-inspired Oracle;
Who, the Kings Dreams in time interpreting,
Had saved themselves, their Country and their King.
With all these Honors, and with Wealth conferd,
With all applause good JOSEPH is preferred,
To rule all Egypt: which with great Dexterity,
Wisdom and Worth, Care, Courage, and Sincerity,
He executes: And first, his Circuit rides
Over all the Land; Barnes every where prouides,
Which in those Plentious Years he fills with Store,
Of every kind. And, since it is no more
Virtue to purchase than preserve what is got,
He slips no time, but prudently does plot
To kill all Vermin, cut off all Excess
Of Gluttony and beastly Drunkenness;
Abates their need-les Beasts, Dogs, Mules, and Horse,
Rids idle Roagues and Vag'rants, that be worse;
And rather buyes-in, from the Coasts about,
Than by a License Iets a Corn go out.
Thus he proceeds: and GOD so blessed his hand,
That all things prosper'd over all the Land.
There was a City called Heliopolis,
(Whose Surname from the Sun derived is)
Whose Prince (a Priest too, to Apollo's Grace)
Had one fair Daughter, (fair indeed of Face
And outward Feature; but, much more diuin'd
For inward Beauties, Graces of the mind)
Whom Phoebus often consulted with, had show'n,
Not to be matched to any of their Own:
But, by a higher Fate, reserved to be
A Strangers Bride, with greater Dignity
To raise her Name, and honor her Posterity.
This Oracle at JOSEPH points in Verity,
Thinks Phoebus Priest and great King Pharaoh, too:
And to this end, the Isaacian Prince they woo.
When Egypt now seven happy years had had,
All plentiful, all prosperous and glad;
It pleased the King, with Royal Pomp and State,
These Nuptial Bands to knit and consummate
With sumptuous feasts; and (to prolong their joys)
With Tilts and Tourneys, Dances, Maskes, and toys,
So long, that now the seven rich Years, at last,
Were ended all, and all their Plenty past.
And now, Sol's Palfreys, having past the Twins,
Were posting hotly toward Cancer's Innes,
When the Egyptians could no more perceive
Nile's ouer-flood, nor any mud to leave;
But, pure, vnpudled on the sand to slide,
And in his Bottom him well-neere to hide:
Their whilome fertile soil now serely riues,
Yawnes wide for thirst, no hope of Harvest gives:
If any seed be sown, it never springs,
Or never buds, or never bears; or brings
Unhappy Darnell, or dry Poppy seed,
Or is devoured by Vermines hungry breed.
So that they live of former Years remains,
Which hardly yet the first hard Year sustaines;
But men are feign to Grass and Rats to fall,
To harmless Creatures, unclean Beasts and all.
Then, to the King, City and Country fly
To sue for Comfort, and to seek supply:
He to his Viceroy JOSEPH them refers;
He, instantly to Under-officers,
Who (by His Order) furnish all their Wants,
At equal Price; yet do so high advance
The Kings advantage, that from far and nigh
The Wealth of all runs to his Treasury:
His Checquer's full: yet had they past (alas!)
Scarce four hard years, and had 3. more to pass.
What shall they do, poor souls? How will they shift?
Now nothing have they, but their bare Lands left:
Those they would sell; but, Who (Alas!) should buy?
None has the Purse, except the King. They try
The Prudent Viceroy: who approues the thing,
Bargains and buys a Fifth part for the King.
This Famine raging fiercely every where,
Fame bruits abroad (which came to Jacobs ear)
That yet in Egypt they were stored so well,
That they had Corn enough, and some to sell:
Old Izrael therefore calling up his Sons,
You see, says he, our short Provisions:
You see how like we are to starve and pine,
And perish all, without the hand Divine:
I hear there is Corn in Egypt to be bought;
Methink, ere now, you should your selves have thought
It time to go: Go, get you quickly thither,
Take Coin and Sacks: go, hye you all together,
Save Benjamin. The other Ten agree,
And, furnished fit, set forth immediately.
Arrived in Egypt, they eft-soones enquire
The Great Corne-Master; lowting low, desire
Corn for their money; JOSEPH knows them brim
To be his Brethren: but they know not Him.
He well remembers their unkindness past,
(And, wrong received, draws strong revenge too fast.)
Yet, for Gods sake, his Fathers, and his Brothers
(Young Beniamin's) he spares all these others;
And speaks to Them, but strangely and austere:
Whence? what are you? you (Sirs) that cluster there?
My Lord, Your Servants are one Jacobs Sons;
We come from Canaan (where our Father wonnes)
Compeld by Famine, (which there rages sore)
To seek your Favor; of your happy Store,
To daign us for our Money what you may.
Our Father has great Household to defray,
Himself, Eleven of Us, our Little Fry,
Shepherds and Bondmen a great company:
And therefore hither are we come, my Lord,
To crave the Help your Favor may afford,
To save so many lives, that may be able,
And shall be willing (some way serviceable)
To thank your Lordship: for, our Father reigns
As King in Sichem, and he stocks the Plains
With goodly Flocks of many Thousand Sheep,
And store of Cattle of all kinds does keep:
Vouchsafe us therefore of your Corn, we pray,
That we may live, what ever price we pay:
For, we come hither, not to beg, but buy.
* To buy? said JOSEPH; nay, I doubt to spy:
Spies are ye all; so many sturdy Clownes
To troop at once through all our Forts and Towns,
To view and to suruay our Strength and store,
And so the weakness of the Land explore.
Yet tell me of your Father and your Brother:
But, I believe neither the one, nor other:
Where Is your Commission? Where Is your Fathers Test?
Why came not that one Brother with the rest?
Or why came you so many? It is clear
* You come to spy: and you shall buy it dear.
Thus, though his heart did melt, his bowels yerne,
He faines him fierce, and bears him roughly stern.
They, prostrate all, beseech him not suspect
Them any such. Our coming was direct,
We swear (say they): The witness we implore
Of the only GOD our Father does adore,
Our Father sent us; Famine drove us hither;
For Corn we come: and that we come together,
Our need, our number, and our distance, crave
At once as much as we at once can have:
Our other Brother is but yet a Lad
(And all the comfort that our Father had)
Too young to travel such a journey yet;
Which, upon us our Father laid, more fit.
We thought on no Commission: for, indeed
In such a case we thought there none should need.
Be good unto us, good my Lord, we pray,
Pity our Father, (and if pity may
Pearce you at all) pity our Brothers case,
Pity our Babes, the hope of all our Race.
Twixt ouer-ioyd, his eyes will needs run over,
Which, yet a while, he turns aside to cover:
Then, thus returns; Your cunning answer shows
That you are false. Truth needs not such a Gloss:
I am resolved, and can believe no other.
By the Life of Pharaoh, till you fetch your Brother,
You shall not hence, one Hostage shall remain,
The rest shall go well laden home with grain:
This favor will I do, expect no other,
Nor move me more, until you bring your brother,
To testify your Stories are not lies:
Else, by the life of Pharaoh you are Spies.
(Here, Sir, Marshall, take them to your charge,
Look none of them be let to go at large)
I Will give you three days Respit, to revolue;
Then let me hear what herein you resolve.
They (inly pricked in their own conscience
For cruelties committed, now long since,
Against this their unknown Brother, now a Prince)
Among themselves debating what was best
(Seeing the Viceroy did so deep protest)
Thought most expedient, and resolve in brief,
To send home Nine, laden with such relief,
To fetch their Brother; leaving one behind:
Which Part, by Lot, to Simeon was assigned;
Whom they for Hostage to the Prince present,
(Upon the third day) with their full intent.
Then he commands their Sacks with Corn be filled:
They pay for it; but, secretly he willed,
That each man's money should again be put
Into his Sack, and then the Sack re-shut.
So, now their Hostage in safe custody,
They lade their Asses, and full heavily
Leave Egypt and their Brother; hying home,
Unto Samaria: where no sooner come,
But their old Father, forthwith missing one,
Cries, Where Is your Brother? Where Is my Simeon?
What, is he sick, or dead (I doubt me rather)?
Neither, said Judah, dead, nor sick, good Father:
He Is well in Health, but does for pledge remain
In Egypt, till we all go back again,
And bring with us our Brother Benjamin:
For, such conditions must we enter in,
Or else we could have brought you nothing thence.
The Man we dealt with, a Great Man, a Prince,
Next to the King, at our arrival there,
Asked many questions, whence, and what we were:
Whether we had a Father, or a Brother,
In what estate, how old; and many other.
We, doubting nothing, told him truly all:
Then, more austere, and more maiesticall,
Now I perceive (says he) that you are Spies,
And all your Answers are so many Lies:
You come but to suruay our Strength, and Store,
To find our Weakness, and our Wants explore:
You tell me of your Father and your Brother,
But I believe neither the one, nor other.
Where Is your Commission? Where Is your Fathers Test?
Why came not that one Brother with the rest?
Or, Why came you so many? It is clear,
You come to spy, and you shall buy it dear.
We answered for our selves the best we could:
All would not serve: The issue was this; we should
Leave one for Hostage, and the other Nine
Should bring home Corn, and bring him Benjamin,
Or never to return unto that place,
Or never dare to look him in the face:
For, by the Life of Pharaoh, we were spies,
(That is his Oath) and all our Words were Lies.
Good Father Jacob having heard all this,
With many a sigh (as sorrows manner is)
Is there, says he, under the Heavens bright Eye,
Another Father so distressed as I?
One Son is lost; another, Prisoner left
In a strange Land; another, now bereft
(By your device, or your advice at least)
And all of you (I doubt me) all the rest
To be extinct, while I survive in fears
Of so bad news to come to my sad ears.
First would to God (so God were not displeased)
My days were ended, and my sorrows eased.
Thus speaking wept he, and thus weeping spoke.
His Sons with Comforts seek his Care to slake,
Saying, The Godly should not fear so deep,
Since God his servants will more safely keep.
Then to their Sacks: Each having his unknit,
Each finds his money in the mouth of it.
Amazed all: sad Jacob, there-upon,
Sons, Sons, (said he) there lackt but this alone:
This is enough to kill all Hope (as vain).
For, if to Egypt you return again,
The mighty Man that feigned you Spies before,
Will find you Thieves now; and what need he more,
Having so sisted, and so sought your Coat,
To find a hole, that he might cut your throat?
No, no (I swear) my Benjamin, my Boy,
Mine only comfort left, mine only Joy,
I will not hazard on so tickle ground:
You, you shall go that are so promise-bound,
If you think good, and God will have it so:
And when you are determined to go,
I Will give you all the golden good I have,
Jewels and Coin, your Brother to un slave
And save your selves; and to bestow in Corn,
If God be pleased that you shall return.
On the other side, against his Fathers Fears,
Sad Judah thus entreats him, even with Tears.
Dear Father, hear us first; and then I pray
Have Care of us, and of your self this day.
For, how shall we unto that Man return,
Who solemnly has by his Pharaoh sworn,
Except we bring our brother Benjamin,
Nor we, nor he that is there cooped in,
Shall be dismissed: nor shall we have the grace
To hear his voice, or ever see his face;
Where, GOD he knows, what shall of us become:
And how much better shall you be at home?
How will you live? Where will you have to feed
This multitude, if there we do not speed?
Father, for Gods sake follow my advice:
Upon my peril, stand not off so nice.
This Lad will save both us and you, and all;
And, on my life, no hurt shall him befall:
Two tender pledges leave I here of mine;
If he miscarry, let Them pay the Fine.
Then doubt not, Father, lay your fear aside,
And prudently for you and yours provide.
That thus our money was returned; no doubt,
By his direction it was brought about:
But, for a pitte-fall, or for Pity, rather,
It is uncertain: this is certain, Father,
He is reported, over all that Coast,
To be a good man, and a godly-most;
And, if the Whole be partly ghest by Part,
We saw some tokens of a tender heart:
For, while to him we there did sad relate
The sad distresses of our present state,
Of you and of our Brother, and our Brats;
Our misery he so compassionates,
That he even wept: which though he thought to hide,
And turned away, yet many of us spied.
Wherefore, good Father, let us lose no time;
Prolong no longer, neither doubt the Clime,
Nor fear the man, nor faint for any thing:
We shall be safe under the Almighties wing.
This, urged with tears; the Old man, overcome,
Cries, Go on Gods name, God re-guide you home:
Go when you will, and with you take the Lad,
And some best Presents that may here be had
In this hard time; Myrrh, Storax, Almonds, Honey,
Gum, Cinnamon, and therewith, double Money,
Both for the former which you brought again,
And for the New, if Now you shall obtain.
And We the while will pray and pay our vows,
To the everlasting Patron of our house.
The Lord of Hosts, our Fathers God and ours,
To prosper and protect you with his powers.
Blushing Aurora sweetly peeping out,
When Sol again had brought his Teeme about,
The Father and the Sons, together all,
All up and ready, on their knees do fall
In due Devotion, as they daily wont:
Then to their Breakfast (not to dwell upon it)
Furnished of what their Journey did require,
Gifts, Money, Benjamin. Their tender Sire,
Weeping, Him kissing, and embracing, Thus
Bids sad Adieu: Dear Son, Ay prosperous
Thy journey be. If Fates thee safe restore,
Then wish I life; for Tears he could no more.
Then to the rest; embracing, blessing all,
While all for Blessing on their knees do call.
They to their long-hard journey settling them,
Leaving Samaria and Jerusalem;
Past Idumaeas Palmy Groves, and past
Syrbonian Moors, Arabian Deserts vast;
At length arrive on Egypts wealthy Coast,
And reach at last their Memphis wished most.
Whom gladly JOSEPH entertaineth there,
And instantly lets out his Prisoner.
Admitted then to gracious Audience,
Thus Ruben spoke: When we, Right Noble Prince,
Returned home, had to our Father done
Your high Commands touching his younger Son,
Whom you required to be hither brought;
Opening our Sacks to shoot the Corn we bought,
In every Sack we found our several Su^m
(Which God he knows, we know not, how should come.)
Our Father hearing what was come to pass,
And, seeing it, deep-sighing, cried, Alas!
Alas! My sons, I see some sad Mis-hap
Hangs over us: and all our old good hap
Is crossed and canceld. Sees Heavens glorious eye
Another Father so distressed as I?
Twelve sons I had, and one (alas!) is lost;
Another, Prisoner in a foreign coast;
Another, now (mine only comfort left)
Surrepted Thus, and You withal bereft:
And all of you to go I wot not whither
(Made Thieves) perhaps to perish all together.
We comfort, We thus press with all our powers,
O Father, trust our Fathers God and ours
And for the Man that now in Egypt swayes,
He is most just, most gentle. Him they praise
For their Preserver, and their Father there
Pious and pure: then, What is thence to fear?
Won with our words, at last with much ado,
He granted us to bring his Darling too.
Go then, said he, God to and fro direct you;
And with his wings of Favor still protect you.
Take with you Benjamin; and take withal
(Such as our Country yields) these Presents small,
Gum, liquid Storax, bitter Almonds, Honey,
Myrrh, Cinnamon: take also double money,
To pay both for the Corn you had before,
And for as much as now you shall bring more:
And to that just Man (as you say) commend
Me and my Son: pray him to stand a Friend,
To pity Him, and You, and Me, and All.
So all good Hap to Him and You befall.
While this he spoke; The Prince, with much ado
Refraining Tears, cries, Welcome all of you,
Your Selves, your Presents, and your Brother here,
Who quits you from suspect: Be of good Cheer,
Go wash your weary Limbs from soil and sweat,
And soon I pray come sit with me at meat.
Thus said the Prince The servants, some prepare
Bath for their Foet; some Vessels; some their Fare;
Buttry and Pantry, some; some spread the Table;
And other-some, as busy in the Stable.
Himself the while dispatched affairs of State,
Heard Suites for Food, appointed each their Rate;
And then returns unto his Guests again;
Shows them his stately House, his Stuff, his Train,
His gold and silver Plate, ingrau'n, imbost,
Couches and Carpets of a wondrous Cost;
And round about, most sumptuous to behold,
Deep Arras Hangings, all of silk and gold,
Of sundry Stories there so lively wrought,
That, almost, living were the Figures thought;
Such sprightly Postures, and so speaking Gestures,
So native Visages, so natural Vestures.
Faith-famous Abra'm, after Heavens behest,
Leads here his Isaac to be killed, as Beast.
The Lad here loads the Ass with Holmen sprayes:
The Father makes the Pile: Hereon he lays
His bond-led, blind-led Son: his hand, heau'd up,
An Angel holds, and there is held a Tup.
There, Jacob, flying his rough Brothers wrath,
Hyes him amain toward his native Path,
His Fathers ancient Seat, and happy Realm,
Betwixt swift Tigris, and the Euphratean Stream.
There, at a Well his Uncle's Daughter aides,
Drawing up Water for the tender Maids:
There, on the Downs he tends their Fathers sheep,
Serving for Rachel double Prentiship.
While Isr'els glad Sons (at this wealth amazed,
Now full of Hope, on these things greedy gazed,
Great JOSEPH calls (for, Supper was gone up.)
Come, give us Water: It is time to sup:
Then, tall, he sets him in his Iuory Chair,
And bids them sit, and treats them wondrous fair.
Here, Death preventing Fracastorius,
This, late begun, He left vn-ended Thus.
FINIS.

