THE WISDOM OF THE ANCIENTS, WRITTEN IN LATIN By the Right Honorable Sir
FRANCIS BACON Knight, Baron of Verulam, and Lord Chancellor of England.

Done into English by Sir Arthur Gorges Knight.

Scutum inuincibile fides.

LONDON, Imprinted by JOHN BILL. 1619.

TO THE HIGH AND ILLUSTRIOUS PRINCESS, THE LADY ELIZABETH OF GREAT BRITAIN.
Duchess of Bauiere, Countess Palatine of Rheine, and chief Electresse of the
Empire.
Madam,
AMong many the worthy Chancellors of this famous Isle, there is observed in
Sir THOMAS MORE, and Sir FRANCIS BACON an admirable sympathy of wit and humor:
witness those grave monuments of invention and learning, wherewith the world
is so plentifully enricht by them both. I will instance only in the conceived
Vtopia of the one, and the revealed Sapientia Veterum of the other: Whereof the
first (under a mere Idea of perfect State government) contains an exact
discovery of the vanities and disorders of real Countries: And the second
(out of the foulds of Poetical fables) lays open those deep Philosophical
mysteries, which had been so long locked up in the Casket of Antiquity; so that
it is hard to judge to whether of these two worthies, Policy and Morality is
more behoulding. I make no question therefore but this observation (touching
the parallel of their spirits) shall pass so current to succeeding ages, that
it will be said of the^ as in former times pronounced of Xenophon and Plato,
Fuere aequales.

And for this Book that humbly present to your Highness, which so eminently
expresses its own perfection, in me it would seem no less a vanity to give
it attributes of glory and praise, then if I should lend Spectacles to Lynx, or
an Eye to Argus, knowing it needles to wast guilding on pure Gould, which is
ever best valued by its own true touch and luster. But to descend to my self,
that do now lay before your Princely ce^sure the Translation of these
excellent and judicious discourses, so barely wrapped up in my harsh English
phrase, that were by the Author so richly attired in a sweet Latin style: I
must therein fly to the Sanctuary of your gracious acceptance. In which hope
securing my doubts, do with all reverence kiss your Princely hands: Remaining
ever ready to approve my self

Your Highness most dutiful and most devoted Servant Arthur Gorges.

To the Book.
RIch mine of Art: Minnion of Mercury;
True Truch-man of the mind of Mystery
Inventions storehouse; Nymph of Helicon:
Deep Moralist of Times tradition:
Unto this Paragon of Brutus race
Present thy service, and with cheerful grace
Say (if Pythagoras believed may be)
The soul of ancient Wisdom lives in the
The Table.
1. CAssandra, or Divination. 2. Typhon, or a Rebel. 3. The Cyclops, or the
ministers of Terror. 4. Narcissus, or Self-loue. 5. Styx, or Leagues. 6. Pan,
or Nature. 7. Perseus, or War. 8. Endymion, or a Favorite. 9. The sisters of
the Giants, or Fame. 10. Actaeon and Pentheus, or a curious Man. 11. Orpheus,
or Philosophy. 12. Caelum, or Beginnings. 13. Proteus, or Matter. 14. Memnon,
or a Youth too forward. 15. Tythonus, or Satiety. 16. Juno's Suitor, or
Baseness. 17. Cupid, or an Atome. 18. Diomedes, or Zeal. 19. Daedalus, or a
Mechanique. 20. Erycthoneus, or Impostury. 21. Deucalion, or Restitution. 22.
Nemesis, or the Vicissitude of things. 23. Achelous, or Battle. 24. Dyonisus,
or Passions. 25. Atalanta, or Gain. 26. Prometheus, or the State of Man. 27.
Scylla and Icarus, or the Middle way. 28. Sphnix, or Science. 29. Proserpina,
or Spirit. 30. Metis, or Counsel. 31. The Sirenes, or Pleasures.
THE PREFACE.
THE Antiquities of the first age (except those we find in sacred Writ) were
buried in oblivion and silence: silence was succeeded by Poetical fables; and
Fables again were followed by the Records we now enjoy. So that the mysteries
and secrets of Antiquity were distinguished and separated from the Records and
Evidences of succeeding times, by the veil of fiction which interposed it
self and came between those things which perished, and those things which
perished, and those which are extant. I suppose some are of opinion, that my
purpose is to write toys and trifles, and to usurp the same liberty in
applying, that the Poets assumed in faining, which I might do (I confess) if
I listed, and with more serious contemplations intermixe these things, to
delight either my self in meditation, or others in reading. Neither am I
ignorant how fickle and inconstant a thing fiction is, as being subject to be
drawn and wrested any way, and how great the commodity of wit and discourse
is, that is able to apply things well, yet so as never meant by the first
Authors. But I remember that this liberty has been lately much abused; in
that many to purchase the reverence of Antiquity to their own inventions and
fancies, have for the same intent labored to wrest many poetical Fables.
Neither has this old and common vanity been used only of late or now and
then: for even Crisippus long ago did (as an Interpreter of dreams) ascribe
the opinions of the Stoikes to the ancient Poets; and more sottishly do the
Chymicks appropriate the fancies and delights of Poets in the transformations
of bodies, to the experiments of their furnace. All these things (I say) I have
sufficiently considered and weighed, and in them have seen and noted the
general leuity and indulgence of men's wits about Allegories. And yet for all
this I relinquish not my opinion. For first it may not be, that the folly and
looseness of a few should altogether detract from the respect due to the
Parables: for that were a conceit which might savor of profaneness and
presumption: for Religion it self does sometimes delight in such vailes and
shadows: so that who so exempts them, seems in a manner to interdict all
commerce between things divine and humane. But concerning humane wisdom, I
do indeed ingenuously and freely confess, that I am inclined to imagine, that
under some of the ancient fictions lay couched certain mysteries and
Allegories, even from their first invention. And I am persuaded (whether
ravished with the reverence of Antiquity, or because in some Fables I find
such singular proportion between the similitude and the thing signified; and
such apt and clear coherence in the very structure of them, and propriety of
names wherewith the persons or actors in them are inscribed and entitled) that
no man can constantly deny, but this sense was in the Authors intent and
meaning when they first invented them, and that they purposely shadowed it in
this sort: For who can be so stupid and blind in the open light, as (when he
hears how Fame, after the Giants were destroyed, sprang up as their youngest
Sister) not to refer it to the murmers and seditious reports of both sides,
which are wont to fly abroad for a time after the suppressing of insurrections?
Or when he hears how the Giant Typhon having cut out and brought away Jupiters
nerves, which Mercury stole from him, and restored again to Jupiter; does not
presently perceive how fitly it may be applied to powerful rebellions, which
take from Princes their sinews of money and authority, but so, that by
affability of speech, and wise edicts (the minds of their subjects being in
time privily, and as it were by stealth reconciled) they recover their strength
again? Or when he hears how (in that memorable expedition of the Gods against
the Giants) the braying of Silenus his Ass, conduced much to the profligation
of the Giants; does not confidently imagine, that it was invented to show, how
the greatest enterprises of Rebels are oftentimes dispersed with vain rumors
and fears?

Moreover, to what judgment can the conformity and signification of Names
seem obscure? Seeing Metis the wife of Jupiter does plainly signify
council: Typhon, insurrection; Pan, universality; Nemesis, revenge, and the
like. Neither let it trouble any man, if sometimes he meet with Historical
narrations, or additions for ornaments sake, or confusion of times, or
something transferred from one fable to another, to bring in a new Allegory:
for it could be no otherwise, seeing they were the inventions of men, which
lived in diverse ages, and had also diverse ends: some being ancient, others
neotericall: some having an eye to things natural, others to moral.

There is another Argument (and that no small one neither) to prove that these
Fables contain certain hidden and inuolued meanings, seeing some of them are
observed to be so absurd and foolish in the very relation, that they show, and
as it were proclaim a parable afar off: for such tales as are probable, they
may seem to be invented for delight, and in imitation of History. And as for
such as no man would so much as imagine or relate, they seem to be sought out
for other ends: For what kind of fiction is that, wherein Jupiter is said to
have taken Metis to wife, and, perceiving that she was with child, to have
devoured her, whence himself conceiving, brought forth Pallas armed out of his
head? Truly I think there was never dream (so different to the course of
cogitation, and so full of monstrosity) ever hatched in the brain of man. Above
all things this preuailes most with me, and is of singular moment, that many of
these Fables seem not to be invented of those by whom they are related and
celebrated, as by Homer, Hesiod, and others: for if it were so, that they took
beginning in that age, and from those Authors by whom they are delivered and
brought to our hands; My mind gives me there could be no great or high matter
expected, or supposed to proceed from them in respect of these originals. But
if with attention we consider the matter, it will appear that they were
delivered and related as things formerly believed and received, and not as
newly invented and offered unto us. Besides, seeing they are diversely related
by Writers that lived near about one and the self same time, we may easily
perceive that they were common things, derived from precedent memorials: and
that they became various by reason of the diverse ornaments bestowed on them by
particular relations. And the consideration of this must needs increase in us a
great opinion of them, as not to be accounted either the effects of the times
or inventions of the Poets, but as sacred relics or abstracted airs of
better times, which by tradition from more ancient Nations fell into the
Trumpets and Flutes of the Graecians. But if any do obstinately contend, that
Allegories are always aduentitially, and as it were by constraint, never
naturally and properly included in Fables, we will not be much troublesome, but
suffer them to enjoy that gravity of judgment which I am sure they affect,
although indeed it be but lumpish and almost leaden. And (if they be worthy to
be taken notice of) we will begin afresh with them in some other fashion.

There is found among men (and it goes for current) a twofold use of Parables,
and those (which is more to be admired) referred to contrary ends; conducing as
well to the foulding up and keeping of things under a veil, as to the
inlightning and laying open of obscurities. But omitting the former (rather
then to undergo wrangling, and assuming ancient Fables as things vagrant and
composed only for delight) the latter must questionless still remain, as not
to be wrested from us by any violence of wit, neither can any (that is but
meanly learned) hinder, but it must absolutely be received, as a thing grave
and sober, free from all vanity, and exceeding profitable and necessary to all
sciences. This is it (I say) that leads the understanding of man by an easy
and gentle passage through all novel and abstruse inventions, which any way
differ from common received opinions. Therefore in the first ages (when many
humane inventions and conclusions, which are now common and vulgar, were new
and not generally known) all things were full of Fables, aenigmaes, parables,
and similies of all sorts: by which they sought to teach and lay open, not to
hide and conceal knowledge, especially, seeing the understandings of men were
in those times rude and impatient, and almost incapable of any subtilties, such
things only excepted, as were the objects of sense: for as Hieroglyphics
preceded letters, so parables were more ancient then Arguments. And in these
days also, he that would illuminate men's minds anew in any old matter, and
that not with disprofit and harshnesse, must absolutely take the same course,
and use the help of similies. Wherefore all that has been said, we will thus
conclude: The Wisdom of the Ancients, it was either much or happy; Much if
these figures and tropes were invented by study and premeditation. Happy if
they (intending nothing less) gave matter and occasion to so many worthy
Meditations. As concerning my labors (if there be any thing in them which may
do good) I will on neither part count them ill bestowed, my purpose being to
illustrate either Antiquity, or things themselves. Neither am I ignorant that
this very subject has been attempted by others: But to speak as I think,
and that freely without ostentation, the dignity and efficacy of the thing is
almost lost by these men's writings, though voluminous and full of pains,
whilst not diuing into the depth of matters, but skillful only in certain
common places, have applied the sense of these Parables to certain vulgar and
general things, not so much as glancing at their true virtue, genuine
propriety, and full depth. I (if I be not deceived) shall be new in common
things. Wherefore leaving such as are plain and open, I will aim at further
and richer matters.

THE WISDOM OF THE ANCIENTS.
1
CASSANDRA, or Divination.
THe Poets fable that Apollo being enamored of Cassandra, was by her many
shifts and cunning sleights still deluded in his desire; but yet fed on with
hope until such time as she had drawn from him the gift of prophesying; and
having by such her dissimulation in the end, atteined to that which from the
beginning she sought after, at last flatly rejected his suite. Who finding
himself so far engaged in his promise, as that he could not by any means
revoke again his rash gift, and yet enflamed with an earnest desire of
revenge, highly disdayning to be made the scorn of a crafty wench, annexed a
penalty to his promise, to wit, that she should ever foretell the truth, but
never be believed: So were her diuinations always faithful, but at no time
regarded, whereof she still found the experience, yea even in the ruin of her
own country, which she had often forewarned them of, but they neither gave
credit nor ear to her words. This Fable seems to intimate the unprofitable
liberty of untimely admonitions and counselles. For they that are so ouerweened
with the sharpness and dexterity of their own wit and capacity, as that
they disdain to submit themselves to the documents of Apollo, the God of
Harmony, whereby to learn and observe the method and measure of affairs, the
grace and gravity of discourse, the differences between the more judicious and
more vulgar ears, and the due times when to speak and when to be silent; Be
they never so sensible and pregnant, and their judgments never so profound and
profitable, yet in all their endeavors either of persuasion or perforce, they
avail nothing, neither are they of any moment to advantage or manage matters,
but do rather haste^ on the ruin of all those that they adhere or devote
themselves unto. And then at last when calamity has made men feel the event
of neglect, then shall they too late be reverenced as deep foreseing and
faithful prophets. Whereof a notable instance is eminently set forth in Marcus
CatoVtice^sis, who as from a watchtower discovered afar off, and as an Oracle
long foretold, the approaching ruin of his Country, and the plotted tyranny
houering over the State, both in the first conspiracy, and as it was
prosecuted in the civil contention between Caesar and Pompey, and did no good
the while, but rather harmed the commonwealth, and hastened on his countries
bane, which M. Cicero wisely observed, and writing to a familiar friend does in
these terms excellently describe, Cato optime sentit, sed nocet interdum
Reipublicae: loquitur enim tanquam in Republica Platonis, non tanquam in faece
Romuli. Cato (says he) judges profoundly, but in the mean time damnifies the
State, for he speaks as in the commonwealth of Plato, and not as in the dregs
of Romulus.

2
TYPHON, or a Rebel.
IVno being vexed (say the Poets) that Jupiter had begotten Pallas by himself
without her, earnestly pressed all the other Gods and Goddesses that she might
also bring forth of herself alone without him; and having by violence and
importunity obtained a grant thereof, she smote the earth, and forthwith
sprang up Typhon a huge and horrid monster: This strange birth she committes
to a Serpent (as a Foster father) to nourish it, who no sooner came to ripenes
of years, but he prouokes Jupiter to battle. In the conflict the Giant
getting the upper hand, takes Jupiter upon his shoulders, caries him into a
remote and obscure country, and (cutting out the sinews of his hands and
feet) brought them away, and so left him miserably mangled and maimed. But
Mercury recovering these nerves from Typhon by stealth, restored them again to
Jupiter. Jupiter being again by this means corroborated, assaults the
Monster afresh, and at the first strikes him with a thunderboult, from whose
blood serpents were engendered. This Monster at length fainting and flying,
Jupiter casts on him the mount Aetna, and with the weight thereof crushed him.

This Fable seems to point at the variable fortune of Princes, and the
rebellious insurrection of Traitors in a State. For Princes may well be said to
be married to their dominions, as Jupiter was to Juno: but it happe^s now and
then, that being deboshed by the long custom of empyring and bending toward
tyranny, they endeavor to draw all to themselves, and (contemning the counsel
of their Nobles and Senators) hatch laws in their own brain, that is,
dispose of things by their own fancy and absolute power. The people (repyning
at this) study how to create and set up a chief of their own choice. This
project by the secret instigation of the Peers and Nobles, does for the most
part take his beginning; by whose conniuence the Commons being set on edge,
there follows a kind of murmuring or discontent in the State, shadowed by the
infancy of Typhon, which being nursed by the natural prauitie and clownish
malignity of the vulgar sort (unto Princes as infestious as Serpents) is again
repaired by renewed strength, and at last breaks out into open Rebellion,
which (because it brings infinite mischiefs upon Prince and people) is
represented by the monstrous deformity of Typhon: his hundred heads signify
their divided powers; his fiery mouths their inflamed intents; his serpentine
circles their pestilent malice in besieging; his iron hands, their merciles
slaughters; his Eagles tallents, their greedy rapynes; his plumed body, their
continual rumors, and scouts, and fears and such like. And sometimes these
rebellions grow so potent that Princes are enforced (transported as it were by
the Rebels, and forsaking the chief Seats and Cities of the Kingdom) to
contract their power, and (being deprived of the Sinews of money and majesty)
betake themselves to some remote and obscure corner within their dominions: but
in process of time (if they bear their misfortunes with moderation) they may
recover their strength by the virtue and industry of Mercury, that is, they may
(by becoming affable and by reconcyling the minds and wills of their Subjects
with grave edicts and gracious speech.) excite an alacrity to grant ayds and
subsidies whereby to strengthen their authority anew. Nevertheless having
learned to be wise and wary, they will refrain to try the chance of Fortune
by war, and yet studdy how to suppress the reputation of the Rebels by some
famous action, which if it fall out answerable to their expectation, the Rebels
finding themselves weakened, and fearing the success of their broken proiects;
betake themselves to some slight and vain brauadoes, like the hissing of
serpents, and at length in despair betake themselves to flight, and then when
they begin to break, it is safe and timely for kings to pursue and oppress
them with the forces and weight of the kingdom, as it were with the mountain
Aetna.

3
The Cyclopes, or the Ministers of Terror.
THey say that the Cyclopes (for their fiercenes and cruelty) were by Jupiter
cast into hell, and there doomed to perpetual imprisonment: but Tellus
persuaded Jupiter that it would do well, if being set at liberty, they were
put to forge thunderboults, which being done accordingly, they became so
painful and industrious, as that day and night they continued hammering out
in laborious diligence thunderboults and other instruments of terror. In
process of time Jupiter having conceived a displeasure against Aesculapius the
son of Apollo for restoring a dead man to life by physic; and concealing
his dislike (because there was no just cause of anger, the deed being pious and
famous) secretly incens't the Cyclopes against him, who without delay slew him
with a thunderboult: In revenge of which act; Apollo (Jupiter not prohibiting
it) shot them to death with his arrows.

This Fable may be applied to the proiects of Kings, who having cruel, bloody,
and exacting Officers, do first punish and displace them, afterward by the
counsel of Tellus, that is of some base and ignoble person, and by the
preuayling respect of profit they admit them into their places again, that
they may have instruments in a readynes, if at any time there should need
either severity of execution, or acerbity of exaction. These servile creatures
being by nature cruel, and by their former fortune exasperated, and perceiving
well what is expected at their hands, do show themselves wonderful officious
in such kind of employments but being too rash and precipitate in seeking
countenance and creeping into favor, do sometimes take occasion from the
secret becknings and ambiguous commandes of their Prince to perform some
hateful execution. But Princes (abhorring the fact, and knowing well that they
shall never want such kind of instruments) do utterly forsake them, turning
them over to the friends and allies of the wronged to their accusations and
revenge, and to the general hatred of the people, so that with great applause
and prosperous wishes and exclamations toward the Prince, they are brought,
rather too late then undeservedly, to a miserable end.

4
NARCISSUS, or Self-love.
THey say that Narcissus was exceeding fair and beautiful but wonderful
proud and disdainful; wherefore dispising all others in respect of himself,
he leads a solitary life in the woods and chases with a few followers, to
whom he alone was all in all, among the rest there (...) (...) (...) (...)
(...) (...) (...) (...) above like a man, below like a beast, his feet like
Goats hoofes, bearing these ensigns of his jurisdiction; to wit, in his left
hand a Pipe of seven reeds, and in his right a sheephooke, or a staff crooked
at the upper end, and his mantle made of a Leopards skin. His dignities and
offices were these: he was the God of Hunters, of Shepherds, and of all
rural inhabitants: chief president also of hills and mountains, and next to
Mercury the Ambassador of the Gods. Moreover he was accounted the leader and
comaunder of the Nymphs, which were always wont to dance the rounds and
friske about him, he was acosted by the Satyrs and the old Sileni. He had
power also to strike men with terrors, and those especially vain and
superstitious, which are termed Panicque fears. His acts were not many, for
ought that can be found in records, the cheifest was that he challenged Cupid
at wrestling, in which conflict he had the foil. The tale goes too that he
caught the Giant Typhon in a net, and held him fast. Moreover when Ceres
(grumling and chafing that Proserpina was ravished) had hid her self away, and
that all the Gods took pains (by dispersing themselves into every corner) to
find her out, it was only his good hap (as he was hunting) to light on her,
and acquaint the rest where she was. He presumed also to put it to the trial
who was the better Musician he or Apollo, and by the judgment of Midas was
indeed preferred: But the wise judge had a pair of Asses ears privily chopped
to his Nodle for his sentence. Of his louetrickes, there is nothing reported,
or at least not much, a thing to be wondered at, especially being among a troop
of Gods so profusly amorous. This only is said of him, that he loved the
Nymph Echo (whom he took to wife) and one pretty wench more called Syrinx,
toward whom Cupid (in an angry and reuengefull humor because so audaciously
he had challenged him at wrestling) inflamed his desire. Moreover he had no
issue (which is a marvel also, seeing the Gods, especially those of the
Malekind, were very generatiue) only he was the reputed father of a little
Girl called lamb, that with many pretty tales was wont to make strangers
merry: but some think he did indeed beget her by his wife lamb. This (if any
be) is a noble tale, as being laid out, and bigg bellied with the secrets and
mysteries of nature.

Pan (as his name imports) represents and lays open the All of things or
Nature. Concerning his original there are two only opinions that go for
current: for either he came of Mercury, that is, the word of God, which the
holy Scriptures without all controversy affirm, and such of the Philosophers
as had any smacke of divinity assented unto: or else from the confused seeds of
things. For they that would have one simple beginning refer it unto God: or
if a materiate beginning, they would have it various in power. So that we may
end the controversy with this distribution that the world took beginning
either from Mercury, or from the seeds of all things. Virg. Eolog. 6.
Namque canebat vti magnum per inane coacta
Semina, terrarumque, animaeque, marisque fuissent,
Et liquidi simulignis: and his exordia primis
Omnia, and ipse tener mundi concreuerit Orbis.
For rich-vaind Orpheus sweetly did rehearse
How that the seeds of fire, air, water, earth,
Were all pact in the vast void universe:
And how from these all firstlings all had birth,
And how the body of this Orbicque frame
From tender infancy so bigg became.
But as touching the third conceit of Pans original, it seems that the
Grecians (either by intercourse with the Egyptians or one way or other) had
heard something of the Hebrew mysteries: for it points to the state of the
world not considered in immediate creation, but after the fall of Adam, exposed
and made subject to death and corruption: for in that state it was (and remains
to this day) the offspring of God and Sin. And therefore all these three
narrations, concerning the manner of Pans birth, may seem to be true, if it
be rightly distinguished between things and times. For this Pan or nature
(which we suspect, contemplate, and reverence more then is fit) took
beginning from the word of God by the means of confused matter, and the
entrance of preuarication and corruption. The Destinies may well be thought the
Sisters of Pan or Nature, because the beginnings, and continuances, and
corruptions, and depressions, and dissolutions, and eminences, and labors, and
felicities of things, and all the chances which can happen unto any thing are
linckt with the chains of causes natural.

Horns are attributed unto him, because Horns are broad at the root and
sharp at the ends, the nature of all things being like a Pyramid sharp at the
Top. For individual or singular things being infinite are first collected
into Species, which are many also; then from Species into generals, and from
generals (by ascending) are contracted into things or notions more general, so
that at length Nature may seem to be contracted into a unity. Neither is it to
be wondered at, that Pan touches heaven with his horns, seeing the height of
nature or universal Ideas do in some sort, pertain to things divine, and
there is a ready and short passage from Metaphysicke to natural Theology.

The body of Nature is elegantly and with deep judgment depainted hairy,
representing the beams or operations of creatures: for beams are as it were
the hairs and bristles of Nature, and every creature is either more or less
beamie, which is most apparent in the faculty of seeing, and no less in every
virtue and operation that effectuals upon a distant object: for whatsoever
works up any thing afar off; that may rightly be said to darte forth rays
or beams.

Moreover Pans beard is said to be exceeding long, because the beams or
influences of celestial bodies do operate and pierce farthest of all, and the
Sun when (his higher half is shadowed with a cloud) his beams break out in
the lower, and looks as if he were bearded.

Nature is also excellently set forth with a biformed body, with respect to the
differences between superior and inferior creatures. For the one part by
reason of their pulchritude, and equabilitie of motion, and constancy, and
dominion over the earth and earthly things, is worthily set out by the shape of
man: and the other part in respect of their perturbations and unconstant
motions (and therefore needing to be moderated by the celestial) may be well
fitted with the figure of a brute beast. This description of his body perteines
also to the participation of Species, for no natural being seems to be
simple, but as it were participating and compounded of two. As for example; man
has something of a beast: a beast something of a plant: a plant something of a
inanimate body, so that all natural things are in very deed biformed, that is
to say compounded of a Superior, and inferior Species.

It is a witty Allegory that same of the feet of a Goat, by reason of the
upward tending motion of terrestrial bodies toward the air and heaven: For
the Goat is a clyming creature, that loves to be hanging about the rocks and
steep mountains; And this is done also in a wonderful manner, even by those
things which are destinated to this inferior globe, as may manifestly appear
in clouds and Meteors.

The two Ensigns which Pan bears in his hands do point, the one at Harmony,
the other at Empiry: for the Pipe consisting of seven reeds does evidently
demonstrate the concent and harmony and discordant concord of all inferior
creatures, which is caused by the motion of the seven Planets: And that of the
Shep-hooke may be excellently applied to the order of nature, which is partly
right, partly crooked: This staff therefore or rod is especially crooked in
the upper end, because all the works of divine providence in the world are
done in a far fetched and circular manner, so that one thing may seem to be
effected, and yet indeed a clean contrary brought to pass, as the selling of
Joseph into Egypt, and the like. Besides in all wise humane government, they
that sit at the helm do more happily bring their purposes about, and
insinuate more easily into the minds of the people, by pretexts and oblique
courses, then by direct methods; so that all Scepters and Mases of authority
ought in very deed to be crooked in the upper end.

Pans cloak or mantle is ingeniously fained to be the skin of a Leopard,
because it is full of spots: so the heavens are spotted with stars, the sea
with rocks and Islands, the land with flowers, and every particular creature
also is for the most part garnished with diverse colors about the supersicies,
which is as it were a mantle unto it.

The office of Pan can be by nothing so lively conceived and expressed, as by
fayning him to be the God of hunters, for every natural action, and so by
consequence, motion and progression, is nothing else but a hunting. Arts and
Sciences have their works, and humane counsels their ends which they earnestly
hunt after. All natural things have either their food as a prey, or their
pleasure as a recreation which they seek for, and that in most expert and
sagacious manner.

Torua Leaena Lupum sequitur, Lupus ille Capellam:
Florentem Cythisum sequitur lasciua Capella.
The hungry Lioness (with sharp desire)
Pursues the Wolf, the Wolf the wanton Goat:
The Goat again does greedily aspire.
To have the trifol-iuyce pass down her throat.
Pan is also said to be the God of the country Clownes, because men of this
condition lead lives more agreeable unto nature, then those that live in the
Cities and Courts of Princes, where nature by too much art is corrupted: So as
the saying of the Poet (though in the sense of love) might be here verified:

Pars minima est ipsa puella sui.
The maid so trickt her self with art.
That of her self she is least part.
He was held to be Lord President of the mountains, because in high
mountains and hills, Nature lays herself most open, and men most apt to
view and contemplation.

Whereas Pan is said to be (next unto Mercury) the messenger of the Gods,
there is in that a divine Mystery contained, for next to the word of God the
image of the world proclaims the power and wisdom divine, as sings the
sacred Poet. Psalm. 19. 1. Caeli enarrant gloriam Dei, atque opera manuum eius
indicat firmamentum. The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament
shows the works of his hands.

The Nymphs, that is, the souls of living things take great delight in Pan:
For these souls are the delights or minions of Nature, and the direction or
conduct of these Nymphs is with great reason attributed unto Pan, because the
souls of all things living do follow their natural dispositions as their
guides, and with infinite variety every one of them after his own fashion does
leap and friske and dance with incessant motion about her. The Satyrs and
Sileni also, to wit, youth and old age are some of Pans followers: for of all
natural things there is a lively iocund and (as I may say) a dancing age, and
an age again that is dull bibling and reeling. The cariages and dispositions
of both which ages to some such as Democritus was (that would observe them
duly) might peradventure seem as ridiculous and deformed as the gambols of
the Satyrs, or the gestures of the Sileni.

Of those fears and terrors which Pan is said to be the Author, there may be
this wise construction made, namely, That nature has bredde in every living
thing a kind of care and fear tending to the preservation of its own life
and being, and to the repelling and shunning of all things hurtful. And yet
Nature knows not how to keep a mean, but always intermixes vain and empty
fears with such as are discreet and profitable; so that all things (if their
insides might be seen) would appear full of Panicque frights: but men
especially in hard and fearful, and diverse times are wonderfully infatuated
with superstition, which indeed is nothing else but a Panicque terror.

Concerning the audacity of Pan in challenging Cupid at wrestling, the meaning
of it is, that Matter wants no inclination and desire to the relapsing and
dissolution of the world into the old Chaos, if her malice and violence were
not restrained and kept in order, by the prepotent unity and agreement of
things signified by Cupid, or the God of love; And therefore it was a happy
turn for men and all things else, that in that conflict Pan was found too weak
and overcome.

To the same effect may be interpreted his catching of Typhon in a net: for
howsoever there may sometimes happen vast and unwonted Tumors (as the name of
Typhon imports) either in the sea or in the air, or in the earth, or else
where, yet Nature does entangle in an intricate toil, and curb and restrain,
as it were, with a chain of Adamant the excesses and insolences of these kind
of bodies.

But for as much as it was Pans good fortune to find out Ceres as he was
hunting, and thought little of it, which none of the other Gods could do,
though they did nothing else but seek her, and that very seriously, it gives us
this true and grave admonition, That we expect not to receive things necessary
for life and manners from philosophical abstractions, as from the greater
Gods, albeit they applied themselves to no other study, but from Pan, that is
from discreet observation, and experience, and the universal knowledge of the
things of this world, whereby (oftentimes even by chance, and as it were going
a hunting) such inventions are lighted upon.

The quarrel he made with Apollo about Music, and the event thereof
conteines a wholesome instruction, which may serve to restrain men's reasons and
judgments with the reins of sobriety from boasting and glorying in their
gifts. For there seems to be a twofold Harmony, or Music; the one of divine
providence, and the other of humane reason. Now to the ears of mortals, that
is to humane judgment, the administration of the world and the creatures
therein, and the more secret judgments of God, sound very hard and harsh;
which folly albeit it be well set out with Asses ears, yet notwithstanding
these ears are secret, and do not openly appear, neither is it perceived or
noted as a deformity by the vulgar.

Lastly, it is not to be wondered at, that there is nothing attributed unto Pan
concerning loves, but only of his marriage with Echo: For the World or Nature
does enjoy it self, and in it self all things else. Now he that loves would
enjoy something, but where there is enough there is no place left to desire.
Therefore there can be no wanton love in Pan or the World, nor desire to
obtain any thing (seeing he is contented with himself) but only speeches,
which (if plain) may be intimated by the Nymph Echo, or, if more quaint, by
Syrinx. It is an excellent invention, that Pan or the world is said to make
choice of Echo only (above all other speeches or voices) for his wife: for
that alone is true philosophy, which does faithfully render the very words of
the world, and is written no otherwise then the world does dictate, it being
nothing else but the image or reflection of it, not adding any thing of its
own, but only iterates and resounds. It belongs also to the sufficiency or
perfection of the World, that the begets no issue: for the World does generate,
in respect of its parts, but in respect, of the whole, how can it generate,
seeing without it there is no body? Notwithstanding all this, the tale of that
tatling Girl faltred upon Pan may in very deed with great reason be added to
the Fable: for by her are represented those vain and idle paradoxes concerning
the nature of things which have been frequent in all ages, and have filled the
world with novelties, fruitles if you respect the matter, changlings if you
respect the kind, sometimes creating pleasure, sometimes tediosnes with their
overmuch prattling.

7.
PERSEVS, or War.
PErseus is said to have been employed by Pallas for the destroying of Medusa,
who was very infestious to the western parts of the world, and especially about
the utmost coasts of Hyberia. A monster to dire and horrid, that by her only
aspect she turned men into stones. This Medusa alone of all the Gorgons was
Mortal, the rest not subject to death. Perseus therefore preparing himself for
this noble enterprise had arms, and gifts bestowed on him by three of the
Gods: Mercury gave him wings annexed to his heels, Pluto a helmet, Pallas a
shield and a looking Glass. Notwithstanding (although he were thus furnished)
he went not directly to Medusa, but first to the Greae which by the mother
side were sisters to the Gorgons. These Greae from their birth were
hoare-headed, resembling old women. They had but one only eye, and one tooth
among them all, both which she that had occasion to go abroad was wont to
take with her, and at her return to lay them down again. This eye and tooth
they lent to Perseus: and so finding himself thoroughly furnished for the
effecting of his design hastens toward Medusa. Her he found sleeping, and
yet durst not present himself with his face toward her, least she should
awake, but turning his head aside beheld her in Pallases glass, and (by this
means directing his blow) cut of her head, from whose blood gusshing out
insta^tly came Pegasus the flying horse. Her head thus smit of, Perseus bestows
on Pallas her shield, which yet retained his virtue, that whosoever looked upon
it should become as stupid as a stone or like one plannet-strucken.

This Fable seems to direct the preparation and order, that is to be used in
making of War: for the more apt and considerat undertaking whereof, three
grave and wholesome precepts (sauouring of the wisdom of Pallas) are to be
observed.

First, that men do not much trouble themselves about the conquest of
neighbor nations, seeing that private possessions, and Empires are enlarged by
different means: for in the augmentation of private revenues the vicinity of
men's territories is to be considered: but in the propogation of public
dominions, the occasion and facility of making War, and the fruit to be
expected ought to be in steed of vicinity. Certainly the Romans what time their
conquests toward the West scarce reached beyond Liguria, did yet in the East
bring all the Provinces as far as the mountain Taurus within the compass of
their arms and command: and therefore Perseus, although he were borne and
bred in the East, did not yet refuse to undertake an expedition even to the
uttermost bounds of the West.

Secondly, there must be a care had that the motives of War be just and
honorable: for that begets an alacrity, as well in the Soldiers that fight, as
in the people that afford pay: it draws on and procures aids, and brings many
other commodities besides. But there is no pretense to take up arms more pious,
then the suppressing of Tyranny, under which yoke the people loose there
courage, and are cast down without heart and vigor, as in the sight of Medusa.

Thirdly, it is wisely added; that seeing there were three Gorgons (by which
Wars are represented) Perseus undertook her only that was mortal, that is he
made choice of such a kind of War as was likely to be effected and brought to
a period, not pursuing vast and endless hopes.

The furnishing of Perseus with necessaries was that which only advanced his
attempt and drew fortune to be of his side: For he had speed from Mercury,
concealing of his counsels from Orcus, and Providence from Pallas.

Neither is it without an Allegory, and that full of matter to, that those wings
of celerity were fastened to Perseus his heels, and not to his anckles, to his
feet and not to his shoulders; because speed and celerity is required, not so
much in the first preparationes for War, as in those things which second and
yield aid to the first: for there is no error in War more frequent, then that
prosecutions and subsidiary forces do fail to answer the alacrity of the
first onsets.

Now for that helmet which Pluto gave him; powerful to make men invisible, the
moral is plain: But that two-fould gift of providence (to wit the shield and
looking glass) is full of morality: for that kind of providence which like a
shield auoids the force of blows is not alone needful, but that also by which
the strength, and motions, and councels of the enemy are descried, as in the
looking glass of Pallas.

But Perseus albeit he were sufficiently furnished with aid and courage, yet
was he to do one thing of special importance before he entered the lists
with this Monster, and that was to have some intelligence with the Greae. These
Greae are treaso^s which may be termed the Sisters of War, not descended of
the same stock, but far unlike in nobility of birth; for Wars are general
and heroical, but Treasons are base and ignoble. Their description is elegant:
for they are said to be grayheaded, and like old women from their birth, by
reason that Traitors are continually vexed with cares and trepidations. But all
their strength (before they break out

8
ENDYMION, or a Favorite.
IT is said that Luna was in love with the Shepherd Endymion, and in a
strange and unwonted manner bewrayed her affection: for he lying in a Cave
framed by nature under the mountain Latmus, she oftentimes descended from her
sphere to enjoy his company as he slept, and after she had kissed him
ascended up again. Yet notwithstanding this his idleness and sleepie security
did not any way impair his estate or fortune; for Luna brought it so to pass
that he alone (of all the rest of the Shepherds) had his flock in best
plight, and most fruitful.

This Fable may have reference to the nature and disposition of Princes: for
they being full of doubts and prone to jealousy, do not easily acquaint men
of prying and curious eyes, and as it were of vigilant and wakefull
dispositions, with the secret humors and manners of their life: but such
rather as are of quiet and obseruant natures, suffering them to do what they
list without further scanning, making as if they were ignorant and perceiving
nothing, but of a stupid disposition and possessed with sleep, yielding unto
them simple obedience, rather then sly complements: for it pleases Princes
now and then to descend from their thrones of Majesty (like Luna from the
superior orb) and laying aside their Robes of dignity (which always to be
cumbred with, would seem a kind of burden) familiarly to converse with men
of this condition, which they think may be done without danger; a quality
chiefly noted in Tiberius Caesar, who (of all others) was a Prince most severe,
yet such only were gracious in his favor, as being well acquainted with his
disposition, did yet constantly dissemble as if they knew nothing. This was the
custom also of Lewis the eleventh king of France, a cautious and wily Prince.

Neither is it without elegancy, that the cave of Endymion is mentioned in the
Fable, because it is a thing usual with such as are the favorites of Princes,
to have certain pleasant retyring places whither to inuit them for recreation
both of body and mind, and that without hurt or prejudice to their fortunes
also. And indeed these kind of favorites are men commonly well to pass: for
Princes although peradventure they promote them not ever to places of honor,
yet do they advance them sufficiently by their favor and countenance: neither
do they affect them thus only to serve their own turn, but are wont to
enrich them now and then with great dignities and bounties.

9.
THE SISTER OF THE GIANTS, or Fame.
IT is a Poetical relation that the Giants begotten of the Earth made war
upon Jupiter, and the other Gods, and by the force of lightning they were
resisted and overthrown. Whereat the Earth being excitated to wrath, in
revenge of her children brought forth Fame, the youngest Sister of the Giants.

Illam, terra parens ira irritata Deorum.
Extremam (vt perhibent) Caeo Enceladoque sororem,
Progenuit. --
Prouok't by wrothfull Gods the mother Earth
Gives Fame the Giants youngest sister birth.
The meaning of the Fable seems to be thus, By the Earth is signified the
nature of the vulgar, always swollen and malignant, and still broaching new
scandals against superiors, and having gotten fit opportunity, stirs up
rebels, and seditious persons, that with impious courage do molest Princes,
and endeavor to subvert their estates: but being suppressed, the same natural
disposition of the people still leaning to the viler sort, (being impatient of
peace and tranquillity) spread rumors, raise malicious slanders, repining
whisperings, infamous libelles, and others of that kind, to the detraction of
them that are in authority: So as rebellious actions, and seditious reports,
differ nothing in kind and blood, but as it were in Sex only; the one sort
being Masculine, the other Feminine.

10.
ACTAEON, and PENTHEVS, or a curious Man.
THe curiosity of Men, in prying into secrets, and coveting with an indiscreet
desire to atteine the knowledge of things forbidden, is set forth by the
Ancients in two examples: the one of Actaeon, the other of Pentheus.

Actaeon having unawares, and as it were by chance beheld Diana naked, was
turned into a Stag, and devoured by his own Dogs.

And Pentheus climing up into a tree, with a desire to be a spectator of the
hidden sacrifices of Bacchus, was stricken with such a kind of frenzy, as that
whatsoever he looked upon, he thought it always double, supposing (among other
things) he saw two Suns, and two Thebes; insomuch that running toward
Thebes, spying another Thebes, instantly turned back again, and so kept still
running forward and backward with perpetual unrest.

Eumenidum veluti demens videt agmina Pentheus,
Et Solemn geminum, and duplices se ostendere Thebas.
Pentheus amazed does troops of furies spy,
And Sun and Thebes seem dooble to his eye.
The first of the Fables pertains to the secrets of Princes: the second to
divine mysteries. For those that are near about Princes, and come to the
knowledge of more secrets then they would have them, do certainly incur
great hatred. And therefore (suspecting that they are shot at, and
opportunities watched for their overthrow) do lead their lives like Stagges,
fearful and full of suspicion. And it happens oftentimes that their Servants,
and those of their household (to insinuate into the Princes favor) do accuse
them to their destruction: for against whomsoever the Princes displeasure is
known, look how many servants that man has, and you shall find them for the
most part so many traitors unto him, that his end may prove to be like
Actaeons.

The other is the misery of Pentheus: for they that by the height of knowledge
in nature and philosophy, having climed, as it were, into a tree, do with rash
attempts (unmindful of their frailty) pry into the secrets of divine
mysteries, and are justly plagued with perpetual inconstancy, and with
wavering and perplexed conceits: for seeing the light of nature is one thing,
and of grace another, it happens so to them as if they saw two Suns. And
seeing the actions of life, and decrees of will do depend of the
understanding, it follows that they doubt, and are inconstant no less in will
then in opinion, and so in like manner they may be said to see two Thebes: for
by Thebes (seeing there was the habitation and refuge of Pentheus) is meant the
end of actions. Hence it comes to pass that they know not whither they go,
but as distracted and unresolved in the scope of their intentions, are in all
things carried about with sudden passions of the mind.

11
ORPHEUS, or Philisophy.
THe tale of Orpheus, though common, had never the fortune to be fitly applied
in every point. It may seem to represent the image of Philosophy: for the
person of Orpheus (a man admirable and divine, and so excellently skilled in
all kind of harmony, that with his sweet rauishing music he did as it were
charm and allure all things to follow him) may carry a singular description of
Philosophy: for the labors of Orpheus do so far exceed the labors of
Hercules, in dignity and efficacy, as the works of wisdom, excel the works
offortitude.

Orpheus for the love he bare to his wife (snacht as it were from him by
untimely death) resolved to go down to Hell with his Harp, to try if he
might obtain her of the infernal powers. Neither were his hopes frustrated:
for having appeased them with the melodious sound of his voice and touch,
prevailed at length so far, as that they granted him leave to take her away
with him, but on this condition that she should follow him, and he not to
look back upon her, till he came to the light of the upper world, which he
(impatient of, our of love and care, and thinking that he was in a manner past
all danger) nevertheless violated, insomuch that the covenant is broken, and
she forthwith tumbles back again headlong into hell. From that time Orpheus
falling into a deep melancholy became a contemner of women kind, and
bequeathed himself to a solitary life in the deserts, where by the same melody
of his voice and harp, he first drew all manner of wild beasts unto him, who
(forgetful of their savage fiercenes, and casting off the precipitate
prouocations of lust and fury, not caring to satiate their voracity by hunting
after prey) as at a Theater in fawning and reconciled amity one toward
another, stand all at the gaze about him, and attentively lend their ears to
his Music. Neither is this all: for so great was the power and alluring force
of his harmony, that he drew the woods and moved the very stones to come and
place themselves in an orderly and decent fashion about him. These things
succeeding happily and with great admiration for a time, at length certain
Thracian Women (possessed with the spirit of Bacchus) made such a horrid and
strange noise with their Cornets, that the sound of Orpheus harp could no more
be heard, insomuch as that Harmony, which was the bond of that order and
society being dissolved, all dissorder began again, and the beasts (returning
to their wonted nature) pursued one another unto death as before: neither did
the trees or stones remain any longer in their places: and Orpheus himself
was by these femall Furies torn in pieces, and scattered all over the desert.
For whose cruel death the river Helicon (sacred to the Muses) in horrible
indignation, hid his head under ground, and raised it again in another place.

The meaning of this Fable seems to be thus. Orpheus music is of two sorts,
the one appeasing the infernal powers, the other attracting beasts and trees.
The first may be fitly applied to natural philosophy, the second to moral
or civil discipline.

The most noble work of natural philosophy, is the restitution and renouation
of things corruptible, the other (as a lesser degree of it) the preservation of
bodies in their estate, deteining them from dissolution and putrefaction. And
if this gift may be in mortals, certainly it can be done by no other means then
by the due and exquisite temper of nature, as by the melody and delicate touch
of an instrument. But seeing it is of all things the most difficult, it is
seldom or never attained unto, and in all likelihood for no other reason, more
then through curious diligence and untimely impatience. And therefore
Philosophy hardly able to produce so excellent an effect, in a pensive humor
(and not without cause) busies herself about humane objects, and by persuasion
and eloquence, insinuating the love of virtue, equity, and concord in the
minds of men, draws multitudes of people to a society, makes them subject to
laws, obedient to government, and forgetful of their unbridled affections,
whilst they give ear to precepts, and submit themselves to discipline, whence
follows the building of houses, erecting of towns, and planting of fields and
orchards, with trees and the like, insomuch that it would not be amiss to say,
that even thereby stones, and woods were called together, and settled in order.
And after serious trial made and frustrated about the restoring of a body
mortal; this care of civil affairs follows in his due place: Because by a
plain demonstration of the inevitable necessity of death, men's minds are moved
to seek eternity by the fame and glory of their merits. It is wisely also said
in the Fable, that Orpheus was auerse from the love of women and marriage,
because the delights of wedlock and love of children do for the most part
hinder men from enterprising great and noble designs for the public good,
holding posterity a sufficient step to immortality without actions.

Besides even the very works of wisdom, (although amongst all humane things
they do most excel) do nevertheless meet with their periods. For it
happens that (after kingdoms and commonwealths have flourished for a time)
even tumults, and seditions, and wars arise; in the midst of which hurly
burlies: first, laws are silent, men return to the prauity of their natures,
fields and towns are wasted and depopulated, and then, (if this fury continue)
learning and philosophy must needs be dismembered, so that a few fragments
only, and in some places will be found like the scattered boords of
shipwreck, so as a barbarous age must follow; and the streams of Helicon
being hid under the earth until (the vicissitude of things passing) they
break out again and appear in some other remote nation, though not perhaps
in the same climate.

12.
COELVM, or Beginnings.
We have it from the Poets by tradition, that Coelum was the ancientest of the
Gods, and that his members of generation were cut off by his son Saturn.
Saturn had many children, but devoured them as soon as they were borne.
Jupiter only escapt, who being come to man's estate, thrust Saturn his father
into hell, and so usurped the kingdom. Moreover he pared off his fathers
genitals with the same faulchin that Saturn dismembered Coelum, and cast them
into the Sea, from whence came Venus. Not long after this, Jupiter (being
scarce settled and confirmed in this kingdom) was invaded by two memorable
wars. The first of the Titans, in the suppressing of which Sol (who alone of
all the Titans favoring Jupiters side) took exceeding great pains. The second
was of the Giants, whom Jupiter himself destroyed with thunderboults, and so
all wars being ended, he reigned secure.

This Fable seems enigmatically to show from whence all things took their
beginning, not much differring from that opinion of philosophers, which
Democritus afterward labored to maintain, attributing eternity to the first
Matter and not to the world. In which he comes somewhat near the truth of
divine writ, telling us of a huge deformed Mass, before the beginning of the
six days work.

The meaning of the Fable is this, By Coelum may be understood that vast
concauity, or vaulted compass that comprehends all matter: and by Saturn may
be meant the matter it self, which takes from its Parent all power of
generating: for the universality or whole bulk of matter always remains the
same, neither increasing or diminishing in respect of the quality of its
nature: But by the diverse agitations and motions of it were first produced
imperfect, and ill agreeing co^positio^s of things, making, as it were certain
worlds for proofs or assaies, and so in process of time a perfect fabric or
structure was framed, which should still retain and keep his form. And
therefore the government of the first age was shaddowed by the kingdom of
Saturn, who for the frequent dissolutions and short continuances of things was
aptly fained to devour his children. The succeeding government was deciphered
by the reign of Jupiter, who confined those continual mutations unto
Tartarus, a place signifying perturbation. This place seems to be all that
middle space between the lower Superficies of Heaven and the center of the
Earth: in which all perturbation and fragility and mortality or corruption are
frequent. During the former generation of things in the time of Saturns reign,
Venus was not borne: for so long as in the universality of Matter, discord was
better and more preualent then concord, it was necessary that there should be
a total dissolution or mutation, and that in the whole fabric. And by this
kind of generation were creatures produced before Saturn was deprived of his
genitalles. When this ceased, that other which is wrought by Venus, immediately
came in, consisting in settled and preualent concord of things, so that Mutation
should be only in respect of the parts, the universal fabric remaining
whole and inuiolate.

Saturn they say was deposed and cast down into Hell, but not destroyed and
utterly extinguished, because there was an opinion that the world should relapse
into the old Chaos and interregnum again, which Lucretius prayed might not
happen in his time. Quod procul a nobis, flectat fortuna gubernans
Et ratio potius quam res persuadeat ipsa.
Oh guiding providence be gracious,
That this Doomes-day be far removed from us.
And grant that by us it may be expected,
Rather then on us in our times effected.
for afterward the world should subsist by its own quantity and power. Yet
from the beginning there was no rest: for in the celestial Regions there first
followed notable mutations, which by the power of the Sun (predominating over
superior bodies) were so quieted, that the state of the world should be
conserved: and afterward (in inferior bodies) by the suppressing and
dissipating of inundations, tempests, winds, and general earthquakes, a more
peaceful and durable agreement and tranquillity of things followed. But of this
Fable it may conuertibly be said, that the Fable conteines philosophy, and
philosophy again the Fable: For we know by faith, that all these things are
nothing else but the long-since ceasing and failing Oracles of Sense, seeing
that both the Matter and Fabric of the world are most truly referred to a
Creator.

13.
PROTEVS, or Matter.
THe Poets say that Proteus was Neptunes heard-man, a grave Syer, and so
excellent a prophet, that he might well be termed thrice excellent: for he
knew not only things to come; but even things past as well as present, so that
besides his skill in divination, he was the messenger and interpreter of all
Antiquities and hidden mysteries. The place of his abode was a huge vast cave,
where his custom was every day at noone to count his flock of Sea-calues, and
then to go to sleep. Moreover he that desired his advice in any thing, could
by no other means obtain it, but by catching him in Manacles, and holding him
fast therewith; who nevertheless to be at liberty would turn himself into
all manner of forms and wonders of nature, sometimes into fire, sometimes into
water, sometimes into the shape of beasts and the like, till at length he were
restored to his own form again.

This Fable may seem to unfold the secrets of nature, and the properties of
Matter. For under the person of Proteus, the first Matter (which next to God is
the auncientest thing) may be represented: for Matter dwelles in the concauity
of heaven as in a Cave.

He is Neptunes bondman, because the operations and dispensations of Matter
are chiefly exercised in liquid bodies.

His flock or heard seems to be nothing but the ordinary Species of sensible
creatures, plants, and metals: in which Matter seems to diffuse and as it
were spend it self, so that after the forming and perfecting of these kinds,
(having ended as it were her task) she seems to sleep and take her rest,
not attempting the composition of any more Species. And this may be the Moral
of Proteus his counting of his flock, and of his sleeping.

Now this is said to be done, not in the morning, nor in the evening, but at
noone, to wit at such time as is most fit, and convenient for the perfecting
and bringing forth of Species out of Matter, duly prepared and predisposed,
and in the middle, as it were, between their beginnings and declinations,
which we know sufficiently (out of the holy history) to be done about the time
of the Creation: for then by the power of that divine word (Producat) Matter at
the Creators command did congregate it self (not by ambages or turnings, but
instantly to the production of its work into act and the constitution of
Species. And thus far have we the Narration of Proteus (free, and
unrestrained) together with his flock complete: for the universality of things
with their ordinary structures and compositions of Species bears the face of
matter not limited and constrained, and of the flock also of material beings.
Nevertheless, if any expert Minister of Nature, shall encounter Matter by main
force, vexing, and urging her with intent and purpose to reduce her to nothing;
she contrariwise (seeing annihilation and absolute destruction cannot be
effected but by the omnipotency of God) being thus caught in the straites of
necessity, does change and turn her self into diverse strange forms and
shapes of things, so that at length (by fetching a circuit, as it were) she
comes to a period, and (if the force continue) be takes her self to her former
being. The reason of which constraint or binding will be more facile and
expedite, if Matter be laid hold on by Manacles, that is, by extremities.

Now whereas it is fained that Proteus was a prophet, well skilled in three
differences of times, it has an excellent agreement with the nature of Matter:
for it is necessary that he that will know the properties and proceedings of
Matter, should comprehend in his understanding the sum of all things, which
have been, which are, or which shall be, although no knowledge can extend so
far as to singular and individual beings.

14
MEMNON, or a youth too forward.
THe Poets say, that Memnon was the son of Aurora, who (adorned with
beautiful armor, and animated with popular applause) came to the Troiane
war: where (in a rash boldness, hasting unto, and thristing after glory) he
enters into single combat with Achilles the valiantest of all the Grecians, by
whose powerful hand he was there slain. But Jupiter pitying his destruction,
sent birds to modulate certain lamentable and doleful notes at the
Solemnization of his funeral obsequies. Whose statue also (the Sun
reflecting on it with his morning beams) did usually (as is reported) send
forth a mournful sound.

This Fable may be applied to the unfortunate destinies of hopeful young men,
who like the sons of Aurora (puffed up with the glittering show of vanity and
ostentation) attempt actions above their strength, and provoke and press the
most valiant Heroes to combat with them, so that (meeting with their
ouermatch) are vanquished and destroyed, whose untimely death is often
accompanied with much pity and commiseration. For among all the disasters that
can happen to mortals, there is none so lamentable and so powrefull to move
compassion as the flower of virtue cropped with too sudden a mischance. Neither
has it been often known that men in their green years become so loathsome
and odious, as that at their deaths either sorrow is stinted, or commiseration
moderated: but that lamentation and mourning do not only flutter about their
obsequies like those funeral birds; but this pitiful commiseration does
continue for a long space, and especially by occasions and new motions, and
beginning of great matters, as it were by the morning rays of the Sun, their
passions and desires are renewed.

15.
TITHONVS, or Satiety
IT is elegantly fained that Tithonus was the paromour of Aurora, who (desirous
for ever to enjoy his company) petitioned Jupiter that he might never dye, but
(through womanish oversight) forgetting to insert this clause in her petition,
that he might not withal grow old and feeble, it followed that he was only
freed from the condition of mortality, but for old age, that came upon him in a
marvelous and miserable fashion, agreeable to the state of those who cannot
die, yet every day grow weaker and weaker with age. Insomuch that Jupiter (in
commiseratio of this his misery) did at length metamorphose him into a
Grasshopper.

This Fable seems to be an ingenuous Character or description of pleasure,
which in the beginning, and as it were in the morning seems to be so pleasant
and delightful that men desire they might enjoy and monopolize it for ever
unto themselves, unmindful of that Satiety and loathing, which (like old age)
will come upon them before they be aware. And so at last (when the use of
pleasure leaves men, the desire and affection not yet yiedling unto death) it
comes to pass that men please themselves only by talking and commemorating
those things which brought pleasure unto them in the flower of their age, which
may be observed in libidinous persons, and also in men of military professions:
the one delighting in beastly talk, the other boasting of their valorous deeds
like Grasshoppers, whose vigor consists only in their voice.

16.
IVNOS SVTOR, or Baseness.
THe Poets say, that Jupiter to enjoy his lustful delights took upon him the
shape of sundry creatures, as of a Bull, of an Eagle, of a Swane, and of a
goulden shower: but being a Suitor to Juno he came in a form most ignoble and
Base, an object full of contempt and scorn, resembling indeed a miserable
Cuckoo, weather-beaten with rain and tempest, nummed, quaking, and half dead
with could.

This Fable is wise and seems to be taken out of the bowels of morallity, the
sense of it being this, That men boast not too much of themselves, thinking by
ostentation of their own worth to insinuate themselves into estimation and
favor with men, the success of such intentions being for the most part
measured by the nature and disposition of those to whom men sue for grace: Who
if of themselves they be endowed with no gifts and ornaments of nature, but
are only of haughty and malignant spirits (intimated by the person of Juno)
then are Suitors to know that it is good policy to omit all kind of appearance
that may any way show their own least praise or worth: and that they much
deceive themselves in taking any other course. Neither is it enough to show
deformity in obsequiousnes, unless they also appear even abject and base in
their very persons.

17.
CUPID, or an Atome.
THat which the Poets say of Cupid or Love cannot properly be attributed to one
and the self same person; and yet the difference is such, that (by rejecting
the confusion of persons) the similitude may be received.

They say that Love is the ancientest of all the Gods, and of all things else
except Chaos, which they hold to be a contemporary with it. Now as touching
Chaos, that by the ancients was never dignified with divine honor, or with the
title of a God. And as for Love, they absolutely bring him in without a father,
only some are of opinion that he came of an Egg which was laid by Nox, and
that on Chaos he begot the Gods and all things else. There are four things
attributed unto him, perpetual infancy, blindness, nakedness, and an Archery.
There was also another Love which was the youngest of the Gods, and he, they
say, was the Son of Venus. On this also they bestow the attributes of the
elder Love, as in some sort well apply unto him.

This Fable tends and looks to the Cradle of Nature, Love seeming to be the
appetite or desire of the first matter, or (to speak more plain) the natural
motion of the Atome, which is that ancient and only power that forms and
fashions all things out of Matter, of which there is no Parent, that is to say,
no cause, seeing every cause is as a parent to its effect. Of this power or
virtue there can be no cause in Nature (as for God, we always except him) for
nothing was before it, and therefore no efficient cause of it. Neither was
there any thing better known to nature, and therefore neither Genus nor Form.
Wherefore whatsoever it is, positive it is, and but inexpressible. Moreover, if
the manner and proceeding of it, were to be conceived, yet could it not be by
any cause, seeing that (next unto God) it is the cause of causes, it self
only without any cause. And perchance there is no likely hood, that the manner
of it may be contained or comprehended within the narrow compass of humane
search. Not without reason therefore is it fained to come of an Egg which was
laid by Nox. Certainly the divine Philosopher grants so much. Eccl. 3. 11.
Cuncta fecit tempestatibus suis pulchra, and mundum tradidit disputationibus
eorum, it a tamen vt non inueniat homo opus, quod operatus est Deus, a
principio ad finem. That is, he has made every thing beautiful in their
seasons, also he has set the world in their meditations, yet cannot man find
out the work that God has wrought, from the beginning even to the end. For
the principal law of Nature, or power of this desire, created (by God) in
these parcels of things, for concurring and meeting together (from whose
repetitions and multiplications, all variety of creatures proceeded and were
composed) may dazzle the eyes of men's understandings, and comprehended it can
hardly be. The Greek Philosophers are observed to be very acute and diligent
in searching out the material principles of things: but in the beginnings of
motion (wherein consists all the efficacy of operation) they are negligent and
weak, and in this that we handle, they seem to be altogether blind and
stammering: for the opinion of the Peripatetickes concerning the appetite of
Matter caused by Privation, is in a manner nothing else but words, which rather
sound then signify any realty. And those that refer it unto God, do very
well, but then they leap up, they ascend not by degrees: for doubtless there is
one chief law subordinate to God, in which all natural things concur and
meet, the same that in the forecited Scripture is demonstrated in these
words. Opus, quod operatus est Deus a principio vsque ad finem, the work that
God has wrought from the beginning even to the end. But Democritus which
entered more deeply into the consideration of this point after he had conceived
an Atome with some small dimension and form, he attributed unto it one only
desire, or first motion simply or absolutely, and another comparatively or in
respect: for he thought that all things did properly tend to the center of the
world, whereof those bodies which were more material descended with swifter
motion, and those that had less matter did on the contrary tend upward. But
this meditation was very shallow containing less then was expedient: for
neither the turning of the celestial bodies in a round, nor shutting and
opening of things may seem to be reduced or applied to this beginning. And as
for that opinion of Epicurus concerning the casual declination and agitation
of the Atome, it is but a mere toy, and a plain evidence, that he was
ignorant of that point. It is therefore more apparent (then we could wish)
that this Cupid or Love remains as yet clouded under the shades of Night. Now
as concerning his attributes: He is elegantly described with perpetual
infancy (...) (...) desire to some individual nature, so that the general
disposition comes from Venus, the more exact sympathy from Cupid, the one
derived from causes more near, the other from beginnings more remote and
fatal, and as it were from the elder Cupid, of whom every exquisite sympathy
does depend.

18
DIOMEDES, or Zeal.
DIomedes flourishing with great fame and glory in the Trojan wars, and in
high favor with Pallas was by her instigated (being indeed forwarder then he
should have been) not to forbear Venus a jot, if he encountered with her in
fight, which very boldly he performed, wounding her in the right arm. This
presumptuous fact he carried clear for a while, and being honored and renowned
for his many heroicke deeds; at last returned into his own country, where
finding himself hard besteed with domesticke troubles, fled into Italy,
betaking himself to the protection of Forreiners, where in the beginning he
was fortunate and royally entertained by King Daunus with sumptuous gifts,
raising many statues in honor of him throughout his dominions. But upon the
very first calamity that happened unto this nation whereunto he was fled for
succor: King Daunus enters into a conceit with himself that he had
entertained a wicked guest into his family, and a man odious to the Gods and an
impugner of their Divinity, that had dared with his sword to assault and wound
that Goddess, whom in their religion they held it sacrilege so much as to
touch. Therefore, that he might expiat his countries guilt (nothing respecting
the duties of hospitality, when the bonds of Religion tied him with a more
reverend regard) suddenly slew Diomedes, commanding withal (...) (...) (...)
(...) time in their senses and memories.

19.
DAEDALVS, or Mechanique.
Mechanical wisdom and industry, and in it unlawful science perverted to
wrong ends, is shadowed by the Ancients under the person of Daedalus, a man
ingenious, but execrable. This Daedalus (for murdering his fellow servant that
emulated him) being bannished, was kindly interteined (during his exile) in
many cities, and Princes Courts: for indeed he was the raiser and builder of
many goodly structures, as well in honor of the Gods, as for the beauty and
magnificence of cities, and other public places: but for his works of
mischief he is most notorious. It is he which framed that engine which
Pasiphae used to satisfy her lust in companying with a bull, so that by this
his wretched industry and pernicious device, that Monster Minotaur (the
destruction of so many hopeful youths) took his accursed and infamous
beginning, and studying to cover and increase one mischeife with another, for
the security and preservation of this Monster he invented and built a
Labyrinth, a work for intent and use most nefarious and wicked, for skill and
workmanship famous and excellent. Afterward that he might not be noted only
for works of mischief, but be sought after as well for remedies, as for
instruments of destruction; he was the Author of that ingenious device
concerning the clue of thread, by which the Labyrinth was made passable without
any let. This Daedalus was persecuted by Minos with great severity, diligence
and inquiry, but he always found the means to avoid and escape his tyranny.
Lastly he taught his son Icarus to fly, but the nouice in ostentation of his
art soaring too high, fell into the Sea, and was drowned.

The Parable seems to be thus: In the beginning of it may be noted that kind
of envy or emulation that lodges and wonderfully swaies and domineers amongst
excellent artificers, there being no kind of people more reciprocally
tormented with bitter and deadly hatred then they.

The bannishment also of Dedalus (a punishment inflicted on him against the
rules of policy and providence) is worth the nothing: for Artificers have this
prerogative to find enterteinment and welcome in all countries, so that exile
to an excellent workman can hardly be termed a punishment, whereas other
conditions and states of life can scarce live out of their own country. The
admiration of artificers is propogated and increast in foreign and strange
nations, seeing it is a natural and inbred disposition of men to value their
own countrymen (in respect of Mechanical works) less then strangers.

Concerning the use of Mechanical arts, that which follows is plain. The life
of man is much beholding to them, seeing many things (conducing to the ornament
of religion, to the grace of civil discipline, and to the beautifying of all
humane kind) are extracted out of their treasuries: and yet notwithstanding
from the same Megazine or storehouse are produced instruments both of lust and
death, for (to omit the wiles of bands) we well know how far exquisit
poisons, warlike engines, and such like mischeifs (the effects of Mechanical
inventions) do exceed the Minotaur himself in malignity and savage cruelty.

Moreover, that of the Labyrinth is an excellent Allegory, whereby is shadowed
the nature of Mechanical sciences: for all such handicrafte works as are more
ingenious and accurate, may be compared to a Labyrinth in respect of subtilty
and diverse intricate passages, and in other plain resemblances, which by the
eye of judgment can hardly be guided and discerned, but only by the line of
experience.

Neither is it impertinently added, that he which invented the intricate nooks
of the Labyrinth, did also show the commodity of the clue: for Mechanical arts
are of ambiguous use, serving as well for hurt as for remedy, and they have in
a manner power both to loose and bind themselves.

Unlawful trades, and so by consequence arts themselves are often persecuted
by Minos, that is by laws, which do condemn them and prohibit men to use
them. Nevertheless they are hid and retained every where, finding lurking
holes, and places of receipt, which was well observed by Tacitus of the
Mathematicians and figure flingers of his time in a thing not much unlike;
Genus (inquit) hominum quod in ciuitate nostra semper and retinebitur and
vetabitur. There is a kind of men (faith he) that will always abide in our
City though always forbidden. And yet notwithstanding unlawful and curious
arts of what kind soever, in tract of time, when they cannot perform what they
promise, do fall from the good opinion that was held of them (no otherwise
then Icarus fell down from the skies) they grow to be contemned and scorned,
and so perish by too much ostentation. And, to say the truth, they are not so
happily restreined by the raines of law, as bewraied by their own vanity.

20.
ERICTHONIVS, or Imposture.
THe Poets fable that Vulcan solicited Minerua for her virginity, and
impatient of denial with an inflamed desire offered her violence, but in
struggling his Seed fell upon the ground, whereof came (...) (...) mother they
cast them behind their backs, which at first struck them with great amazement
and despair, seeing (all things being defaced by the flood) it would be an
endless work to find their mothers sepulcher, but at length they understood
that by bones the stones of the earth (seeing the earth was the mother of all
things) were signified by the Oracle.

This Fable seems to reveal a secret of Nature, and to correct an error
familiar to men's conceits: for through want of knowledge, men think that
things may take renouation and restoration from their putrefaction and dregs,
no otherwise then the Phoenix from the ashes, which in no case can be admitted,
seeing such kind of materials, when they have fulfilled their periods, are unapt
for the beginings of such things: we must therefore look back to more common
principles.

22.
NEMESIS, or the Vicissitude of things.
NEmesis is said to be a Goddess venerable unto all, but to be feared of none
but potentates and fortunes favorites. She is thought to be the Daughter of
Oceanus and Nox. She is purtrayed with wings on her shoulders, and on her head
a Coronet; bearing in her right hand a iauelin of Ash, and in her left a
Pitcher with the similitudes of Aethiopians engraven on it: and lastly she is
described sitting on a Heart.

The Parable may be thus unfolded. Her name Nemesis does plainly signify.
Revenge or Retribution, her office and administration being (like a Tribune of
the people) to hinder the constant and perpetual felicity of happy men, and to
interpose her word, veto, I forbid the continuance of it, that is, not only to
chastise insolency, but to intermix prosperity (though harmles and in a mean)
with the vicissitudes of adversity, as if it were a custom, that noe mortal
man should be admitted to the Table of the Gods but for sport. Truly when I
read that Chapter, wherein Caius Plinius has collected the misfortunes and
miseries of Augustus Caesar, whom of all men I thought the most happy, who had
also a kind of art to use and enjoy his fortune, and in whose mind might be
noted neither pride, nor lightness, nor nicenes, nor disorder, nor melancholy
(as that he had appointed a time to die of his own accord) I then deemed this
Goddess to be great and powerful, to whose altar so worthy a sacrifice as
this was drawn.

The Parents of this Goddess were Oceanus and Nox that is, the vicissitude of
things, and divine judgment obscure and secret: for the alterations of things
are aptly represented by the Sea, in respect of the continual ebbing and
flowing of it: and hidden providence is well set forth by the Night: for even
the nocturnall Nemesis (seeing humane judgment differs much from divine) was
seriously observed by the heathen.

Virgill Aeneid. lib. 2.
-- Cadit and Ripheus instissimus vnus,
Qui fuit ex Teucris, and seruantissimus equi,
Dijs aliter visum --.
That day by Greekish force was Ripheus slain,
So just and strict obseruer of the law,
As Troy within her walls did not contain
A better man: Yet God then good it saw.
She is described with wings, because the changes of things are so sudden, as
that they are seen, before foreseen: for in the Records of all ages, we
find it for the most part true, that great potentates, and wise men have
perished by those misfortunes which they most contemned, as may be observed in
Marcus Cicero, who being admonished by Decius Brutus of Octauius Cesars
hippocriticall friendship and hollow heartednes toward him, returns this
answer; Te autem, mi Brute, sicut debeo, amo, quod istud quicquid est nugarum
me scire voluisti. I must ever acknowledge my self (Dear Brutus) beholding to
thee, in love, for that thou have been so careful to acquaint me with that
which I esteem but as a needles trifle to be doubted.

Nemesis is also adorned with a Coronet, to show the envious and malignant
disposition of the vulgar, for when fortunes favorites and great potentates
come to ruin, then do the common people rejoice, setting as it were a crown
upon the head of revenge.

The Iauelin in her right hand points at those, whom she actually strikes and
pierces through.

And before those, whom she destroys not in their calamity and misfortune,
she ever presents that black and dismal spectacle in her left hand: for
questionles to men sitting, as it were, upon the pinnacle of prosperity, the
thoughts of death and painfulnes of sickness and misfortunes, perfidiousnes of
friends, treachery of foes, change of state, and such like, seem as ougly to
the eye of their meditations, as those Ethiopians pictured in Nemesis her
Pitcher. Virgill in describing the battle of Actium, speaks thus elegantly of
Cleopatra.

Regina in medijs patrio vocat agmina sistro,
Nec dum etiam geminos a tergo respicit angues..
The Queen amidst this hurly burly stands,
And with her Country Timbrell calls her bands;
Not spying yet where crawld behind her back
Two deadly Snakes with venom speckled black.
But not long after, which way soever she turned, troops of Ethiopians were
still before her eyes.

Lastly, it is wisely added, that Nemesis rides upon an Heart, because a Heart is
a most lively creature. And albeit it may be, that such as are cut off by death
in their youth, prevent and shun the power of Nemesis, yet doubtless such,
whose prosperity and power continue long, are made subject unto her, and lie as
it were trodden under her feet.

23.
ACHELOVS, or Battle.
IT is a Fable of antiquity, that when Hercules and Achelous as riuals
contended for the marriage of Deianira, the matter drew them to combat, wherein
Achelous took upon him many diverse shapes, for so was it in his power to do,
and amongst others, transforming himself into the likeness of a furious wild
Bull, assaults Hercules and prouokes him to fight. But Hercules for all this,
sticking to his old humane form, courageously encounters him, and so the
combat goes roundly on. But this was the event, that Hercules tore away one of
the Bulls horns, wherewith he being mightily daunted and grieved, to ransom
his horn again, was contented to give Hercules in exchange thereof, the
Anealthean horn, or Cornu-Copia.

This Fable has relation unto the expeditions of war, for the preparations
thereof on the defensive part (which expressed in the person of Achelous) is
very diverse and uncertain. But the inuading party is most commonly of one
sort, and that very single, consisting of an army by land, or perhaps of a
Navy by Sea. But for a King that in his own Territory expects an enemy, his
occasions are infinite. He fortifies towns, he assembles men out of the
countries and villages, he raises Cittadels, he builds and breaks down
bridges, he disposes garrisons, and places troops of Soldiers on passages
of rivers, on ports, on Mountains, and ambushes in woods, and is busied with a
multitude of other directions, insomuch that every day he prescribes new
forms and orders, and then at last having accomodated all things complete for
defense, he then rightly represents the form and manner of a fierce fighting
Bull. On the other side, the inuader his greatest care is, the fear to be
distressed for victuals in an enemy Country. And therefore affects chiefly to
hasten on battle: for if it should happen that after a field fought, he prove
the victor, and as it were break the horn of the Enemy, then certainly this
follows that his enemy being stricken with terror and abased in his
reputation, presently bewraies his weakness, and seeking to repair his loss,
retyres himself to some strong hold, abandoning to the Conqueror the spoil
and sack of his country and cities: which may well be termed a type of the
Amalthean horn.

24.
DIONYSVS, or Passions.
THey say that Semele Jupiters Sweetheart (having bound her Paramour by an
irreuocable oath to grant her one request which she would require) desired
that he would accompany her in the same form, wherein he accompanied Juno:
which he granting (as not able to deny) it came to pass that the miserable
wench was burnt with lightning. But the infant which she bare in her womb,
Jupiter the Father took out, and kept it in a gash which he cut in his thigh,
till the months were complete that it should be borne. This burden made
Jupiter somewhat to limpe, whereupon the child (because it was heavy and
troublesome to its Father, while it lay in his thigh) was called Dionysus,
Being borne, it was committed to Proserpina for some years to be nurs't, and
being grown up, it had such a maiden face, as that a man could hardly judge
whether it were a boy or a girl. He was dead also, and buried for a time, but
afterward revived. Being but a youth he invented, and taught the planting and
dressing of Vines, the making also and use of wine, for which becoming famous
and renowned, he subiugated the world, even to the uttermost bounds of India.
He rode in a Chariot drawn with Tigers. There danced about him certain
deformed hobgoblins called Cobali, Aoratus, and others, yea even the Muses also
were some of his followers. He took to wife Ariadne, forsaken and left by
Theseus. The tree sacred unto him was the Iuie. He was held the inuentor and
institutor of Sacrifices, and Ceremonies, and full of corruption and cruelty.
He had power to strike men with fury or madness; for it is reported, that at
the celebration of his Orgies, two famous worthies, Pentheus and Orpheus were
torn in pieces by certain frantic women, the one because he got upon a tree
to behold their ceremonies in these sacrifices, the other for making melody
with his harp. And for his gests, they are in a manner the same with Jupiters.

There is such excellent morality coucht in this Fable, as that Moral
philosophy affoords not better: for under the person of Bacchus is described
the nature of affection, passion, or perturbation, the mother of which (though
never so hurtful) is nothing else but the object of apparent good in the eyes of
Appetite. And it is always conceived in an unlawful desire rashly propounded
and obtained, before well understood and considered, and when it begins to
grow, the Mother of it, which is the desire of apparent good by too much
feruency is destroyed and perishes: Nevertheless (whilst it is yet an
imperfect Embrio) it is nourished and preserved in the humane soul, (which is
as it were a father unto it, and represented by Jupiter) but especially in the
inferior part thereof, as in a thigh, where also it causes so much trouble
and vexation, as that good determinations and actions are much hindered and
lamed thereby, and when it comes to be confirmed by consent and habit, and
breaks out, as it were, into act, it remains yet a while, with Proserpina as
with a Nurse, that is, it seeks corners and secret places, and, as it were,
caves under ground, until (the reins of shame and fear being laid aside in a
pampered audaciousnes) it either takes the pretext of some virtue, or becomes
altogether impudent and shameless. And it is most true, that every vehement
passion is of a doubtful sex, as being masculine in the first motion, but
faeminine in prosecution.

It is an excellent fiction that of Bacchus his reviving: for passions do
sometimes seem to be in a dead sleep, and as it were utterly extinct, but we
should not think them to be so indeed, no, though they lay, as it were, in
their grave; for, let there be but matter and opportunity offered, and you
shall see them quickly to revive again.

The invention of wine is wittily ascribed unto him, every affection being
ingenious and skillful in finding out that which brings nourishment unto it;
And indeed of all things known to men, Wine is most powerful and efficacious
to excite and kindle passions of what kind soever, as being in a manner, a
common Nurse to them all.

Again his conquering of Nations, and undertaking infinite expeditions is an
elegant device; For desire never rests content with what it has, but with an
infinite and insatiable appetite still couets and gapes after more.

His Chariot also is well said to be drawn by Tigers: for as soon as any
affection shall from going afoot, be advanced to ride in a Chariot and shall
captiuate reason, and lead her in a triumph, it grows cruel, untamed, and
fierce, against whatsoever withstands or opposes it.

It is worth the nothing also, that those ridiculous hobgoblins are brought in,
dancing about his Chariot: for every passion does cause, in the eyes, face, and
gesture, certain indecent, and ill-seeming, apish, and deformed motions, so
that they who in any kind of passion, as in anger, arrogance, or love, seem
glorious and brave in their own eyes, do yet appear to others misshapen and
ridiculous.

In that the Muses are said to be of his company, it shows that there is no
affection almost which is not soothed by some Art, wherein the indulgence of
wits does derogate from the glory of the Muses, who (when they ought to be the
Mistresses of life) are made the waiting maids of affections.

Again, where Bacchus is said to have loved Ariadne that was rejected by
Theseus; it is an Allegory of special observation: for it is most certain,
that passions always covet and desire that which experience forsakes, and they
all know (who have paid dear for serving and obeying their lusts) that
whether it be honor, or riches, or delight, or glory, or knowledge, or any
thing else which they seek after, yet are they but things cast off, and by
diverse men in all ages, after experience had, utterly rejected and loathed.

Neither is it without a mystery, that the Iuie was sacred to Bacchus: for the
application holds, first, in that the Iuie remains green in winter. Secondly,
in that it sticks too, embraces, and ouertoppeth so many diverse bodies, as
trees, walls, and edifices. Touching the first, every passion does by
resistance, and reluctation, and as it were by an Antiparistasis (like the Iuie
of the cold of winter) grow fresh and lusty. And as for the other every
predominate affection does again (like the Iuie) embrace and limite all humane
actions and determinations, adhering and cleaving fast unto them.

Neither is it a wonder, that superstitious rites, and ceremonies were
attributed unto Bacchus seeing every giddy headed humor keeps in a manner,
Reuell-rout in false religions: or that the cause of madness should be ascribed
unto him, seeing every affection is by nature a short fury, which (if it grow
vehement, and become habitual) concludes madness.

Concerning the rending and dismembring of Pentheus and Orpheus, the parable is
plain, for every preualent affection is outrageous and severe against curious
inquiry, and wholesome and free admonition.

Lastly, that confusion of Jupiter and Bacchus, their persons may be well
transferred to a parable, seeing noble and famous acts, and remarkable and
glorious merits, do sometimes proceed from virtue, and well ordered reason,
and magnanimity, and sometimes from a secret affection, and hidden passion,
which are so dignified with the celebritie of fame and glory, that a man can
hardly distinguish between the acts of Bacchus, and the gests of Jupiter.

25.
ATALANTA, or Gain.
ATalanta who was reputed to excel in swiftness, would needs challenge
Hippomanes at a match in running. The conditions of the Prize were these: That
if Hippomanes won the race, he should espouse Atalanta; If he were outrunne,
that then he should forfeit his life. And in the opinion of all, the victory
was thought assured of Atalantas side, being famous as she was for her
matchless and inconquerable speed, whereby she had been the bane of many.
Hippomanes therefore bethinkes him how to deceive her by a trick, and in that
regard prouides three golden apples, or balls which he purposely carried about
him. The race is begun, and Atalanta gets a good start before him. He seeing
himself thus cast behind, being mindful of his device, throws one of his
golden balls before her, and yet not outright, but somewhat of the one side,
both to make her linger, and also to draw her out of the right course: she out
of a womanish desire, (being thus enticed with the beauty of the golden
apple) leaving her direct race, runs aside, and stoops to catch the ball:
Hippomanes the while holds on his course, getting thereby a great start, and
leaves her behind him: But she by her own natural swiftnes, recouers her
lost time, and gets before him again. But Hippomanes still continues his
slight, and both the second and third times casts out his balls, those
enticing delays; and so by craft and not by his actiuitie winnes the race and
victory.

This Fable seems allegorically to demonstrate a notable conflict between Art
and Nature: for Art (signified by Atalanta) in its work (if it be not let
and hindered) is far more swift then Nature, more speedy in pace; and sooner
attaines the end it aims at, which is manifest almost in every effect: As you
may see in fruit trees, whereof those that grow of a kernel are long ere they
bear, but such as are grafted on a stock a great deal sooner. You may see it
in Clay, which in the generation of stones, is long ere it become hard, but in
the burning of Brickes, is very quickly effected. Also in moral passages you
may observe, that it is a long time ere (by the benefit of Nature) sorrow can
be assuaged and comfort attained, whereas Philosophy (which is, as it were, Art
of living) taries not the leisure of time, but does it instantly, and out of
hand; And yet this prerogative and singular agility of Art is hindered by
certain golden apples, to the infinite prejudice of humane proceedings: for
there is not any one Art or Science which constantly perseueres in a true and
lawful course, till it come to the proposed end or mark: but ever and anon
makes stops, after good beginnings, leaves the race, and turns aside to
profit and commodity, like Atalanta. Declinat cursus, aurumque volubile
tollit.
Who does her course forsake,
The rolling gold to take.
And therefore it is no wonder that Art has not the power to conquer Nature,
and by pact or law of conquest, to kill and destroy her: but on the contrary,
it falls out, that Art becomes subject to Nature, and yields the obedience, as
of a wife to her husband.

26.
PROMETHEVS, or the State of man.
THe Ancients deliver, that Prometheus made a man of Clay, mixed with certain
parcels taken from diverse animales, who studying to maintain this his work by
Art (that he might not be accounted a founder only, but a propagator of humane
kind) stole up to heaven with a bundle of twigs, which he kindling at the
Chariot of the Sun, came down again, and communicated it with men: And yet
they say, that (notwithstanding this excellent work of his) he was requited
with ingratitude, in a treacherous conspiracy: For they accused both him and
his invention to Jupiter, which was not so taken as was meet it should, for the
information was pleasing to Jupiter and all the Gods. And therefore in a merry
mood, granted unto men, not only the use of fire, but perpetual youth also,
a boon most acceptable and desirable. They being, as it were, ouerioyed, did
foolishly lay this gift of the Gods upon the back of an ass, who being
wonderfully oppressed with thirst, and near a fountain, was told by a Serpent
(which had the custody thereof) that he should not drink, unless he would
promise to give him the burden that was on his back. The silly Ass accepted
the condition, and so the restoration of youth (sold for a draught of water)
past from men to Serpents. But Prometheus full of malice, being reconciled unto
men, after they were frustrated of their gift, but in a chafe yet with Jupiter,
feared not to use deceit in Sacrifice: for having killed two Bulls, and in one
of their hides wrapped up the flesh and fat of them both, and in the other only
the bones, with a great show of religious devotion, gave Jupiter his choice,
who (detesting his fraud and hypocrisy, but taking an occasion of revenge)
chose that that was stuffed with bones, and so turning to revenge (when he saw
that the insolency of Prometheus would not be repressed, but by laying some
grievous affliction upon mankind, in the forming of which, he so much bragged
and boasted) commanded Vulcan, to frame a goodly beautiful woman, which being
done, every one of the Gods bestowed a gift on her; whereupon she was called
Pandora. To this woman they gave in her hand, a goodly Box, full of all
miseries and calamities, only in the bottom of it, they put Hope: With this
Box she comes first to Prometheus, thinking to catch him, if peradventure, he
should accept it at her hands, and so open it: which he nevertheless, with
good providence and foresight refused. Whereupon she goes to Epimetheus (who,
though brother to Prometheus, yet was of a much differing disposition) and
offers this Box unto him, who, without delay, took it, and rashly opened it,
but when he saw that all kind of miseries came fluttering about his ears,
being wise too late, with great speed and earnest endeavor, clapped on the
cover, and so, with much ado, retained Hope sitting alone in the bottom. At
last Jupiter laying many and grievous crimes to Prometheus his charge (as
namely that he had stolen fire from heaven, that in contempt of his Majesty,
he sacrificed a bulls hide stuffed with bones, that he scornfully rejected his
gift, and besides all this that he offered violence to Pallas) cast him into
chains, and doomd him to perpetual torment: and by Jupiters command, was
brought to the mountain Caucasus, and there bound fast to a pillar that he
could not stir; there came an Eagle also, that every day sat tyring upon his
liuar, and wasted it, but as much as was eaten in the day, grew again in the
night, that matter for torment to work upon might never decay. But yet, they
say, there was an end of this punishment: for Hercules crossing the Ocean in a
Cup, which the Sun gave him, came to Caucasus, and set Prometheus at liberty,
by shooting the Eagle with an arrowe. Moreover in some nations there were
instituted in the honor of Prometheus, certain games of Lampbearers, in which
they that striued for the prize, were wont to carry torches lighted; which, who
so suffered to go out, yielded the place and victory to those that followed,
and so cast back themselves, so that whosoever came first to the mark with
his torch burning, got the prize.

This Fable demonstrates and presses many true and grave speculations, wherein
some things have been heretofore well noted, others not so much as touched.

Prometheus does clearly and elegantly signify Providence: For in the
universality of nature, the fabricque and constitution of Man only was by the
Ancients pict out and chosen, and attributed unto Providence, as a peculiar
work. The reason of it seems to be, not only in that the nature of man is
capable of a mind and understanding, which is the seat of Providence, and
therefore it would seem strange and incredible that the reason and mind
should so proceed and flow from dumb and deaf principles, as that it should
necessarily be concluded, the soul of man to be endued with providence, not
without the example, intention, and stamp of a greater providence. But this
also is chiefly propounded, that man is as it were, the center of the world, in
respect of final causes, so that if man were not in nature, all things would
seem to stray and wander without purpose, and like scattered branches (as they
say) without inclination to their end: for all things attend on man, and he
makes use of, and gathers fruit from all creatures: for the reuolutions and
periods of Stars make both for the distinctions of times, and the
distribution of the worlds site. Meteors also are referred to the Presages of
tempests; and winds are ordained, as well for navigations, as for turning of
Milles, and other engines: and plants, and animals of what kind soever, are
useful either for men's houses, and places of shelter, or for raiment, or food,
or medicine, or for ease of labor, or in a word, for delight and solace, so
that all things seem to work, not for themselves, but for man.

Neither is it added without consideration, that certain particles were taken
from diverse living creatures, and mixed and tempered with that clayie mass,
because it is most true that of all things comprehended within the compass of
the universe, Man is a thing most mixed and compounded, insomuch that he was
well termed by the Ancients, A little world: for although the Chymicques do,
with too much curiosity, take and wrest the elegancie of this word
(Microcosme) to the letter, contending to find in man all minerals, all
vegetables and the rest, or any thing that holds proportion with them, yet this
proposition remains sound and whole, that the body of man, of all material
beings, is found to be most compounded, and most organicall, whereby it is
endued and furnished with most admirable virtues and faculties. And as for
simple bodies, their powers are not many, though certain and violent, as
existing without being weakened, diminished, or stented by mixture: for the
multiplicitie and excellency of operation have their residence in mixture and
composition, and yet nevertheless, man in his originals, seems to be a thing
unarmed, and naked, and unable to help it self, as needing the aid of many
things; therefore Prometheus made haste to find out fire, which suppeditates
and yields comfort and help, in a manner, to all humane wants and necessities:
so that if the soul be the form of forms, and if the hand be the instrument
of instruments; fire deserves well to be called the succor of succors, or the
help of helps, which infinite ways affoords aid and assistance to all
labors and mechanical arts, and to the sciences themselves.

The manner of stealing this fire is aptly described, even from the nature of
the thing: It was, as they say, by a bundle of twigs held to touch the Chariot
of the Sun: for twigs are used in giving blows or stripes, to signify
clearly, that fire is engendered by the violent percussion, and mutual
collision of bodies, by which their material substances are attenuated, and
set in motion, and prepared to receive the heat or influence of the heavenly
bodies, and so, in a clandestine manner, and as it were, by stealth, may be
said to take and snatch fire from the Chariot of the Sun.

There follows next a remarkable part of the parable, That men in steed of
gratulation, and thanksgiving, were angry, and expostulated the matter with
Prometheus, insomuch that they accused both him and his invention unto Jupiter,
which was so acceptable unto him, that he augmented their former commodities
with a new bounty. Seems it not strange, that ingratitude toward the author
of a benefit (a vice that, in a manner, contains all other vices) should find
such approbation and reward? No, it seems to be otherwise: for the meaning of
the Allegory is this, That men's outcries upon the defects of nature and Art,
proceed from an excellent disposition of the mind, and turn to their good,
whereas the silencing of them is hateful to the Gods, and redounds not so much
to their profit: For they that infinitely extol humane nature, or the knowledge
they possess, breaking out into a prodigal admiration of that they have and
enjoy, adoring also those sciences they profess, would have them be accounted
perfect; they do first of all show little reverence to the divine nature, by
equalizing, in a manner, their own defects with Gods perfection; Again, they
are wonderful injurious to men, by imagining they have attained the highest
step of knowledge (resting themselves contented) seek no further. On the
contrary, such as bring nature and Art to the bar with accusations and bills
of complaint against them, are indeed of more true and moderate judgments, for
they are ever in action, seeking always to find out new inventions. Which
makes me much to wonder at the foolish and inconsiderate dispositions of some
men, who (making themselves bondslaues to the arrogance of a few) have the
philosophy of the Peripateticques (containing only a portion of Grecian
wisdom, and that but a small one neither) in so great esteem, that they hold
it, not only an unprofitable, but a suspicious, and almost heinous thing, to
lay any imputation of imperfection upon it. I approve rather of Empedocles his
opinion, (who like a madman, and of Democritus his judgment, who with great
moderation complained how that all things were inuolued in a mist) that we
knew nothing, that we discerned nothing, that truth was drowned in the
depthes of obscurity, and that false things were wonderfully joined and
intermixed with true (as for the new Academie that exceeded all measure) then of
the confident and pronuntiatiue school of Aristotle. Let men therefore be
admonished, that by acknowledging the imperfections of Nature and Art, they
are grateful to the Gods, and shall thereby obtain new benefits and greater
favors at their bountiful hands, and the accusation of Prometheus their
Author and Master, (though bitter and vehement) will conduce more to their
profit, then to be effuse in the congratulation of his invention: for in a
word, the opinion of having enough, is to be accounted one of the greatest
causes of having too little.

Now as touching the kind of gift which men are said to have received in reward
of their accusation (to wit, (...) (...) having the use of that celestial
fire, and of so many arts, are not able to get unto themselves such things as
Nature it self bestows upon many other creatures.

But that sudden reconciliation of men to Prometheus, after they were
frustrated of their hopes, contains a profitable and wise note, showing the
leuity and temerity of men in new experiments: for if they have not present
success answerable to their expectation, with too sudden haste desist from
that they began, and with precipitancy returning to their former experiments
are reconciled to them again.

The state of man in respect of Arts, and such things as concern the
intellect, being now described, the parable passes to Religion: For after the
planting of Arts follows the setting of divine principles, which hypocrisy
has ouerspread and polluted. By that twofold Sacrifice therefore is elegantly
shadowed out, the persons of a true religious man and an hypocrite. In the one
is contained fatnes, which (by reason of the inflammation and fumes thereof) is
called the portion of God, by which his affection and zeal (tending to Gods
glory, and ascending toward heaven) is signified. In him also are contained
the bowels of charity, and in him is found that good and wholesome flesh.
Whereas in the other, there is nothing but dry and naked bones, which
nevertheless do stuff up the hide, and make it appear like a fair and
goodly sacrifice: By this may well be meant those external and vain rites,
and empty Ceremonies by which men do oppress and fill up the sincere
worship of God, things composed rather for ostentation then any way conducing
to true piety. Neither do they hold it sufficient to offer such
mock-sacrifices unto God, except they also lay them before him, as if he had
chosen and bespoke them. Certainly the Prophet in the person of God, does thus
expostulate concerning this choice. Esa. 58. 5. Number tandem hoc est illud
ieiunium, quod ELEGI, vt homo animam suam in diem vnum affligat, and caput
instar iunceae demittat? Is it such a fast, that I have chosen, that a man
should afflict his soul for a day, and to bow down his head like a Bull-rush?

Having now touched the state of Religion, the parable conuerts it self to the
manners and conditions of humane life. And it is a common, but apt,
interpretation, by Pandora to be meant pleasure and voluptuousnes, which (when
the civil life is pampered with too much Art, and culture, and superfluity)
is engendered, as it were, by the efficacy of fire, and therefore the work of
voluptuousnes is attributed unto Vulcan, who also himself does represent fire.
From this do infinite miseries, together with too late repentance, proceed and
ouerslowe the minds, and bodies, and fortunes of men, and that not only in
respect of particular estates, but even over kingdoms and commonwealths: for
from this fountain have wars, and tumults, and tyrannies derived their
original.

But it would be worth the labor, to consider how elegantly and
proportionably this Fable does deliniate two conditions, or (as I may say) two
tables or examples of humane life, under the persons of Prometheus and
Epimetheus: for they that are of Epimetheus his sect, are improuident, not
foreseeing what may come to pass hereafter, esteeming that best which seems
most sweet for the present; whence it happens that they are overtaken with
many miseries, difficulties and calamities, and so lead their own lives
almost in perpetual affliction, but yet notwithstanding they please their
fancy, and out of ignorance of the passages of things, do entertain many
vain hopes in their mind, whereby they sometimes(as with sweet dreams) solace
themselves, and sweeten the miseries of their life. But they that are
Prometheus his scholars, are men endued with prudence, foreseeing things to
come warily, shunning and avoiding many evils and misfortunes. But to these
their good properties they have this also annexed, that they deprive
themselves, and defraud their Genius of many lawful pleasures, and diverse
recreations, and (which is worse) they vex and torment themselves with cares
and troubles and intestine fears: For being chained to the pillar of
necessity, they are afflicted with innumerable cogitations (which because they
are very swift, may be fitly compared to an Eagle) and those griping, and, as
it were, gnawing and devouring the liver, unless sometimes, as it were by
night, it may be they get a little recreation and ease of mind, but so, as
that they are again suddenly assaulted with fresh anxieties and fears.

Therefore this benefit happens to but a very few of either condition, that
they should retain the commodities of providence, and free themselves from the
miseries of care and perturbation; neither indeed can any attain unto it, but
by the assistance of Hercules, that is, fortitude, and constancy of mind,
which is prepared for every event, and armed in all fortunes, foreseeing
without fear, enjoying without loathing, and suffering without impatience. It
is worth the noting also, that this virtue was not natural to Prometheus, but
aduentitiall, and from the indulgence of another: for no inbred and natural
fortitude is able to encounter with these miseries. Moreover this virtue was
received and brought unto him from the remotest part of the Ocean, and from
the Sun, that is, from wisdom as from the Sun, and from the meditation of
inconstancy, or of the waters of humane life, as from the sailing upon the
Ocean, which two Virgill has well conjoined in these verses. (...) (...)

and between the Oracles of sense, and the mysteries of faith, unless an
heretical religion, and a commentitious philosophy be pleasing unto us.

Lastly, it remains that we say something of the games of Prometheus
performed with burning torches, which again has reference to arts and
sciences, as that fire, in whose memory and celebration, these games were
instituted, and it contains in it a most wise admonition, that the perfection
of sciences is to be expected from succession, not from the nimblenesse and
promptnes of one only author: for they that are nimblest in course, and
strongest in contention, yet happily have not the luck to keep fire still in
their torch; seeing it may be as well extinguished by running too fast, as by
going too slow. And this running and contending with lamps, seems long since
to be intermitted, seeing all sciences seem even now to flourish most in their
first Authors, Aristotle, Galene, Euclid and Ptolomie, succession having
neither effected, nor almost attempted any great matter. It were therefore to
be wished, that these games in honor of Prometheus or humane nature were
again restored, and that matters should receive success by combat and
emulation, and not hang upon any one man's sparkling and shaking torch. Men
therefore are to be admonished to rouse up their spirits, and try their
strengths and turns, and not refer all to the opinions and brains of a few.

And thus have I delivered that which I thought good to observe out of this so
well known and common Fable; and yet I will not deny but that there may be
some things in it, which have an admirable consent with the mysteries of
christian religion, and especially that sailing of Hercules in a Cup (to set
Prometheus at liberty) seems to represent an image of the divine Word coming
in flesh as in a frail vessel to redeem Man from the slavery of Hell. But I
have interdicted my pen all liberty in this kind, lest I should use strange
fire at the altar of the Lord.

27.
SCYLLA AND ICARVS, or the Middle-way.
MEdiocrity or the Middle-way is most commended in moral actions, in
contemplative sciences not so celebrated, though no less profitable and
commodious: But in political employments to be used with great heed and
judgment. The Ancients by the way prescribed to Icarus, noted the mediocrity
of manners: and by the way between Scylla and Charybdis (so famous for
difficulty and danger) the mediocritie of intellectual operations.

Icarus being to cross the sea by flight, was commanded by his Father that he
should fly neither too high nor too low; for his wings being joined with wax,
if he should mount too high, it was to be feared lest the wax, would melt by
the heat of the Sun; and If too low, least the mistie vapors of the Sea
would make it less tenacious: But he in a youthful iollitie soaring too high,
fell down headlong and perished in the water.

The parable is easy and vulgar: for the way of virtue lies in a direct path
between excess and defect. Neither is it a wonder that Icarus perished by
Excess, seeing that Excess, for the most part, is the peculiar fault of
youth, as Defect is of age, and yet of too evil and hurtful ways, youth
commonly makes choice of the better, defect being always accounted worst: for
whereas excess contains some sparks of magnanimity, and like a bird claims
kindred of the Heavens, defect only like a base worm crawles upon the earth.
Excellently therefore said Heraclitus, Lumen siccum optima anima. A dry light
is the best soul: for if the soul contract moisture from the earth it becomes
degenerate altogether. Again on the other side, there must be moderation used,
that this light be subtilized by this laudable siccity, and not destroyed by
too much feruency. And thus much every man, for the most part, knows.

Now they that would sail between Scylla and Charybdis must be furnished, as
well with the skill, as prosperous success of navigations: for if their ships
fall into Scylla they are split on the Rocks: if into Charybdis they are
swallowed up of a Gulf.

The moral of this parable (which we will but briefly touch, although it
contain matter of infinite contemplation) seems to be this, that in every Art
and Science, and so in their rules and Axioms, there be a mean observed
between the rocks of distinctions and the gulfes of universalities, which two
are famous for the wrack both of wits and arts.

28.
SPHINX, or Science.
THey say that Sphinx was a monster of diverse forms, as having the face and
voice of a virgin, the wings of a bird, and the talents of a Griphin. His
abode was in a mountain near the City of Thebes, he kept also the high
ways, and used to lie in ambush for travelers, and so to surprise them; to
whom (being in his power) he propounded certain dark and intricate riddles,
which were thought to have been given and received of the Muses. Now if these
miserable captives were not able instantly to resolve and interpret them in
the midst of their difficulties and (...) (...) unto it for its gracious
countenance and volubilitie of tongue. Wings are added because Sciences and
their inventions, do pass and fly from one to another, as it were in a
moment, seeing that the communication of Science is as the kindling of one
light at another. Elegantly also is it fained to have sharp and hooked
talents, because the Axioms and arguments of Science do so fasten upon the
mind, and so strongly apprehend and hold it, as that it cannot stir or euade,
which is noted also by the divine Philosopher. Eccl. 12. 11. Verba sapientum
(says he) sunt tanquam aculei and veluti claui in altum defixi. The words of
the wise are like goads, and like nails driven far in.

Moreover, all Science seems to be placed in steep and high mountains: as
being thought to be a lofty and high thing, looking down upon ignorance with
a scornful eye. It may be observed and seen also a great way, and far in
compass, as things set on the tops of mountains.

Furthermore, Science may well be fained to besette the high ways, because
which way so ever we turn in this progress and pilgrimage of humane life, we
meet with some matter or occasion offered for contemplation.

Sphinx is said to have received from the Muses diverse difficult questions and
riddles, and to propound them unto men, which remaining with the Muses are free
(it may be) from savage cruelty: for so long as there is no other end of
study and meditation, then to know; the understanding is not rackt and
imprisoned, but enioyes freedom and liberty, and even in doubts and variety
finds a kind of pleasure and delectation: but when once these Aenigmaes are
delivered by the Muses to Sphinx, that is, to practice, so that it be
solicited and urged by action, and election, and determination; then they
begin to be troublesome and raging; and unless they be resolved and
expedited, they do wonderfully torment and vex the minds of men, distracting,
and in a manner rending them into sundry parts.

Moreover there is always a twofold condition propounded with Sphinx her
Aenigmaes; To him that does not expound them, distraction of mind, and to him
that does, a kingdom: for he that knows that which he sought to know, has
attained the end he aimed at, and every artificer also commands over his work.

Of Sphinx her riddles, there are generally two kinds; some concerning the
nature of things, others touching the nature of Man. So also there are two
kinds of Emperies, as rewards to those that resolve them: the one over nature,
the other over men; for the proper and chief end of true natural philosophy
is to command and sway over natural beeings, as bodies, medicines, mechanical
works, and infinite other things; although the school (being content with
such things as are offered, and pryding it self with speeches) does neglect
realties, and works, treading them, as it were, under foot. But that Aenigma
propounded to Oedipus (by means of which he obtained the Thebane Empire)
belonged to the nature of man: For whosoever does thoroughly consider the nature
of man, may be, in a manner, the contriuer of his own fortune, and is borne to
command, which is well spoken of the Roman Arts.

Tu regere imperio populos, Roman memento:
Hae tibi erunt arts. --
Roman remember that with scepters awe
Thy Realms thou rule. These arts let be thy law.
It was therefore very apposit, that Augustus Caesar (whether by premeditation
or by chance) bare a Sphinx in his Signet: for he (if ever any) was famous not
only in political government, but in all the course of his life; he happily
discovered many new Aenigmaes concerning the nature of Man, which if he had not
done with dexterity and promptness, he had oftentimes fallen into imminent
danger and destruction.

Moreover it is added in the Fable, that the body of Sphinx when she was
overcome was laid upon an Ass: which indeed is an elegant fiction, seeing
there is nothing so accute and abstruse, but (being well understood and
diuulged) may be apprehended by a slow capacity.

Neither is it to be omitted, that Sphinx was overcome by a Man lame in his
feet: for when men are too swift of foot and too speedy of pace in hasting to
Sphinx her Aenigmaes, it comes to pass that (she getting the upper hand)
their wits and minds are rather distracted by disputations, then that ever
they come to command by works and effects.

16.
PROSERPINA, or Spirit.
PLuto they say, being made king of the infernal dominions (by that memorable
division) was in despair of ever attaining any one of the superior Goddesses
in marriage, especially if he should venture to court them either with words or
with any amorous behavior, so that of necessity he was to lay some plot to
get one of them by rapine, taking therefore the benefit of opportunity, he
caught up Proserpina (the daughter of Ceres, a beautiful virgin) as she was
gathering Narcissus flowers in the meadows of Sicily, and carried her away with
him in his Coach to the Subterranean dominions, where she was welcomed with
such respect, as that she was styled the Lady of Dis. But Ceres her mother,
when in no place she could find this her only beloved daughter, in a
sorrowful humor and distracted beyond measure, went compassing the whole
earth with a burning torch in her hand, to seek and recover this her lost
child. But when she saw that all was in vain, supposing peradventure that she
was carried to Hell, she importuned Jupiter with many tears and lamentations,
that she might be restored unto her again, and at length prevailed thus far,
That if she had tasted of nothing in Hell, she should have leave to bring her
from thence. Which condition was as good as a denial to her petition,
Proserpina having already eaten three grains of a Pome-granat. And yet for all
this, Ceres gave not over her suite, but fell to prayers and moanes afresh.
Wherefore it was at last granted, that (the year being divided) Proserpina
should by alternate courses, remain one six months with her husband, and
other six months with her mother. Not long after this Theseus and Perithous in
an over hardy adventure attempted to fetch her from Plutos bed, who being
weary with travel and sitting down upon a stone in Hell to rest themselves,
had not the power to rise again, but sat there for ever. Proserpina therefore
remained Queen of Hell, in whose honor there was this great privilege
granted, That although it were enacted that none that went down to Hell should
have the power ever to return from thence, yet was this singular exception
annexed to this law, that if any presented Proserpina with a golden bough, it
should be lawful for him to come and go at his pleasure. Now there was but
one only such bough in a spacious and shady grove, which was not a plant
neither of it self, but budded from a tree of another kind, like a rope of
Gum, which being plucked of another would instantly spring out.

This Fable seems to pertain to nature, and to diue into that rich and
plentiful efficacy and variety of subalternall creatures, from whom whatsoever
we have is derived, and to them does again return.

By Proserpina the Ancients meant that aethereall spirit which (being
separated from the upper globe) is shut up and detained under the earth
(represented by Pluto) which the Poet well expressed thus.

Sieve recens tellus, seductaque nuper ab alto
Aethere, cognati retinebat semina coeli.
Whither the youngling Tellus (that of late
Was from the high-reard Ether separate)
Did yet contain her teeming womb within
The living seeds of Heaven, her nearest kin.
This spirit is fained to be rapted by the Earth, because nothing can withold
it when it has time and leisure to escape. It is therefore caught and stayed
by a sudden contraction, no other wise then if a man should go about to mix
air with water, which can be done by no means, but by a speedy and rapid
agitation, as may be seen in froth, wherein the air is rapted by the water.

Neither is it inelegantly added that Proserpina was rapte as she was
gathering Narcissus Flowers in the valleys, because Narcissus has his name
from slownesse or stupiditie: for indeed then is this Spirit most prepared and
fitted to be snatched by terrestiall matter, when it begins to be coagulated,
and becomes as it were slow.

Rightly is Proserpina honored more then any of the other Gods bed-fellowes,
in being styled the Lady of Dis, because this spirit does rule and swaye all
things in those lower Regions, Pluto abiding stupid and ignorant.

This Spirit the power celestial (shadowed by Ceres) strives with infinite
sedulity to recover and get again: for that brand or burning torch of Ether
(which Ceres carried in her hand) does doubtless signify the Sun, which
enlightneth the whole circuit of the Earth, and would be of greatest moment to
recover Proserpina, if possibly it might be.

But Proserpina abides still, the reason of which is accuratly and excellently
propounded in the conditions between Jupiter and Ceres: For first it is most
certain there are two ways to keep Spirit in solid and terrestrial Matter;
the one by constipation or obstruction, which is mere imprisonment and
constraint; the other by administration of proportionable nutriment, which it
receives willingly and of its own accord: for after that the included Spirit
begins to feed and nourish it self, it makes no haste to be gone, but is, as
it were, linckt to its Earth: And this is pointed at by Proserpina her eating
of a Pome granat; which if she had not done, she had long since been
recovered by Ceres with her torch, compassing the Earth. Now as concerning that
Spirit which is in Metals and minerals, it is chiefly perchance restrained by
the solidity of Mass: but that which is in Plants and Animals, inhabites a
porous body, and has open passage to be gone in a manner as it lists, were it
not that it willingly abides of its own accord, by reason of the relish it
finds in its entertainment. The second condition concerning the six months
custom, it is no other then an elegant description of the division of the
year, seeing this Spirit mixed with the Earth appears above ground in
vegetable bodies during the summer months, and in the winter sinkes down
again.

Now as concerning Theseus, and Perithous their attempt to bring Proserpina
quite away; the meaning of it is, that it oftentimes comes to pass, that some
more subtle spirits desce^ding with diverse bodies to the Earth, never come to
suck of any subalternall Spirit, whereby to unite it unto them, and so to
bring it away. But on the contrary are coagulated themselves and never rise
more, that Proserpina should be by that means augmented with inhabitants and
dominion.

All that we can say concerning that sprig of gold is hardly able to defend us
from the violence of the Chymicks, if in this regard they set upon us, seeing
they promise by that their Elixar to effect golden mountains, and the
restoring of natural bodies, as it were, from the portall of Hell. But
concerning Chemistry, and those perpetual suitors for that philosophical
Elixar, we know certainly that their Theory is without grounds, and we suspect
that their practice also is without certain reward. And therefore (omitting
these) of this last part of the parable this is my opinion. I am induced to
believe by many figures of the Ancients, that the conservation and restoration
of natural bodies in some sort was not esteemed by them as a thing impossible
(...) (...) (...) (...) Coronets. So as ever since that time all the Muses have
attired them selves with plumed heads, except Terpsichores only that was
mother to the Sirenes. The habitation of the Sirenes was in certain pleasant
Islands, from whence as soon as out of their watchtower they discovered any
ships approaching, with their sweet tunes they would first entice and stay them,
and having them in their power would destroy them. Neither was their song
plain and single, but consisting of such variety of melodious tunes, so
fitting and delighting the ears that heard them, as that it ravished and
betrayed all passengers. And so great was the mischief they did, that these
Isles of the Sirenes, even as far off as a man could ken them, appeared all
over white with the bones of unburied Carcases. For the remedying of this
misery, a double means was at last found out, the one by Ulysses, the other
by Orpheus. Ulysses (to make experiment of his device) caused all the ears of
his company to be stopped with wax, and made himself to be bound to the maine
Mast, with special commandment to his Mariners not to be loosed, albeit
himself should require them so to do. But Orpheus neglecting and disdaining
to be so bound, with a shrill and sweet voice singing the praises of the Gods
to his Harp, suppressed the songs of the Sirenes, and so freed himself from
their danger.

This Fable has relation to men's manners, and contains in it a manifest and
most excellent Parable: For pleasures do for the most part proceed out of the
abundance and superfluity of all things, and also out of the delights and
Iouiall contentments of the mind; the which are wont suddenly, as it were,
with winged entisements to ravish and rapt mortal men. But learning and
education brings it so to pass, as that it restraines and bridles man's mind,
making it so to consider the ends and events of things, as that it clippes the
wings of pleasure. And this was greatly to the honor and renown of the Muses:
for after that by some examples it was made manifest that by the power of
philosophy vain pleasures might grow contemptible; it presently grew to great
esteem, as a thing that could raise and eleuate the mind aloft that seemed to
be base and fixed to the earth; and make the cogitations of men (which do ever
recide in the head) to be aethereall, and as it were winged. But that the
Mother of the Sirenes was left to her feet and without wings; that no doubt is
no otherwise meant, then of light and superficial learning, appropriated and
defined only to pleasures, as were those which Petronius devoted himself
unto, after he had received his fatal sentence, and having his foot, as it
were, upon the threshold of death sought to give himself all delightful
contentments, in so much as when he had caused consolatory letters to be sent
him, he would peruse none of them as Tacitus reports) that should give him
courage and constancy, but only read fantastical verses, such as these are.
Viuamus, mea Lesbia, atque amemus,
Rumoresque Senium Seueriorum,
Omnes vnius aestimemus Assis.
My Lesbia, let us live and love;
Though wayward Dottards us reprove,
Weigh their words light for our behoue.
And this also; Iura Senes norint, and quid sit fasque nefasque
Inquirant tristes, legumque examina seruent.
Let doting Grandsires know the law,
And right and wrong observe with awe:
Let them in that stricte circle draw.


This kind of doctrine would easily persuade to take these plumed Coronets from
the Muses, and to restore the wings again to the Sirens. These Sirenes are
said to dwell in remote Isles, for that pleasures love priuacie and retired
places, shunning always too much company of people. The Sirenes songs are so
vulgarly understood together with the deceits and danger of them, as that they
need no exposition. But that of the bones appearing like white cliffes; and
descryed a far off, has more acuteness in it: For thereby is signified,
that albeit the examples of afflictions be manifest and eminent; yet do they
not sufficiently deter us from the wicked enticements of pleasures.

As for the remainder of this parable, though it be not over mystical, yet is
it very grave and excellent: For in it are set out three remedies for this
violent enticing mischief; to wit, two from Philosophy, and one from Religion.
The first means to shun these inordinate pleasures is, to withstand and
resist them in their beginnings, and seriously to shun all occasions that are
offered to debaush and entice the mind, which is signified in that stopping of
the Ears; and that remedy is properly used by the meaner and baser sort of
people, as it were, Ulysses followers or Mariners; whereas more heroique and
noble Spirits, may boldly converse even in the midst of these seducing
pleasures, if with a resolved constancy they stand upon their guard, and
fortefie their minds; And so take greater contentment in the trial and
experience of this their approved virtue; learning rather thoroughly to
understand the follies and vanities of those pleasures by contemplation, then
by submission. Which Solomon avouched of himself, when he reckoning up the
multitude of those solaces and pleasures wherein he swamme, does conclude with
this Sentence;

Sapientia quoque perseuerauit mecum.
Wisdom also continued with me.
Therefore these Heroes, and Spirits of this excellent temper, even in the
midst of these enticing pleasures, can show themselves constant and invincible,
and are able to support their own virtuous inclination, against all headdy and
forcible persuasions whatsoever; as by the example of Ulysses that so
peremptorily interdicted all pestilent counsels and flatteries of his
companions, as the most dangerous and pernicious poisons to captiuate the mind.
But of all other remedies in this case, that of Orpheus is most predominant:
For they that chaunt and resound the praises of the Gods, confound and
dissipate the voices and incantations of the Sirenes; for divine meditations
do not only in power subdue all sensual pleasures; but also far exceed
them in sweetness and delight.

FINIS.

