THE CHIEF OCCVRrences of both the Armies, from the Eight of April, till the
seventeenth of the same month.

With other intelligences given by credible letters.

VBIQVE FLORET G B
printer's device of John Wolf, with cherubs at top and a satyr and human
figure at bottom; it is signed 'G. B.' (McKerrow 242)

LONDON. sold at the little Shop over against the great ^^uth door of Paul's.
1592.

The chief occurrences of both the armies, from the 8. of April, till the 17.
of the said month.
THe Prince of Parma at his first arrival into France, with intent to raise
the siedge before Roan finding the King to be able to beard him and to keep
still the siedge before the said Town, seemed to withdraw his forces into
Artoys again, and departing from Newcastle, went over the river of Some in
Picardie, which when the king did understand, dismissed a great part of his
forces, and gave them leave to withdraw themselves to their own houses. The
Prince of Parma having taken notice thereof by his intelligences: suddenly
thought to have surprised the king, and his army lying before Roan, and the
King being gone to Deep the eight day of April, news were brought to sir Roger
Williams, by one who had served sir Thomas Morgan, that the prince of Parma had
fully determined and purposed to lodge in Darnetall on Monday being the tenth
of the said month: whereupon as well as upon other aduertisements, Sir Roger
Williams dispatched in all have letters unto his Majesty, who at the receipt
thereof presently the next day in the evening repaired to the Camp then before
Roan: and at his arrival sent the Duke of Boillon, otherwise the vicount of
Touraine with eight hundred horses to discover the enemy. The Duke brought
news to the king of the enemies near approach, very early in the morning,
being the tenth of the said month. Whereupon the king riding to the ships
that lay in the river on the side of New-hauen set such order unto them as
seemed most meet unto his majesty, and causing fire to be put in Crochet,
being the place where the ships lay, sent and dispatched certain chief
officers of the army, to withdraw the siedge from Roan, and to retire toward
Pont de L'Arches, all which being done as the king had appointed himself, his
Majesty gathered a head of all his forces, between the tenth of April, and
the fifteenth of the said month.

The fifteenth day of April, the king began to martch with such forces as
were come of strangers, and his other nobility toward the enemy, and
quartered the same night in Fontaine Le Bourg, three leagues from Roan, and
eight leagues or thereabout from the Prince of Parma his Camp.

The sixteenth of the said month, the king having appointed his Rendeuous
about a League and a half from Angleuille in a great plain near a Winde-mill:
his forces failed not to find his Majesty at the place appointed: and
marching thither in battle array: the number of the horsemen were in sight at
the least between seven and eight thousand horses, and about 16000. footmen
besides the troops of the Duke Monpensier, and the Marshiall d' Amons, who
were expected to meet the king at the next Rendeuous, the 17. of April, and
were at Pont de l' Arches the 15. of the said month.

The Baron Biron, being sent by the king, to lie in Ambuscado with twelve
hundred horses, between New-hauen, and the Duke of Parma his army,
discomfited a certain conuoy coming from the Governor of New-hauen, and sent
the 16. of April late in the evening, some Wagons with provision of war,
and six Spaniards, prisoners to the king.

The King marches toward the Enemy with twenty pecces of Ordinance as well
great as small, and the sixteenth day of April cawsed them to be discharged
at his arrival at Angeuille, his quarter that night being five leagues from
the Princes Camp, to give notice of his coming to them of Caudebeck.

Victuals were somewhat scarce in our camp* because Diep was shut up and
nothing could come thence, by reason of the Prince of Parma his marching
between our Army and the said town, but as soon as the King had sent a
Conuoy from his quarter, victuales and all other munition were sent by the
governor of Diep to our Camp.

The kings ships have hindered the Prince of Parma for plantynge his Ordinance
to batter the town of Caudebeck, and have had a fight with certain vessels
laden with Wine, and other provision of war to relieve the prince of Parma, and
having taken some and sunk the rest, sent those that were taken into Diep.

The king has stopped the passage where the Prince of Parma entered first
into France, with five thousand horses, under the leading and conduct of the
duke Longueuille: and in forces, courage, and magnanimity, is very forward God
be thanked to encounter his enemy.

By other letters credibly reported.
The king understanding by diverse of his spies, how that the Prince of Parma
had left some of his companies in several villages, thither the king made and
has slain them all, among the which the Duke of Parmaes son is slain, it
is credibly reported also that the duke himself is shot into the arm lieng
before Caudebeck. They of New-hauen did send out twelve vessels, in each vessel
a hundredth men to clear the river, and to convey wine and other necessaries
for war to the Duke of Parma, but the Hollanders that lie there and keep it
for the K. did so mightily resist them, that of the Hollanders Admiral there
is but twelve men left alive, and some of the twelve vessels are overthrown,
and other some taken, and those that be taken are brought to Diep and the
merchandise sold there and all their men slain. The king looks daily for more
companies to come to help him. The Duke of Parma is now at Tankauille, which
is about eight miles from Newhauen and the king is at Yuerot, which is about
six miles from Tankeuille, keeping the way from Roane, Diep, and Caudebeck.
All the kings people are fully determined to fight the battle, if they can
any way get their enemies to it: and it is verily thought that if the Duke of
Parma do not find the better means to retire the sooner, he is like to
remain enclosed and therefore it is thought the Duke does draw himself
toward Newhauen, there to receive more succor, or else to get away by Sea.

FINIS.
depiction of St. George slaying the dragon


