GOOD NEVVES FROM FRANCE.

Containing the Insolent Demands of the IESVITES.

Being against 1. The KINGS Authority. 2. The ordinary Justice of his
Majesty. 3. The dignity and power of the Cardinals, Archbishops, and Bishops
of other orders and professions. 4. The young Scholars under them. 5. The good
and welfare of the Towns and Cities which receive them. 6. The perfection of
Sciences. 7. The Antiquity and Commandments of the Church. 8. The Resolution
of the Clergy of France, and the Letters Patents of the Kings; and against the
Sentences of Allowance and Registring thereof, which they themselves have
pursued.


TOGETHER WITH The Decree or Final Judgment of the Kings Privy Council
given the 27. day of September 1624. In the Joint defense of the Universities
of France. And against the Jesuits (in respect of their Insolent demands)
whereby they are forbidden to take upon them the name, title, or quality of an
University, or to give Degrees in any faculty or nomination to any BENEFICES.

Translated according to the French Copy.

LONDON, Printed by I. D. for John Bellamie, and are to be sold at his Shop, at
the three golden Lions, near the Royal Exchange. 1624.

Good News from FRANCE. CONTAINING CERTAIN REASONS, Upon which is grounded
the Decree or Sentence from the Kings Council against the Jesuits demanding
the abrogation of a Decree of the Parliament at Toulouse. By which they were
commanded, that they should not take upon them the name, title, or quality of
an University; and that they should not give any degree in any faculty, nor
any nomination to any Benefices.
THe Universities have always had such a favor of our KINGS, that they have
been received when they did demand Justice of their Majesty's, not only in
their own particular causes, but also in causes which did concern the public
estate of the Kingdom. The Histories and public Acts do plainly show it, and
also it may manifestly appear by the Records of the Parliament at Paris, that
our King Charles the 7. when he would restore and confirm the rights and
fundamental laws of his Kingdom. And having to this end assembled many great
Lords to this Council, there were heard as well their Attorney General, as
also the University at Paris, and upon that which they did represent were made
many good Ordinances, to which his Majesty did swear, and caused all his
Officers and Council to swear to them inviolably. It is manifest to all the
world, that our King is not inferior to his Ancestors in doing Justice to his
Subjects, without acceptance of persons, after GODS Ordinance, by whose grace
he does reign, with resolution to conserve his royal authority, with courage
to maintain his State in all the Bodies whereof it is composed against all
Interprises. Therefore have the Universities being pressed by an extreme
necessity for to defend themselves against the assault, yea against oppression,
which the Jesuits not being contented yet with the dissolutions and ruins
which they have brought upon them heretofore, do now take in hand to bring
upon them, in attributing to themselves their title and their rights (their
title in making so many Universities as they have Colleges of their Society,
their rights in making the advancements, and giving the degrees to the
Scholars, yea to them which the Doctors of the University has refused, as if
they were their superiors.) The same University do hope that it will not be
unpleasing to the King, that the Deputies should defend them. And in defending
themselves in the presence of his Majesty, and of the Lords of his Council,
they do not uphold only the Decree given to their profit by one of the most
honorable Parliaments of his Kingdom (that is to say) the Parliament at
Toulouse, of which the Jesuits dare demand the Abrogation, and so abusing the
favor that his Majesty has done to them in taking one of them for his
Confessor. A most singular favor, which till this present they have not
received of any of our holy Fathers, nor of the Kings of Spain.

But also do show and prove by authentic Acts, yea by the Jesuits own
writings, that the demand which they do make now, and the proiects which they
have to attribute to every one of their Colleges the title and rights of an
University, are contrary and prejudicial to the Kings authority, to the
ordinary Justice of his Majesty, to the dignity and power of the Cardinals,
Archbishops, and Bishops of other orders and professions, to the young Scholars
under them, and to the good of the Towns which do receive them, to the
perfection of Sciences and Antiquity, and to the commandments of the Church,
and to the resolution of the Clergy of France in the assembly at Poissy, in
the year 1561. to the Letters Patents which they have obtained of our Kings,
Henry the second, Francis the second, Charles the ninth, Henry the third, and
to those Letters which they have had for the re-establishing of the King Henry
the Great, of happy memory, and of our King which does reign at this present.
As also to the Decrees of the allowance and registring thereof, which they
themselves have pursued in the Court of Parliament of this Kingdom.

1. Against the Kings authority.
BEcause they will by virtue of a Bull which they say that they have obtained
from our holy Gregory the 13. take upon them power for to choose and create
Judges, Conservators for all kind of causes as well Civil as Criminal, and
mixed: yea, and those in which they themselves should be demanders for their
rights, lands, and houses, fruits, rents, and revenues, and for all other
things moveable and immovable, spiritual and temporal: and that the Judges
which they should have received, should do Justice according to the will of
the rector of their University.

2. Against the Kings Authority.
BEcause by virtue of an Institution inferted and related in a Bull which they
have obtained in the year 1540. of our holy Father the Pope, they retain for
their General, (which since their coming till this present day has been a
stranger, a Spanyard, or one borne under the subjection of Spain) all kind of
government and sovereign authority over the Scholars which are of their
Colleges, and over their Colleges, and over all others which are of their
Society, for to obey him always, and to acknowledge him as one who has the
authority of our Lord Jesus Christ: and in their Vow they do promise to him
as to one which keeps the place of God, all obedience, not only for things
obligatory, but also for all other things, though there should appear no other
thing to them but a sign of the Generals will, without any express
commandment: in doing all things that which should be commanded, in persuading
themselves things to be lawful, and in renouncing through a blind obedience,
all advice and judgment to the contrary, suffering themselves to be carried
and used even as a dead corpse, willing that no particular person, directly or
indirectly, without the permission and approbation of their General, should
ask or cause to be asked of our holy Father the Pope, nor of any other which
is without the Society, any grace for himself or for another: and that he
should believe if he did not obtain his desire of his General, or with his
consent thereto, it is not for him, though it were for divine service: and on
the contrary, if it be fit for him by the consent of his General, which keeps
the place of our Savior Jesus Christ for him, that he shall obtain it. And
that which is said of the Colleges, must also be understood to be said of the
Universities of the Society in the same manner, that if they obtain that
which they demand for this present time, one must no more say for the royal
University of Paris, but the University of the Society, and so of all other
Universities of this Kingdom. And although that he does communicate his power
to other inferiors, which are in the Provinces, Visitators and Commissioners,
yet always he has power to approve or to abrogate and make void that which
they have done, and to ordeine in all things that which he thinks good. And
always they must obey him and honor him as one that is the Vicar of our Lord
Jesus Christ.

3. Against the Kings authority.
BEcause they have a general Agent which gives advice to the General, as
well of persons as of things, as it pleases them. And their General has
four Assistants, one for the business of France and Germany, another for
Italy, and Sicilie, the other for Spain and Portugal, and the other, of the
Indies. And generally for to do all things he has a General Attorney of the
Society, and he has every year a Catalogue sent unto him of all the Houses
and Colleges of the Societies, and another of all the Persons which are in
every Province. They will also that there be in their pretended Universities, a
Secretary of the Society, which keeps a Book, in which are written all the
names of them which come to their Colleges, and which of them do receive
promise to obey the Rector, and to observe the Constitution. And if there are
some which do refuse to give their names, and so do register and enrole
themselves, that he should represent and show them, because they should take
more particular care to the Scholars, whose names are written in the Book of
the University, and to speak it plainly and without dissembling, what can
one say more, as to enrole, seduce, and retain men for a stranger, as always
till this day the General of the said Society has been. And this cannot be
done in this Kingdom without contrariety, and infinite prejudice against our
Kings authority. No man can serve two several Lords, nor can as a subject and
vassal acknowledge the one and the other for his Lord. Our King cannot be
acknowledged and served by a General, upon the conditions here related, more
then our holy Father the Pope can be in quality of a Vicar of our Lord Jesus
Christ, as the Universities with the Catholic, Apostolic, and Roman Church
do acknowledge him for; and as a General that keeps Gods place, and is our
Lord Jesus Christ's Vicar. But if they for to cloak this, say like as they are
wont to do, that they do vow a particular obedience to his Holiness, we
answer, that they do suppress it with that is written in their Constitutions,
that it is only for the Missions, and then they attribute to their General
the full direction and power thereof.

4. Against his Majesty's ordinary Justice.
BEcause that no body of their Colleges and Houses, whether he be of those
which have made their vows, or of their helpers, or of their Scholars, must
suffer himself to be examined for civil and much less for criminal causes,
without the leave of their superior, and that their superior must give no
leave, if it be not in causes that concern the Catholic Religion.

5. Against the dignity and power of the Cardinals, Archbishops, and Bishops.
BEcause they take away from them the power and authority of judging,
otherwise then is written in the Bull, which they say they have gotten for to
choose Judges, Conservators in all civil and criminal causes, and they do
constrain them to judge and decree according to their Institutes and
Constitutions, by virtue of a Bull which they had from our holy Father the Pope
Gregory XIII. in the year 1584 which bears the greatest excommunication, and
a penalty of disabilitie to any Offices and Benefices fecular and regular of
all Orders, and that as soon as the deed shall be done, without any other
declaration against all persons of whatsoever condition and preeminence they
be, which shall withstand and gainesay directly and indirectly the Institutes
and Constitutions of this Society, or any of the Articles, under color of
disputation, and seeking of the truth. As also they do attribute by virtue of
their Institutes, Bulls, and Constitutions to their General the Government of
all the Universities which they have. Which does exclude and deprive the
Cardinals, Archbishops, and Bishops, of the right and possession that they
have as Governors and Protectors of the Universities, which does exempt many
Clerks of their Jurisdiction.

6. Against the Rules and Professions of other Orders.
BEcause that they in respect of those which have a portion with them that they
take the best Benefices for to join them to their Colleges, as it is
manifest; and in respect of others, they do take upon them all the Faculties,
Concessions, exemptions, Indulgences, remission of sins, and grace as well
spiritual as temporal, granted, and yet to be granted, which have and shall
have in time to come all other Orders of beggars, Priests and Nuns for to
enjoy by them for all and in the whole so as they themselves, yea with as much
right, and they will that all those which do study in their Colleges, or
pretended Universities, do promise that they will obey them, and observe all
their Constitutions, for so much that if any Priests do study and take their
degree and promotion, as there do many in the University at Paris, and other
Universities, they should be bound against the rules of their Orders and
Professions, to promise obedience to no other then their Superiors.

7. Against the young Scholars, which are under them.
BEcause the professed Society must take no care to teach in their Colleges
perfection of living, and Letters worthy to a Christian, but only those which
are esteemed to have the Talent, for they shall be as a Nurse-gardian to the
professed Society, and to his helpers, and they know that if with the
Colleges the Universities were also committed to the Societies, keeping in
proceeding, the manner of which is spoken in the fourth part, they help to the
same end, adding thereunto these speeches; For the greater good of God, and the
general good of the Society, which know certainly, that they do not
establish their pretended Universities, but only for their particular interest
and profit.

8. Against the Wealth of the Cities which do receive them.
BEcause they give power to themselves for to leave and abandon the Colleges
and Houses which they have established, and they say that if it does appear by
proof that the Society is more hindered then helped, and their General does
find no remedy for it, that it then is lawful to consider in the first
general Congregation, whether such an House, College, or University ought to
be abandoned or kept, with such a charge, and in abandoning it, they will
dispose of it, and of all the revenues given unto them, if there be not made an
express reservation to the contrary by them which have bin the builders of
them.

9. Against the perfection of Sciences.
BEcause they do reduce their pretended Universities unto three faculties: One
for the Tongues, another for the Arts, and the third for Theology; and they
will not that there should be any Treatise of Physic, nor of the laws
(though it be manifest that they are more necessary for mankind) or at least,
that the Society should not be charged with it.

10. Against Antiquity and the Commandments of the Church.
BEcause that their Scholars, and especially those which dwell in their
Colleges, do more then they hear and understand the great Mass said by a
Deacon and Subdeacon, for they do not say it in their Churches, as it is
known to every one, and they have no Quiere, and they do derogate the
general Counsels.

11. Against the resolution of the Clergy of France that was assembled at
Poisy, in the year 1501. Against the Letters patents of our King and against
the sentences of allowance and registring thereof, which they themselves have
pursued.
BEcause they do take upon them the title, name and rights of the University.
The title and name in giving the quality of an University to every one of
their Colleges for to make so many Universities as they have Colleges. The
rights in making the Promotions and in giving the degrees to the Scholars, yea
to them to whom the Doctors of the Universities have refused it, if it be that
their examiners do find them capable, as if they were their superiors. For by
the resolution of the Clergy here dated, and by the Letters patents of our
Kings here mentioned, and by the sentence of allowance and registring thereof,
which they themselves have pursued in the Courts of Parliament of this
kingdom, it is expressly forbidden that they should do nothing either
spiritual or temporal in prejudice of of the Universities: and they can do
no greater prejudice to the Universities then to make Universities of their
Colleges, and to establish them and give them the titles and rights of
Universities like to them of Paris and others of this Kingdom.

The Parties were heard on Friday last, the 28. of September 1624. in the Hall
where the Council was kept at S. Germain in Lay, where was a great multitude
of people, and the Iesuties demandants were thrust from their Letters of
abrogation, and it was ordained that the decree or sentence at Toulouse should
stand in full force and power.

Good News from FRANCE. CONTAINING A DECREE or FINAL Judgment from the Kings
privy Council, given the 27 day of September. 1624. for the Universities of
FRANCE, jointly against the Jesuits demanding the abrogation of a Decree of
the Parliament of Toulouse. By which they were forbidden to take upon them the
name, title, and quality of an University, and to give Degrees in any
faculty, or Nomination to any Benefices.
An extract out of the Registers of the KINGS Privy Council.
Between the society of the University of the town of Tournon, being of the
society of Jesus, demandant in a request and a decree from the Council given
upon the same, on the 15. of December. 1623. and defendant on the one part: And
the society of the Universities of Toulouse, Valence Cahors defendants; and
the said society of Toulouse demandant in a request of the 19. July last past,
on the other part, without which the qualities may not hinder or prejudice
them. And also the Rector, Deans, Atturneys and Deputies of the University of
Paris; the Rector, Doctors and regents of the University of Bourdeaux; the
Rector, Doctors, and deputies of the University of Reims, the Rector, Dean, and
deputies of the University of Portiers; the Rector, Deans, and deputies of the
University of Caen; the Rector Deans, and Doctors of the Universities of
Bourges, Orleans, Anger, and Aix, coming all on the other part.

The which petition and the decree upon the same dated the 15. of December
1623. being seen by the King in his Council. In respect of the things therein
contained, it pleased his Majesty to abrogate and make void the decree from
the Parliament of Toulouse, given against the demandant to the profit of the
said Universities of Toulouse, Vallence, and Cahors, the 4. of July of the said
year: and so doing to ordain, that the decree of the rule of the Letters
patents agreed upon in the said University of Tournon, in the month of
December 1622. should be executed according to the force and tenor thereof, and
that the said University should be maintained and kept in the possession and
enjoying the Privileges, rights, and powers, to them agreed by the same: the
Bulls of our holy Father the Pope Iulies Letters patents of the ratifying
thereof, and decrees of the registring, notwithstanding the oppositions of the
said Universities of Toulouse, Vallence, and Cahors, to defend the said
society of the said Universities, not to help themselves with the said decree
of of the 13. of July, nor under color of the same to trouble nor hinder the
Rector, regents, and scholars, and deputies of the said University of Tournon
directly, nor indirectly in the enjoying of the liberties, faculties and
powers, which to them have been given, granted, confirmed, and augmented upon
penalty of one thousand pounds costs damages and interests: by which decree
was ordained that the society of the said Universities of Toulouse, Vallence,
and Cahors should be called for, and in the meanetime that the said Rector and
regents of the said Universities of Tournon should enjoy the same Privileges,
Authorities, Preeminences, and liberty which they did enjoy before the said
Letters of the month of December 1622. A Commission upon the said decree on the
said day. Acts of assignements of the 5.9. and 13. of January last past. A
copy of Bulls obtained by the Cardinal of Tournon deceased, of Pope Iulie 3.
being creator of the said University of Tournon, there to make general
studyes in Latin, Greek, Hebrew, Chaldean tongues, and moral, and natural
Philosophy; even as the other Universities; given in Rome, in the year 1552.
the 3. day of May. For the furtherance of which, there are copies of the
Letters of King Henry the second, of the 9. of November, of the same year
being dated to the said Parliament of Toulouse and to the Seneschall of
Beaucaire and Nismes for the proclaiming and registring of the said Bulls. Also
the Act of the proclaiming and registring in the said Parliament of Toulouse
the 11. of April 1553. And in the registry of the Archbishop extracted out of
the registers of the Parliament of Paris containing certain conclusions and
demands made by the Kings servants in the said Parliament of the 26. January
1552. A copy of a contract of gist and legacy made forever by the said Sir de
Tournon deceased the said Fathers the Jesuits of the College which he had
caused to be builded in the said town of Tournon, with the appurtenances,
dependancies and revenue at the charge contained in the clauses and conditions,
as be declared by the said contract passed before Gilles Mesnager and Malthurin
Porcher Notaries public in the court of Justice at Orleans the 6. January
1560. accepted by Don John Baptist Violle a Priest and Atturny general of the
Iosuites. And moreover is put down the copy of the Procuration of the
general of the said Fathers the Jesuits, for to accept the said gift and
legacy of the 28. of October, of the same year: also the act from the
assembly that the Priests of the Abbey of Chaise-Dieu being united to the said
College, had; which did approve and authorize the said contract of the 24. of
February in the same year; extracted out of the register of the Parliament of
Paris, concerning the Kings and the Queens (his mothers) Letters for the
verification of the before going Letters patents, to the allowance and
approbation of the Bulls, privileges, and institutions of the said Fathers to
the Jesuits in the said year 1560. A suite in Law of Mr Mesnill deceased,
Advocate in the cause of the University of Paris, and of the Fathers the
Jesuits, follows the Counsel and resolution of the assembly of the Clergy of
France kept at Poissy, in the year 1561. A copy of the act of the assembly
kept by the Gallican Church at Poissy aforesaid the 15. of September, 1561. A
copy of the decree from the said Parliament at Paris of the 13. of February in
the said year 1561. By which is ordained that the said Act made in the
assembly at Poissy, should be registered under the conditions therein contained.
A copy of the Letters Patents of the King Charles the ninth, given in the
month of July 1561. for the conformation and allowance of the said gift and
transport. A copy of the Decree of the Parliament of Toulouse, of the
foureteenth day of February in the said year 1561. for the Proclayming and
registring of the said Letters of gift, upon the charges and conditions as are
mentioned in the Act of the Assembly kept at Poissy, the fifteenth day of
September in the said year. A relief of King Henry the third, of the
thirteenth day of April, 1584. to the Parliaments of Paris, Roan, Bourdeaux,
Dauphine, Province and Borgongne, for to verify and register the said Bulls of
the said University at Tournon, and of the ratification which is Registered at
Paris, Grenoble, and Province the ninth day of June, the ninth day of November,
and the nineteenth day of December, in the said year, 1584. A Decree of the
court of Parliament at Aix for the verification of the said Bulls and Letters
the nineteenth day of December, 1584. A decree of the Court of Parliament at
Paris of the nineteenth day of June 1584. for the execution of the said Letters
Patents of the thirteenth day of April aforesaid, in the same year; by which
was ordained that the said Letters and Bulls should be registered, without which
they may hinder or prejudice the freedom of the Gallican Church, and without
which the Patentees may take upon them no other quality then of Scholars of
the College at Tournon, A Copy of a Petition extracted out of the Records of
of the University at Paris, the seventeenth day of this present month of
September. An other Copy of a Declaration made by the Fathers the Jesuits to
the said University, and extracted out of the said Records on the same day. A
Copy of a Petition presented to the Parliament at Paris, by the Priests and
Scholars of the Society and company of Jesus, of the College at Clermont,
upon the reception to the Assembly at Poissy, and the Conclusions of the
Chief Attorney of the said Parliament: extracted also out of the said Records
on the said day. A printed Copy of the Edict upon the reestablishing of the
Fathers, the Jesuits given at Roan in the month of September, 1603. Letters
in the form of a Comminaltie of King Henry the Great deceased in the month of
October, 1604. By the which he had allowed the said foundation; and for so
much as it should be necessary, confirmed the said Privileges and rights.

Other Letters in the form of a Comminaltie of the month of December 1622.
bearing such a like Confirmation, underneath which is the Registring of the
Parliament at Toulouse, of the ninth of January 1623. A Decree of the said
Parliament of the ninth of March of the said year 1623. Because the said
Demandants should enjoy the effect of the said Letters. And a Copy of an Act
from the Assembly kept in the great Hall of the College and University at
Aix, on the twentie-fifth day of April of the said year 1623. by those of the
said College and University. A Copy of the Letters which the said Defendants
have obtained in the Chauncery at Toulouse the twelfth of April 1624. for
being received as Opposants against the Decree of the aboue-said Registring. An
exploit of an Assignement of the fourth of May 1624. An Extract of a
Presentation done in the said Assignement on the seaventeenth day following. A
Decree of the said Parliament at Toulouse the thirteenth day of July, in the
said year 1623. between the Society of the said Universities at Toulouse,
Vallence, and Cahors, having obtained the Kings Letters against the said
Society of the Fathers the Jesuits at Tournon. By the which allowing the said
Letters, the said Obtainers were received as Opposants to the Examination of
the said Decree of the Registring; and without having any regard thereunto, the
said Fathers the Jesuits at Tournon were forbidden that they should take upon
them any name, title, or quality of an University, neither to give any
Catholics of Study, nor any Degrees in any Faculty, nor any nomination to
the Benefices, upon penalty of dissolution, and other sentences: nevertheless
that all Testimonial Degrees and Nominations, which are given by them by
authority of the same Decree of the Registring, should be of no value. And
also they which might have obtained them, are forbidden not to use the same
upon penalty of the five hundred pounds, without prejudice of the said Decree
of the Registring concerning the union of the benefits there only mentioned. A
Decree of the said Parliament at Toulouse of the eleventh of the said month of
July, saying, That notwithstanding the things aboue-said and alleged by Brun,
Attorney of the Society of the College of the Jesuits at Tournon he should
possess, and the parties should appear precisely on Thursday next. An Act of
an Attestation of the twentie-fourth of May 1624. passed before the Seneschall
at Toulouse, that Master John de Brun, Attorney in the Court, was Attorney of
the said Fathers the Jesuits, which are of the Jurisdiction of the Parliament
at Toulouse, and in the said quality did all their business, as well in
demanding as defending. Another Decree from the Parliament upon a Petition of
the chief Attorney of the eleventh of August 1623. By which all Rectors,
Principalls, and Overseers of the Colleges, and of the Jurisdiction as well
of the said Fathers the Jesuits, as others, were forbidden to give any
Testimonialls of the Study in Parchment, with a seal, nor with a Preface. A
quire of writing Paper Printed, containing the declarations of the twenty one
of January 154 and of the twenty-third of June 1594. And Letters Patents of the
month of December 1610. of the privileges granted by the King to the said
Universities at Paris. And the Decrees in consequence given to the privy
Council the seaventeenth of December 1604. and the nineteenth of November
1612. A Petition of an Intervention of the said Rector, Deanes, Atturneyes, and
Deputies of the said University at Paris, the parties interposing themselves
were received the seaventeenth of June last past. A signification of the
twentieth of the said Month. Another Petition of Intervention of the Rector,
Doctor, and Regent of the University at Bourdeaux, the parties interposing
themselves were received, and there was an Act given unto them of that they had
employed for the Intervention of the said Petition, and of that which had been
written and produced by the said University at Paris; as also those at
Toulouse, Valence, and Cahors, the twentieth of this present month of
September. A signification of the said day. Another Petition of Intervention
from the Rector, Doctors, and Deputies of the University at Reims, the parties
interposing themselves, were received the twentie-fifth of the said month of
September. A signification of the same day. Another Petition of Intervention
from the Rector, Deanes, and Deputies of the University at Poictiers; the
parties interposing were received in the month of June last past. An Act of a
declaration, that for all their Productions and Intervention, they did employ
the said Petition, and all that which had been written and produced by the
University at Paris. A signification of the month of September then next
following. Another Petition of Intervention from the Rector, Deanes, and
Deputies of the University of Caen; the parties interposing themselves were
received the twenty-two of the said month of June. An Act of a declaration
that he would employ the said Petition for their Production, and all that which
had been produced and written by the University at Paris. A signification of
the twenty-third of September. A Petition of Intervention from the Rectors,
Deanes, and Doctors of the Universities at Bourges, and Orleance; the parties
interposing themselves were received the twentieth of September, and an Act of
their employment. A signification of the said day. Petitions of Intervention
from the University at Aix, and Angers. A Petition of the Chancellor, Rector,
and Doctors of the University of Cahors, that they did employ for their
Production that which had been written and produced by the said Rector, and
Doctors of the University at Toulouse, whereof they haud had an Act the
twelfth of August last past. A signification of the said day: a Petition of the
Society at Toulouse.

A decree upon the same that the Parties may be heard thoroughly of the same day
the ninteenth day of July last past. A direction in consequence of the
fifteenth day of August. A direction between the said parties, of the two and
twentieth day of April last past, there to communicate, write and produce
writings and productions, and all that which has bin produced before my Lord
of the ludgement Court, Counselor to the King in his Privy Council, and
ordinary Master of the Petitions, of this Hall, as Commissioner hereto
appointed, and to hear his report. And after that Master John Aubert Rector of
the said University at Paris, has been heard for all the Universities at
France, being. The King and his Council at the same Instance of abrogation
has acquitted, and does acquit the said Parties out of fuite; Provided that
the Demanders may provide themselves by a civil Petition against the said
Decree in the said Parliament at Toulouse, and there besides upon the final
conclusion of the said Interposers, his Majesty does ordain that they should
provide themselves so as they should think it fit, and without cost. Done in
the Kings privy Council kept at S. German en Lay the seven and twentieth
day of September 1624. And this underneath conferd.

Signed. De Choisy.

Lewis by the Grace of God, King of France and Navarre, to Our chief Usher
and Sargieant, hereunto required, send greeting. We do charge and command you
by these presents, that the Decree of our Council hereto annexed under Our
Counter-seale given to day between the Society of the University of the
Town of Tournon, of the Society of Jesus, Demandant and Defendant on the one
part, and the Agent of the University at Toulouse, Vallence and Cahors,
Defendants; and the said Agent of Toulouse, Demandant on the other part; And
also the Rectors, Deanes, Atturnyes, Doctors, Regents, and Deputies of the
Universities at Paris, Bourdeaux, Reimes, Poictiers, Caen, Bourges, Orleans,
Angers and Aix, deposing themselves on the other part: That you do signify
unto the said Agent of the Society of Jesus, and all other to whom it shall
appertain, that they do not pretend any cause of Ignorance, but that they do
obey hereunto: Commanding them in Our name, not to do any thing against it,
but to do this and all other acts and exploits required, and necessary for
the execution of Our said Decree, upon the request of the said Doctor, Deane,
Attorney, and Deputy of the said University at Paris, We do charge you,
without demanding any leave. Hereof fail you not, for so is Our pleasure.
Given at S. Germain en Lay, the 27. of September, Anno Dom. 1624. and of Our
Reign the 15.

Underneath is written by the King and his Council.

Signed De Choisy.

FINIS.
A GAGGE FOR THE POPE, AND THE IESVITS: OR THE ARRAIGNEMENT, AND EXECVTION OF
ANTICHRIST.

Shevving plainly, that Antichrist shall be discovered, and punished in this
World: to the amasement of all obstinate PAPISTS.

LONDON Printed by I. D. for Edward Blackmore, and are to be sold at his Shop,
at the Great South-dore of Paul's. 1624.


