

NORTH-VVEST FOX* OR, Fox from the North-west passage.

BEGINNING With King ARTHVR, MALGA, OCTHVR, the two ZENI'S of Iseland,
Estotiland, and Dorgia; Following with brief Abstracts of the Voyages of
Cabot, Frobisher, Davis, Waymouth, Knight, Hudson, Button, Gibbons, Bylot,
Baffin, Hawkridge: Together with the Courses, Distance, Latitu^^^ ^^ngitudes,
Variations, Depths of Seas, Sets of ^^^^s, Currents, Races, and over-Falls;
with other Observations, Accidents and remarkable things, as our Miseries and
sufferings.

Mr. JAMES HALL's three Voyages to Groynland, with a Topographicall description
of the Countries, the Salvages lives and Treacheries, how our Men have been
slain by them there, with the Commodities of all those parts; whereby the
Merchant may have Trade, and the Mariner Employment.

Demonstrated in a Polar Card, wherein are all the Maines, Seas, and Islands,
herein mentioned.

With the Author his own Voyage, being the XVIth. with the opinions and
Collections of the most famous Mathematicians, and Cosmographers; with a
Probability to prove the same by Marine Remonstrations, compared by the Ebbing
and Flowing of the Sea, experimented with places of our own Coast.

By Captain LVKE FOX of Kingstone upon Hull, Capt. and Pylot for the Voyage,
in his Majesty's Pinnace the CHARLES.

Printed by his Majesty's Command.

LONDON, Printed by B. ALSOP and THO. FAUCET, dwelling in Grubstreet. 1635.

TO THE KINGS MOST SACRED AND EXCELLENT MAJESTY.
MOST MIGHTY MONARCH* and MY DREAD SOVEREIGN.
SEeing that it has pleased You to examine the Endeavors of those formerly
employed toward the search of the North-west Passage, and that it has bin
Your Highness pleasure, to examine me Your meanest Subject, concerning the
hope of a further Discovery, how it formerly had failed; and what better
helps could now be produced, appointing me Your Highness Pinnace the CHARLES,
with Your Royal Instructions for my better proceeding, which unto me was the
greatest Honor that ever Subject received, (and at my Return continuing Your
Royal and Gracious favor, commanding me unto Your Royal Presence to deliver
my Accounts;) has since imboldened me to examine with my self thus far,
that hereby (as duty obliges) I might bring some better satisfaction to your
Royal demand; which was, Whether there were a Passage or no, and were I
capable thereof at my being near the same? But since that meditation and
contemplation has given me more insight thereinto, than Speculation at that
instant could; For it was not possible for me to frame any Conclusion, until I
had circuted the Bay of Hudson and Button, whereby I might find from whence a
new Tide (which I found there) should come; and here SIR, I prostrate my
Account in particular, which then I presented in general.

I begin with King ARTHVR his Conquests, and so proceeds to all those
Discoveries (that I can find Antiquity has preserved) toward the North-west,
until this Your own time; to show, how those Maynes, Islands, and Continents,
they have discovered, does like dew from Heaven deseend upon Your Royal
Throne; so as most Dread Sovereign, the true Right thereto is Yours, which I
pray may be augmented unto the furthest bounds of the East and W. Ocean.

I do not only bring to show, but put your Majesty in mind of what you know:
knowing that your Majesty being called by more weighty affairs of State, may
pass by (unremembred) such small Trifles as this; yet observing Your Highness
willingness to promote Navigation and those discovering Enterprises, has made
me thus presume.

I have endeavored the probability of a Passage, praying unto Almighty GOD, to
set it as a fair Jewel in your Royal Crown, and bring to pass in those
happy days which we do enjoy under your Gracious and godly Government;
Rather than some Foreign Prince or State, should advance and find the same.
These shall be the prayers, with Your long life and prosperous Reign,

Of Your humblest Subject and Servant, LVKE FOX.

The Preface to the Reader.
GENTLE READER, expect not here any flourishing Phrases or Floquent terms,
for this Child of mine begot in the North-wests cold Clime, (where they breed
no Scholars,) is not able to digest the sweet milk of Rethorick, that is food
for them* the Parent not being able to maintain it any longer, it being now
past the Cradle, hopes, the Public will willingly bestow Education of the
Infant for his better breeding; for which the Father prays, and the rather
because the Midwife persuades him that the Child looks like himself, there
were some desired to have had him come abroad like the Lapwing, before the
shell was from over his head, but the Nurse more careful of the tenderly borne
Infant procrastinated the time, supposing that after birth it would strengthen
apace in this temporate Clime, and in time be the better able to Journey; but
in Conclusion its turned to Discovery, not of a Passage but of the way to find
one, to come to the ^le Iapon, China, and the Orient all India; of which,
hearing that diverse inquired after; (for who would not share in such Treasures
as there is to be had) as what has Fox done, others how far far has he
been, has he been as far as any ^an, If there be a Passage how chance he
has not found it, if not, why do they search after it; and in fine, has he
made a Voyage or no, the meaning of this last I know not, nor I think they
neither; but for that the most desire to know what I have done, and how far I
have bin; I answer as the Old women tells tales, Further and further than I can
tell; and for the rest I refer them to mine own Iournall: For I hope it may
satisfy those that are indifferent, and that stand well affected to those
Discovering enterprises, for whose cause and the good or content of others it
was chiefly compiled. I do confess, that they have not done me much amiss in
causing me to show my self; for hereby they shall know, that before this
undertaking I was not ignorant of what my predecessors had done before I came,
which was no small help both to my safety and proceeding. For some will
Calumniate out of malice, some for that they dislike all things but what
themselves or friends does; but I hope the judicial Seaman will stand in my
defense: For amongst those inquisitors, especially the never-satisfied-curious,
I find few that does or will know what they inquire after, other having other
employments rests content with the verbal Report of their own Times, rather
than look after the La(...) and Experiences of so unpleasant, and as it is
held unprofitable a Voyage. For these and others, I leave to peruse what shall
follow, wherein the desirous may be satisfied, how every Successor (as his
fancy, direction, or opinion guided) thought to rectify himself by others
mistaking, or to find the Passage in those places left unsearched or perfectly
discovered: For no question, but this Voyage might long since have attained his
full perfection; if the first beginners had been yearly continued, which
since Captain DAVIS was not, but supplied a^wayes (after some years of
breathing) by Green men, or those who (in that time) had forgot their
experience; nay, I may avo^ch, that if this course had been taken, and private
ends had been wanting, that since Mr. HVDSON his first Voyage 1610. the
Passage had been sailed through before 1618. and done at one quarter of the
Charge; and howsoever it was not my fortune to find, yet I praise GOD for that
I have brought home the news thereof, though I have left it for him whose time
God shall be pleased to ripen for the same; For it is a wonder that a Voyage of
such Consequence as this, wherein all the parts of Navigation may be practiced,
should so longlye raked in the embers and no further search made thereinto,
(conside-ring that within these few years, there has bin more excellent
Secrets in Navigation found out then has been in all the former Ages) it
being (no question) but more then the difficultest half Discovered; to
encourage which thou shall read h^ere ^^w great Princes have taken pleasure to
increase their Dominions (in Person) by Navigation, as also that our Ancestors
were not so simple as we make them; and that this Hunting of the Whale (which
as yet we make rare) was in practice in King ALFREDS time related by OCTHER,
who called him Lord, as King ARTHVRS Successor; which OCTHER sailed about the
North Cape of Finm^rke, as appears by his own Narration, and this was long
before RICHARD CHANCELLOR, whom we make Prima. I begin with those Princes, to
show the Honor and Renown of our Nation, and so proceed to all that went
before me North-Westwards, out of a coniecturall necessity which I conceive
them to be as Appendices to the Iournals of these modern times.

It will be objected, that many of these Abstracts are taken out of other
Books, and that those are the Voyages of other men; I answer it is true, the
most of them are. For what are all those of Mr. Hackl^its, and Mr. Purchase, but
the Collections and preservations of other men's labors; For who can speak or
write that which was never done before, and I do confess my self to be
infinitely bound unto them and others for their pains; for if they had not bin
thus carefully stored up, these had been wanting as are diverse others. For in
searching thou shall find, that the works of many brave men are buried in
oblivion, whose Names are devolved and but something brought unto us through
the succession of Ages, and though part of those works have escaped, the
wrack of the rest have perished in the Gulf of time, which has swallowed the
best of many men's endeavors, and for those extant* thou can not come unto
without labor and charge, all which I have brought to thy hands almost for
nothing, considering the charge of Books of great prise, the labor in search
and Quotations; besides, here is much that never came in Print as yet, being
very difficult to be had. And though I have abstracted those Works of my
Predecessors, yet I have interlaced my own experience, and been curious not
to leave out any thing of theirs or my own, wherein I could think my
remembrance might avayle thee. And although we all have sometimes stumbled,
yet we may be excused, considering the long and strange Journey we had to
go, and who follows does but persevere by our example, nor have I like the
Poet feigned a Storm where I had none: Nor do I hold that man fit to take
charge of Voyages remote, especially Northeast or Westward, and be Ignorant of
those Abstracts and Iournals following. For I know, knowledge will conceive
them to be good Preparatives. Howsoever in them I have done my best, and
whosoever will amend them, I shall take him for my friend, I have restored all
the names of Capes, Headlands, and Islands formerly given by Captain DAVIS, Mr
HVDSON, and Sir THOMAS BVTTON, (which since have been infringed upon) unto
their first appellations, both in my Book and Map. I do confess, that there
be many who might more ^itly have undertaken this labor then my self, if they
had been so well acquainted with the action; For we have many Practitioners,
whom we call Mathematical Seamen, who that after a little practice in Art,
purposes then to go to Sea and Travel; therefore carefully busying
themselves about perusing the Cosinographicall Maps, and with great industry
studied the books of Navigation, and to better their knowledge, have enquired
of many excellent Mariners for their better satisfaction, in the difficultest
parts thereof, thinking that they are now ^it to set sail and launch forth to
Sea, conceiting of themselves to be far more able then the Seaman; yet when
they have taken the charge of the Ship upon them, and is hoyst forth of the
quiet port into the ruff and boisterous Ocean, where they shall behold many
hideous mountains of high threatening billows, and raging waves, tempestuous
gusts, with hayle, rain and thunder, Shifts of winds, and counter Seas,
Currents, Races, Sets, and Over-fals, being deprived of Sun, Moon and Stars
for long season, they will then think that they only dreamed before, when
they imagined of the Course of the Seas, and that their Books were but weak
Schoolemasters, that the talk of Art were far short of the Practice, when at
beholding the Stars which they thought to have used as guides and directions*
seem now as they threatened their ruin and destruction; nay, when you shall
look forth and tremble at the rising of every wave, and shall be aghast with
fear to refrain those Rocks and dangers which lie hid within the Seas
fairest bosom, together with the greatness of the Ocean, and smalnesse of
their Ship; for want of experience to handle, not knowing how to shun, they
will then think that the least gale is of force to overthrow them, and know
that Art must be taught to practice by long and industrious use. For it is not
enough to be a Seaman, but to be a painful Seaman; for a Seabred man of
reasonable Capacity, may attain to so much Art as may serve to Circle the
Earths Globe about, but the other wanting the experimental part cannot* for I
do not allow any to be a good Sea man, that has not undergone the most
Offices about a Ship, and that his youth has bin both taught and inured to all
labors; for to keep a warm Cabin and lie in sheets, is the most ignoble
part of a Sea man, but to endure and suffer; as a hard Cabin, cold and salt
Meat, broken sleeps, mould bread, dead beer, wet Clothes, want of fire, all
these are within board; besides Boat, Lead, Topyardes, Anchor-morings and the
like. For as Oil Paper laid upon the object, makes it more transparant, so
does Experience show Art to see without spectacles; and concluding this point
in starling for I have no other Co^ne and but small store of that, to those who
says, that I am but a North-Countrey Coaster, and has but been brought up in
small Vessels. I wish their pride to know, that Gods mercy is over all his
Creatures, and has created as good men in the North as in the South, let no
man be disdained, misprised or undervalued for his wants (except in Virtues.)
For I do not think, but little Mr. IEFFERY that pretty Courtier, can pitch his
eyesight as high into the Firmament, as Mr. EVANS his Majesty's great Porter.
And for Seamen, where have you better than the Scotshmen are, and yet
North-Countrey men. It was also cast into my dish, that I was an Officer of the
Admiralty; a poor conceit to object against me for this undertaking, and as
much as to say; as the greatest Civilian held to be in Christendom, cannot be
capable of higher Promotion, if he belong to the Admiraltie.

I have also placed a Polar Map or Card, that this Discovery may be the better
understood, and for that I did desire to give satisfaction by Demonstration of
all treated of in the Book, for otherwise, another proiection could not have
contained it but at unreasonable diversity; and because I cannot describe all
the Names in Fretum Hudson, of Capes, Islands, and Bays at length in Letters,
in respect of the smalnesse of the Degrees of Longitude, I have inserted them
in a table by the letters of the Alphabet, as thou shall find, beginning with
A, b, c, d, and tracted my own way and discovery forth and home, in small
pricks.

I acknowledge it to be but rough-hewen like Ship wrights ^imber, but what it
wants in smoothness or form, let thy good Report lick it into. I trust I
shall not need to use the fashion of Authors, to make any doubt of carping
Momus or railing Zoilus, seeing I have intended thy Good without any
Reservation to my self. But I fear me I have held thee too long in this
place, like him who purposes to take a long Journey stumbles upon his own
threshold, but have Patience, for I had rather be in fault then want, I have
here prostrated my duty to my King, and my service to my Country, craving thy
favorable acceptance, I rest.

From Kingston upon Hull, this first of January, 1635. Thine, in all
welwilling, Luke Fox.

polar map

CERTAIN TESTIMOnies concerning King Arthur and his Conquests of the North
regions, taken by Mr. Hacklute out of the Histories of the Kings of Britain;
written by Galfridus Monamutensis, newly Printed at Hedleberg, 1587.
Lib. 9. Cap. 10.
IN the year of CHRIST, 517. King Arthur in the second year of his reign,
having subdued all parts of Ireland, sailed with his Fleet into Iseland, and
brought it and the people thereof into subjection; the rumor being spread
throughout all the other Lands, that no Country was able to withstand him;
Doldanius, King of Gotland, and Gunfacius the King of Orkney, came voluntary
unto him, and yielded their obedience, promising to pay him Tribute. The winter
being spent, he returned into Britain; established his Kingdom in perfect
peace; he continued there for the space of twelve years.

Lib. 9. Cap. 12.
After that, King Arthur sending his Messengers into diverse Kingdoms, he
summoned such as were to come to his Court, as well out of France, as out of the
adjacent Islands of the Sea, and a little after: from these adjacent Islands came
Guillaumarius King of Ireland, Malvatius King of Iseland, Doldunus King of
Gotland, Gunnotius King of Orkney, Lot the King of Norway, and Archilius King
of Denmark.

A testimony of the Right and Appendances of the Crown of the Kingdom of
Britain, taken out of Mr. Lambert, Fol. 137. page 2.
ARTHVR which was sometimes the most renowned King of the Britains, was a
mighty valiant and famous Warrior. This Kingdom was too little for him and
his mind was not contented with it; he therefore valiantly subdue^ all
Scantia now called Norway, and all the Isles beyond Norway; to wit, Iseland, and
Groenland, which are appertaining unto Norway. Sweveland, Ireland, Gotland,
Denmark, Semeland, Windeland, Curland, Roe, Femeland, Wireland, Flaunders,
Cherilland, Lapland, and all other Lands of the East sea even unto Russia, in
which Lapland he placed the Eastmost Bounds It seems K. A^thur passed y^
North Cape of Finmarke.
of his British Empire, and many other Islands beyond Norway even under the
Pole, which are appendances of Scantia now called Norway; he planted the
Christian Faith throughout all Norway, matched their Nobility with British
blood, called Norway the Chamber of Britain, and incorporated them unto us.

Another testimony out of Galfridus Monumetensis concerning the Conquest of
Malga King of England, Lib. 11. cap. 7.
MALGO succeeded Vorciporius which was the goodliest man in person of all
Britain, a Prince that expulsed many Tyrants, he was strong and valiant in
war, taller then most men that then lived, and exceeding famous for his
virtues. This King also obtained the Government of the whole Island of
Britain, and by most sharp battles he recovered to his Empire the six
Islands of the Ocean Sea, which were before Tributaries to King Arthur; namely,
Ireland, Iseland, Gotland, Orkney, Norway, and Denmark.

The Voyage of Octher to the Northeast parts beyond Norway, reported by
himself unto Alfred the famous King of England, about the year. 890.
OCTHER said, that the Country wherein he dweit was called Helgoland, he told
his Lord King Elfreed, that he dwelt furthest North of any Norman, he said,
that he dwelt toward the North part of the Land toward the West coast. And in
another place he affirms, that there was no man dwelling toward the North
from him, and a^lirmed the land to stretch far to the North, yet all Desert,
and not inhabited. Upon a time, he fell into a fancy to know how far the Land
stretched Northward, whereupon he took his voyage directly North, along the
Coast having always the Desert land upon his Sta^board, and upon the Larboard
the maine Ocean, and continued his course for the space of 3. days; in which
space, he was come as far toward the North, as the Whale-hunters used to
travel; he proceeded to the North, Whale-fi^^ing has been of long
con^^^ance.
as far as he was able to sail in other 3. days, at the end whereof, he
perceived the Coast turned toward the East, or else the Sea opened with a maine
Gulf into the land, he knew not how far: well he wist and remembered, that
he was feign to stay till he had a Western wind and somewhat Northerly, and
thence he sailed plain East along the Coast still, so far as he was able
in 4. days, at the end of which time, he was compelled to stay, until he had
a full Northerly wind, for as much as the Coast bowed down thence directly
toward the Southward, at leastwise, the Sea opened into the Land, that he
could not tell how far; so that he sailed along the coast directly South,
so far as he could travel in five days, and at the 5. days end, he
descryed a mighty River which opened very far in the land, at the entry of
which River he stayed his course, and in conclusion turned back again; For
he durst not enter so: fear of the Inhabitants of the Land, perceiving that on
the other side of the River it was thoroughly inhabited; which was the first
peopled Land he had found from the place of his dwelling; whereas continually,
he had a desert Wilderness upon his Starbord-side, except some in places, he
saw a few Fishers, Fowlers, and Hunters, which were all Finnes, and on the
Larbord the maine ocean. Thus much for Octher, whom it appears was the second
that doubled the North Cape that we have extant, King Arthur being the first.

Although I know, here is something that will not be believed, yet I will
proceed, seeing that the more and further I do go on, I find some reason to
have better confidence of the former, and thus much, etc.
Therefore as follows, out of the Comments of Arngrinus, Fitz Ionus. 1598.
A Certain Writer says, he has put down the distance between the mouth of
Elbe and Baczend in the South part of Iseland, to be 400. leagues; from whence
if you will account the difference of Longitude, to the Meridian of Hambrough,
Iseland must have none of the Longitudes accounted of, as 5. 7. 6. 20. 30. 28.
325. according to several Authors, for I am able to prove by 3. several
Voyages of Hamburgers, that it is but 7. days sail from Iseland to Hambrough,
besides all the Islands which for the abundance of Sheep are called Farrier; as
likewise the Desert shoares of Norway, are distant from us but two days
sailing, we have 4. days sailing into habitable Groenland, and almost in the
same quantity of time, we past over to the Province of Norway called St^d,
lying between the Towns of Oridrosia or Trondon, and Bargon, as we find by
ancient Records of those Nations.

Iseland has bin called by three names one after another; for one Nuddocus a
Norvegian borne, who is thought to be the first Discoverer thereof, as he was
sailing toward Farra Islands, through a violent Tempest did by chance arrive at
the East shore of Iseland, where beholding the Mountains tops covered with
Snow, called this Island Snowland.

After this one Gardarus, being moved with Nuddocus reports, went to seek, and
when he had found, he called it Garders I Will.

After these two, one Flok went into this Land, and named it after the Ice he
found there, Iceland.

This land has some years no Ice at all, as in 1592. but the Sea is open for
most years from April to January, and in May all is driven to the West, and
this Land he inhabited about the year of our Lord, 874.

In the year 1591. there was a Ship of Germany lay laden with Copper 14. days
in the harbor of Vopnaford; in November she set sail and departed; this was
some ship of the Balticke Sea, or Hambrough, which durst not go through the
Narrow seas for Spain.

The Commentor Arngrinus says, in the year of Christ 874. Iseland being
indeed discovered before that time, as is above mentioned was the first of all
inhabited by certain Norvegians, their Chieftaine, was one Ingulphus, from
whose name the East Cape of Iseland is called Ingul^e Hoffdie, these Planters
are reckoned up by name in our Records: says he, more then to the number of
400. together; with those of their blood and kindred, and great families
besides: neither only is their number described, but it is so plainly set
down what Coasts, what Shoares, and what Inland places each of them did
occupy, and inhabit, and what names the inhabitants did give unto Straights,
Bays, Harbors, Necklands, Creekes, Capes, Rocks, Crags, Mountains, Hills,
Valleys, Hammockes, Springs, Floods, Rivers; and to be short, what names they
gave unto their Granges, and houses: whereof many as this day are received and
used. Therefore the Norvages with their company, peopled all the habitable
places of Iseland.

The voyages of the Brethren Mr. Nicolo and Anthony Zeni Venotians, collected
out of their own Letters by Mr. Francisco Maritino.
NIcolas caused a ship to be made ready at his own charge in Italy 1380. with
intent to see England and Flanders, but was by tempest cast upon the I Will of
Freesland, where he had been cruelly entreated, had it not been for Zichmni,
Lord of certain Islands, called Porland, lying on the South of Freesland, being
rich and populous, he was also Duke of Sorany lying over against Scotland.

This Prince being arrived upon Freesland to make war upon the same,
understanding the shipwreck came presently, and hearing by the Latin tongue
that he was of Italy, he received him into protection with great joy.

This Prince having the last year, given the overthrow to the King of Norway
in some of his Signiories, was come to Friesland also to take the same from the
said King whereof he was Lord, and to that purpose, understanding that Mr.
Nicolo had great judgment, in Sea and Martial affairs, he gave him
commission, to go aboard his ships, commanding the Captain to honor him in
all things, and to use his counsel: his Navy consisted of 30. sail, whereof
two rowed with Oars.

With these small Barks, and one ship, they ^ailed to the Westward and won
Ledovo and Ilofe, and diverse other small Islands, and turned into a Bay called
Sudero; in the Haven of the Town called Samstoll, they took certain small
Barks laden with fish.

Here they found Zichmni who came thither by land conquering all the Country,
they sailed to the W. by another Cape or Gulf, and conquered all the Islands
they found to the Signorie of Zichmn^. These Seas for as much as they sailed,
were in manner nothing but shoales and Rocks, so as it was thought amongst
them, that the fleet had perished, if it had not been for the skill and
knowledge of Mr. Nicolo and his men, who had been brought up in the practice
of Navigations all their lives.

At the counsel of Mr. Anthony they go on Land, when they heard of the good
success of Zichmni in his wars, and that all the Island by Ambassadors was
yielded unto him.

At their meeting, the Prince gave Mr. Nicolo the honor of Knighthood, and
graced him as the preserver of his fleet, and rewarded his men. In Triumphant
manner they go toward Friesland, the chief City thereof is situate on the
S. E. side within a Gulf or Bay, as there are many in that Island; in this
Gulf or Bay is such abundance of fish taken, that many ships are laden to
serve Flanders, Britain, England, Scotland, Norway, and Denmark.

Thus much is taken out of a Letter that Mr. Nicolo sent to his Brother
Anthony, requesting that he would seek some means to come to him.
MAster Anthony furnished a ship, and after great danger with great joy arrived
with his Brother, where he remained 14. years, 4. years with his Brother and
10. years alone, where they so behaved themselves, that Nicolo was made
Captain of Z^chmnies Navy; they set forth for the enterprise of Estland,
being between Friesland and Norway, but by storm of wind they were driven
upon certain shoales, where a great part of their Fleet was cast away. The
King of Denmark coming to rescue Estland, his Fleet utterly perished, which
Zichmni having notice of by a ship of the Enemies, he determines to set upon
Iseland.

Which together with the rest, was subject to the King of Norway, but he
finding the Country well fortified, his small Fleet were glad to retire; In
the same channels he assaulted the other Isles, called Iseland; which are 7.
Talas, Broas, Heance, Trans, Mimant, Dambere, and Breast; and having spoiled
them all, he built a Fort in Breast, where he left Mr. Nicolo with men, small
Barks, and Munition, and with the few ships he had left, he returned to
Friesland.

Mr. Nicolo in (...) with 3. small Barks sails Northward, and arrives in
Engroneland, where he found a Monastery of Friars, near a hill that casts
forth fire, like Vesurius and Etna.

They subsist specially, by a Fountain of water issuing from that Hill,
whereby the Monastery and all other buildings are refreshed and warmed at their
pleasure, as also their Gardens thowed and watered, their stones for building
are cast out of this combustable forge, which being once cooled will not
dissolve, but taken hot and cast into Water, makes a marvailous strong lime,
the people have these devoted men in great veneration.

They feed upon wild Foul and Fish, for the Bay or Haven, by reason of the
heat of this Water does never freeze, by means whereof, there is such
concourse of Sea-fowle and abundance of fish, whereby all the people are fed
and maintained, and 1000. employed about taking the same. Hither in Summer
time, which lasts but three Months, come many Barks from the Islands
thereabout, and from the Cape about Norway, and from Trondon, and exchange all
needful commodities for fish, which they dry with the Sun or cold: to this
Monastery resort many Friars of Norway, S^etia, but the The Frost l^steth 9.
Months*
most part are of Iseland. There are continually in that part many Barks,
which are kept there by reason of the Sea being froze, waiting for the Spring
to dissolve the Ice. Their Boats are made like unto Weavers shuttles, taking
the skins of fishes, and sowing them together in many doubles, they fashion
them with the bones of the same fish, and make them so sure and substantial,
that it is marvailous to see, how in tempests they will shut themselves close
with in, and let the sea and wind carry them they care not whither, without
either breaking or drowning, and if they chance to be driven upon the Rocks,
they remain sound without any bruise at all, and they have as it were a sleeue
in the bottom which is tied fast in the middle, and when there comes any
water into the Boat, they put it into the one half of the sleeue, then
fastening the end with two pieces of wood, and loosening the band beneath, they
convay the water forth of the Boat, and this they do as often as they have
occasion.

Moreover, this Water is of a Sulphurous brimstone nature, and is conveyed into
vessels of Brass, Tin, and Stone, and so employed to all uses, to warm
their houses, or boil their meat without any stink, or noisome smell. The
Friars of this Monastery speak all the Latin tongue, and this is all that
then was known of Engroneland.

Mr. Nicolo: dyed in Friesland, and being dead Anthony succeeded him both in
Goods and Dignity, and albeit he attempted and made great supplication, yet
could he not obtain license to return to his Country. For Zichmni intended
to make himself Lord of the Sea, used his counsel, and determined to send him
with diverse Barks to the West-wards; for that certain Fishermen of his, had
discovered certain Islands very rich and populous, which discovery Mr. Anthony
in a Letter to his Brother Carolo recounteth thus:

SIx and twenty years since, there departed 4. fisher Boats, Estotoland
the which a mighty tempest, tossed too and fro diverse days, when at length
they discovered, an Island called Estotoland, lying Westward above 1000. miles
from Freesland, upon which, one of the Boats was cast away, and the 6. men
therein were taken and carried to a fair and populous City, where the King
sent for many Interpreters, but none could understand their language, but one
who spoake Latin, who was also cast there by chance, who understanding their
case, rehearsed it to the King, who caused the^ to stay in his Country 3.
years, in which time they learned the Language: one of them was in diverse
parts of the Island, and reports it to be Rich and abounds with all
Commodities of the world, it is little less then Iseland, but far more
fruitful, in the middle is a Mountain, from whence there Springs 4. Rivers
that pass through the whole Country.

The Inhabitants are very witty people, and have all Arts and faculties as we
have, and it is credible that in times past, they have had traffic with our
men; for be said, he saw Latin books in the Kings Library, which at that
present they did not understand, they have a peculiar language and letters or
characters to themselves, they have Mines of all manner of metals, but they
abound with Gold; they have trade in Engroneland, from whence they bring
Furs, Brimstone, and Pitch, he says, that to the Southward, there is a great
populous country very rich in gold, they sow Corn, and make Beer and Ale, and
use it as we do wine, they have mighty great woods, there are many Cities and
Castles. They build small Barks, and have sailing, but they have not the
Loadstone, nor know not the use of the Compass; wherefore the Fishers were had
in great estimation, insomuch that the King sent them Southward to a country
they call Dorgio, but in that voyage they had such weather, that they thought
to have perished in the sea, but escaping that, they fell into another more
cruel, for they were taken in the Country and the most part of them Man eaters.
eaten of the Salvage people, which fed upon Man's flesh as the sweetest meat.

But this Fisherman escaped, by teaching them to take fish with nets, in the
Sea and in fresh rivers, whereby he was honored and beloved of all.

The Lords of the Country fell out about him, and in 13. years he was there,
he was sent to at least 25. of them from one to another, to teach his Art of
Fishing, so that he was in all parts of the Country; which he says, is very
great, the people very rude, and void of goodness, they all go naked,
neither have they wit to cover their bodies with the skins of beasts they take
by hunting, whereby they are miserably vexed with cold, they have Lances,
sharp at the point, they have Bows, and strings made of beast skins, they are
a cruel people, and have certain laws amongst themselves; to Southwards the
people have more civility, the air being more temperate, and have Cities and
Temples with Idols, there they sacrifice men to Idols, and afterward eat
them, they have some knowledge of gold and silver.

Now this Fisherman had an intent to get home, but his companions being in
despair thereof, never offered to attempt their freedom, and therefore stayed
there; whereupon he travailed through the woods toward Dorgio, the next Lord
knew him, and he was conveyed from one to another, until at length he came to
Dorgio, where he stayed three years, and hearing of diverse Boats that were
arrived there, he went to the sea side, and asking of whence they were, they
said of Estotiland, he being glad, requested to be entertained by them, and
carried to their country, which they gladly granted and used him for their
Interpretor.

After that, he frequented that trading with them and became very rich,
wherewith he furnished a bark, returned into Friezeland, and to his Lord made
this report of that wealthy Country.

He is credited here, for that the Mariners do affirm his reports to be true,
wherefore this Lord is resolved to send me forth with a fleet toward these
parts, but it was not so; for Z^chmni went himself, and concerning their
proceedings I have a Letter in form following;

Our preparation for Estotiland was begun in an unluckie hour, for three days
before our departure the Fisherman dyed that should have been our guide,
notwithstanding this Lord would not give over the enterprise, taking the
Mariners that returned with him; making our navigation to the Westward, we
discovered Islands subject to Friesland, and having passed certain shelves, we
stayed at Ledovo 7. days.

The first of July, we arrived at Ilofe, we stayed not there but had a ve^ing
storm at Sea for 8. days, not knowing where we were, a great part of their
barks were cast away, the weather being fair they gathered up the pieces of
broken barks sailing on with prosperous wind, they discovered land at W.

They took harbor, and an infinite company of armed men came to defend their
Island, Zichmni makes signs of peace, sends 10. men, of ten several languages
but they could understand none, but one that was of Iseland, who informed them,
that the Islands name was Ic^ria, named after the name of the first King of that
place, whom they say was son to Dedalus, King of Scotland, who conquered that
Island, and left his son there for King, and they called this Sea the Icarion
Sea, in remembrance of that King, in further search was drowned there. They
would not suffer us to land, but only they would receive one man to learn the
Jtalian tongue, as they had received the other ten.

He espying a harbor on the East side, put therein for wood and water, but the
inhabitants assaults, slew, and maimed many of them, enforcing them away; and
sailing about the Cape of the Island toward the North, we found many shoalds,
amongst the which, we were ten days continually in danger of losing our whole
fleet.

Zichmni seeing he could not prevail against the force of the Islands, sailed
6. days toward the West, but the wind changing into S. W. he sailed 4. days
with wind a poope with a grown sea, he discovers land, not knowing what land,
and rowing to it with Oars; they find a good harbor, and see far off a
Mountain, that cast forth smoke. Zichmni sent forth an hundred Soldiers, to
search what people inhabited it, the whiles he takes in wood and water, catches
great store of fish and Sea foul, with such abundance of Eggs, that his men
half famished were filled therewith, this was in June, ye air so temperate
and pleasant as impossible to express. They find no people, they name the
haven Trine, the Soldiers returning back, had bin through the Island, finds
the fire natural, that the hills bottom produced, and that there was a Spring
which issued water like pitch, and run into the Sea, and that there dwelt a
multitude of people of small stature, hiding themselves in caves in the ground.
Zichmni taking liking to the soil, stays there with such as were willing, the
rest he sent away in the ships, wherein unwilling, I was Captain.

Anthony sails 20. days East without sight of any Land, altering his course
S. E. in 5. days he discovered Neome, he knowing the Country, had sailed past
an Island as he found, he victuailed here, the Island being subject to Zichmni:
And in 3. days he sails to Friesland.

What followed after this Letter he knew not, but by conjecture, that Zich:
built a City, and discovered on both sides of Engroneland, and that he see it
particularly described in the Sea card, but the narration is lost. The
beginning of his letter is thus.

COncerning these things that you desire to know of me, as of their Manners,
and Customs, of the Beasts and Countries adjoining. I have made thereof a
particular Book, which by Gods help, I will bring with me, wherein I have
described, the Country, the monstrous Fishes, the Laws and Customs of
Friesland, Iseland, Eastland, the Kingdom of Norway, Estotiland, Dorgio, an
the end of the life, of Mr. Nicolo, with his discovery, and the state of
Engroneland: I have also written the Life and Acts of Zichmni, a Prince as
worthy of Immortal memory, as any that ever lived, for his great vigilance,
and singular humanity: Wherein I have described the discovery of Engroneland,
on both sides, and the City he builded; and further, I hope to be with you
very shortly to satisfy you by word of mouth.

All these Letters were written by Mr. Anthony, to Mr. Carlo his brother.

FOr the more credit and confirmation of the former History of Mr. Nichcolo and
Mr. Anthony, which for some few respects, may be called in question. I have
hereunto annexed, the judgment of that Famous Cosmographer Abraham Ortelius,
or rather the yiedling or submitting of his judgment thereunto, who in his
Theatrum Ortis, Fol. 6. next after the Map of Mar del Zur, borrows proof,
and authority out of this Relation, to show that the N. E. part of America,
called Estotiland, is in the Original always affirmed to be an Island: was
about the year, 1390. discovered by the foresaid Venetians, and above 100.
years before Columbus set sail for these Western Regions, and that the
Northern Seas were even then sailed by our Europian Pilates.

This writer acknowledging, that Original copies of the Zenijs Letters, were
by him careleslly torn in peeec^ in his youth, which loss he now grieved at,
I doubt in this, he was enforced in many things, to patch up, as his memory
would serve, so as there may be some likelihood of untruths, howsoever I do
believe, the first Copies were true, though this is subject to mistakings.

To continue antiquity may be to some purpose, seeing there may be some use
thereof by the painful Seamen, otherwise it may something satisfy, the never
satisfied Curious, who enquire after the beginning of things, and herein Mr.
Hakeluits pains does deserve great commendations: who records in his English
Voyages.

That Madoc, soon of Oween Guyneth, Prince of North Wales left the Land in
contention, between his Brethren, and prepared certain ships with Men and
Munition, and sought adventures by Sea, sailing West, leaving the coast of
Ireland so far North, that he came to a Land unknown, where he saw many
strange things.

This must needs be some part of this Country, of which the Spaniards affirm
themselves to be the first founders since Dannos time, whereupon it is
manifest, that this Country was by Brittanies discovered long before Columbus.

Of Mado^s return there be many fables, but he did return, and declared of
the fruitful Countries, he had seen with out Inhabitants, and on the
contrary, what barren and wild ground, his Brethren and Nephews, did kill and
murder one another for: He prepared a Navy of ships, got with him such Men and
Women, as were desirous to live in quiet, and taking leave of his friends,
took his journey thither again. Therefore it is to be supposed, that he and
his people inhabited part of this Country; for it appears by Francis Lopez de
Gomara, that in Acuzamill and other places, the people honored the Cross,
whereby it may be gathered, that Christians had been there before the coming
of the Spaniards.

This Madoc arriving again in that West Country, unto the which he came 1170.
left most of his people there, and returned back for more of his own Nation,
acquaintance, and friends, to inhabit that fair and large Country, went
thither again, with 10. sail, as I find noted by Guyten Owen. I am of
opinion, that the Land whereunto he came was some part of the West Indies.

As concerning Sebastian Cabot, I cannot find, that he was any further
Northward then the 58. Degree, and so returned along the Land of America to the
S. but for more certainty, hear his own Relation to Gal^acius Bu^rigarius,
the Popes Legate in Spain. Understanding, says he, by reason of the Sphere,
that if I should sail by the way of North-west, I should by a shorter tract
come to India; I caused the King to be advertised of my device, who immediately
caused two Caravels to be furnished, with all things needful, which was as
near as I can remember, in the year 1496. In the beginning of Summer, I begun
to sail North-west, not thinking to find any other Land then that of Cataia,
and from thence to come into India.

But after certain days, I found the Land run to the North which was to me a
great displeasure, nevertheless sailing along the Coast, to see if I could
find any Gulf that turned, I found the Land still to continue continent, to
the 56. Degree under the Pole* and seeing that there the Coast turned toward
the East, dispairing to find the passage, I turned back again, and sailed
down by the Coast of that Land toward the Equinoctial. Thus much from
himself.

But hear, how Baptistie Ramusius his Country man, how he flattereth him thus.
It Is many years, since it was written unto me by Sebastian Cabota our
Countryman a Venetian, a Man of great experience and very rare in the Art of
Navigation, and the knowledge of Cosmographie, who sailed along and beyond this
Coast of new France, at the charges of Henry the 7. King of England, and he
advertised me, that having sailed along time West by North, beyond those Islands
into the Latit. of 67. Degrees. and. under the North Pole; and on the 11. day of
June, finding still the open Sea, without any impediment, he thought verily by
that way, to have passed on still to Cataia, which is in the East, and would
have done it, if the Mutiny of the shipmasters and Mariners, had not
hindered, and made him return home, from that place.

Out of Robert Fabians Chronicle.
THere is also mention made of John Cabota, Sebastians Father, by his means,
in the 13. year of Henry the Seventh, at the same Kings charge, one ship was
victuailed from Bristow, wherein diverse Merchants of London adventured sma
stocks, to search for an Island, he said was very Rich and replenished with
great Commodities: In his company went from Bristow 3. or 4. small Barks,
laden with coarse Cloth, Caps, Laces, Points, and other trifles; they departed
the beginning of May, but were not heard of in that Majors time.

Out of the same Chronicle.
William Purchase being Mayor, three Saluages were taken in New found Land,
and brought to the King, 3. Salvages brought home*
they were clothed in Beasts skins, and eat raw flesh, and spoke such
speech, that no man could understand them, and in their demeanor much like to
brute Beasts; of which two years after, I saw two apparrelled after the
manner of Englishmen in Westminster Parish, I could not discern them from
English, until I had learned what they were.

An Extract taken out of the Map of Sebastian Cabota, cut by Clement Adams.
IN the year of Grace 1497. John Cabot a Venetian and Sebastian his Son,
with an English Fleet, set from Bristow, discovered that Island which before
that time, no man had attempted, on the 24. day of June, this Land he called
Prima Vesta, that is to say, first seen; that Island lying out before the Land,
he called the I Will of St. John: Because he discovered it upon that day of St.
John Baptist. The inhabitants of this I Will, use to wear Beasts skins, in
their Wars they use Bows, Arrows, Pikes, Darts, Wooden-clubs, and slings:
The soil is Barren in some places, and yields little fruit; but is full of
white Bears, and Stagges, far greater then ours, it yeildeth plenty of Fish,
and these very great, as Seals and Sammons, there are Soales of a yard in
length, but especially, there is great plenty of that kind of Fish, which the
Salvages call Baccalaos, there are also bred Hawks and Eagles.

Another Testimony of the Voyage of Sebastian Caboc, taken out of the third
Decade of Peter Martyr of Angleria.
THe North seas have bin searched by one S^bastia^ Cabot a Venetian borne, he
furnished 2. Ships at his own charge, (and first) with 300. men directed his
course, toward the N. Pole, that even in the Month of July, he found
monstrous heaps of Ice swimming on the Sea, and in a manner continual day
light: Thus seeing these heaps of Ice before him, he was enforced to turn his
sails, and follow the W. coasting the shore, he was thereby, brought so far
into the South, by reason of the land stretching Southward, that it was there
almost equal in latitude with Fretum Herculeum.

As he traveled by the coasts of this great Land which he named Bacculaos, he
says, he found the like course of waters toward the West, but the same
running more soft and gently, then the swift waters, which the Spaniards found
in their Navigation Southward; wherefore it is not only mo^e like to be true,
but ought also of necessity to be concluded, that between both the Lands
hitherto unknown, there should be certain great open places, whereby the
waters continually pass, from the East, to the West: Which waters I suppose to
be driven about the Globe of the Earth, by the incessant Motion and impulsion
of the Heavens, and not to be swallowed and cast up again, by the breathing of
Demogorgon, as some have imagined; because they see the Sea by increase, and
decrease to ebb and flow. Sebastian Cabota himself calls those Lands
Bacculaos, because that in those Seas thereabout, he found so great multitude
of certain big Fish* much like unto Tanis, which the Inhabitants call
Bacculaos, and that they sometime stayed his ship. He found the people also of
these Regions covered with Beasts skins, he says also, he saw great plenty of
Copper, and this is all of Note out of this Author.

Francis Lopez de Gomara, out of his General History of the West Indies.
HE which brought most certain news of the Country of Bacculaos, says
Gomara, was Sebastian Cabot a Venetian, which rigged 2. ships, at the Cost of
Henry the 7. King of England, having great desire to Traffic for the Spices,
as the Portugales did; he carried with him 300. men, and took the way toward
Iseland, from beyond the Cape of Labrador, until he found himself in 58. Degrees.
and better, he made relation that in the Month of July, it was so cold and the
Ice so great, that he durst not pass any further; the days were very long in
manner without night, he returned and refreshed at Bacculaos, and after sailed
along the Coast Southward unto 38. Degrees, and from thence he shaped his
Course to return into England.

An abstract of the Courses, Distances, Latitudes, Longitudes, Variations,
Depths, and other Observations; as also, the several proceedings, Discoveries,
Accidents, and remarkable things of the Captains, Masters, Pilots and others,
formerly employed for the search of the Northwest Passage to the East India.
The History of Sir Martin Frobrishe^s voyage, 1567.
WAs 15. years in noting and bringing up the Adventure before he did attempt
the same, which was brought to pass by the help of the right honorable
Ambrose Dudley Earl of Warwick, the Expedition was prosecuted in two small
Barques of 25. tonnes the piece, viz. The Gabriel, and the Michael, and one
Pinnace of 10. Tonnes.

He departed from Blackwall, June 15. went by the North, June 15.
the 15. of July he had sight of a ragged land, he took to be Freezeland*
durst not approach the same for Ice and Fogge, and thereabouts he lost the
sight of his small Pinnace by storm; which he thought the Sea had devoured,
wherein were only four Men.

The Michael misliking the matter, slipped back for England, with report, that
the Captain was lost at Sea.

The worthy Captain notwithstanding he had sprung his Mainmast in the storm,
proceeded on W. Northwards, and the 20. he had sight of a high land he named
Queen Elizabeth's July 20.
Forlarnd, and sailing more Northerly along the Coast, descried another Forland
with a Gut, Bay or passage Westward: He met great store of Ice along the Coast,
was crossed with winds that he could not thwart those streights in few days; he
discernes the Ice to be well consumed, either ingulfed therein by Indrafts, or
else set so Southwards by Currents; He enters the 21. sails Westwards 50.
leagues with land on both sides; imagines the one the maine Continent of Asia,
the other on larboard the firm land of America, he named the Straight
Frobrishers straight. After he had sailed 60. leagues up he went on land, found
signs where fire had been made; and Dear so mankind, as he was feign to
defend himself against them: The people resort to him in their Canoes of
Leather, had like to have stolen his Boat from him before he was aware; they
came on Shipboard, brought him Salmon, Flesh and Fish, they appeared to be
nimble of their joints Savage thieves Salmon, Flesh, Fish.
and strong; they fall to trade for Fish, Seal, coats of Seal skins, and
Bears skins, for bells, looking-glasses, and other toys; they intercept his
boat with 5. men, nere till this day His boat and 5 men lost.
heard of. The Captain by the ringing of a bell intices one of the Salvages to
him, as though he would give it him, he lets the bell fall into the Sea, as the
Salvage should have took it, He betraies one Salvage.
he takes him by the hand and pulls him with his boat into the Ship: Whereupon
in despite, the Salvage bit his tongue The spite of a Salvage.
in twain, yet he lived till he came into England, and then dyed of cold he
had taken at Sea; with this prize he returns for England, arriveth in Harwich
the 2. of October.

He commands his Company at their landing in the foresaid Country, to bring
away something with them of the Possession.
first they could lay their hand upon, in token of possession in the right of
Queen Elizabeth.

Whereupon, some brought Stone, some flowers, some grass, one brought a piece
of stone much like to Sea coal in color, but by weight seemed to be Metal
or Mynerall; but as yet not esteemed of, but from the place from whence it came.

Of this bright Stone he gives a piece (as of something brought from that far
Country) to one of his Adventurers wives, who throwing the same into the fire
to burn; and after it was quenched with vinegar, it glistered with a bright
Marquesset of Gold; whereupon the matter being called into some question, it
was tried by certain Goldsmithes in Gold Oar.
London, who upon essay made, gave out that it held Gold, and that very richly
for the quantity; and the said Goldsmithes promised great matters, if any
quantity thereof could be had, which hopes produced a second Voyage.

This Voyage they gave names to Sounds, Islands, Bays, Capes, Streights, etc,
as Elizabeth Forland, Cape Labradore, Gabriels Island, Priors Sound, Thomas
Williams Island, Bourchers Island: Frobrishers Streights. And describes the
Country* people to be like the Tartars: With long black hair, broad Faces,
flat Noses, tawnie colored, wearing Garments of Seals skins. He arrived in
Harwich the 2. of October.

Navigation of Christopher Hall Master, with Frobrisher the first Voyage.
SEcretary Woollye, was sent from her Majesty, to give charge to the Company
of the ship to obey their Captain, and be diligent in all things; he observes
at Gravesend and found the. Latitude. 51. degrees. 23. min. Variation 11. degrees. ^ /
^.

Inn 24. he had sight of Faires I Will: The 25. he had sight of the Swinborne in
Shotland, the S. most Cape bears N. N. W. Fairly at the same time W. S. W.
sailing from these bearings with Swinborne, he had depth 60. 50. 40. Fathams.
Lat. 59. 46.


Fairly bearing W. N. W. 6. leagues offryn, he had depth 59. and 46. fatham,
and went into Tromius Sound in Shotland to stop a leake.

14. Leagues West, South-wards from Fair, I Will he had variation W. 11. degrees. 9.
min.

July, 11. He had sight of Friesland sharp pinacled High-Land, July. Lat. 61.
Land, and covered with snow; bearing W. N. W. the Captain attempted to get on
Land, but could not for great store of Ice: And had no ground at 120. Fatham,
sailing from thence 20. leag. S. W. observing the Sun in the Meridian 52.
degrees. Judges the variation W. 2. points and a half.

The 28. was foggie, but at the breaking up thereof, he had sight of Land,
supposed Labrado; found great store of Ice about the Land, but he had no ground
at 100. Fath. a Cables length Great Current.
off shore. And a great Current sets S. W. and N. E.

1. League ^ / ^. in the hour, The tide sets to the shore, and thenone great
piece of Ice breaking made a noise, as if the Cliffe had fallen into the Sea.

10. The flood sets S. W. along the Land: And it flows so. August. A mistake.


11. Latitude here 63. ^ / ^. This day they enter the Streights, and set sail
for Gabriels Island, then distant 10. Leagues.

13. They enter within a Sound in a Sandy Bay, the Land bears E. S. E. depth
8. Fatham, a S. E. Moon full Sea; they name this Sound Priors sound, distant
from Grabriels 10. leag.

16. Calm and fair, in 2. hours the Ice was froze about August.
the Ship a quarter of an inch thick.

The 19. the Captain and he went on shore upon an Island with 8. men, and from
the top thereof, they had sight of 7. Boats which came rowing from the East
side to the Island, then they returned on shipboard and sent their Boat with 5.
men to see which way they took, and so with a white Cloth or waffe brought one
of their Boats with their men in her along the shore, rowing after the Boat
until they see the ship, and then they rowed on shore, and he followed and
gave every one of them a thread Point and brought one of them Salvages come on
shipboard.
aboard, where he did Eat, and Drink, and then carried him ashore again;
whereupon the rest being 19. Persons came on board, but he could not understand
their Language, they be like Tartars, with long black hair, broad faced, flat
nosed, and tawny Colored, wearing Seal skins, and so do the women, nothing
differing, but the women in the Face has blue strokes down the Cheeks, and
about the eyes; their Women marked.
Boats are made of Seal skins, with a wooden keele within them, much like
unto a Spanish shalop, save only they be flat bottomed, and sharp ended.

20. They went on Land upon the East side of the Island with 4. men more in the
Boat, where they see their houses, the people came to them calling (and
rowing) one of them came into their Boat, they carried him on board, and gave
him a Bell, and a knife, the Captain commanded 5. men to set him on shore in
an Island, and not amongst their Company, but they not regarding went to them,
who surprised their Boat and themselves* A Surprise.
never as yet heard of.

21. The next day, they shot off a Falken-gun, and sounded a trumpet to hear
from their men, but were not answered, this morning the Snow was on Foot
thick upon the ha^tches.

22. They went to the place where their men were lost, and had sight of 14.
Boats, and some came near them, but they could hear nothing of their men.

26. Returns homeward, at 8. a clock in the night, was thwart of Gabriels
I Will, and had Cape Labradore as he supposed, W. 10. Leagues off.

1. Had sight of Friesland 8. leag. off, from this day to the September.
6. they run along Iseland.

25. Sight of Orkney.

1. Anchor at Yarmouth. October.


Sir Martin Frobrisher his 2. Voyage. 1577.
DEparted from Blackwall the 26. of May, with 3. ships, May.
to wit, the Aid of the Queens, burden 180. Tonnes, the Michaell, and the
Gabriell, accompanied with 140. Gentlemen, Soldiers, and Sailors, victualed for
half a year.

He went by the North the 7. of June, arrived at Orkney, in June.
the Isles of Scotland. 8. He departs from thence, sails betwixt W. and N. W.
until the 4. of July, 26. days sail; from thence they meet with much
Drift-wood, as they suppose from New found Land: And driven over with the
Current, which they say, sets from the W. to the East.

The 4. of July, they had sight of Friesland, 10. or 12. leagues off, and great
store of Ice, 30. or 40. Fatham above water, they July.
supposed on ground; though they could scarce sound the bottom for depth. The
General attempteth to go on Land but cannot: they coast it 4. days; sees no
sign of habitation.

Yet by Birds which in Fogs had lost the land and came to the Ships; they
suppose the Country to be more habitable within, then outward shore makes
show or signification.

The 8. they depart from thence. 16. He comes to the making of the Land, named
the year before by him, the Queens Forland, being as they judge it, an Island
lying near the supposed continent of America: Another Island lying upon the
Asian side, called Halls Island; betwixt which two Islands, goes in Frobrishers
straights, or the unknown passage into the Sea of Sur. He does suppose that
the Ice of this Coast is carried by some contrary E. or W. tide or current,
upon the Coast of Freezland: causing that Country to be far more intemperate;
than other countries far more North.

At their first entrance, they found the Straight mured with Ice, the Captain
with his Pinnace past twice through, before he durst hazard in the great Ships.

They go on land, the people seemed to be joyful thereof, they embrace* and
the Captain laid hands on them; but they escape through nimblenesse* and
defends themselves with their bows and Arrows; he took one, all the rest
escaped.

They put their Ships into the Straights all full of Ice, they made 14. bourds
in one watch, to refrain the Ice, the lightness of the night did them much
comfort and help for sight, and this hazard they made for safeguard of their
Captain and Master who were on land.

17. Being the day following, the Capt. came on board with report of great
riches hid in the bowels of that Continent.

Within 3. or 4. days after, they had been in the Streights, July.
the W. and N. W. winds dispierst the Ice. The 19. they enter without
impediment. The 20. they found a good harbor, Iackman Mrs. Mate.
and names it Iackmans Sound, anchoring the Ships there.

The General marches up into the land, takes possession in the Queens name,
and imployes his men about the business they came thither for.

Whilst they continued in this harbor, they kept watch continually with
boats and roapes ready to hale and towe away the Ice, which otherwise might
have driven thwart the Ships with Ebb and flood.

The General finds not commodity answerable to his Expectation in the
supposed America: leaves the Ships; coasts on to the supposed Asia, the stones
on land and Sand in Sea sparkle like Gold on both sides, (if all be Gold that
glysters) upon the West shore they found a dead Fish floating, it proved by the
horn to be a Sea Unicorn; the Spiders put therein Sea Unicorn.
dyed.

The General in further search, finds Gold oar as he supposed, with a good
harbor, and returns to the Ships; by the way he espies a Tent covered with
Seal skins, the people was fled, he leaves glasses, bells, and knives, therein;
only took one Dog and nothing else; leaves a letter, with They took a Dog.
pen, ink and paper, for his men to write (which was took from him the last
year) if they were living.

Their men march up again, and found their Tents were remooved to the foreside
of the Bay, they fled by Sea; our A conflict.
men incompasse them both by land and Sea, they defend themselves with bows and
Arrows, and fiercly assault our men: We wounded 3. with our Arrows, who
perceiving themselves hurt desperately, lept from the Rocks into the sea and
drowned A woman and ^^^ld taken.
themselves. The rest escaped by flying into the Mountains, only* women
stayed, the one for Age, the other having had a Child, was brought on Shipboard
being shot through the hair of her head but her child was shot through the
arm, which the Surgeon endeavoring to cure, she plucked off the Barbarous
Surgery.
applied salues, and like a Dog, with licking, healed up the Child's arm.

The man Salvage formerly taken and she brought together, every man with
silence desired to behold the manner of their meeting, the which was more worth
the beholding then can well be expressed; At their first sight they beheld each
the other very wistly a good space, without speech or word uttered, with great
change of Color and Countenance, as though it seemed the grief of their
Captivity had taken away the use of their tongues, the Woman at first very
soddainly, as though she disdained or regarded not the man, turned away, and
began to sing as though she minded another matter, but being again brought
together, the Man broke up the silence first, and with a stern and stayed
countenance, began to tell a long solemn tale to the woman, whereunto she gave
good hearing, and interrupted him nothing till he had finished, and afterward
being grown into more familiar acquaintance by speech, they were turned
together, so that I think the one would hardly have lived without the comforts
of the other, and for so much as we could perceive; albeit they lived
continually together, yet they did never use as man and wife, though the woman
spared not to do all necessary things that appertain to a good huswife,
i^defferently for them both; as in making clean their Cabine, and in every
other thing appertaining to his ease. For when he was sick, she would make him
clean, and kill and flea the dogs for their eating, and dress his meat.
Only I think it worth Slavage Modes^y.
the noting, the continency of them both, for the man would never shift
himself, except he had first caused the woman to depart out of his Cabine, and
they both were most shamefast, least any of their privy parts should be
discovered, either of themselves or of any other.

This Bay was named York Sound: The point Bloody Point.

Our men returned to their Tents (seeing there was no hope to bring them to
Civility) and made spoil of the^; wherein they found an old shirt, a doublet,
a Girdle, and shoes of the men lost the last year.

This done they return again to their Ship. And the third August.
day they depart from this supposed America: The fourth, they came to the
General in a fair harbor on the East side, which they named the Countess of
Warwicks Sound; In this place, they fully intend to ^ade with the supposed gold
Mineral, to counteruaile the charge of their first and this second Voyage.

The Inhabitants come to them again, and make show that 3. of the 5. men are
alive, making signs for pen and ink, and that within three or four days
they would return, and bring those that were living.

Sir Martin Frobrisher his Letter to the English Captains, taken the last
year in Meta Incognita.
IN the Name of GOD in whom we all believe, who I trust has preserved your
bodies and Souls amongst those Infidels, I commend me unto you, I will be glad
to seek by all means you ca^ devis^ for your deliverance, either with force
or with any Commodities within my ships, which I will spare for your sakes, or
any thing else I can do for you; I have on board of theirs a man, a woman, and
child, which I am contented to deliver for you, but the man of theirs which I
carried away the last year is dead in England; moreover you may declare unto
them, that if they deliver you not, I will not leave a man alive in their
Country: And thus if one of you can come to speak with me, they shall have
either the man, woman or child, in pawn for you; and thus unto God whom ^
trust you do serve, In have I leave you to him, we will daily pray for you,
this Tuesday morning the 7. of August.

Yours to the utmost of my poor. MARTIN FROBRISHER.

I have sent you by these bearers, Pen, Ink and Paper to write back again, if
persoally you can, come to satisfy me of their estate.

Here their Captive being on shore, set up 5. small sticks in a Circle one by
another, with a small bone placed in the midst, they conceited thereby, he
would give his Countrymen to understand, that for 5. men betrayed the last
year he was taken prisoner, which he signified by the bone in the midst;
for afterward, we showed him the Picture of his Countryman which the last
year was brought into England, whose counterfeit was drawn with his Boat and
furniture, both as he was in his own and also English apparel, he was upon
the sudden much amazed thereat, and beholding advisedly the same with silence
a good while, as though he would strain courtesy, whether should begin the
speech (for he thought him no doubt, a living creature) at length began to
question with him, as with his Companion, and finding him dumb and mute,
seemed to suspect him as one disdainful, and would with a little help have
grown into choler at the matter, until at last by feeling and handling, he
found him but a deceived Picture, and than with great noise and cries ceased
not to wonder, thinking that we could make men live or dye at our pleasure.

They also make signs they have a King carried on men's A King.
shoulders, a man far surpassing any of ours in bigness and stature. It may be
thought they are used to traffic with some other Nation; yet for all this
fair dealing they lay lurking to betray our men, with diverse signs and raw
flesh, which we got, and it served for meat for the man and woman, whose
stomachs as yet could not digest the Ships victuals; One amongst them
counterfeited himself ^ame, who being shot at with a Calliver to affright him,
he presently took to his legs and run away; but in all this time they
cannot hear of their men.

Their weapons are Bows, Arrows, slings and darts, they have 2. sorts of
Boats, the one is for one man and close decked, shaped like a Weavers shuttle;
the other open and will carry Great Canoes.
14. men more or less; and planckt with Seal skins.

It is thought that their habitation in Winter is far within the land, and
that they abide here in Summer only to live upon Fish.

The 24. of August after they had satisfied their minds and laden their
Ships, they depart, falls with the lands end of England and puts into Milford
haven in the Admiral.

The 2. barks were separated at Seaby storm; the one arrived at Bristow: the
other came about Scotland, and arrived safely at Yarmouth. In this voyage they
lost two men; Queen Elizabeth named the land Meta incognita.

Things Remarkable in this second Voyage.
THey are men of large Corporature, good proportion, and of color not much
unlike the Sunne-burnt Country man. They wear their hair something long, cut
disorderly before, their women wear their hair long, knit up with two loopes,
some of them Races their cheeks, chins, and faces, whereupon they lie a color
like dark Azure.

They eat all their meat Raw, as flesh, fish, foul, or but lightly
perboyled, with water and blood they will eat Ice as we do Sugar.

For necessity, they will eat grass like bruit beasts, without table or
stool, and when their hands are imbrued in blood they lick them clean with
their tongues.

They yoke their Dogs for use, as we do Oxen, and when they grow old they
fatten them to eat, and if they dye they do the like.

They apparel themselves in skins of Beasts and Foul, sowed together with the
sinews thereof, to defend them from cold.

They make their apparel with hoods and tails, which tails they bestow as
favors to ratify any friendship showen them, the men's garments are not so
long as the women's.

They wear their hose close to their legs, from the wast to the knee without
any opening before, as well the one kind as the other, upon their legs they
wear hose of leather, with the fur-side inward 3. pair at once, especially
the women, in these hose they put their necessaries they carry about them, they
put also a bone into their hose from the foot to the knee, whereon their hose
being drawn are held up in place of garters.

They dress their skins very soft and supple with hair on, in winter they
wear the skin-side inwards, in Summer outward, other apparel they have none.

Their beasts, fishes, and fowls, are all their meat, drink, apparel,
houses, bedding; and all their Riches.

Their houses are tents covered with skins, pitched with quarters four square,
meeting at tops sewed together with sinews, their entrance is always ore
against the Sun.

They have other sorts of houses which they found not to be inhabited, raised
with stones and Whale bones, and covered with skins, the entering not unlike
unto an ovens mouth, which they frequent during their hunting time, and so
leaves them until they come thither again.

They have 2. sorts of Boats, the one only for one man the other for 16. men,
they kill all their fish and flesh with darts, and it may be thought, they
repair to some other place to live in winter farther from the Sea side, they
will eat their flesh and fish, smell it never so filthily, what knowledge they
have of God or what Idol they adore is unknown, they make signs of people
that wear bright plates of Gold in their foreheads. The Country is high and
mountainous, great quantity of snow lying thereon, there is little plain
ground and no grass, but that which is like unto moss growing upon soft
ground such as we get turffe upon. There is no wood at all. There is great
quantity of Dear, their skins like unto Asses, their heads or horns do
far exceed any, both in length and breadth of those Countries, their feet
are great as Oxen which measured were 7. or 8. inches in breadth, their are
also Hares, Wolves, fishing-Beares, and sundry sorts of Sea foul.

The 3. Voyage of Sir Martin Frobrisher, this Voyage the Queen gave him a
Chain of Gold.
Articles to be observed in his Fleet.
1. INprimis to banish Swearing, Dice, and Card playing, and filthy
Communication, and to serve GOD twice a day with the ordinary service used in
the Church of England, and to clear the glass according to the old order of
England.

2. The Admiral shall carry the light, and after his light be once put out no
man to go on head of him, but every man to fill his sails to follow as near
as they may, without indangering one another.

3. That no man shall by day or night depart further from the Admiral than the
distance of one English mile, and as near as they may, without indangering one
another.

4. If it chance to grow thick, and the wind contrary either by day or night,
that the Admiral be forced to cast about, before her casting about she shall
give warning by shooting off a piece, and to her shall answer the
Vice Admiral, and the Reare-admirall, each of them with a Piece, if it be by
night or in a fogge, and that the Vice Admiral shall answer first and the
Reare-admirall last.

5. That no man in the fight discrying any sail, or sails, give upon any
occasion any Chase before he have spoken with the Admiral.

6. That every night all the Fleet come up and speak with the Admiral, at 7.
of the clock or betwixt that and eight, and if the weather will not serve them
all to speak with the Admiral, then some shall come to the Vice Admiral, and
receive the order of their course from Mr. Hall. chief pylot of the flight, as
he shall direct them.

7. If to any man in the flight there happens any mischance, they shall
presently shoot off 2. pieces by day, and by night 2. pieces, and show 2.
lights.

8. If any man in the night come up and hayle his fellow knowing him not, he
shall give him his watch word, Before the world was God, the other shall answer
him if he be one of our flight, After God came Christ his Son, so that if any
be found amongst us not of our company, he that first discryeth any such sail
or sails, shall give warning to the Admiral by him self or other that he can
speak unto, that sails better then he, being ne^rer unto him.

9. That every ship in the fleet in the time of Fogs, which continually happen
with little winds and most calmes, shall keep a reasonable noise with Drum and
Trumpet, or otherwise to keep themselves clear one of the other.

10. If it fall so thick and misty, that we lay to Hull, the Admiral shall
give warning with a piece, and putting out* lights one over the other, to the
end that every man may take in his sails, and at his setting of sails again
do the like if it be not clear.

11. If any man discover Land by night, that he give like warning that he does
for mischances, 2. lights and 2. pieces; if it be by day one piece, and put out
his flag, and strike all sails he has abroad.

12. If any ship shall happen to loose company by force of weather, then any
such ship or ships, shall get him into the Latitude of -- and so keep that
Latitude until they get Fri^land, they shall get them into the Latit. of --
and to the North of -- and being once entered into the straights, all such ship
or ships shall every watch shoot off a good piece, and look out well for
smoke and fire, which those that get in first shall make every night, until
all the fleet become together.

13. That upon the sight of an Ensign, in the Mast of the Admiral, a piece
being shot off, the half fleet shall repair to the Admiral, to understand
such conference, as the General is to have with them.

14. If any chance to meet with any Enemy, that 4. ships shall attend upon
the Admiral, viz. The Francis of Foy* the Moon, the Bark Dynnis, and the
Gabriell; and 4 upon my Lieutenant General in the Judeth. viz. The Hopewell,
the Ar^enall, the Bear, and the Salamander; and the other 4. upon the
Viceadmiral, the Anne Francis, the Thomas of Ipswich, the Emanuell, and the
Michaell.

15. If there happen any disordered person in the flight, that he be taken and
kept in safe custody until he may conveniently be brought aboard the Admtrall,
there to receive such punishment as his or their offense shall deserve. 120.
Persons appointed to inhabit Metaincognita: 3 Ships was appointed to be left
for y^ use of the Inhabitants.


He departed from Harwich the 31. of May, 1578. with 15. Ships, having given
that Instructions for ordering of his fleet as well for civil government as
direction.

He goes by the West; the 6. of June he had sight of Cape Clear sailing
toward the N. W parts from Ireland.

A great Current from S. W. carried them 1. point to the N. E. of their course,
which current seemed to him to continue its course toward Norway. Freezeland.


The 20. of June, the General discries land, and being Frezeland, names it
West England, he goes on shore, and finds a good harbor for Ships, the
people ^led; they Judge it part of Meta incognita, or Groneland, their boats
and apparel are all alike with those of Meta incognita; they found in their
Tents, a box of small Nails, red herrings, and diverse carved things, so as
they judge them to be civil people, and Artificers June.
or else to have trade with those that are.

23 They depart from thence, and names a certain cliffe for some resemblance
Charing cross, they meet with much ye, many Whales and fogges.

The Salamander a ship of his Flight struck upon a Whale, with full stem being
under courses and Bonnets, he makes an uglie noise and two days after they
found a dead Whale, supposes July.
it the same.

The 2. they had sight of the Queens Forland, they bear in all day, had much
Ice, at night they were entered the Sreight all overcome with Ice; not froze
there, but driven by the winds violence. The writer conceives the Mary
glaciale to be a conjecture. It flows 10. Fatham.


And that no salt Sea can be froze ore with Ice, and in these place where it
does ebb and flow above 10. Fathames.

And the Ice he met at Sea 1000. Miles from land, all which congealed upon
fresh water; he concludes they were froze in bays and rivers, and not in the
Sea.

This Ice does shut together with wind, and open at the shifting or change
thereof as in other places, so as it is passable.

The Bark Dennis struck upon a Rock: The ship sunk, the men were saved by
their boats; therein were much of the house drowned, which the men appointed
to winter, should have lived in Meta incognita. Amidst the Ice a storm takes
them at S. E. some takes in sails and hulls, that had room; others make fast
to the Ice others send off Ice with poales, oars, junkes, oken boards, and the
like; so as all were put to it: Yet for all this, their ship sides, and waeles
were sore torn and bruised.

The next day, the wind changed W. N. W. the Ice dispierced, they go to Sea
and meets 4. more of their Company, who had all kept the Sea, during the S. E.
storm, they resolve to keep the Sea until the Sun dissolve, or the wind
dispierce the Ice out of the straight.

7. They cast about inward again, had sight. Of what Land it should be there
was difference of opinions; Through Current N. E
the thick mists, and by snow newly fallen, the habit of the Land was altered:
Thinking they had bin to the N. E. of Frobrishers straights. Then coming from
Land by a Current coming from thence along the Coast, they were carried to S.
W. off the Queens Forland, more miles then they thought possible

Here they make a piece of Land, for Mount Warwick, yet wonders how they
should be so far shot within the straight without their knowledge, how be it
they confessed they found a swifter course of flood, then hitherto they had
observed; And here their Ships were whirled about in a moment, Whirlepoole.
lying a Hull as though they had been in a Whirlepoole, the waters making no
less noise to be heard a far off, then the waterfall of London bridge.

Here they could have no observation, the General sends to the Ships to know
their chiefest opinions; Christopher Hall chief Pylate said, he had never
seen that coast before, nor could not make it for any part of Frobrishers
streights, although the land did lie and trent alike. July.


The 10. the weather continued thick and dark, and the fleet disperced, they
were doubtful whether to set to Sea, or to follow a doubtful course in a Sea,
Bay, or Straight, they knew not, or stand a long an unknown coast, where they
could not discern dangers for dark mists and thick weather.

Whereupon some betook themselves to Sea, as thinking that the safest Course,
others followed the General, within that doubtful and unknown Streights
above 60. leagues, having always a fair Continent upon the Starboard, and a
continuance of an open Sea before them, so as if it This does argue that this
Straight does go through Groeneland into Fretum Davis.
had not been for the gathering of his fleet again; as also their lading of
Ore, he both would and could have gone into the Mare del Sur, for the further
they sailed, the less Ice, and 50. leagues within this Straight was none at
all.

This straight has also a great Indraft; for by the foresaid current, the
floting wrack of the bark Dyoniss lost at the Queens Forland, was brought
thither along the Coast, and by the Indraft drawn in there, it being many
miles distant.

They do also affirm out of some of their best mariners observation, that in
this straight, the ^lood-tyde does run 9. hours, and ebb 3. which may well
come to pass by force of the current coming from the E. and butting upon that
coast, may enforce the tide into all indrafts and rivers, with longer flowings,
until the force of the ebb, receiving his strength from the West Sea, do
resist it, the Sea will not according to the saying.

Naturam expellas furca^ licit usqui recurrit. Also they observed upon this
Coast, that lying a Hull, 25. This 15. leag. was to the E. from Land; and this
hullling must be neer^ some indraft. If so* I am persuaded, the S. part of
Groenland is all Islands.
leagues off Land, the wind blowing trade they were brought to within two
leagues thereof contrary to expectation.

This part of the Country, they hold to be more populous, and fruitful then
any discovered before: And better stored with grass, foul, and wild Beasts.
And here they see greater Boats then before, and of the contents of 20.
persons; And they think that being 60. leag. up the soresaid straight, they
saw Land on Larboard.

To return back again the same way out of this straight, along the supposed
backeside of the Continent of America: at the Queens Forland; he espies a Gut
to go through in Frobrishers straights, sends the Gabriell through, who meets
again in the straight, so the Queens Forland proved an Island.

They anchor in the straight, at a Land they named Hattons Head-land, where
they met 7. of their ships, and stays for the rest. The 26. they had a cruel
storm of wind and snow which disperced their Fleet, and were most cruelly
weather-beaten.

The 2. of August, all the Fleet arrived except 4. and harbors nee^e Mount
Oxford. The 6. day they got up as high as Leicester point. Then they hold a
Consultation for inhabiting but does not. 1. ship they had lost then as they
thought but she came home without doing any thing. Therest searches for Mines
and finds one, calls it Bests blessing, after his own name, that found it, but
in bringing their ship thereto, she grounded upon a Rock and half dried; So
as they were forced to underprop her with their main yard, and thereby escaped
the danger which they might otherwise have fallen into.

Now the Fleet being all laden and ready, they furnish up a little house with
Bells, Babies, Pictures of men and women, Glasses, Whissles, Pipes, with an
oven with baked bread, and left it to the Natives. And upon the last of August,
the whole Fleet was ready to depart, but a cruel storm took them, some at
Sea; some at anchor in Sounds: The Busse was feign to seek a new way to Sea
through a Sound she rid in upon the backside of Bear sound; and got to Sea to
the N. of Frobrishers Straights; but the General came home in the Gabriell and
could not get aboard his own ship the Aid.

The Busse coming home, found an Island in 57d, and a half sailed a long 3.
days, and says, it is a fruitful Champion country, and woody.

The Busse fell on the South of Freezeland, the 8. of September, they steered
from thence S. E. and by S. until the 12. when they discryed land 5. leagues
off: The S. W. part bore S. E. by E. the Northermost, N, N, E. or N, E. the
Master accounted the S. E. point of Freezland was then from him N. W. by N. If
this Island were found again there is great store of F^^h about ^^.
50. leag. he accounts this Island to be 25. leagues long S. E. and N. W. the S.
side is in 57. ^ / ^. they had sight of it 28. hours, they opened 2. harbors
therein, the Master did account himself 50, leagues S. E. by S. from
Freezeland, when he first discovered this land; there dyed about 40. persons
upon this voyage.

It is to be observed in these Voyages, That these are but Histories, and that
they did not know whether they saw Asia and America or no, as I am sure they
did not, nor know in what land they were; yet for certain they were at Meta
Incognita, otherwise Groneland. I think they meant, to have kept this golden
Country to themselves; for the courses, distance, latitude, longitude,
variation, and other marine observations herein is none, only one Latitude of
63. 8. min. the entrance of Frobrishers Straights; and Freezeland they have
placed in 61. degrees. with this new Island, the Busse is in 37d. and a half
Northern Latitude.

There is Bears, Hares, Foxes, and innumerable of Sea-Fowle, where of his men
killed in one day 15. hundred, he found of Ginnie beans in their tents of color
Red, the Inhabitants are good markemen with their darts, for the most part they
will strike a Ducke in the eye, but altogether in the head.

The first Voyage of Captain John D^vis of Sandruge in Devonshire 1585. to the
North-West.
He departed from Darmouth the 7. day of June, with 2. Thought to find it
betwixt Frobrishers 62 and C^bots, 58. as I suppose.
Barques, viz. the Sunshine of 50. tonnes 23. persons, and the Mooneshine of
35. tonnes, 17. persons; he put into Falmouth the 8. and remained there until
the 13. he went by the West.

14. He puts into Si^^ey and had contrary winds until the June.
28, in his course N. Westward he see many Whales and Porposes, they killed a
Darly-head or porkfish which eat as sweet as any Mutton.

The 19. they fall into a great whirling or brisling of a tide July.
setting to Northwards, and they heard a mighty roaring of the Sea, as if it
had been the breach of some Shore, the weather was fogge and mist, they lanch
a boar to sound, but finds no ground at 300. fathomes, and found the roaring
to be the Sea and Ice beating together.

The 20. they descryed land, the most deformed that ever was seen, it seemed
like the form of Sugar loafes, over-to^ping the Clouds and covered over with
snow, the shore belaid with Ice, a league off he names this Land Desolation.

The 21. they perceived themselves imbaid very deep, and great store of Ice,
to the N. N. E. W, and S. W. they cleared themselves by running S. S. W. along
the shore.

The Captain attempts to land but could not for Ice, they This water came from
land for certain.
try for fish but could get none, the water was black and thick like to a
standing poole, here were many Seals.

They see woods on land like to those on New found land, they had great store
of float-wood upon the Coast, they took up one Tree 60. foot long and 14.
hands about, they bend their course to South with intent to double the Land.

The 23. they coast the land which did lie E. N. E and W, S. W.

The 24. they coast the Land lying E. and W. not able to come near shore for
Ice the weather something thick and cold, the allowance of victual was
increased, so as 5. men had every morning ^ / ^. pound of bread and one can of
beer to breakefast, the weather like April in England, but when the wind
blew from land or Ice it was cold, but when it came of the Sea it was very hot.

They depart from this land, sails N. Westward above 4. days; 29. they descry
land in 64. 15. bearing N. E. the ay^e and sea clear and temperate, he stands
with land, espies many fair sounds and harbors and many Inlets into the land,
he Judges this land to be a number of Islands, he anchors, goes on land, finds
where the inhabitants had been, he finds also a Shoe, pieces of Leather
sowed with seames, and pieces of furre, and wool like to Beaver. Wool like
Beaver.


The Country people come to him, he causes his Musicians to play wherein they
took great delight, and falls a dancing, at night he comes a board, they all
depart.

The 30. in the morning came 30. Canoes by the Ship, calls The Savages came.
them to land, and they both make protestation by clapping on their breasts and
pointing to the Sun, they become familiar, they will sell their clothes from
their backs, with the buskins, hose and gloves made of Seal skins and bird
skins, the leather well dressed and artificially sowed; They had one pair of
Leather well dressed.
Buskins full of wool like Beaver, they are very tractable, void of subtilty,
and easy to be brought to civility, he thinks they worship the Sun.

During their stay here, they found a reasonable quantity of wood, as Furre,
Spruce, and Iunupir, which had floated thither. They saw abundance of Seals
in Shoales, as it had all been fish, the cliffes was such as Sir Martin
Frobrisher brought from Meta Incognita: There was diverse slowers, Slud or
Muscovia-glasse, Muscovy-glasse
they found an herb growing upon the Rocks whose fruit was sweet, full of
red luyce, the ripe ones were A red Berry.
like Currants, they judge the people to have store of Furs, Store of Furs
they make show after they see he would have skins and furrs, that they would
go into the Country and fetch such things as they had, but the wind coming
fair he came away.

The first of August they proceeded N. N. W. for the discovery.

The 6. he descried land in 66. 40. min. void of Ice, he anchors August.
and in a bay near a fair Mount, the Cliffes thereof as orient as Gold: He
names it Mount Raleigh, the road Totnes-road, the Sound encompassing the road
Exe^ers Sound, the N. Forland Dyers Cape, the S. For-land or cheeks of the
Sound Cape Walsingham; He espies 4. white Bears, and kills one first, and two
afterward.

The next day they kill a Bear, the sore-paw was 14. inches A huge Bear killed.
over, this Coast was Mountainous without wood, or any thing growing thereon;
the air was very temperare.

The 8. he sets sail from Mount Raleigh, and Coasts along S. S. W.

The 9. his men complained their allowance was too small, Allowance augmented.
it was augmented to 5. men 4. l. of bread a day, 12. quarts of beer, 6.
New-land fishes, and on the flesh day one gill of Pease more, but Butter and
Cheese, was restrained from them.

The 11. he comes to the South-most Cape of this Land, he named it the Cape of
Gods mercy; the weather foggie, he Coasts the N. side, and at the fogges
vp-breaking, he was entered into a fair passage in some places 20. leag.
broad; tolerable weather, void of Ice, the Sea of the nature, color and
quality of the maine Ocean.

Hear he has great hope of a passage, sails 60. leag. N. N. W. discovers
certain Islands in the midst: but passage on both sides, he devides both the
ships, the one sails on the N. Fogge in a strange straight.
side the other on the S. where they stayed 5. days with S. E. wind, fogge
and foul weather.

14. They go on Land, find signs of people, and tame dogs with collers about
their necks; a bone in their Pizels, and are used to traile sleddes which they
found, like ours; one made of Furre, spruce, and oken boards; the other of
Whalebone. They had hung upon the top of these sleds, the heads of 3. Beasts
they had killed. They found other trifles nothing worth, but only to show that
the people had lately been there, but they find this place all Islands with
great Sounds passing betwixt them. And here they found whales coming Whales*
from the Western Sea; and to the Eastward they had not seen one.

As they were rowing into a Sound lying S. W. soddenly there came a violent
Counter-checke of a tide from S. W. Tide from S. W. flowed 6. or 7. Fathams.
against the flood which they came with; but sounding, they could have no
ground here at 300. fathoms. It flowed uppe and down 6. or 7. fathoms, and
they could not perceive from whence it was maintained: If care had been taken
at their entrance into this Straight, they might easily have resolved
themselves.

The 21. they coast the S. shore, they see many Sounds.

The 23. they enter into a fair Sound, at the S. entrance of this Straight in
25. fathom green Ose.

The 26. they depart from the sight of the N. land of this entrance, directing
their course homewards.

The 10, he had sight of Desolation. 13, He departs from sight thereof; the
27, he had sight of England; and the 30, he came into Dartmouth.

The Observation.
He set forth from England, June 28, his furthest was 66* d. 40. N. latitude,
he sails then N, W. into a passage 60. leag. upon the America side, as was
then supposed and found no hinderance; yet he returns homewards the 21. of
August: He was the first we know of, that ever was on the West Side of
Groenland, or sailed so far West in that parallel.

He discovered upon Groenland-side, from Desolation to 64. 15, min. and on the
West Side from 66. 40. to the South Side of his new Entrance, and returned home
safely.

Captain John Davis, his second Voyage. 1587.
HE departed from Dartmouth with 4. ships, viz. The Mermayd May 7.
100. Tonnes, the Sunshine 60. tonnes, the Mooneshine 35. tonnes, the
North-starre 10. tonnes.

The 15. discovers land in 60. degrees. and in longitude from the June.
Meridian of London 47. mightily pestered with Ice and snow, from land the Ice
lay in some places 10. 20. 50. leagues; he was constrained to bear back into
57. degrees. to acquit the Ice.

The 29. he meets land in 64. and in longitude from London, Meridian 58. 30.
for diverse reasons he bears into this known harbor, and to set up his Pinnace;
he finds many goodly harbors, with high land little troubled with snow, and
sea altogether void of Ice; he sends his Boats to search before the ships for
shoale-water to anchor in. The Country people come to them with cries and
shouts; but after they espied some of the Company, whom they knew before, they
came to their boats and hung upon them with great joy. The Captain with
diverse others goes on Land. The people come to him with dancing and leaping;
and made signs, they knew all those that had been there the year before: At
this present, there were 18. of them to whom he gave to every one a knife; they
offered him skins, but he showed them that he bestowed them in courtesy, and
so dismissed them; with signs that they should return in 4. hours.

The people repair to him the next day, and brought with The people bring
Skins for trade.
them the skins of Seals, Stagges, white Hares, Seale-fish, Salmon-peale,
small Codde, dry Caplin, with other fish, and Birds.

He sent to search their habitation with command that no hurt should be
offered, they find Tents framed upon wood, covered with Seal skins; they
find therein dry Caplin, bags of Train oil, and Seal skins in tan-tubbs.

He man's his Boat attended with 50. Cannoes, intending to view the Country,
the people very carefully help him up and down the steep Rocks. In leaping,
our men outstript them, in wrestling they cast our best wrastler that had both
They found them to have both skill and strength.
skill and strength.

In a certain Island they found a grave wherein men lay buried covered over with
Seal skins, and a Cross laid over them; they be people of good stature,
broad-faced, every time they come they make new truce by pointing to the Sun,
and crying Eleo^t, striking upon their breast. He takes them to be Idolaters and
witches: They are simple in all their conversation; but very theevish in
stealing of Iron; of which they make great account; They in the end began to
show their Nature in cutting of Cables, their Boat from their stern^; They
gave them knives but not for that purpose.
and their Clothes where they laid to air.

They also stole their Oars, a Calliver, a Boar spear, a sword, whereupon
they brake the Peace, by shooting off a Musket and a Faulcon, at which noise
they all departed with great fear. They returned again within 10. hours, to
entreat peace which was immediately granted, they brought Seal skins and
Salmon-peale, but seeing Iron they could not forbear to steal; they eat
their meat raw, drink salt water, and eat grass and ye with delight.

Their weapons are for the most darts; but some have Bows and Arrows, and
Slinges, with their Nets, made of whale-fynne, with which they do
artificially catch fish with. They have war with some other Nation or Inland
people; for many of them are wounded; He had amongst them Copper Ore* black
Copper, and red Copper; thinking to search Ores of black, and red Copper.
the habitation of this Country in his Pi^^ace, he entered a large River and
went on Land to discover, but the high Mountains hindered his prospect. He
gathers Muscles for his supper, and took harbor for that night under the
Rocks: where he see a mighty whi^le wind, taking up the water in great (...)
for the ^pace of (...) hours without any intermission. To conclude, he found
this not to be firm Land but mighty Rivers and Sounds, and Throughlets
between Meaning the E. Sea, and Fretum D^^^
vast and desert Islands: with passage between Sea and Sea; he returns to his
ship.

In his absence the people had stolen an Anchor, and with sli^gs had thrown
stones into the ship of half a pound weight, he seemed to the Inhabitants to
take no notice of the injury done him, he tills them on land, gives them
bracelets and other Yet much desirous o^ ^r^^e.
toys, and intices 7. or 8. on board, some of them goes into the maine top.

After Sunset they begin again to assault them, with stones in slings into the
Mooneshine, and with one stone struck the Boatswaine, that he overthrew him.

The 11. they came to make a new truce, the Ringleader of the mischief was
one; the truce made they take one prisoner, A Salvage taken.
who pointed to his fellows to bring the things that were stolen, and he
should be enlarged unto them.

The wind within an hour came fair, they brought the fellow away. One of his
consorts came and followed, talking to him; at length they took leave, making
great lamentation: The prisoner spoke 4. or 5. words to the other clapping his
hands upon his face; the other doing the like, they depart. This prisoner in
few days grew a pleasant Companion, trimmed up his darts, and fishing tools,
made Okum, and would lay his hand upon a Roape to hail, his meat was first
dry Caplin, they had taken there in their Tents; when it was done he eat poor
John.

The 14. of this Month one man dyed: the rest were in July.
good Health. The 17. in the Latit. of 63. ^ min. he fell with a huge Island of
Ice in one entire Mass; So big as they could not draw the limits, with Bay and
Capes, and like huge Cliffes as he took it, to be Land at first. And in this
place he had stickle and strong Currents. No other but what the Ice made being
forced through the water by the winds, and drawing so much water as they be
either on ground or near. Also, as his motion does trouble and alter the
waters true course, which causes the Tides to edy, being near it; as Islands
in the Sea standing in the Flood, or Ebbes way, will do the like. He Coasts to
S. off this Ice until the 30. of July, and says, ti was such a Bar to his
proceedings, as all his hopes were banished. The 24. all his Ropes were frozen:
By a gross fogge his men begin to grow sick, and feeble; and told him he
ought in Conscience to regard the safety of his own life and preservation of
others: and not through his over-boldnesse to leave their Widows and
Fatherless children to give him bitter curses; ( leave these excuses and come
home Davis, come home:) besides, the great Ship was too great and unweldy to
discover withal; besides her charge was 100. pound a month; So with diverse
other excuses he sends her homewards, and with the Mooneshine made shift to
steer E, S, E. from the Ice to seek the next Land.

The first of August, he sees land in 66, 33. Longitude from London 70. degrees.
here he graves the Moonelight (that had been forth but 3. months) in a very
good road he finds this land to be all Islands, with Sea on E, on W, on N. but
a Musk^ta stung him grievously; the people here sends him a Seal driving with
the tide, which they had boyd up with bladders.

The people trade with him for skins as the others did, and are in all things a
like, but in pronunciation of language more plain, and not hollow in the
throat. Their Salvage kept him close, and made signs to them to get him a
Companion.

Here he left the Mermaid at Anchor the 12, day and sails W, above 50,
leagues, sees land in 66, 19, this land is 70, leagues from the other, he
anchors by an Island of Ice from clock 9, to 3, in the morning.

The 15. he departs this land to the South, sails until the He finds many
passages but attempts none.
18, and then he sees land N, W a fair Promontory in 65, and no land to
Southward; here he had great hope of a Passage: He sails still southwards and
sees Land S, W, and by S. the 17. by observation he was in 64, 20, m. he had
sailed by Cha^t and precise account 15, leagues S, by W, yet upon observation
Sail more E. and come home then*
he found it S, W. so as he says, it was by a Western Current.

August, 19. it fell snow and foul weather, they lie at h^ll all Night within
5. leagues of land.

The 20. the weather breaks up, they bear in with land and got into a harbor
close for all weathers* they go on land and can discer^e it to be all Islands,
they come away in the afternoon with a N. E. wind fair weather, shapes Now
Davis is coming home
their course to the South, whereby they may discover the passage.

They coast the land until the 28. finding it still to continue In 56. great
store of Codfish.
to the S. from 67. to 57. he sees marvailous store of Sea foul, as Guls and
others, he tries for fish, in one glass kills an 100, Codde although he was
but badly provided, he doubting the weather, steps into harbor in 56. d. sails
10. leag. up a River 2 leagues broad, very fair Woods on both sides; stays
here until the first of Sept. had 2. great storms, he went 6. miles on land:
The woods were Furre, Pyne-apple, Elder, Ewe, With and Birch, h^ sees a black
Bear, and here were store of land and river foul, as Goose, Ducks,
Black-birdes, Iayes, Thrush, and of Partridge and Feasant, he kills great store
with Bow and arrows; At the harbors mouth were greatstore of Cod-fish.

The first of September he set sail, and with fair weather, coasts along to
the Southward, the 3. day being calm lets fall a Cadger to prove for fish; In
which place there was such abundance as the hook was no sooner overboard but
it was Great skull of Fish*
taken, it was the largest and best fed fish that ever he see, and some of his
men which were Fishermen, said they never saw a bigger Skull of fish in their
lives.

The 4. he anchors in a good road among Islands, the Country low-land, pleasant
and full of woods: To the N. of this place 8. leag; finding a mighty great Sea
between 2. lands to the W. the S, land to his judgment is nothing but Isles, he
greatly desired to have gone into this Sea but wind or something was against
him, he anchored in 4. fadome fine sand. In this place is fish and foul mighty
store, he had left on land some fish to dry, he sent 5. men on land for them;
The Country people lay lurking in the wood, and on a sudden a^saulted them,
they slew 2. and greatly wounded other 2. one escaped by swimming with an arrow
shot through his arm.

Great store of fish and foul, they made a hook of a crooked Spike, before the
bait was changd they took more then 40. great Cods, the fish swimming so
abundantly thick about the hook as is incredible to be reported. This Davis
in his Hydrographicall does describe.

The 10. he shapes his course for homeward, he arrived in England the beginning
of October.

The Observation.
He departed from England the 7. of May, 15. of June he sell with Land in 66d.
70. d. Longitude from London, he was troubled with Ice, he finds that there is
Copper Ore, the people may be brought to trade, but are theevish and
treacherous, he stayed in harbors 24. days, went no further to the Northwards
then 66d. 17. m. in Long from London 70d. he returns the beginning of August,
and upon the coast of America in 55d. finds great store of great ^od-fish,
having not done so much as he did in his first voyage, he arrived very safely
in England the beginning of October.

You shall understand that the Sunshine and the North-starre, were to seek
the Passage betwixt Iseland and Groenland by the appointment of Captain John
Davis, of which their Voyage the relation is writ by Henry Morgan servant to
Master William Saunderson Merchant of London, a worthy and principal
Adventurer in the Voyages of Davis, as follows.

FromCaptaine Davis.
THey departed in the Latitude of 60. degrees. the 7. of June, and sailed into 66,
and took harbor in Iseland the 12, and stays there until the 3, of July,
then he comes forth and being a little troubled with Ice shapes his course for
Groynland; the 7, he sees it, and ranges along until the months end.

The 3, of August, he comes to Gilberts Sound in 64 degrees. 14 min. Davis his
Randevow; and it seems was so appointed to meet Davis and his fleet, who
departed from thence the 11. of July; The people came and traded with them, and
in the end sought to betray them, they played at football and our men cast them.

They depart from thence 5, or 6 leag. Southwards, the same people come to them
again, they see Foxes and Dogs run upon the Islands as they observe them to
be, they found the horns of Stags and footing, but see none.

The 30 of August they depart for England, the wind takes them contrary, so as
they take another harbor, there come of the people, and bring them Seal
skins.

The Master would have changed one of the boats he had formerly bought, which
they would have taken from them by violence; they fall to combat with our men,
and throwing their darts, struck one of our men; another of our men shot one of
them into the breast with an arrow, the fight continued, our men took one of
them into our boat his boat and all, our men killed three of them, two of them
were shot with arrows, and the other hurt with a sword, he with his boat
taken was shot with an arrow, our men cast him overboard, and his consort
took him up, and conveyed him away, they departed and would not come to us as
before.

The 31 of August, we departed from Gilbert sound, the 3 of September they lost
sight of the North Star; the 30, they enter 500. Seal skins
our Channel. They brought home 500, Seal skins, 140, half skins, what
bone it was they brought home, they know not.

Captain Davis his 3. Voyage, North-West, 1587.
FRom Dartmouth with 3 Ships, the Elizabeth, the Sunneshine, May 19.
and a Clincker called the Hellen of London.

The 12 of June, there fell difference betwixt the Master of the Sunneshine,
and the Mariners, for that the Seamen would go on the Voyage a fishing, the
Master would not until he had the company of the Elizabeth, but the matter was
reconciled, and all were content to go to the place of Randevow.

The 14. of June, they descry land high and mountainous, but did imagine
themselves to be 16, or 17, leagues off.

The 16, they anchored in harbor, the people came according to their old
order with crying Eliout, and showed them Seal skins.

The 17, they make way to set up their Pinnace they brought from London.

The 18. he passed about the Island, he found black Pumice-stones, and salt
kerned upon the Rocks white and Salt.
glistering, this day he took one of the people a strong fellow.

The 20, the Salvages came to the Island, where the Pinnace was set up and made
ready to be lancht, and tore the two upper strokes away from her for love of
the Iron; I doubt in revenge of their prisoners, and for harm done the last
year; but being thus much made unserviceable, it was agreed, the Elizabeth
should have her to fish.

Now as they were ready to depart, news was brought the Captain, that the
ships that they were to venture their lives in (I think for the discovery) had
at one time 300. strokes, yet they agree to commit themselves to Gods mercy in
her, rather A Leake.
than return with disgrace; So they stand North-wards along the Land which
they call the land of their Merchants: because the people come and traffic
with them; but here they were in doubt of their Ship. I take it, the Elizabeth
and Sunneshine, are gone a fishing home, himself went N. ward into 67. 40.
where they had great store of Whales and foul, which they call Cortenous; two
Canoes came to them at Sea, they cry El^out, and gives Birds for bracelets, one
had a dart with a piece of Unicorn horn; the Salvage made stay thereof until
he saw a knife, and then he truckt; they went along with them 3. Trade to be
had.
hours. The 25 came 30. Canoes 10. leagues off Land and brought Salmon-peeles,
Birds, and Caplyn; they give them Pinnes, Needles, Bracelets, Nails, Knives,
Bells, looking-Glasses, and other tri^^es: For a Knife, a Nail, or a Bracelet:
they will sell their Coats or any thing they have.

They brought not above 20. skins, but made signs that if they would go
ashore; they should have more. Chichesanege, skins I think.

The 30. he was in 72. degrees 12 min. at midnight the Compass June.
set the variation 28. degrees. Westward; he Coasted this This was the West side
of Groynland.
Land which he called London Coast.

From the 21. to the 30. the Sea all open to the West, and Northward the Land
on Starboard E. from him, the wind shifted to the North.

Then he left that shore, and named the N. most part he did discover Hope
Sanderson, and shaping his Course West, run 40. leag. and better without
sight of any Land.

The 2. he meets with a mighty bank of Ice, West from him. He would feign
have quit it by the North-wards; but July.
the wind would not; which if he had, he would have run W. until he had
seen Land, and have been resolved. The 6. being fair weather, he puts the
Bark amongst the Ice, but could not prevail: the 7, 8, 9, 10. He coasts the
Ice: the 11, was fogge and calm.

The 13 he determining to go again to the shore: And harbor for 5, or 6,
days; Hoping in that time the extreme heat of the Sun, and beating of the
Sea; would have made way with the Ice; but when he was nigh Land he durst not
It is to be understood, that these Dar^s were headed with Vnicorn^ Horn.
anchor, for depth of water; The Salvages came often and truct for skins. Darts
they had for old and new knives, and they would gladly have had him to the
Land; but he beare^ away.

The 15. he finds himself driven 6. points west beyond his 6. points W. of his
co^^se.
Course: He lays the fault either in the Ship, or Current.

The 16. he falls with the bank of Ice again.

The 17. he had sight of Mount Raleigh, at 12 at Night, he All this time he
^anged Southward.
was thwart of his old hole again: He sails 60. leagues N, W. up the
streights; The 23, he anchors in the bottom of the Gulf; and calls the Isles,
Cumberland Isles.

Whilst he was at anchor, a Whale passed up by him, here S. W. by W. full Sea.
the Compass set at 30. d. variation; This day also he departs shaping his
course S, E. and seeks to recover the Sea. The 25 be was becalmed in the
bottom of the Gulf, the air extreme hot, Bruton the Master goes a Land to
course Dogs; they find many graves and Trane spilt; the Salvage dogs was so
fat they could scarce go.

The 26 was a pretty storm at S, E. 27, 28, 29. fair weather; He had coasted
the South Side shore of Cumberlands sound: And was got clear out into 62, degrees.
betwixt which and 63. degrees. 00. he espies an opening: And names L^mleys Inlet.
it Lumleys Ilet: And tells of great falls and Gulfes of water.

The 31 he see a Head-land he names Warwicks Forland. August.


The 1. he falls with the South-west Cape of the Gulf, and names it Chidleys
Cape, in 61 degrees. 10. min.

From the first to the 12, He trents along the South-land, sees 5 Dear on the
top of an Island, he calls Darcyes Island: Darcies Il^.
they take to another Island, his Boat was too little to carry his men and
chase the Dear: though it were in the water, one of them was as big as a
pretty Cow and very fat, their feet as broad as Ox feet.

The 13. in 54, d. Latitude. Here he struck upon a Rock, he stops his leake:
And Coasts along into 52 degrees. not finding his fishing ships as was appointed
for them to stay, and fish in Latit. between 54, and 55 degrees. until the fine
of this month, but in 16 days they were fisht and gone home: himself arrives
at Dartmouth, the 15, of September.

The Copy of Davis his Letter to Mr. Saunderson.
GOod Mr. Saunderson, with Gods great mercy, I have made my safe return in
health with all my company: And have sailed 60. leag. further, then my
determination at my departure; I have been in 73. degrees. finding the Sea all
open, and 40 leag* between Land, and Land; The passage most probable; the
B^cecution casie: as at my coming you shall fully know.

The Marine Observation.
THat he Coasted the West side of Groynland, farther then before from 65, degrees.
odd min. to 72, degrees. odd minutes, naming it London-Coast, and on the West
side was as far up his former streights as before; only he then forgot to
name the Earl of Cumberlands Isles, which now he has done; And besides, he
has in his return home, seen and named Lumleys Inlet, and passed by Fretum
Hudson, unknown: Yet he has named Cape Warwick, Which is the East part of
Resolution, and Chidleys Cape; the South bounds thereof, now called Buttons
Isles; But untruly, these two things are both; although in his Letter writ to
Mr. Saunderson at his arrival the 2. Voyage he does assure the Passage; to be
in one of the 4. places upon peril of his Life; But I think he durst not
venture it: He went forth the 7. of May, and returns homewards the 23 of July.
His greatest Variation West was 30. degrees. And the 15, of July, he was driven 5,
points W. of beyond his Course, by what accident he knows not. For to use his
own words, speaking of Warwickes Head-land; This Cape as it was the most S.
limit of the Gulf, we passed over, the 30, of this Month: So was it the N.
promontorie or first beginning of a very great Inlet, whose South limit at this
present we see not: Which Inlet or Gulf this afternoon and in the Night we
passed over to our great admiration, for the waters fall.

These abstracts are more at large to be seen in the first and 3 Volumes of
Mr. H^ckluits Voyages.

The Voyage of Captain George Waymouth, with two Fly-bo^tes, one of 70,
the other of 60. Tonnes; 35 men, victua^led for 18 months; set forth by the
Muscovia and T^^kie Companies.
HE set forth the second of May 1602. he went by the North, made the Start, or
one of the Westmost Isles of Comes to H^^sons Bay, the ^^ of May.
Orkney, it being low land, bearing West, in latitude 59 degrees. 30 min. he shapes
a course betwixt N, and West, until he brings the Start North, sails away W,
and by N. in 59 degrees. 40 min. then steeres away W, S, W. in 57 degrees. 55 min. and
there had no variation at all, he hailed away Westward, and had some fogge,
much rain, but warm, as in England.

16 This day at noone he was 57 degrees. 35 min. and had not seen the Sun or
Moon in 76 hours before, and now had variation 11 degrees.

18 He saw a great Island of Ice, in the afternoon he got sight also of the
Southmost part of Groenland, he coasts this Ice to Vide Davi^.
the North, coming sometime into black water, and presently the Sea would be
clear again; he could not game ground in 120 Fathoms, neither could he
discern any Current, at which he reckons Cape Des^lation N, N, E, 24 leagues
off him.

22 He was in 60 degrees. 37 min. latitude. 27 The weather warm, as in England, he
had great store of sea-Guls.

28 He directs his course Westwards, and sees the land of America, in 62 degrees.
30 min. makes it to be Warwickes foreland, it was high-land and covered with
snow, with other small Islands, there was great store of Ice, upon the forelands
Eastside, but the sea was altogether clear, the land lay N, by E. about 6
leagues in length.

29 He was beaten to the Southwards, by N. E. winds, and These were formerly
found and named by Davis.
finds Warwicks foreland to be an Island, he discovers Lumleys Inlet; a great
Current sets to the West, the greatest hope of a passage this way, the
weather was fogge and snow, he had a great whirling of a Current, in latitude
61 degrees. 12 leagues from the Coast of America. Now was he in the entrance of
the passage Chidlies Isles* bearing W, by S, half South.


The 1 of Julie was fogge and snow, the air very cold, he traverst to, and
again in many overfals, but by his course he could not discern which way the
Current set, but most like to the West, he traversed therein 16 or 17 days,
and could find no ground in 120 fathom.

2 He discernes a maine bank of Ice in 60 degrees. fair weather, July.
he lancht his boat, and loaded her twice therewith, to dissolve to
fresh water: he sets into many overfals along this coast of America, which
coast here he conceives to be broken land.

3 The S, W. he stands in with the coast of America, and meets with Ice 10
leagues off, the water black, and thick as puddle.

8 He had beat it to the Northward, and descries the land This was upon the
Southside of Davis his entrance into Cumberlands Isles.
of America, in 60 degrees. 53 min. being very high, it bore S, W. covered with
snow, he was 5 leagues off, but could not come near it for Ice.

9 A storm began at N, E. he cleares himself of the land and Ice by standing
to Southwards, the storm continued, so that he stood to the Southwards in
forecourse.

17 From the 9 to the 17, he was in traverse, and here he heard a fearful
noise of Ice, he had thick weather, his roapes and sails all frozen.

18 The wind N, E. extreme cold and frost, the air very clear; his roapes
were froze, and it froze so extremely, that it was a maine bar to his
proceedings, and destruction to his men.

19 He stood to Eastward, with wind N, E. and the same night his men conspired
to bear up the helm, and keep him in Cabin; they show the reason for so
doing in writing; by A mutiny.
good chance he understands thereof and prevents them.

The Reasons.
That although it were granted, that we might winter between 60 and 70 degrees
of latitude, with safety of lives and vessels, yet it will be May next, before
we can dismure them to lanch out into the Sea; and therefore if the Merchants
should have purpose to proceed on the discovery of the N. W. parts of America
the next year: you may be in the foresaid latitude from England by the first
of May, and so be furnished better with men and victuals, to pass and proceed
in the foresaid action.

Seeing then, that you cannot assure us of a safe harbor to the Northward, we
purpose to bear up the helm for England, yet with this limitation, that if in
your wisdom you shall think good to make any discovery (it seems there
were some with him understood more then himself) either in 60, or 57 degrees,
with this Northwest wind, we will yield our lives with your self to
encounter any danger, thus much we thought needful to signify, as a matter
builded upon reason, and not proceeding upon fear or cowardice. This cannot
be.


Then being in latitude 68 and 55 min. there was no means to persuade them,
but they would bear up the helm, whereupon he came out of his Cabin, to
enquire who was the cause, they answered, one and all, hoysing up sails, and
directing the course South by West.

22 He sent for the chiefest of the Mutineeres, and punished This does not
appear that he could punish, and yet suffer them to carry the ship back.
them severely, this day he came by an Island of Ice, both ships launcht their
boats, to fetch some to make freshwater: this Island cracked two or three times,
as though it had been thunder-clappes, and it brake in sunder to the great
danger of his boats, the one being half laden with Ice.

25 It blew hard, the course West by South, with fogge, and was in latitude 61
degrees, and 40 minutes, and finds an Inlet in this latitude.

27 The South-south-East wind blew very hard, with fog and rain, his course
West.

30 The wind came in a shower to West, North-west, and July.
blew hard, and because the year was far spent, and many men sick in both
Ships, he thought good to return; with great hope of this Inlet to be a
passage of more probability, then Davis his Straights, because he found it not
pestred with No such matter.
Ice, and a straight of 40 leagues broad; he says, he sailed 100 leagues West
by South, into the Inlet; he says also, he found the variation to be 35
degrees Westward, and the needle to decline, or rather incline.

Observe.
83 Degrees and a half, the 5 of Julie, he was clear off the Inlet; the 6,
South-east wind and fogge, the 7, 8, and 9th, he passed by many great Islands
of Ice, and discovered an Island upon Here was Davis.
the coast of America, latitude 55 degrees, 30 minutes.

14 He stood off and on this coast, from the 5, until the 14, had some foul
weather, and made some Islands; he stands into an Inlet in 56 degrees, and had
good hope of a passage for diverse probable reasons.

I find nothing more of note, but that upon the Coast of America, betwixt 55
degrees, 30 and 50 minutes, he observed two variations, the one of 17 degrees. 15
min. the other 18 degr. 12 min. the coast was void of Ice, unless some great
Islands drive from the North, and that the ship had like to have perished for
want of spare decks; one whirlewind he saw upon this Coast, take up the Sea
into the Air extremely, that he A whirlewind.
was entered 30 leagues within one Inlet, latitude 56 degrees, where if the wind
had come Northerly, South or East but one day, he had perished.

4 He had sight of the Island of Silly, the next day he came August.
into Dartmouth.

The general Observation.
He set forth the 2 of May, and returned homewards the 30 of July, his greatest
latitude we can be certain of, was 63 degrees. 53 min. and passing the Grand
Meridian, betwixt Orkney and Desolation, he had no variation, his greatest was
35 degrees Westward; he neither discovered, nor named any thing more then
Davis, nor had any sight of Groenland, nor was not so far North; nor can I
conceive he has added any thing more to this design; yet these two, Davis
and he did (I conceive) light Hudson into his Straights, nor did he, try in so
long time being, to and again, upon the Coast of America for Davis his
fishing, having such abundance of the largest, and best fed Cod-fish that he
saw; his ships were never separated, which showed that they were not greatly
distressed.

Master James Hall of Kingston upon Hull, Pilot Major of three Ships, set forth
by the King of Denmark for the discovery of Groenland. 1605. his first Voyage
Abstracted.
FRom Denmark he set forth the 2 of May, and says, he Variation.
found the Compass vary Eastward, at the Naes of Norway, 7 degrees. 10 min.

He says, that one league to the Northward of Fair ^sl^; he found the race of
a Tide, setting so strongly Northwestward, as if it had bin in the race of
Portland.

Fair Isle, bearing E, S, E. four leagues off; Swi^borne head N. E. by N.
eight leagues off. The I Will of Foul, N, E. the Compass was varied to the
Eastward, of true North, 60 degrees. 10. minutes, and he thinks that the Island
Busse discovered by A great mistake.
the Busse of Bridgewater in Frobrishers last Voyage, is not truly placed in
the Marine Charts.

At his falling with Groenland, he named a headland, Cape It can be no other
but Cape Farewell.
Christianus, after the King of Denmark, in latitude 59 degrees. 50 minutes, and
he found it due; for that none other before him has named it; S, W. by W. five
leagues from thence, he had 12 degrees. 15 min. variation Westwards, standing from
thence to Seawards, he sailed three hours in black water as thick as puddle.

He found Cape Christianus and Desolation, to lie W. by N. Two Currents
50 leagues distance, and a Current S, S, W. set him violently into the Ice, he
also finds the Current upon the side of America, to set to the North; but
contrary, on the Groenland coast, to the South.

He finds a harbor upon the Coast of Groenland, and sails A good harbor.
6 leagues up a great Inlet, or river, before he could find 16 fathomes to
anchor in, the land on both sides was steepie and mountainous.

He goes on land and finds houses, or rather Tents, covered with
Seale-skinnes, the people came to him, crying Eliout, holding up their hands,
their boats were covered all over with Seal skins, about their Tents, was
great abundance of the flesh of Seals (to dry) with Caplin, and of Pilchards
innumerable, Great store of Pilchards.
of which, with other fishes, their rivers are full, their dogs were very fat,
they found in their Tents, Fox and Seal skins, very well dressed; also certain
coats of Seal, and Foul skins, with the feather-side inwards, they also
found a certain vessel boiling upon a lamp, the vessel made after the manner
of a little pan, the bottom of stone, the sides of Whales Gils, therein was
Seals flesh, boiling in Seal oil; and in another a dogs head boiled, by
those Tents lay two great boats, with which he supposed they transported
themselves from one place to another, this not being the place of their Great
Cannowes.
continual habits; the boats were open with 8 or 10 thoughts, and 20 foot in
length at least, for a sai^e they have the guts of some beast well dressed, and
neatly sowed together.

After this the people came to them in their boats, and bartered Seal skins
and their Coats, even for old nails, or for a knife, they will sell coat and
boat, Unicorn horn, or Salvage barter.
Mors teeth, Whale finne, with which they head their darts and weapons, the
Latitude of this Harbors mouth is 66. degrees. 13
30, min. an E, and W. Moon, makes a full Sea, it flows 3. fathomes and an
half up and down, he had made about Oil let forth*
a barrel and ^ / ^. of oil, and leaving it on land all night, the Salvages
let it forth. 18


The Salvages came the next day and bartered, and going on land upon a sudden,
without violence done them (which shows their wicked condition) they assailed
them with Salvage assault.
stones out of slings in most violent manner, at the shooting of a Falcon-gun
they all fled.

The next day again they repair to the number of sixty, making new truce by
crying Eliout, but perceiving they had bags full of stones by them, at the
report of a Pistol they all departed, and after that, they came to the same
Cliffe again, and violently assaults them that no man could stand upon the
hatches, so as he was glad to shield himself by loosing his Bonnets, and
lacing them about his ship, and at the firing of a Musket they would ducke
down behind a Rock, the report gone, they would afresh assault them. He
departs from hence 19
and came to an anchor in an excellent haven on the S. side of a high hill,
which he named Mount Coningham; this Sound for Denmark Haven.
the goodness thereof, he named Denmarke-haven.

20 He loosed from this harbor, the Salvages came again to the number of 73.
beating and making a hideous noise, they enter into barter, and throw Shells and
toys into his Boat, he causing his boy to fetch them, they shoot him through
both buttockes, with a Dart; there were at this time mustered upon the Islands,
to the number of 300 people.

Now follows Mr. James Hall his Topographicall Description of the Land, as
he discovered the same.
THe land of Groenland, is a very high ragged, and mountainous Country, having
many good Rivers, Harbors, and Bays; into 5. of which, he sailed 10, or 12
English leagues, being very navigable, with abundance of Fish of sundry sorts,
the Land in all places where I came, seemed to be fertile, according to the
Climate wherein it lies, for between the Mountains was most pleasant Plains
and Valleys, insomuch as if he had not seen the same, he would not have
believed, that such a fertile land in show could have bin in those Northern
Regions; there is also great store of Foul, as Ravens, Crows, Partridges,
Pheasants, Seamewes, Gulls, with other sorts; of Beasts he has not seen any,
except black Foxes of which there are very many. He does suppose there are
also many Dear, for about their tents, they found many Hartshornes, with the
bones of other beasts, also within the land he saw the footing and dung of
diverse other beasts, he found the footing of one beast to be 8 inches over; in
the rivers were Fishes, as Seals, Whales, and Salmon, with diverse other sorts
of fishes; the coast is a very good and fair land, for 3 leag. off, he found
15 fathomes, and as he approached the same 13, 12, 10 fathomes, very fair
sandy ground. The people are a kind of Samoid or wandering nation, removing
from one place unto another, they are people of a reasonable stature, brown of
color, very like the people of the East and W. India, they are active and
warlike, using their darts and slings very nimbly, they eat their meat raw,
or little parboild, with blood, oil or water; they apparel themselves in
skins of such beasts as they kill, but especially with Seals and fowls,
which they can dress very soft and smooth, in Summer turning the hair and
feather side outward, in Winter inwards, their weapons are slings, bows,
darts headed with bone or iron, he supposes them to be Idolatrous, worshipping
the Sun, he met all the coast along much drift wood, but from whence it came he
knew not, he coasted this Coast along from 66 degrees. to 69 degrees. and found many
good sounds and harbors, and returning toward his Ship which he found in a
harbor, by espying certain Worlockes, which the Captain had caused to be set
as Beacons, for to give him knowledge of their being.

In this his absence from the Admiral, the Saluages had July.
done them much violence, the Captain had taken three of of them, whom he
kindly entreated, others of them he slew, this evening he takes in his
provision of fresh water.

He sets on land one young man to be left in the Country, July.
to his cruel fortune, and this was done by express command of the
State-holder of Denmark, before his coming sorth they also in the Pinnace set
another on land, both being malefactors, giving of them small necessaries, ( It
may be those people lived a long time after, and may be yet living, if the
Salvages have not dev^ured them) he sets sails and comes to Sea, where he
found much drift Ice with a high Sea, which he thought to be a current, setting
through Fret^^^ Davis to A strange current.
the Southward, as by experience he proved; for by observation this day at
noone, he was in Latitude 62 degrees. 40. m. whereas, the day before he was in
Latitude 66 degrees. 10 min. having made by account a S, by W. way, about 10
leagues, this current he did find to set along the Coast of Groenland, South by
East.

15 This day he was in Latitude 57 degrees; the 16 day close weather, he meets
with a mighty skull of Whales, amongst drift Ice, and meets also a great
current setting West North-west over for America. This is the A great Current.
current found by Frobrisher, coming from the East, and butting upon the
East Side of Groenland, and does strike along the Land to Cape Christianus,
otherwise called Cape Farewell.

1 He met with a skull of Herrings, so that he knew himself August.
not far from Orkney, he was in Latitude, 58 degrees. 40 m. and sounding had 42
fathomes, very sandy ground, with some black dents, when shortly after, and
the same day in the evening, he sounded again, and had but 20 fathomes dented
ground, he was near the shore before he saw it, for it was thick weather.

10 He came to Elsenore Rode in Denmark.

The second Voyage of Master James Hall from Denmark to the further discovery
of Groenland with five Ships, (observed 1606.)
^7 He set forth from Copemanhaven, and went betwixt May.
Orkney and Shotland the 7 of Iu^e, which day one of the Groenlanders dyed, it
seemed it was one of them he had brought from thence the year before. 14 He
accounts himself to be 19, degrees. 45, min. from the Meridian of the Naes of
Norway.

14 He steereth away W. the wind S, E. and thick weather, June.
he imagines himself in 58 degrees. 10, min. Latit. at which time by reason of a
Northerly Current, contrary to his expectation, Northerly Current variation 11
degrees.
he had made a West way Southerly 22 leagues, and then as he supposes, the
Compass varied Westward one point.

1 He sees land being 8, leag. off, with a great bank of Ice, July.
lying off the S, W. end thereof; he supposes it to be Busse Busse I Will again
discovered.
Island, and that it lies more to the Westward, then it is placed in the
Marine charts.

Steering away W, by N. he was in a great Current, setting Current see S, S, W.
S, S. W. the which he did suppose, did set betwixt Jseland, and Busse I Will,
over with America, from hence he steeres away W, N, W.

6 He found himself to be in 58 degrees. 50, min. whereby contrary to his
expectation, he did plainly see the South-erne current A caveat for Commanders
in Fleets.
to be the cause, this Evening he found the Compass to be varied 12 degrees. 5
min. Westward, this Night their Pinnace and Vice Admiral, come foul of one
another.

8 He was in 59, degrees. 30, min. and finds still the Current and variation to
carry him to the Southward of West.

10 He sees the Coast of America in Latit. 60, degrees. 16, Variation.
min. about 9 leagues off, and finds the needle varied 23 degrees. W. the hill
tops were covered with snow, the shore to the A Current.
N. full of Ice; he had a Current set West into the shore, and indangers him:
Had not a gale fresh at S, West, brought him off.

18 Until this day he passed many Mountains of Ice, at Noone was in 63, degrees.
45, min. Latit.

19 Being amongst much Ice, and plying to get clear, says Strong Current.
he sees the Land of America in 64 Latit. it lay S, and N. very high, and
ragged, covered with Snow: He finds Da^is does write of the same not far
from this place.
still a strong Current, to the West, from the Latit. 51. his Compass was
placed. of a point to Eastward of N, and was carried almost 4, points to
West-wards beyond his judgment, he found this Current to set W, N, W. the
Compass varied 23 degrees.

From the 20, until the 25. he passes and traverseth over from the West side
for Groyneland, and had sight of Queen Annes Cape, 10. leagues off.

27. He sees the Capes he named the last year, as Cape Annt, Cape Sophy, the
Foords also, as Rumells foord, Christianus foord, and puts into Coninghams
foord; where he says, Sylver Mine
the Silver was.

The Salvages come on board, and barter with them for August.
Iron, with Seal skins, and Whale-fynne; he searched up the Foord, and finds
it to be but a Bay, with many green, and pleasant Islands, the people to the
number of 25. follows them with their Boats, some of his men on Land
travailes up the Mountains, and sees rain Dear. Rain Dear.


6 There fell some small difference amongst them about choosing of an anchoring
place, the water being deep, and they removing from their first Road-sted
further up the River; where it flows S, E. and N, W. in Latitude 66, degrees. 25.
minutes.

9 The Captain went up the River, with his Boat, where they came to see their
winter Houses, which were builded with Whales bones, the baulkes thereof were
of Whales ribs, and covered with Earth; they had certain vaults or rooms
underground 4 square, two yards deep in the Earth: The town consists of
about 40. houses, they found the burial of their dead, the Corpse wrapped in
Seale-skinnes, and stones laid in the manner of a Coffin over them.

This day they take 5, of the inhabitants to bring into Denmark, to be
informed of their Country, which they call Seca^^nga, and say, that within the
Land, they have a great A King in Groynland.
King; who is carried upon men's shoulders.

10 They come forth of Rumels foord, and in great danger got to Sea* being
enforced between certain Islands, which He comes homeward.
lie off Cape Sophie 4, leagues into the Sea; the last year he named them,
Knights Islands; being got there he came into 66. degrees. 50. min. La^it. W, N, W.
from Cape Sophy 15 leag. off.

18 He goes within sight of shore, being all high land* like Islands and great
store of Ice, betwixt him, and the same.

28 He coasted to and again amongst Ice, until this day having had a storm*
and meets one of his Fleet, which had been separated from him, he fell with
two banks of Ice, and is 8, leag. off Desolation by account, but could not see
it by reason of fogge.

31 He meets Ice which he marvailes at, being that the South-most part of
Groynland described in the Marine Chart, is in the Latit. of 60 degrees. he being
then in 59 degrees. 10 min. Desolation bearing W, N, W. half N, 64 leag. off; and
Cape Cape Christianus the next known part of Groenland.
Christianus, the next known part of Groynland N, W, by W. Westerly 38 leag.
he holds an E, S, E. Course, and sees Land the same day, being very high, lying
along E, S, E. 16. leag; the W. part seemed to fall away E, by N. the land was
very high, and covered with snow, he was not certain, whether it was the Maine
or an Island, he named it Frost Island. (I cannot conceive but that by his Latit.
it must be the same, he had formerly named Cape Christianus.)

1 He comes homewards the 8, day, and is in 58. d. 36 m. September*
variation 2 d. 45 m. W. The 10. day, he was in 59 degrees. 10. min. variation, 1
degrees. 4 min.

18 He espies the Island of Farrey, Latit. 62 d. 3, m. the stream sets under
the Isles next hand E, and W.

He arrived at Copeman Haven, his conclusion is, that Bredarenses October. 4.
Foord, is the most Northerly, Coninghams Foord is next in 67. d. and odd m.
the Foord where they see the Town, is 2 leag. to S, of Coninghams, the town
stands 10, leag. up the Foord, the Kings Foord is in 66 d. ^ / ^. (but he did
not find the Silver Mine.

Master James Hall was employed in a third Voyage from Denmark 1607. but after
that he had made the Land, the Danes mutined, and in fine forced the ships
back again for Iseland, there being then nothing done toward the edifying of
this work, it is needless to make any further search after the same.

The 4th and last Voyage of Master James Hall from Kingstone upon Hull, with 2
Ships, viz. the Patience, and the Hearts-Ease, written by William Baffin.
HE says, that in the Morning perceiving the Sun, and Moon to shine very
clear, he purposed to find out the Longitude, and this day he spent in finding
out the true Meridian Line upon an Island, by hanging at the extremes thereof ^
plummets in thread instead of an Index or sight.

9 He observed the Moon just upon the Meridian, at which July.
very instant the Suns almicanter was 8 degrees. 53 min. N. the Poles elevation
65 degrees. 20 min. by which working, according to the doctrine of Sphaericall
triangles having 3 sides given, to wit, the Complement of the Poles elevation,
the Complement of the Almicanter, and the complement of the Suns declination
to find out the quantity of the Angle, at the Po^e; by which working, he finds
the time to be clock 4, 17 min. and 24 sec. he finds likewise by the
Ephemerides, that the Moon came to the Meridian of London at 4 a clock 25 m.
34 sec. which 17 m. and 24 sec. subtracted, leaves 8 min. 10 sec. of time,
for the difference of the Moons passing betwixt both the Meridians, the Moons
motion that day was 12 degrees, seven minutes, which converted into Minutes of
time, were 48 minutes 29 sec. this wrought by the rule of proportion, is thus;
if 48 min. 29 sec. the time that the Moon comes sooner to the Meridian, then
she did the day before, give 360 degrees. the Earths Circumference; what shall 8
min. Longitude wrought in Cockings Sound Latit. 65 degrees. 20. min.
10 sec. to wit, 60 degrees. 30. min. the difference betwixt the Meridian of
London, and Cockings Sound in Groenland.

This he affirms to be without any great error, the rules truly observed and
Ephemerides exact, for that no instrument can be exact enough to find out the
true Hour, Minute, and second, the loss of one Minute being the loss of 7
degrees. in Longitude.

22 Master Hall was slain with a Dart, thrown into Master Hall slain.
his body, by one of the Groenlanders, before whose death, and since the ninth
day, little was done worthy note; but the supposed Mine sought for; and in that
search many brave Rivers and Harbors were found, with the footing of some
great Dear or Elke, as big as an Ox; ^t Dear footing.
may be supposed that the cause of this Blow, was for the loss of the Brother,
or other the Friends of the Momicide, which might be some of those five, the
Danes carried away the last year; (and but one before,) for that in all
trading, both before and after his Death, they did never A Caveat.
offer any violence, unto any of the Company, but before, would oftentimes be
pointing and aiming as it were at him, calling him Captain one to another.

They search further for the Mine, and find many places where the Danes had
dug, with stone of Orient color, but when it was refined, it proved dross:
having no metal at all therein, but was like to Muscovia sludde, they also
found a pleasant Vallie.

They find not the Mine, as also the people forbear to trade with them, as
before, they made way again out of this River, to come to their Admiral, in
which way and in many Islands, they find where many of their winter houses had
bin, and some of their Tents were but lately carried away, in which place they
also found, of their long Boats made of Wood; and bound together with skins
of Whale-fyn, and covered with Seal skins, being 33 foot long, and 5, broad
having in them 10 thoughts or Seats, this day they depart Rumells Foord, in 67
degrees Latitude, and 24 degrees 16, minutes variation, it being one of the
fairest Rivers he see in that Country, it lies in East, and E, by South, and
that Night he came to the Admiral, then in the Kings Foord.

26 They consult about coming home, for the Captain was slain, and the people
refuse to trade with them as they were wont. I think for fear, for the same
Voyage, one James Pullie, was also slain by a Salvage, for offering to take
one of their people out of his Boat by violence.

They depart homewards, Master Andrew Barker, of Hull in the Admiral, William
Huntris Master in the Pinnace.
18 HE is in 58 degrees. 50 min. he finds the variation August.
to be 13 degrees. 22 min. contrary to observation of other men in this place, and
because this was the first Sea-Voyage of this young Arts-man, I will trace his
own words; the 18. the Suns declination says he, was 9 d. 58 min. for the
Meridian of London; but being almost 4 hours of time to the West-wards, there
is 1 / ^. to be abated from the rest, for his declination was 9 degrees. 55 min.
his altitude, 24 degrees. 40. min. in Latitude 59 degrees. his distance from the South
by the So much B^ffin September.
Compass 81 degrees. Latitude 57 degrees. variation 11 degrees. 10 m.

6 Nothing of note but one storm until this day, the latitude was 61 degrees. 18
min. the variation 6 degrees. East, the deep 68 Fathomes.

8 He came to the I Will of Orkney, where anchoring, the people September.
came, and gave them Hens, geese, and sheep, for old clothes, or shoes.

11 He came to Kingstone upon Hull.

The observation he made of Groenland.

That it is an exceeding high land, and Mountains which are very high within
the land, they are of stone, some of one color, some of another; all
glistering, but nothing worth, if there be any Metal, it lies low in the
earth, and cannot well be come by; there are some rocks purer then Alablaster,
the Northside of the Mountains are continually covered with snow, there are
few trees but in one place 40 miles within the land; in a river called
Balls-river, upon the Southside of a Mountain, there is a little Grove of
Wood, about 6 or 7 foot high, like a Coppice in England, it being of Willow,
Juniper, and such like, they found much Angelica, And he thinks the Country
people do eat thereof, for he saw many of those roots in their boats.

There are store of Foxes in the Maine and Islands of sundry colors, there are
as white as snow, and long surred; there is diverse Dear, but they be far up
within the land; for the Inhabitants do hunt them sore that come toward the
Sea, where themselves live; he see 7 at one time, his men had diverse Darts, and
horns of Dear, he see the foot of one beast bigger than the foot of an Ox,
their Dogs and Fox Pizzels have a bone within them; the people all the Summer
time use nothing, but fishing, drying their fish, and Seals flesh upon the
rocks, for their winters provision; every one both man and woman, have a boat
covered with Seals skins, close sowed, that no water can enter them, some of
them are 20 foot long, and not above a foot broad, shaped like a Weavers
shuttle, so light, that a man may carry many of them at once; they use but one
oar, with a wash at both ends, it is incredible to see how swiftly they row,
no ship being able to sail so fast, they sit in the midst of their boats, and
holds their oar in the middle; In these boats they catch their fish, as
Seals, Salmon, Morses, and others; they strike some with Darts, and angle
others; their coard is made of Whale-bone, their hook of a bone, with which
lines and hooks, we have catched very much fish.

I could not learn of their rites and Ceremonies, but generally they worship
the Sun, they remove from place to place as their fishing does serve; they live
in tents in the Summer, and in winter in houses somewhat within the ground,
when they approach you they will hold up their hand to the Sun, Crying
Eliout, which we answering in like fashion, they dare boldly come to us. They
make a Cave with stones, wherein they bury their dead, according to the
bigness of the Corpse, defending them strongly from the p^ey of Foxes, or
Ravenous beasts, they make another near the former, wherein they bury his
bow, arrows and da^ts, and other his provision, and he is buried in his
apparel, the coldness of the clime keeps the body from putrefaction.

11 They eat their meat raw, yet they use fire, they drink September.
Salt Water, by the Ship side.

Some of our men conceived them to be Man-eaters, but he thinks not, because
they might have killed 3 of our men, at one time filling water, in an Island far
from our Ship and without any weapon, at which time, a great company of them
came to them, and searching their boat for Iron, they gave them all they had,
with their chest keys; whereupon they depart A Cavea^.
without doing them any harm, but let others take heed.

Since that I have entered thus far into Groenland by the way of Capt. Davis
and Mast. James Hall, hear the report of Dethmar Plef-kins a Minister, sent
into Iseland from Hamburgh, 1563.
GRoenland was first so named in the year of CHRIST, 900. And although I
purposed, says he, to pass over Groenland with silence, yet seeing I touched
upon the land, and observed some few things, I thought it not impertinent to
make mention of them. There was in a Monastery in Iseland, called Helgafiel, a
certain blind Monk who lived miserably there, he was borne in Groenland, of a
dark complexion, and broad face; the Governor commanded him to be brought
unto him, that he might know some part of the State of Groenland, he said,
there was a Monastery of St. Thomas in Groenland, into the which, his parents
thrust him when he was but young, and after he was taken out by the Bishop of
Groenland, when he was 30 years of age, to sail with him into Norway, to the
Archbishop of Nidrosia (or Drunton) to whom the Island Bishops are subject; in
his return he was left in a Monastery by the Bishop, whose Country Groenland
was, this was done as he said, in 1546. he said that Island was called
Groenland, A^tiphrastically: for that it seldom or never waxes green, and
that there is so great cold there throughout the whole year (except June,
July, and August) that being clothed and covered with Furs, they could scarce
be warm, and that they had at home, certain round pieces of wood, which being
moved with their feet, kept their feet warm, he says, that it abounds as
Island does with fishes, and that they Their Pigmies are beasts, Unicorns,
fishes.
had Bears and white Foxes, ^ay, Pigmies, and Unicorns, and that the Day did
not appear, until the Sun had run through Pisces.

This Monk told us mavelous strange things, that there was in the Monastery
of S. Thomas (where he lived) a Fountain, which sent sorth burning and flaming
water, that this water was conveyed through Pipes of stone, to the several
Cells of the Monks, and that it made them warm as stoves do with us, and all
kind of meats might be boiled in this Fountain, and fiery water, and no
otherwise than if it had bin on a fire indeed, he advertised moreover, that the
walls of the Monastery, were made with Pumice stones, out of a certain mountain
not far from the Monastery: like to Hecla in Iseland, for if you power this
water upon the Pumice stone, there will follow a slymie matter, which in steed
of lyme they use for motter.

After the Governors conference with him, I came privately to demand, certain
particulars, touching the Pigmies and other things; he had a little skill in
the Latin tongue, he understood me speaking Latin, but answered me by an
Interpreter; he said the Pigmies represent the most perfect shape of man, that
they were hayrie to the outermost joints of the finger, and that the males have
beards down to the knees, but although they have the shape of man, yet they
have little sense, or understanding, or distinct speech, but make show of a
kind of ^issing* after the manner of Ge^se, that his Abbot kept two of them in
his Monastery, male and female, but they lived not long, and that they were
unreasonable creatures, and live in perpetual darkness, that some say, they
have War with the Cranes; but that, he knew not.

He affirmed that the same manner of food was in Groenland, as in Iseland; to
wit, of Fish, but not of Cattle, because they have no Cattle; and that the
Country is not populous. Forthwith from Iseland begins the H^perbor^on Sea,
which beats upon Groenland, and the Country of the Pigmies, which at this
day, is called Nova Zembla, and there the frozen Sea has a Bay, which is
called the white Sea, or Pigmies country.
Mare album; and there are certain passages whereby they sail into the
Soythian Sea, if they can for Ice. And the Governor had a ship of the King of
Denmarkes furnished withal necessaries, but when he heard (by the Monk) of
the short cut into the Kingdom of China, by the Tartar^a^ Sea, which had often
been attempted by others, held it but in vain.

The last of March, 1564. he commanded that ship to The Authors Voyage.
sail to those places, and me also together with them, enjoining me diligently
to mark well the situation of the places, and whatsoever we met with, worthy
of sight or report; we were in the ship 3 score and 4 men, as well Danes as
Iselanders, and the 20 day of April we arrived in a certain Promontorie of
Groenland, and when we found no harbor, to the which we may safely commit our
selves, letting down the lead, we found the depth of the Sea, and it was such,
as we could not anchor there, and the abundance of Ice was so great, that it
was not possible to sail near the rocks, 24 of us armed, with great labor,
and danger went on shore in our Skiffe; among whom I was to try whether I could
find a harbor or no, and what kind of men Groenland had, in the mean time the
ship floated in the Sea and Ice in a great Calm, half our Company abode on
the shore (to keep the Skiffe) another part (and I with them) ran abroad to
discover, they that were left on shore to keep the Skiffe, going hither and
thither, found a little man dead, with a long beard, with a little boat, and a
crooked hook of the bone of a fish, and a leather A little man dead.
Cord, four fish-bladders were bound unto the boat (as is supposed) that it
should not be drowned, whereof 3 were sunk and fallen flat, this boat (because
it was very unlike ours) the Governor sent to the King of Denmark.

We wandered in the mean season, in a land unknown unto us, which was covered
with snow, and Ice, we found neither footing of men or any inhabitants, nor fit
place, but the Sea was closed and fensed, on every side with craggy Rocks; yet
we met with a great white Bear, which neither feared us, nor could be driven
away with our cries, but came full upon us, as to his certain prey, and when
he came near unto us being twice shot through with a gun, he stood bolt
upright, with his fore-feete like as a man stands, until he was shot
through, the 3. time, and so fell down dead, his skin was sent to the King
of Denmark, we agreed amongst our selves before we went on shore, if we found
a fit harbor, or else had need of their help, that we should pluck up our
Stander, which we carried out with us, for that purpose; and that, if they
would call us back, should signify the same with their Ordnance; a tempest
arising in the mean while, the Master of the Ship gives us a sign to return,
and calls us back unto the Ship, all of us after with great labor, in 3.
days returned unto the Ship with the Bears skin, we sailed A great mistake
The Russ. were the first that named this land Nova Zembla, so Stephen B^rrowes,
1556. But this cannot be Pigmies-land, for that must join or be near to
Groenland.
therefore to the other side of the Island to the North, to the Country of the
Pigmies or Nova Zembla, that by the mouth of the white Sea, we might come to
the Scythian or Tartarian Sea; from thence they say, there is a passage to the
Kingdom of China and Cathay, but being hindered by the Ice, we could not pass
the mouth of that Sea, wherefore without doing any thing, we returned into
Iseland the 16 of June.

The Voyage of Master John Knight employed into Groynland as Captain, the
year before by the King of Denmark but now out of England to search the N. W.
passage. 1606.
18 He was set forth at the cost and charge of the Muscovia April.
Company, and the East India Merchants.

He set sail from Gravesend the 18 of April, and arrived in Orkney the 26.
he stayed there 14 days with contrar^ winds, and in the mean time he
entertaines 2. men of the Country, to go along with him on the Voyage.

12 He set forth from St. Margarets Sound in Orkney, and May.
steered away W. by S.

16 This day at noone holding still his course Westward off Variation 48d
S. the Latit. was 58 d. 19 m. his magneticall declination 8 degrees. also this
mornings Sun being 10 d. above the Horizon, was distant from E, Northward 22
degrees.

17 This day he was in 58 d. 10 m. this morning the Sun did rise 50 d. to the
N. off East.

12 He was in Latit. 57 d. 50 m. continuing his course still Southwards off W.
from the last day much wind at N, N, ^. and fog, and he had a current setting
to the North.

22 He saw many Sea guls and Rock weed.

23 He judged his way to be made S, W, by W. but it proved W, by S. or rather
W, 20 leag. by reason of a current (there he sees an Owl.)

28 He had Lat. 57 d. 57 m. the variation 14 d. 30 m. Westward, Latit. 57 d. 57
m Variation 14 d. 30.
this day he had black water streams, leaches and falls of currents, it seemed
to the N. and some to the West.

29 Latit. 58 degrees he was in a tyde-gate, which he judged to set N, and S.
or that it was the Eddie of the currents which he saw the other day (he sees
white Fowls chirping Dead Cowes.
like Sparrowes) and also many dead Cowes adrift ( I think rather Crows.)

His Latit. was 58 d. 3. m. the variation 24 d. to the N, Westwards, Latitude
58 d. 3 min. Variation 24 d. June.
this night he observed the Sun to set 21 d. W. from N.

1 He was in Latit. 57 d. 35 m. and saw many black fowls, like Willockes
flying in flocks together.

4 He was in Latit. 54 d. 40 min.

5 He was in 56 d. and had the variation by the Scale 20 d. Latitude 56 d.
Variat. 20 and 24 degrees.
by his other Instruments 24 d. W. the Sun was 22 d. ^ / ^. high, and to the
North off W. 30 d. by the Instruments, and 26 d. by the skale.

11 At noone, he had Latit. 58. at night the Sun set 14 d. W, from N. at
morning it rises 50. d. to the E. off North.

13 He had sight of land like Islands, in Latit. 57 d. 25 min. and had some
quantity of Ice driving to the South.

On Friday he makes fast to the Ice, but the wind calming, he rows, betwixt
Ice and Ice, toward the land, but in a fog he makes fast again to the Ice,
when it cleared he loosed again, and Rows in, and is exceedingly pestered
with Ice, suffering a mighty storm (with thick, and foggie weather) which so
bruised his Ship betwixt the Islands of Ice; that he was in danger to be
crushed to pieces, though employed all his industry to the uttermost of his
power.

19 He again discovers the Island of America, bearing N. and by W. about 15
leag. off, the variation 25 d. W. Latit. 56 Latitude 56 d. 48 min. Var^at. 25 d.
d. 48 m. this coast shows like broken Islands and the Tide of flood comes
from the North.

24 He had a violent storm Northerly, and such a su^^e of the Sea came in,
that his roapes broke that were fast on shore, Lost his Rud^er.
his Rudder was driven from his stern by the force of the mighty Islands of
Ice, so that he was forct to hale close into the bottom of a cove, to save his
Clothes, furniture and vi^tuals, but before he had done, the Ship was half
full of water, His Ship bul^ed.
and he took little rest for that night, (which may very well be believed.)

25 The ship on ground, he goes about to set the water out: of her, and to
stop so many of her leakes as he could come by, and some went to building the
shallop, he caused his boat to be lanched over the Ice, and sent his mate
Edward Gorill with 3 more, to seek for a better place, where to bring his ship
on ground, if it were possible to mend her again. They returned without any
certainty, by reason of the abundance of Ice, which choked every place, yet
they found wood growing on the shore.

Here Master John Knight ended, writing his Iournall with his life, another
proceeds as follows.
26 ON Thursday in the morning he caused some of his men to go on board to
save what things they could, himself, Edw. Gorrill his mate, and 3 more of his
company took the boat, having with them 4 pistols, 3 muskets, 5 swords, and a
half pikes, for to go over to a great Island, not above a mile from the ship,
to see for Harbor to mend his ship in, they took with them an Aequinoctiall
Dial, a paper to draw the land; when they were passed over, the Mr. his
Brother and Mate, with one more went on shore, leaving ^. in the Boat from 10
of the clock in the morning until 11 at night, who heard no news of them,
after they departed from the top of the hill; then did the Trumpeter being one
of them left in the Boat, sound two or 3 times, and the other did discharge
his Musket two or 3 times more, and so they came away to the The Master and
other n^^^^ hard ^^^.
W. side with the Boat where the ship was, who were watching for their
coming; but when they see these two come and no more, they marvelled where the
rest were; and when they were on land, the others inquired for the Master and
the rest, but they could tell no news of them, after their departure from the
boat, but that they did see them go on to the top of the Island, which report
did strike all the men into great fear, to think in what extremity they were,
because they wanted their Master and 3 of their men, their ship sunk and they
nothing to trust too but their shallop, which was at that time but. furnished:
This night lying on shore in their Tent, which was betwixt 2 Rocks, they kept
very good watch, for fear of any peoples sudden assault, or if the Master
and his company, had travailed so far, as they could not come home again
that night, if they should shoot a musket they might hear them; but they came
not at all.

27 They consulted that 7 of them should go over with the boat to try if they
could see or learn any news of their Master or of their men, supposing that
they were either surprised by the Salvages of the Country, or else devoured by
the wild beasts, so they took with them 7 muskets, swords and Targets, and
such provision as they had in the ship, and went down to the Sea side, but
they could not get over for Ice, at length they returned, with much ado to
come to shore, and went to the ship to save such things, as they could get out
of her.

28 Fair weather, they make clear the ship, and help to save and mend all
things, she lay upon the Rocks; therefore they make her as light as they could,
for beating and bruising of her Hull, that night it rained very sore, and about
clock 1. in the boat-swain and Stewards watch it being almost out, the Steward
goes on board the ship to pumpe, leaving the boateswaine at watch, some muskets
shot from their Tent, now while he was pumping, there came over the Rocks a
great sort of the Country people, to the place where the boateswaine was at
watch, who when they saw him, they shot Salvage tre^^^ry.
arrows at him, running to him as fast as they could, whereupon he discharged
his musket at them, and so fled back to the Tent as fast as he could, thinking
they had beset it they were so many; the Steward hearing the Musket go off,
came forth of the Ship, and when he was coming saw the Salvages approaching
their Shallop, and cried out to them in the Tent to save the boat, and the
Shallop, who made what have they could; but when they came at their boat and
see so many of the Salv. in the Shallop, they were then afraid of being
betrayed, at this time it rained sore, yet calling their wits together, they
sent 2 of their men back to the tent, the rest made toward the Salvages, and
shot at them some 3 or 4 muskets, who when they perceived it, they stood in the
shallop and held up their hands to them calling one to another; they thinking
it were better to dye in their own defense in pursuing the Salvages, then they
them, for it was in the night, and they were still in sight; thus recovering
their Shallop, they sent more men to keep the Tent, the Salvages were but 8
men, and a dog, yet the rest followed, but they were got into other boats,
before they over took them. The Ice was so thick, that they stuck fast in
them, they came so near them as they could, and shot a doozen shot at them,
before they could get clear, the shot caused them to cry out one to another
very sore, for their boats were full of men, as far as they could judge, they
are little people, tawny colored, thick haired, little or no beard, flat
Saluages described.
nosed, and are man-eaters.

26 They carry all their provision aboard their Ship for fear June.
of the Salvages second assault, the ship lying between two Rocks, and all
without so full of Ice, that they could not pass any way to sea, no not with a
boat; this day 2 of our men watched, that we might have warning, if any of them
came again with their boats, the Carpenter made what have he could with the
shallop, and did only tinch, but neither calk^ nor pitched her, yet they
brought her to the ship.

30 They fall to work with axes, and pick-axes, to cut the Ice, for all about
the Island was nothing else, and no place to ride free in, that night it pleased
God, that they rowed her away with their oars, but she was exceeding leake,
and the shallop also, and which was worse, they had never a Rudder to steer
withal, yet they rowed all night amongst Ice.

1 and 2. They rowed up and down amongst the driving Ice, July.
with little hopes to recover their Country.

3 The wind at N. they had a great current set to Southward, Current South*ward*
they make fast to a piece of Ice, and went to work, to stow their things snug
and close down within board to make her stiff, for they had no ballast, the
Carpenter makes what shift he could, to hang their Rudder, having nothing to
make Gudgions nor Pintels, they were feign to break open the Masters Chest, to
take the Iron bands, to make fast An enforced shift to hang a Rudder.
2 pickaxes for 2 pintels, this Night they hang the Rudder with 2 pintels, and
a Cable through the middle of it, to keep it too with two tackes, now were
they in good hopes, to get clear; for before their ship being Leake, with her
stem sore beaten with Ice, and Rocks, themselves with pumping and rowing, were
both sore and weary.

4 This day, the wind came W, N, W. and was fair weather July.
(they got clear out of the Bay the Noone-watch) and was the first they had of
long time before, being all glad to watch to conduct the Ship clear from the
Ice, their ship was so leake, that if she stood vnpumped but half an hour,
they could not dry her with 1000 strokes; therefore they were enforced to
Rumige, and found many leakes, but not that which caused them to pumpe so sore;
at last they find it close abaft the fore-foote, where the keele was split in 2
or 3 places, they could not come to stop it, for it was under a timber, in at
which the Sea came so fast as it was not possible They ^oder.
to keep her free with both pumpes, then did they take their maine bonnet, and
basted it with Okum, and put it overboard right against their leake, which
eased them 4 or 500. strokes in an hour, they all this day consult to shape
their course for New Foundland, hoping to meet with some English or French,
and to mend their Ship; at this time one of their men was very sick, another
had his hand splinted, and most of them all were so sore with rowing, and
pumping, as they were not able to stir, but that they must perforce.

5 They shape their Course for New Foundland.

21 They fall with land being nothing but Islands, Latit. 49 degrees, 30 minutes.

22 Fair weather, they stand in among Islands, and a great Current set from
Island to Island, no ground at a 100 Fathoms, they keep too and fro all this
night, in great danger* being among broken Rocks, with thick weather.

23 They epsy a dozen shallops fishing, they make toward them, they took
harbor and remained in this Bay o Fogo: until the 22 of August, repairing
their ship, and refreshing themselves; the 24 of September, they arrive a
Dartmouth.

This journall from the death of Master John Knight, wa writ by Oliver Brown
one of the Company.

An Abstract of the Voyage of Master Henry Hudson, to the Northwest, begun the
17 of April, 1610. and ended with his life, being treacherously exposed by
some of his Company.
22 IN the Road of Lee, in the River of Thames, he caused April.
Master Coolbrand to be set in a Pinke, to be carried back again to London.
This Coolbrand was every way held to be a better man than himself, being put
in by the Adventurers as his assistant, who envying the same (he having the
command in his own hands) devised this course, to send himself the same way,
though in a far worse place, as hereafter follows.

5 He came to the Isles of Orkney, and here he set the N. May.
end of the Needle, and the North end of the Fly all one.

6 He was in latitude 59 d. 23 m. and there he perceived that the N. end of
Scotland, Orkney, and Shotland (for he visited them all) as he says, are not
so Northerly as is commonly set down in the Charts.

8 He saw Far Islands in Lat. 62. 24 m. but he staid not there.

11 He fell with the E. part of Iseland, then plied up along the S. part of the
land and came to the Westmost; and the 15. he still plied up until the last of
May, and got some fowls of diverse sorts.

1 He put to Sea out of a harbor in the Westmost part of June.
Iseland, (and according as he writes) plied to the Westward in Latit. 66d.
34 m.

2 He was in Latit. 65 d. 57 m. small wind Easterly.

4 He saw Greenland perfectly over the Ice, this night, Sun Greenland.
set at N. and rise N, N, E. The 5. he plied in 65 d. still incom bred with
Ice, which hang upon the c^^st of Greenland.

9 He was off Frebrishers s^ra^^s, and p^ide Southward until Davis his error
but not believed.
the 15. and then he was in Latit. ^9 d. 27 m, and had sight of Desolation, and
finds the error, of the former lying down of the land, running to the
Northward, as he says, until this day in 60 d. 42 m. he saw much Ice, many
riplings and overfallings, and a strong stream setting West Northwest.

23 In sight of much Ice, wind variable, and in latitude 62. degrees, 19.
minutes.

25 About midnight he saw the land North, but was suddenly lost, yet he run
still Westward in 6^ degrees. 19 min. and he plied upon the South side seeking the
shore, he was troubled with much Ice, in latitude, 52 degrees. 16. min.

8 He plied off the shore again, until this day, the Pol^s July.
elevation 60 d. 0 m. he saw the land from N, W. by W. N. unto the S, W, by W.
covered with snow, a Champion land, and calls it Desire provoked.

11 He plied still to Westward, and fearing a storm, he anchored by 3 ragged
Islands, in uncertain deepes, between 8. and 9 fathomes; he finds the harbor
unsufficient, by reason of sunken rocks, one of the which was the next morning
2. fathomes above water (which he had gone over) he calls them the Isles of
Gods mercy; it flows here better than The I Will of Gods Mercy*
4 fathomes; the stood came from North, flowing 8 a Clock the Change day, the
latitude in this place is 62 d. 9 min.

16 Plying to Southward, until this day he was in 58 degrees. 50 min. there he was
Imbayed with land, and had much Ice.

19 Until this day he plied Westward, and found his latitude 61 degrees. 24 min.
where he see a Bay in the South land which he named ( Hold with h^pe.)

21 Hence he plies to the Northward, had variable winds, and finds the Sea
more grown, then he had any time since he left England.

23 The Poles height was 61 degrees. 33. min.

25 He saw the Southland, and named it, Magna Britania.

26 He was in latitude, 62 degrees. 44 min.

28 He plied Southward off the Westward, and was in 63. degrees. 10 min.

31 Plying Southerly, he found himself in 62 d. 2^ min.

1 He had sight of the North shore, from the N, E, by ^. ^. August.
to the W. by. S. the N. 12 leagues off, the W. part 20 leagues, he had no
ground at 180 fathomes, and he thought he see land, bearing E, N, E. on the
Suns side, but could not make it perfectly, here he found the latitude, 62 degrees.
50. min.

2 This day he had sight of a Fair headland 6 leagues off, which he called
Salisburies Foreland, he ran from thence W, S, W. 14 leagues, in the midst of
which, he came in to a great whirling Sea, whither caused by the meeting of a
streams, or overfals he knew not, thence sailing W, by S. 7 leagves farther;
he was in the mouth of a straight, and had no ground at 100 fathomes, the
straight not being above 2 leagues broad in the passage, in this Western part,
which from the Eastern part of Fretum Davis is distant 250 leagues.

3 This day he put thorough this passage (which was narrow) after his men had
been on land, that did observe; the flood-tide did come from N. flowing by the
shore 5 fathoms.

After he had sailed West by South 10 leagues, the land fell to the Southwards,
and the Isles to the West left him, he observed, and found himself in 61 d. 20
m. and a Sea from the Westwards.

He names the Cape on the Star-board, C. Digges, being an Cape Digges.
Island; that on the Larbord stands upon the maine, named by Cape Worstenholme.
him Cape Worstenholme, here is all I find extant of his own writing,
although he lived until July following, before he was exposed.

A large discourse of the said Voyage, and the success thereof, written by
Abacuk Pricket, Who lived to come home
They came to the Isles of Orkney, and from thence to Far, May.
one day being calm, they fell to fishing, and killed good store of God and
Ling, from thence they raise the Isles of Westmony, in one of which the King of
Denmark has a fortress, by which they passed to raise the Snow-hill-foote, a
mountain so called, on the N, W. part of the land, and in that course, they
see the famous Mount Hecla, which cast out much fire, a sign of foul weather
to come; they leave Island on stern, and met a maine of Ice, lying upon the
Northpart thereof, which when they see, they stood back for a Harbor in
Island, called Derefer, where he killed good store of Foul; from thence they put
to Sea again, but the wind not serving, he puts back again into another
harbor, called Lousy Bay, hear they found a Bath so hot as would scald a
Foul,

He put forth for Groenland, and thought he saw land, but i^ June 1.
prooved a fog bank.

He raised Groenland, but great store of Ice hung upon the land, this land is
Mountainous, with hills like Sugar loaves, covered with Snow.

He coasted along betwixt W, and N, W. until he saw Dissolation, which is a
great Island, on the N, W. part of Groenland, here he saw great store of Whales,
some came about and under the ship, but did no harm: From hence he directed
his course N, W. and would have hailed more Northerly if the wind would have
suffered him, in this course he see the first mountainous Ice; about the last
of June, he raised the land N. off him, he took the same to be that Island
which Capt. Davis set in his Chart, on the W. side of this straight he would
have gone to N. thereof, but the wind would not suffer him, so he fell on the
Southside into a great ripling or overfall of a current, into this current, he
went and made his way Northward off W. until he met with Ice which hung on
this Island; wherefore he cast about to the South, and cleared himself and then
stood to the W, amongst some store of sloting Ice, and upon the Ice store of
Seals, he still made way N, W. and meets sometimes with Ice, and then again
clear; thus proceeding betwixt Ice and Ice, he sees a great Island of Ice
overtumble, which was a good warning to him not to come near them; the next
day he had a great storm, and was driven to put in amongst A warning.
the Ice, and there to lie, some of his men fell sick, he will not say for
fear, though he see no other sign of grief.

The storm ceasing, he put from the Ice standing W, S, W: and N, W. and as the
clear Sea and Ice would suffer him; seeing the sea thus continued he would
seek to the S. but the more he strove the worse he was, for he was fast
enclosed and began to despair (as he after told this Writer) he thought he
should never have got out of this Ice, but there have perished.

Wherefore he showed him his Card, that he was 100. leag. See Weymare
further than ever any English man was, and referred to their choice to proceed
further or no; whereupon some wished them at home, others any where so from
amongst the Ice, but in Discontents*
this distraction, there passed words which was thought upon long time after.

There was one told the Master, that if he had a 100 pound he would give 90
thereof to be at home, but the Carpenter made answer and said, if he had 100.
he would not give 10 upon any such condition, but would hold it as good money
as ever he had any, and by Gods leave, to bring it as well home; well, to work
they go and with labor get the ship clear, the sea being also clear, a
league or 2 off; the course now is N, N, W. in the end, he raised high land, at
S. W. (covered with snow) and names it, Desire provokes, he heard the noise of
a great overfall of a tide that came out of the Land, and now he could well
discern that formerly he had been imbayed, and that Time made his
acquaintance so well known to the Ice, that when wet fogge or foul weather
came, he should make fast to the broad piece of Ice, and run and sport, and
fill sweet fresh water upon the same, after he had brought this land to bear
S off him, he had a current or tide to open the Ice, being carried first one
way and then another, but in bays they lay as in a pond, without mooving, in
the Bay wherein he was thus troubled, he see of those Icie mountains on
ground, here was 120 and 140 fathomes of water, and here he sees a Bear upon
the Ice, his men gave chase, to him, but lost him, by the tides carrying away
the Ice, the Bear was gone out of their reach.

He continued his course, toward the North-West, and raised land to the North
and Ice, where there was a Bear which came from Ice to Ice, until she came
near them, and then she run away; he stood along on the South side of this
land meeting with Ice, which seeing, he stood into the shore, and found a
harbor, in the West end of this Island, he went over one Rock of two fathomes
and a half, and at low water it was so much bare, he names it the Isles of Gods
mercy, Isles of Gods Mercy. Partridges.
the Master sent this Author, over to discover this Island, to the North and
North-West he met with a covery of Partridges, and killed only the old one, it
was barren land, having nothing thereon but water plashes, and torn Rocks, as
though it had been subject to earthquakes, to the North of this Island, there
is a great bay or Sea, they know not what it Spring tides carried the Ice to
the N, West.
may prove, there was a great Island of Ice on ground, which with the spring
tide was set on float and carried to the N, W. but came not back within sight,
here they found some drift wood on shore.

From thence he stood to S, W. to double the land to the W. off him, through
many pieces of Ice, at length he found a clear Sea, and raised land to the N,
W. whereupon he stood more to S. then before (and fell amongst Ice) which he
would have doubled to the N. but could not, then he stood to the S, W. amongst
the Ice, and strove to get to the land but could not for the Ice, from out of
this bay he stood to the North, and was soon clear of the Ice, then he stood
to S. W. and W. where he was enclosed with land and Ice, having land on the one
side from the S. to the N, W. and on the other side he see land from E. to W.
but the land that lay to the N. and lay E. and W. was but an Island, he went so
far as he could, (and made fast to the Ice, the tide brought upon him) but
the ebb did open Tide and ebb.
and made way, and 7 or 8 hours he was clear, and with the great Islands of
Ice, was carried to the N, W.

He stands to the W. along the S. shore and raised 3 Capes or headlands one
above another, the middlemost is an Island, with a Bay which he thinks will
prove a good harbor, he names them Prince Henry's Forland, when he had laid
these, he raised another which was the extreme part of the land looking
toward the N. upon it are two hills (but one above the rest) like an humlocke,
he names it King James his Cape, to the N. of this lies certain Islands, he
names it Queen Annes Forland, he still followed the N. shore beyond the Kings
Forland, there is a Bay wherein lies some broken land and close to the maine,
but he passed by on the night.

From thence he stood to the N. and W. to double this land again, and fell
with land that stretched from the maine, like a shore from S, to N. and from
N, to W. and down to S, again, here a storm takes him and he stands to N. and
raises land, then he stood to S. again, for he was loathat any time to see the
N. shore, the storm continuing, and he coming to the S. he found himself
shot to the W. a great way, which he mervailed at, (considering his leaward
way) to S. W. ward off this land, there is a hill he named Mount Charles, to
the N. and beyond this is an Island, that to the East has a fore head land, and
beyond it to the W. other broken land, where he thinks may be found a good
harbor, he names this Cape Salisbury.

He then left those lands to the North-East, and fell into a ripline or
overfall of a current, which he thought to be shoald water, but had no ground,
he put on still in sight of the Southland, and raised land 2 leag. from the
maine, he took it to be the North maine, but it proved an Island, having a very
fair Head-land to the West, which he named Cape Digges, Cape Digges.
on the other side, to the East, was another Cape or head-land which he called
Cape Worstenholme; betwixt which two he Cape Worstenholme.
sailed South.

He sends the Boat on shore to Digges his Island, and in her going she was
overtaken by a storm of Rain, Thunder, and Lightning, they came to the N,
East Side, being high-land, but with much ado, going to the highest part, they
find some Dee^e
plain ground, and Dear, 4 or 5. And after 16 in one Heard, but could not
come nigh them with Musket shot.

Thus going from place to place, they see (to the West) a Hill higher then all
the rest, it was steep, and they could not get up to it, but on the South-west
side; and on that side was a great water pond, from whence on the South runs
a stream of water, as much as would drive a Mill, falling into the Sea: and in
this place bred great store of Foul, and the best grass grew there, they had
seen since their coming from England, they found Sorrel and Scurvey-grasse
in great abundance, they found likewise Hills, made like to haycockes, Foul
hanged.
within which were great store of Foul hanged by the necks, they took many
of them; and down a valley carried them to their Boat.

In this time the Master had brought in the Ship, between the two lands, and
shot off some pieces, to call the boat on board, for it was a fogge, they
persuaded him to stay here for refreshing, but he would not, but sailed down
to the S. the land bears E, from him, and the same Maine that he had all He
lost sight of East-land.
the time followed, he loses the sight thereof, because it fell away to the
East, and after he had sailed 25 or 30. leag. he came to shallow water, broken
ground, and Rocks; which he passed to the S. and in a storm of wind, the
water still shoalding, he came to anchor in 15 fathomes.

After this, he wayed and stood S, E. for so the Land laid, and came to have
land on both sides, then he anchored, and sent the Boat on land, the Land on
the W. was a very narrow A large Sea to South.
point, and to the S. there was a large Sea: He stood to the South between
these two Lands in this place, not above two leagues, and in the sight of the
East-shore; in the end he lost sight thereof, and came into the bottom of a
bay into 6. or 7. fathom water, then he stands up again to the N. by the
West-shore, until he came to an Island in 53 degrees. where he took in water, and
ballast.

From thence, he passed to the N. but some 2 or 3 days after, there fell some
reasoning concerning their coming into this Bay and going out, the Master
takes occasion to reviue old matters, and displaces his Mate Robert Ivet, and
also his Boate-swaine, for words spoken in the great Bay of Ice; he places
Robert Bylot his Mate, and William Wilson Boate-swaine, and then stands up to
the N, until he raised land, and then down to the S. then up again to the N.
and then down to Michaelmas Bay.
the S. and on Michaelmas day he came in and went out from certain Islands
which he sets down for Michalmas Bay; from thence he stood to the N. and came
into shole water, the weather thick and foul.

He anchored in 6 or 7 fadomes, and lay there 8 days, before which time he
could not have one hour to get up his anchor, the wind then ceasing, the
Master would have up the anchor, against the mind of all that knew what
belonged thereunto; but when he had his anchor on peake, the Ship took one sea
and threw them all from Capstone, and diverse were hurt, he left his anchor and
saved most of his Cable, for the Carpenter had laid his axe ready to cut the
Cable if occasion should so fall out.

From hence he stands to S, W. through a clear Sea of diverse soundings, and
came to a Sea of two colors, one black the other white, and 16 or 17 fadom
water, between which he went 5 or 6 leag. the night coming on, he goes in his
maine and fore-saile and came into 5 or 6 fathomes, he saw no land for it was
dark, so that he stood to the East, and had The West most of Hadsons Bays.
deeper water, and then stood to the S. and S. W. and came to the West^. most
bay of all, ( in this bay wintred Captain James of Bristow) in this bay
nearest to the N. shore he anchored and sent on Land his boat, he found the
land flat, and his Footing of a Man.
men saw the footing of a man and a ducke in the snowy Rocks and found good
store of wood, here he saw a ledge of Rocks lying S. and N. to the Southward
off him, and flowed over at full sea, and a strong tide set in there, he weyed
anchor at midnight and thought to stand forth as he came in, but it S^^ on ^
Rock.
fortuned that he run upon these Rocks, and sat there, for 12 hours, but
by Gods mercy he got off again unhurt though not unafrighted.

He then stood up to the East and raised 3 hills lying North and South, he went
to the furthermost, and left it to the North he came into a Bay and anchored,
and sent the Carpenter, and this writer to look for a place to winter; it
being the last of October; the nights long and cold, the earth all covered with
Snow, themselves wearied, having spent 3 months in a labyrinth, November.
in this Bay, they went down to the East, to the bottom there, but returned
not with that they went for; the next day he went to the South, and S, West,
where he found a place, unto which he brought his ship, and hailed her on
ground, and on the 10 day she was froze in; now he looks to the lengthning of
his provision.

He was victualled for 6 months with good provision and might have had more
from home if he would, now he must pinch for that he knew of no supply until
he came the next year to Cape Digs, where the Foul breed, for there was all
his hopes; wherefore he propounded reward to him that either killed beast,
fish, or foul; his Gunner dyed about the middle of this month, he blames the
Masters uncharitable dealing with this man, but note what followed.

The Master kept in his house at London, a young man named Henry Greenes
condition.
Henry Green, borne in Kent, of worthy Parents, but by his life and
conversation, he had lost the love of all his friends, and spent all that he
had, but by the means of one Master Venson, his mother parted with 4 l. to buy
him clothes, which money he was not trusted with the disposing of himself,
this Henry Green, was not known to the Adventurers, nor had any wages, but
came only on board at Graves-end, and at Harwich, would have gone into the
field with one Wilkinson of our Company; at Island he fell out with the
Surgeon in Dutch, Green beats the Surgion.
and he beat him on shore in English, which set all the Company in a rage, so
that they had much ado to get the Surgeon on board again, this Author told
the Master of it, but he bade him let the matter alone; for (said he) the
Surgeon has a tongue that would wrong the best friend he had, but Robert
Iuet, the Masters Mate would needs put his fingers in the Embers, and told the
Carpenter a long tale, (when he was drunk) that the Master had brought in
Green to crack his credit that should displease him, which when the Master
heard of, (being forty leagues from Island) he would have gone back to Island
to have sent Juet his Mate home in a Fisherman, but being otherwise persuaded,
all was well and Green stood upright, and was very inward with the Master, and
was a serviceable man every way for manhood, but for Religion he would say he
was white Paper, whereon he might write what he would; now the Gunner was dead,
and then (as order is in such cases) if the Company stand in need of any thing
belonged to the man that is deceassed, then is it brought to the maine Mast,
and there sold to them that will give the most for it; this Gunner, had a gray
cloth Gown, which Green prayed the Master to befriend him, so much as to let
him have it, paying for it as another would give, the Master said he should,
and therefore answered some, who sought for it that Green should have it and
none else.

Now out of time and season, the Master called the Carpenter to go in hand
with a house on shore, which at the beginning he would not hear of, when it
might have been done; the Carpenter told him that the Snow and Frost was such,
as he neither could nor would go in hand with such work, which when he heard
he feretted him out of his cabbine and struck him, calling him by many foul
words and threatened to hang him, the Carpenter told him, that he knew what
belonged to his place better then he did, and that he was no house Carpenter,
yet the house was made with much labor to no end, the next day after, the
Master and the Carpenter fell out, the Carpenter took his Piece and Henry
Green with him, for it was ordered that none should go out alone, but one
with a Piece another with a Pike, this did move the Master so much more against
Green, that Robert Bylot his mate must have the Gown, and had it delivered
unto him, which Henry Green seeing, he charged the Mr. with his promise, but
the Mr. did so rail on Green, and with so many words of disgrace, telling him
that all his friends durst not trust him with 20 shillings, and therefore why
should he, and as for wages he was to have none, nor should if he did not
please him, yet the Mr. had promised him as good wages as any man in the ship,
and to have him one of the Princes Guard at his home coming, but you shall see
how the Devil so wrought out of this that Green did the Master what mischief
he could, in seeking Green practice of mischief.
to discredit him, and to thrust him and other honest men out of the ship; to
speak of all the troubles, and of this cold Winter would be too tedious.

Now he shows how mercifully God dealt with them in this time, for in the
space of three months he had such store of one kind of Foul, which were
Partridge, as white as Milk, at which he killed at least one hundred dozen, of
sundry sorts, for all was fish that came to the net, at the Spring this foul
left them, and in their places came other of diverse sorts, as Swannes, Goose,
Ducke, and Teale, but hard to come by, he thought that they would have bred
there in those broken grounds, but they do not, but came from the S, and flew
to the N. further then he was this Voyage, yet if they had been taken short
with N. or N. E. winds, they stay there against the winds return, and then
take their flight to the N. ward, and in short time none of them are to be
seen there.

Then he searched the woody hills and valleys, for all things Miserable food.
that had any show of substance (for food) how vile soever, the moss of the
ground, and the frog in his ingendring time was not spared, but amongst diverse
sorts of buds, it pleased God that Thomas Woodhouse brought one of a tree, that
was full of Turpentine substance, of this the Surgion made a decoction A
Medecinable bud.
to drink, and applied the buds hot to them that were troubled with ache in
any part, from whence they received present ease.

Now about that time the Ice began to break out of the A Salvage*
bays, there came a Salvage to their Ship, as it were to see and to be seen,
and was the first, that they had seen in all that time, he entreats him well,
and used him kindly, promising to himself great matters by this means; and
therefore called for all the Knives and hatchets which every man had to his
private use, and to this Salvage he gave a knife, a looking-glass, and
buttons, who received them thankefully, and made signs that after he had slept
he would come again, which he did and brought with him a sled which he drew
after him, and upon it two Dear skins, and two Beaver skins, he had a scrip
under his arm, out of which he drew those things the Master had given him; and
lays the knife upon the Beaver skins, and the glasses and buttons upon the
other, and so gave them to the Master, who received them; and the Salvage took
They trade.
those things which the Master had given him, and put them into his scrip
again, then the Master showed him a hatchet, for which he would have given him
one of his Dear skins, but the Master would have both, and so he had, although
not willingly, after many signs of people to the N. and to the S. and that
after so many sleeps, he would come again, he went his way but came no more.

Now the Ice being broke out of the Sounds, that a boat might pass, the Mr.
appointed William Wilson, Henry Green, Michael Pierce, John Thomas, Andrew
Motter, Bennet Mathewes, and Arnold Lodlo, to go on fishing, these men the
first day they went, caught 500. fish as big as good Herrings, and some
Trouts, here was good hope to have their want Fishing.
supplied, but those were the most that ever they got in one day, for many
days they got not a quarter so many; in this time of their fishing, Henry
Green, and William Wilson, with some others plotted to take the net and
Shallop which the Carpenter had new set up, and so to shift for themselves, but
the Shallop being ready, the Master would go in it himself, to the S, and S,
W, to see if he could meet with people, for to that end it was set up: and
that way he could see the woods set on fire by them; the Master takes the net
and shallop, and so much victuals as would serve for nine days, and went to
the Southward, they that remained on board were appointed to take in water,
wood, and ballast; and to make the ship ready against his return; but he could
set no time, for he was persuaded that if he met with the Salvages, he should
have refreshing of fresh meat, and that good store; but in conclusion, he
returned worse then he went, and though the Inhabitants set the woods on fire
before him, yet they would not come to him.

Being now returned, he makes ready for his home coming, A bill of return.
and first he delivers all the bread in the fore room, which came to a pound a
piece for every man's share, and delivered unto every man a bill of return,
willing them to have that to show if it pleased God they came home, and he
wept, when he gave it unto them, but to help themselves to some relief; the
boat went to fish from Friday morning until Sunday noone, and brought but 80
small fish for 18 hungry bellies; whereupon he waighed and came away from his
wintering place into the Sea, where his bread being gone, that store of cheese
which he had must stop the gap, being but five; the Company grudged, Cheese
shifted.
for they made account of nine; but those five were equally divided by the
Master, some counselling him to the contrary, for there were some, who having
it, would make haste to be rid thereof, because they could not govern it; I
know (says the writer) when Henry Green gave half his bread which he had for
14 days, to one to keep, and prayed him not to let him have any until the
next Monday, but before Wednesday at night, he never left until he had it
again, having eaten up his first weeks bread before; so Wilson the boatswaine,
had eat in one day his 14 days bread, and has laid in bed, 2 or 3 days for
his labor. The cause why the Master delivered all the cheese, was because they
were not all of one goodness, and therefore they should see that they had no
wrong done them, but that every man had the best and worst together, which was
3 pound and one half for 7 days.

The wind serving, he wayed and stands to the N, W. and on Monday night, the 18
of June, he fell into the Ice, and the next day with W. wind he lay fast within
sight of land until Sunday following; now being here the Master told Nicholas
Simmes that there would be a breaking up of Chests, and a search for bread, and
willed him, if he had any to bring it to him, which he did, and delivered the
Master 30 Cakes in a bag; this deed of the Mr. (if it be true) has made me
marvel what should be the reason, why he did not stop the breach in the
beginning, but let it grow to that height as it overthrew himself and many
other honest men; but there are many devices in the heart of man, but the
counsel of the Lord should stand.

Being thus on the Ice, on Saturday the one and twentieth Wilson and Green,
their ^reachery.
of June at night, Wilson the Boatswaine, and Henry Green came to this writer
lying lame in his Cabin, and told him that they and the rest of their
associates would shift the Company, and turn the Master and all the sick men
into the Shallop, and let them shift for themselves, for there was not 14 days
victual left for all the Company, at that poor allowance they were at: and
that there they lay, the Master not caring to go one way or other; and that
they had not eaten any thing this three days, and therefore were resolute
either to mend o^ end, and what they had begun, they would go through
therewith, or die; when he heard this, he told them, he marvelled to hear so
much from them, considering that they were married men, and had wives and
children, and that for their sakes they should commit so foul a thing in the
sight of God and man, as that would be: for why should they banish themselves
from their native country; Henry Green bad him hold his peace, for he knew
the worst of it; which was to be hanged when he came at home, and therefore of
the two he Hang or starve
would rather be hanged at home then starved abroad, and for the good will they
bore him they would have him to stay in the ship; he gave them thanks, and
told them that he came into the ship, not to forsake her, nor yet to hurt
himself and others by any such deed, Henry Green told him then, that he must
take his fortune in the Shallop, if there be no remedy quoth he, the will of
God he done.

Away goes Green in a rage, swearing to cut his throat that went about to
disturb them, and left Wilson by him, with whom he had some conference, but to
no good, for he was persuaded to go on with the action, whilst it was hot,
lest their parties should fail them; and the mischief they intended to
others, should fall upon their own shoulders. Green comes again and
demanded what he said; Wilson answered and said, he is in his old song, still
patient; then he spoke to Green to stay 3 days, in which time he would so
deal with the Mr. as all should be well, but being denied, he dealt with him
but for 2 days, nay, for 12 hours, there is no way then say they, but out of
hand: then he told them that if they would stay while Monday* he would join
with them to share all the victuals in the ship* and would justify it when he
came at home; but this would not serve, wherefore he told them it was some
worse matter they had in hand, then they made show of, and that it was blood
and revenge he sought or else he would not undertake such a deed, at such a
time of night, Green with that took his Bible, which lay before him, and
Swear.
swear that he would do no harm, and what he did, it was for the good of the
Voyage, and for nothing else, and that all the rest should do the like, the
like did Wilson swear.

Green went his way, and presently comes Ivett, who because he was an ancient
man, he hoped to have found some reason in him, but he was worse then Green,
for he swore plainly that he would justify this deed at home-comming, after
him came, John Thomas, and Michael Pierce, as birds of one feather, but because
they died, as hereafter shall be showed, he let them pass; then came Motter
and Bennet, of whom he demanded, if they were well advised what they had taken
in hand, they answered, they were, and therefore came to take their oath.

Now says this writer, because he was much condemned for this oath, as one
that plotted with them, and that by an oath he should bind them together to
perform what they had begun; he thought good to set down to the view of all
men, to see how well their oath and deeds agreed, and thus it was; You shall be
true to God, your Prince and Country, you shall do nothing but to the glory
of God, and to the good of the action in hand, and harm to no man. This was
the oath without adding or diminishing, he looked for more of those companions,
althoughthose were too many, but there came no more while it was dark, and
they in readiness to put this deed of darkness into execution, he called to
him Green and Wilson, and prayed them not to go in hand with it in the dark,
but to stay until morning, for now he hoped every man would go to his rest,
but wickedness sleeps not: for Henry Green keeps the Master Company all
night, and gave this writer bread, which his Cabin mate gave him, and others
were as watchful as he; then he asked Henry Green, whom he would put out
with the Master, he said the Carpenter, John King, and the sick men, he said
they should not do well to part with the Carpenter, what need soever they
should have; why, the Carpenter was in no more regard amongst them, then
another, for that he and John King were condemned for wrong done in the
victuals; but the chiefest cause was because the Master loved him, and made him
his mate, upon this his return from his wintring place, thereby displacing
Robert Bylot, who they did grudge because he could neither write nor read;
for therefore said they, the Master and his ignorant mate will carry the ship
whether the Master pleases; the Master having forbidden any man to keep
account or reckoning having taken from all men whatsoever served for that
purpose; well, he obtained of Henry Green and Wilson, that the Carpenter
should stay, by which means, after that they had satisfied themselves, the
Master and the rest might be taken into the ship again, or he hoped that
some one or other would give some notice to the Carpenter, John King, or the
Master; for so it might have come to pass, and have been by some of them
prevented, that were the most forward.

Now it cannot be amiss to show how they were lodged, and to begin in the
cooks Room, there lay Bennet, and the Cooper lame without the Cooks room,
on the starboard side lay Thomas Woodhouse sick, next to him lay Sydrach
Fenner lame, then lay Wilson the boatswaine, and then Arnold Lodlo next to him,
in the Gunners room lay Robert Iuet and John Thomas, on the Larboard side lay
Michaell But, and Adiran Moore which was never well since they lost their
anckor, next to him lay Michaell Pierce and Andrew Motter, next to them,
without the Gunner room lay John King, and with him Robert Bilot, next to them
himself, and next to him Francis Clements, In the midship betwixt the Capstone
and the Pompes, Henry Green, and Nicholas Simmes, this night John King was
late up, and they thought he had been with the Mr. but he was with the
Carpenter, who lay in the poope, and coming from him was met by his cabbine
mate, as it were by chance, so they went to cabbine together, it was not long
ere it was day, then came Bennet, for water for the kettle, he went into the
hold, when he was in, they shut the hatch on him, but who kept it down he
knows not, but upon the deck came Bennet.

In the mean time went Henry Greeene and another to the Carpenter, and held
him talk, until the Master came out of his Cabin, which he soon did, then
came John The Master bound.
Thomas and Bennet, before him, while Wilson binds his arms behind him, he
asked what they meant, they told him that he should know when he was in the
Shallop; now Iuet, while this was doing, came to John King into the hold, who
King liked one.
was provided for him, for he had got a sword of his own and kept him at a
Bay, and might have killed him but others came to help him, and so he came up
to the Master, the Master called to the Carpenter, and told him that he was
bound, but he heard no answer made, now Arnold Lodlo, and Michell But, railed
at them and told them there knavery would show it self, then was the Shallop
hailed up to the ship side, and the poor sick and lame men, were called up to
get them into the Shallop, the Master called to this writer who came out of his
cabbine, as well as he could, to the hatch way to speak with him, where on his
knees he besought them for the love of God to remember themselves, and to do as
they would be done unto, they bad him keep himself well and get him into his
cabbine, not suffering the Master to speak to him; but when he came into his
cabin again, at the horn window which gave light into his cabbine, the Mr.
told him that Juet would overthrow them all; nay said he, it is that villain
Green, and spoke it not softly.

Now was the Carpenter at liberty, and asked them if they would be hanged when
they came at home, and as for himself, he said he would not stay in the Ship
unless they would force him, they bid him go then, for they would not stay
him, I will said he, so I may have my chest and all that is in it, they said he
should, and presently put it into the Shallop, then came he to take his leave
of this writer, who persuaded him to stay, which if he would he might so work
that all might be well, but he answered, that he did not think but that they
would be glad to take them in again, for he was so persuaded by the Master,
that there was not one in all the ship that could tell how to carry her home,
but says he, if we must part (which we will not willingly do, for they would
follow the ship) prayed him if they came to the Cape before them, that he would
leave some token, that he had been there near to the place where the Fowls
breed, and he would do the like for us, and so with tears we parted, now were
the sick men driven out of their cabbines into the Shallop but John Thomas, who
was Francis Clements friend, and Bennet, was the Coopers, so as there was words
between them and Henry Green, saying that they should go, and the other
swearing that they should not go, but such as were in the Shallop should
return when Henry Green heard that, he was compelled to give place and to put
out Arnold Lodl^ and Michael But, which with much a do they did.

In the mean time there was some that plied there work Breaking chests open.
as though the ship had been entered by force, and they had free leave to
pillage, breaking up chests and ri^eling all places, one of them came to this
writer, and asked him what they should do, who answered that they should make
an end of what they had begun, for he see him do nothing but sharke The names
of those exposed into the Shallop.
up and down; now all the poor men in the Shallop, as Henry Hudson Master,
John Hudson his son, Arnold Lodle, Sirack Fenner, Phillip Staff the
Carpenter, Thomas Woodhonse, Adam Mo^re, Henry King, and M^che^^ But; the
Carpenter got of them a piece, and powder and shot and some pikes, an Iron pot
with some meal and other things, they stood out of the Ice the Shallop being
fast to the stern of the Ship, and so when they were high out, for he cannot
say they were clean out, they cut the head-fest from the stern of their ship,
and then out went topsailes, and stood to the E. in clear Sea, having lost
sight of the Shallop, in the end they took in top sails, righted their helm,
and lay in foresaile, until they had ransacked and searched all places in the
Ship, in the hold they found one of the vessels of meal whole, and another
half spent, for they had but two, they found also 2 firkins of butter, some 27
pieces of porke, and half a Bushel of pease, but in the Mrs. cabbine they
found 200 of Biscuit Cakes, a peck of meal, of Bear to the quantity of a Butt,
now when it was said that the Shallop was again come within sight, they let
fall the maine sail, and out top sails and fly as from an enemy.

Then he prayed them to remember themselves, but Wilson nor the rest would
hear of no such matter, coming high the E. shore they cast about to the W.
and came to an Island where they anckred in 16 fathoms, and tries on shore with
the net for fish, but could not drive for rocks, Michaell Pierce, killed two
foul, and hear they found good store of weed called cockle grass, of which
they gathered (as in their wintering place) and came on board* they lay there
that night and the most of the next day, in which time they see not the Shallop
nor Lost the Shalfor ever.
ever after, now came He^. Green and told him that it was the companies will
that he should go up into the Mrs. cabbine, and take charge thereof, he told
him that it was more fit for Rob. Iuet, he said he should not come in it, nor
meddle with the Mrs. Card nor Iournals, so up he came and Hen. Green gave the
key of the Mrs. chest and told him that he had laid the Mrs. best things
together, which he would use himself when time did serve, the bread was also
delivered this writer by tale.

The wind serving they stand N, E. and this was Bylots course contrary to
Ivet, who would have gone N, West, they had the E. shore in sight, and in the
night had a stiff gale of wind and stood before it, until they met with Ice,
and stood amongst the same until they were fast, it was so thick on head,
and the wind brought it so fast on a stern, that they could not stir
backewards, and so laid there 14 days in worse plight then ever before they
had been, where was great store, yet it lay not so broad upon the water as
this, for this sloating Ice continued miles and half miles in compass, having
a deep Sea and a tide of flood setting S, E. and N, W. but Bil^t was confident
to go through to the N, E. as he did.

At length being clear of the Ice, he continued his course in sight of the
East shore until he had raised 4 Islands which lay North and South but past
them 6 or 7 leag. where the wind took them short, they stood back to them
again, and came to anckor between 2 of the Westmost, they found nothing on
land but Cockle grass, he says, he found that before they came to this place;
that he was kept in the Ship) against Henry Greenes mind) because he did not
favor their proceeding better then he did, for he drove him to take upon him
to search for such things as himself had stolen, and accused him of a matter
no less then treason amongst themselves, for that he had deceived the company
of 30 bread cakes; now they began to talk that England was no safe place for
them, and Henry Green swore that the ship should not come in any place, but
keep the Sea still, until he had the Kings hand and seal to show for his
safety, they had many devises but Henry Green was their Captain and so they
called him, from those Islands he stood to the N. having the Eastern land in
sight, and raised these Islands the Master had called Romn^ys Islands, between
which Islands and the shallow ground to the E. off them, the Mr. stood down
into the first great bay, this was going outward in the Masters time: they kept
the East side ^^i^l^in sight, and coming thwa^t of low land, struck once upon
a Rock that lay under water, but without any harm, S^ru^k upon a Ro^k.
that they saw they continue their course and raise Lan^ on head which
stret^hed to the North, there they said p^^i^^l^ that Robert Bilot by his
Northern^ course had l^^^ the ^^^^s to the South, and that in time they must
s^^ke that way for relief, having but small store left: Bu^ Bilot would still
follow the land to the North, saying that ^^^ ^^p^d in good time to find what
would relieve us that way, as soon as to the South; This Writer faith, that
he told them that this Land was the Mai^^ of Wostenholme Cape, and that the
shallow Rockey ground was the same that the Master ran down by when he went
into* the great Bay. Robert Ive^, and all said it was not possible unless the
Master had brought the Ship over land, and willed them to look into the
Masters Card, how well their course and it did agree, they stood to the East,
and left the Maine land to the North by many small Islands into a narrow gut,
between two Lands and anchored; they went on the West side, and found a great
Horn, and cockle Found a great horn which they took to be Sea V^^corne.
grass on the East side, this Grass was great relief to them, for without it
they could not have recovered the Capes, for want of Victual.

When they weighed Anchor the^ doubled the Cape to the North which is high
land, even to the Capes which is North and South some 25. or 30. leagues, then
they stand to the North, they saw of those Fowls which breed at the Capes, and
killed some; at which time with great joy they raised the Capes, and bearing
for them, came to the Islands that lay in the mouth of the Streights: but
bearing in they ran upon a Rock, and stood fast for 8. or 9. hours, it was Set
on ^ Rock
ebb when they grounded, but the next flood floated them off again. It was
fair weather, the ebb came from the East, and the flood from the West; being
afloate they stood to the Eastward and anchored.

This day he sent the Boat on land to kill Foul, they in the Ship had warning
to stand as near as they could: but the wind being contrary, they could not
fetch the place where the Foul breed, but they found great store of Gulls upon
the Cliffes, but hard to come by, but with their pieces they killed 30. and
toward night returned on shipboard; then they brought their Ship nearer the
Mouth of the Streights, and anchored in 18. Fathoin upon a Riffe or Shelfe: but
when they had wayed and stood to the place where the Foul breed, they were
feign to stand to and again in the Streights mouth under Sail, because they
could not find ground to Anchor in, the water was so deep.

The Boat went to Diggs Cape, and made directly for the place where the Foul
breed, where they see 7. Boats came about the Eastern point toward them: but
when the Salvages saw their Boat, they draw their lesser Boats into their
bigger, and when they had done they came rowing to their Boat, and made signs
to the rest, our men made ready for all essays; the Saluages came to them, and
they grew familiar Salvages.
one with another, so as ours took one of theirs into their Boat, and they
took one of ours into theirs; then they carried our Men to a Cove where their
Tents stood to the Westward of the place where the Foul breed, so they carried
our Man into their Tents, where he remained until our men returned theirs; In
our Boat went their man to the place where the Foul breed; and we being
desirous to know how the Salvages killed their Foul, he showed them the
Salvage fowling.
manner how, which was thus: They took a long Pole with a snare at the end,
which they put about the Fowls neck, and so pluck them down. When our men
knew that we had a better way, and so showed the Salvages the use of our
Pieces, which at one shot would kill 7. or 8. To be short, they returned to
the Cove to receive our man, and to deliver: heirs. When they came they made
great joy with dancing, leaping, July. Mores teeth, and diverse things.
and striking of their breasts, they offered diverse things to our Men: but they
only took some Mores teeth, which they gave them for a knife, and two glass
Buttons, so receiving our Man, they came abroad rejoicing at this chance as if
they had met with the most simple people of the World.

And Henry Green more then the rest was so confident that Henry Green.
by no means we should take care to stand upon our guarde: God blinded him so,
that where he thought to receive great matters from this people, he received
more then he looked for; and that suddenly, by being made an example for all
men that make no conscience of doing evil; and that we take heed how we
trust the Salvage people how simple soever they seem to be.

They made haste to be on shore, and because the Ship rid far off, they
weighed and stood as near the place where the Foul breed as they could; and
because he, this Writer was lame, he was to go into Boat to carry such things
as he had in the Cabbine, of every thing some what; And so with more have then
good speed (and not without swearing) away he went; as Henry Green, William
Wilson, John Thomas, Michael Pierce, Andrew Motter, and himself. When they
came near the shore, the people were on the hills dancing and leaping; to the
Cove we came, where they had drawn up their Boats. We brought our Boat to the
East side of the Cove close to the Rocks; on land they go, and make fast the
Boat to a great stone on the shore; the people came and every one had something
in his hand to barter; but Henry Green swore that they should have nothing
until he had Ve^ison, for that they had so promised him by signs the last day.

Now when we came they made signs to their Dogs, Ealvages treacherous.
whereof there were many like Mongrels, as big as Hounds, and pointed to the
Mountains, and to the Sun, clapping their hands. Then Henry Green, John
Thomas, and William Wilson, stood hard by the Boats head; Michael Pierce, and
Andrew Motter were got upon the Rocks a gathering of Sorrel, not one of them
had any Weapon about him, not so much as a stick, save Henry Green only, who
had a piece of a Pike in his hand, nor saw he any thing they had to shoot him
with. Henry Green and Wilson had Looking glades, lewes-trumps, and Bells,
which they were showing; the Salvages standing round about them; one of them
came into the Boats head to show him a Bottle. This Writer made signs unto him
to get him ou shore: but he made as though he had not understood him: whereupon
he stood up and pointed him on shore. In the mean time another stole behind to
the stern of the Boat; and when he saw him on shore that was on the Boats
head, he sat down again, but suddenly he saw the legs and feet of a man
by him; wherefore he cast up his head and saw the Salvage, with his knife in
his hand, who stroke at Salvage had a knife.
his Breast over his head; he casting up his arm to save his breast; the Savage
wounded his arm, and stroke him into the body under his right Pap, the Salvage
stroke a second blow, which he met with his left hand, and then stroke him into
the right thigh, and had like to have cut off his little finger of his left
hand; Now this Writer had got hold of the string of the knife, and had wound it
about his left hand, he striving with both his hands to make an end of that he
had begun, found the Salvage but weak in the gripe, (God enabling him) getting
hold of the sleeve of his left arm he see his left side lay open to him; which
when he saw, he put his sleeve of his left arm into his left hand, holding the
string of the knife fast in the same hand, and having got his right hand at
liberty, he sought for somewhat wherewith to strike him, not remembering his
Dagger at his side, but looking down he saw it; and there with struck the
Salvage into the body and throat. Salvage slain.


Whilst he was thus assaulted in the Boat, their men were set upon on the
shore, John Thomas and William Wilson had their bowels cut; and Michael Pierce
and Henry Green being mortally wounded came tumbling into the Boat together.
When Andrew Moter saw this medley, he came running down the Rock and leaped
into the Sea, and so swam to the Boat; and hung at her stern until Michael
Pierce took Gods judgment upon the treacherous
him in, who manfully made good the Boats head against the Salvages that
pressed sore upon them. Now Michael Pierce had got an Hatchet, with which he
stroke one that he lay sprawling in the Sea. Henry Green cried coragi^, and
laid about him with Trunchion; this Writer cries to clear the Boats head, and
Andrew Motter cries to be taken in; the Salvages betake them to their Bows
and Arrows, which they sent so amongst them, that Henry Green was slain
outright, Green slain.
and Michael Pierce received many wounds, and so did the rest. Michael Pierce
clears the Boat and put it from the shore, and helps Andrew Motter in: but
in the clearing of the Boat Pricket received a cruel wound on his back with an
Arrow. Michael Pierce and Motter rowed away the Boat; which when the Salvages
saw, they came to their Boats; which they feared they would have lanched to
have followed them, but they did not; their Ship was in the middle of the
Channel, and yet could not see them all this time.

Now when they had rowed a good way from the shore Pierce fainted, and could
row no more: then was Motter driven to stand in the Boats head and wave to the
Ship, which at first saw them not; and when they did, they could not tell what
to make of them, but in they stood for them, and so took them up. Green was
thrown into the Sea, the rest was taken into the Ship, the Salvage being yet
alive, but without sense. That day dyed Wilson cursing and swearing in most
fearful manner, Michael Pierce lived two days and then The end of 4. wicked
men.
dyed. Thus have you had the tragical end of Green and his 3. Mates, being
the lustiest men in all the Ship.

The poor number that was left was to ply the Ship to and again in the mouth
of the Straits, for there was no anchoring; and besides, they were to go in
the Boat to kill Foul to bring them home, which they did with great danger;
for if the wind blew, there was an high Sea: and the Eddie of the tide would
carry the Ship so near the Rocks, as it feared the Master, for so now they
call By lot.

After which great labor, and on the South Cape they had killed 300. Foul,
they stood to the East: but the wind came Three hund^ed Fowls killed.
East, and put them back again to the Capes where they killed 100. Fowls; at
length a West wind drives them homewards, for the most par along the North
side of the Straight, until he fell into broken g^ound about the Queens
Forland, and there anchored, and ^^om thence he came to Gods mercies, and from
thence to those Islands that lie in the mouth of the Straits: but not seeing the
land until they were ready to run their Bowsprit against the Rocks in a
fogge, but it cleared a little, and then they might see themselves enclosed
amongst Rockie Islands, and could find no ground to anchor in.

They lie a try all night, and the next day the fogge continues, they seek
for ground to anchor in, but found none under 100. Fathoms. The next day he
weighed again and stood to the East, and now they are brought to the allowance
of half a Foul a day, yet they had some meatleft, and nothing else; and now
were glad to burn of the feathers (for sowing of the skins, which before they
sleaed off the Foul) because they will not pull, nor the garbidge also was not
thrown away.

He says that after they were clear of those Islands which lie out with two
points, one on the South East, and the other on the North, making a Bay to the
sight, as if there were no way through, he continued his course East South
East, and South East, thinking to raise desolations, from thence to shape his
course from Ireland, though Ivet persuaded to go for New Foundland, hoping
there to have relief amongst our Countrymen: but in Latitude 57. degrees, the
wind came South West, and so it was thought fit to seek for food where some
grew: viz Ireland, and so the course was directed; In which time they were fain
to fry their Fowls bones in Candle Fowls Bones fried for meat.
tallow, putting vinegar thereto which was stirred amongst them, and every man
had one pound of Candles allowed for one week as a great dainty. And when Rob.
Juet said that by his reckning they were within 60. or 70. leagues of Ireland,
they had 200. leagues thither, their course was much longer, (though evil
stony) for their men were so weak as they were feign to sit at the Helm.

Then Robert Juet dyed, and the rest despaired, and said they were past
Ireland; their last Foul was in Stepetub, and the men cared not what end went
first. The Master was glad to do their labor and his own, tackling going to
wrack, and none regarding to help the same. In this extremity it pleased God
to give them sight of Land; not far from the place where the Master said they
should fall, which was the Bay of Galloway to the West of the Derses; so they
stood along to the South W. and espied a sail which was a Boat off Foye at
anchor fishing; this Bark brought them into Bear Bear Haven in Ireland.
Haven; here they stayed some few days and dealt with the Irish for Relief,
but found none: for in that place there was neither bread, drink, nor money, or
Country men which were then on fishing, they found as could in kindnsse, that
they would do nothing without present money. In the end John Waymouth one of
the Bark brought them in and furnished them with money upon pawn of their
best Anchor and Cable, wherewith they brought Bread, Bear, and Beef.

Now as they were beholding to Waymouth, so were they beholding to Captain
Tailor for making their Contracts, and for their men's wages, who would not go
with them home, except Waymouth would pass his word; Whereupon Tailor swore he
would press them; and if they would not go he would hang them.

In conclusion, they agreed for 3. pound 10. shillings a man to bring the Ship
to Plymouth or Phalmouth, and to give the Pilot 5. pound; and if they were put
into Bristow, they were to have 4. li. 10. s. a Man, and the Pilot 6. li. and
omitting further circumstance, they came to Plymouth, from thence to Arive at
Plymouth.
the Downs, from thence to Gravesend, and so to London; where the Master had
this Writer to Sir Thomas Smiths.

The Printer on the behalf of Pricket.
FOr as much as this may happily be suspected by some, not so friendly to
Pricket, who returned with that company who so cruelly had exposed Hudson; and
therefore may seem to lay heavy imputation, and rippe up further occasion then
they will believe: he says also he added the report of Thomas Woodhouse one of
the exposed Company, who ascribed the occasions of discord to Juet; I take not
on me to sentence, no not to examine; I present the evidence just as I had it:
Let the Bench censure with both ears, that which they may see with both eyes,
and there note, to which I first prefixed his letter to Master Samuel Macham.

Master Macham, I heartily commend me unto you. I can write unto you no news,
though I have seen much but such as every Fisherman haunting the Coast, can
report better than my self.

We kept our Whitsunday on the N. E. end of Iseland; and I think I never fared
better in England then we feasted here; they of the Country are very poor, and
live miserably: yet we found there store of dainty fresh Fish, and dainty
Foul. I my self in one afternoon killed so many as feasted all our Company,
being 23. persons at one time only with Partridges, besides Curlew, Plover,
Mallard, Teale, and Geese. I Store of foul in Iseland.
have seen two hot Bathes in Iseland, and have been in one of them. We are
resolved to try the utmost, and lie only expecting a fair wind, and to
refresh our selves to avoid the Ice, which now is come off the West Coast, of
which we have seen whole Islands: but God be thanked have not been in danger of
any; Thus I desire all your prayers for us.

Iseland this 30, of May. 1610.
A note sound in the Deske of Thomas Woodhouse Student in the Mathematics, and
one of th^se exposed with one Hudson in the Shallop.
THE 10. of September 1610. after dinner our Master called all the company
together, to hear and bear witn^sse of the abu^e of some of the company; it
having been the request of Robert Iuet, that the Master should redress some
abuses and slanders as he called them, against this Iuet, which thing after
the Master had examined, and heard with equity what he could say for
himself, there were proved so many great abuses and mutinous matters against
the Master, and action by Ivet, that there was danger to have suffered them
longer: and it was fit time to punish and cut off further occasions of the like
motives.

It was first proved to his face by Bennet Matthew, our Trumpeter, Inets
mutinies.
upon our first sight of Island: and he confessed that he supposed that in the
account would be manslaughter, and prove bloody to some.

Secondly, at our coming from Island, in the hearing of the company, he did
threaten to turn the Ship head home, from the action, which at that time was
wisely pacefied by the Master, in hope of amendment.

Thirdly, it was deposed by Phillip Staff our Capenter, and Arnold Lodlo to
his face upon the holy Bible, that he persuaded them to keep Muskets charged,
and Swords ready in their Cabbines, for they should be charged with shot ere
the voyage were over.

Fourthly, we being pestered in the Ice, he had used many words tending to
mutiny, discouragement, and slander of the action, which easily took effect
in those that were timorous: And had not the Master in time prevented, it might
easily have overthrown the voyage, and now lately being imbayed in a deep
Bay, which the Master had desire to see, for some reasons to himself known,
his words tended altogether to put the company into a fright of extremity, by
ventring in cold, jesting at our Masters hope to see Bancum by Candlemas.

For those and diverse other base slanders against the Master, Ivet displaced.
he was deposed, and Robert Bylot who had showed himself honestly, respecting
the good of the voyage, was placed Masters Mate in his stead.

Also, Francis Clements the Boateswaine, at that time was put from his office,
and William Wilson a man thought more fit preferred to his place: this man had*
basely carried himself to our. Master, and to the action.

Also, Adrian M^tter was appointed Boatswaines mate, and a promise from the
Master, that from this day Iuets wages should remain to Bylot, and the Bosons
overplus of wages should be equally divided, between Wilson and John King, to
the owners good liking, and one of the quarter Masters, who had very well
carried themselves to the furtherance of the business.

Also, the Master promised, that if the offenders yet behaved themselves
honestly, he would be a means for their good and that he would forget
injuries, with other admonitions.

Here the Reader may observe a plain expression of Hudsons Hudsons good nature.
good carriage, made concerning the voyage, and pithily demonstrated, which
makes me ready to call Pricket to further question, who in all his long
declaration of this voyage, has not given Hudson any commendations, no not in
his good parts: and yet has taken pains enough otherwise, to make an ample
expression, and to call the rogue Green, Henry Green Well Pricket, I am in
great doubt of thy fidelity to Master Hudson.

The Voyage of Sir Thomas Button with two ships, the Resolution, August.
the Admiral, the Discovery Vice Admiral, manured and victualled for 18.
Months. 1612.
COncerning this voyage there cannot be much expected from me, seeing that I
have met with none of the Iournalls thereof: It appears that they have been
concealed, for what reasons I know not, but it is sitting that such things
should be made extant, as may any way redound to the good of the Commonwealth;
and therefore I can but communicate what I have received from Abacuck Pricket,
and others by Relation, who was in the same Voyage, and from Sir Thout as Roe
in the last part of a Iournall of this voyage.

He departed about the beginning of May, and went by the West, and entered the
passage on the South of Resolution, and sometime was fast amongst the Ice: but
at length he came to Diggs his Island, where he stayed 8. days; and in that
time I^e Diggs.
set up a Pinnace he had brought from home with him in pieces; and they set
from thence to the Westward, where he discovered the Land he called Carys
Swansnest; From thence he proceeded to the Southward of the West, falling with
land in Latitude about 60. d. 40. with the named Hopes-check. I think because
that there his expectation was crossed, and thereabout enduring a grievous
storm, was put to the Southward, and constrained to look for harbor the 13.
of August, to repair some losses. After which time came on the new Winter with
much stormy weather, as he was constrained to winter there, in a small Rile or
Creek on the North side of a River in Lat. 57. d. 10. which River he named
Port Nelson, Port Nelson.
after the name of his Master (whom he buried there) putting his small Ship in
the foremost and Baracadoe both them (with Piles of Fur and earth) from
storm of Snow, Ice, Rain, Floods, or what else might fall.

He wintered in his Ship, and kept 3. sires all the Winter: but lost many men,
and yet was supplied with great store of white Partridges, and other Foul, of
which I have heard it credibly reported, that this company killed 1800. dozen
in the Winter season.

The report of Captain Hawbridge. He entredinthe South Channel.
S'eing the South shore within Fretum Hudson, near Hopes advance twice or
thrice, and once trying the tide about Savvage Isles, where it came from the
South East, and flowed 3. fathoms. At length he came in the South Channel
between 3. Fathoms.
the I Will Salisbury, and the South maine sailing in between C. Wostenholme and
Sir Drdley Diggs his I Will, to the West end thereof, where he says is a bank of
Owes to anchor upon at 13. fathom. C. Wostenholme is to be brought within the
West point of the I Will, which will then bear East by South. Here the Salvages
did offer to assault his men (bound going to kill A Foul.
Willicks, of which there is such store, as in short time he could have laded
his Boat) with two Canons, and to the number 80 Salvages in 2. Canons.
of 70. or 80. men came upon them, until with one Musket shot he slew one of
their men, and hurt more, who much amazed with the report and excecution of a
Musket retired, yet at his coming from thence, he sending his Pinnace boat on
land to take in fresh water; the Salvages were laid in ambush amongst the
Rocks, and slew him 5. men dead, one escaped 5. men slain
by swimming. It is much to be doubted that the Salvages did slay those men in
revenge, for 4. of their great Canons he took off the Land from this people,
whereof he restored but two back again. And here it was where the villains
Green and Juct were slain, after they had exposed Master Hudson; This is Sir
Dudley Diggs his I Will, and there is Dear within the same. He passed from hence
to a Cape on the N. side of his Bays entrance, which he named Carys Swans
nest, and from thence to his Hopes checked, was troubled with shift of winds,
and should water, took harbor the 15. of August in Port Nelson, he endured a
sharp Winter lost many men, killed 3. Dear in the River as they were swimming
for side to side. There came also to them diverse Bears and Wolfes, and it was
the 16. of February before the River Not above a mile broad.
was froze over, having had diverse warm thawing days before, the Captain
having been sick the whole Winter, began to mend the 24. of January. The Ice
began not to clear out of the River until the 21. of April, after which they
killed daily with their Net abundance of Fish, as big as Mackrils.

Now during this wintering it appears, that Sir Thomas having good time to
advise and contemplate what was to be done the nextyeere; drew some Demands in
writing, which Something propounded to the company.
he caused (it seemed) the most understanding men of his Company to answer. Of
which, such answers as came to my hands I do hereby freely impart, for thy
better understanding.

Laus Deo, 1612. December the 22.
The course and distance from place to place, from Cape Clear, to this River
in New Walls.
Imprimis, from Cape Clear to Cape Desolation ^. Variation. 24.
strait course by common Compass North W. by W.. 428. leagues.

The Latitude of 59. d. 40. m.

From Desolation to the I Will of Resolution, Variation 26. d..
course is N. W. by W. the Latitude 61. d. the distance 170. Leagues.

From Resolution to Sir Dudley Diggs his Variation 30. d.
I Will, Lat. 62. d. 40. m. N. W. the distance is 142. Leagues.

From Sir Dudley Diggs his I Will, to the Variation 22. d.
Cheeks, the course is W.. Northerly, the distance 193. Leagues.

From the Cheeks to new Wales, Lat. 57. the Variation 22. d.
course is S. by W. the distance 90. Leagues.

The courses are all by the common Compass. Your Worships and ever, or mine own
never, till death,

William Hawkeridge.

My answer to the first demand under your favor, I think it not amiss to
search this River, if God give strength to our Men, before our departure from
it, to have the knowledge Good advise.
how far it does extend; and that we may meet with some Inhabitants which may
further our expectations, but I cannot think of any profit to be made by it.

My answer to the 2. Demand, is to search to the Northward about this Western
land, until if it be possible that we may find the Flood coming from the
Westward, and to bend our courses against that flood following the ebb,
searching that way for the passage. For this flood which we Well guest Hubart.
have had from the Eastward, I cannot be persuaded but that they are the veins
of some head-land to the Northwards of the Cheeks, and by the Inlets of Rivers
which let the floods tides into them; which Hedlands being found al, I do
assure my self that the tide will be found to come from the Westward.

Herein I have showed my opinion so far my Judgment will afford, until
further reasons induces me to the contrary.

Per me Josias Hubart.

From the Durses in Ireland, being in 52. Lat. to Cape Farewell in Groenland,
Lat. 58 56. Variation at Cape Farewell, 11. degrees.
the course is W. N. W. W. terly, and the distance is 460. Leagues.

The Southermost part of the Island of Resolution is in Lat. 60. d. 34. m.

From Cape Farewell to the Island of Rosolution, Vari^tion 29. d. ^ great
mistake.
the course is W. and by N. and the distance is 208. Leagues.

Sir Dudley Diggs his Island is in Lat. 62. D. 40. M. and is in distance from
the I Will of Resolution. Variation 3. points.
upon a W. and by N. Northerlyrose. 180. Leagues.

The cheekeslye in 61. D. 17. M. Lat. from Variatin. 3. d,
Sir Dudley Diggs his Island, thereto the course is W. and by S. and the
distance is 190. Leagues.

Our wintering being in the Lat. of 56 d. 58. m.

From the cheeks to our wintering place, Variation 2. d. different. Great in
the Variations.
the course is S. and by W. Westerly, and the distance is 87. Leagues.

The 27. of November.
I made an observation of the Moon, and the planet Mars, and for that I stand
in doubt, for the hour to be axactly found out by any Dial Clock, or other
Instrument, to hang a plannet to find when the foremost Guard was right under
the Pole star, at which instant I found and to be one degree, and 41. minutes
asunder, by which working I suppose or Long from London.
deem it to be as follows; this our wintring place 111. degrees, and 15. of
longitude from our Meridian of the City of London.

Per me Josias Hubart.

In the name of God Amen.
Of the courses from the Misson head in Ireland, being bound toward the
Northwest passage, Captain Thomas Button Gentleman, being our General in the
good ship called the Resolution: John Ingram Captain and Master of the Pinace,
called the Discovery. 1612.

Inprimis, from the Misson head in Ireland, to Cape Discord in Groanland, the
course is Latitude 6. d. 30. m.
N. W. by N. Northerly, and the distance is 360. Leagues.

From the Missonhead to Cape Discord in Groynlaend, the course is N. W. 67. W.
Northerly, by the compass, the Lat. 59. d. 20. ^. and the distance is 380.
Leagues.

From the Missonhead to Cape Desolation is the course lies W. N. W. and the
distance, 490. Leagues.

From the foreside of Cape Discord to Cape Farwell, the course lies S. W.
Southerly by compass distance 58. Leagues.

From Cape Farewell to the Western part of this Head Land, by Cape Desolation,
the course is W. N. W. half Northerly, 100 Leagues distant, and from this Head
Landto Desolation, is 10 Leagues distant, in all from Farewell to Desolation,
the distance is 100. Leagues.

N. N. E. by compass between Cape Farewell, Variation 23. degrees, as he
judged.
and the foresaid Head Land, there set a very great current to the Westward.

From Cape Desolation, to the I Will of Resolution, the course lies W. N. W.
Westerly, Variation 29
altitude 62. d. 30. m. and the distance 120. Leagues.

From Resolution to Salisbury I Will, W. by N. Altitude 63. d. 15. and from the
Island to Wostenholmes Cape, the course lies W. S. W. Southerly 140. Leagues.
12. Leagues.

And from this Cape to Diggs his Island 3. Leagues.

From Resolution to Westenholmes Cape, the The Variation of this I Will 34.
course lies W. by N. Westerly, and the distance is 153. Leagues.

From Resolution to Diggs his Islands, the course is W. by N. Northerly, and the
distance 156. Leagues

Altitude, 63. d.

From Sir Dudley Diggs his Islands, to Nothinghams Island, N. by the compass,
and the distance is 7. or 8. Leagues.

From Sir Dudley Diggs Island, to Swanns Island, W. by S. 40, Leagues.

From Diggs his Island to Hopes Checked, the course is W. S. W. a little
Welterly, and the Hopes Checked 60. d. 40. m.
distance is 200. Leagues.

The Altitude is 60. d. 40. m.

From Hopes Checked to the Broken land, when our Admiral received a great
storm: the course lies S. W. 49. Leagues, Altitude 59. 49. Leagues.

From this broken Land, to the head Northerland, the course lies W. and the
distance is 8. Leagues.

The Headland is the entering into this Bay called New Wales.
From this Head land unto the Road of the harbor, the course lies South 42.
Leagues, and from Hopes checked to this Road, the course lies N. E. and by N.
86. Leagues. July.


Hitherto the Lord of his mercy has blessed, preserved, and kept us from all
dangers whatsoever, which we beseech him to bless us of his mercy, and to
send us well forth again,

Amen. Per me Edward Glanvile.

What I received from Sir Thomas Roe, was an Abstract copy taken out of Sir
Thomas Buttons own Iournall, being at his return to this Hopes Checked, and
not before: As from the beginning of his Voyage, or his wintring. I have
nothing but by report, and thus he proceeded from thence.

15. This day being there he plied up with contrary winds, and fogg having
diversity of depth, altogether standing Eastwards of sometimes to 30. Faddome
and more, and standing in to 7. or 6 m. thus travercing and anckoring, until
the 23. day, finding the Tide to come from N. E. by N. which is an especial
argument that the land does lie so, and not any thing else of note.

23 Having thus plied up to the N. E. wards until this day, and standing into
the shore, he anckored for to try the tide, thinking to send his Boat on
Land, to see what Land it should be: it bare on him from the N. E. by N. to the
N. W. by N. and the depth 42. Fadome not above 4.. League from the Land, this
was the highest land he had seen, since he came from Sir Dudley Diggs his
Island, the last year this Land he named Hopes Advance.

24. This morning proved thick easy wind, and it fell to lighten and thunder,
so as he held it not fit to adventure the Boat from the Ship.

25. He stood of from midnight until this day 10. leagues N. E. by N. to
anchor: but he says the wind was N. E. by N. the ground was more even in
standing off, and on then before, he stood off 4. leagues more into 87. Fathom.

This evening at the Suns setting, he took him with two several Instruments,
and found him to go down 33. d. to the W. off North by one, and by the other
30. d. they took the midst betwixt both.

26 After midnight he stood in again N. N. W. 5. leagues, the wind came to the
S. W. the weather fair and clear, and the best he had since he came from his
wintering place: about 9. this morning he sees land; it bore on him from the N.
E. by North, to the N. W. by North, about 8. or 9. leagues off at noone he
steered to the Eastern point, to get hold thereof, and had a good observation
in 62. d. 42. m. and his depth 74. fathoms; who will protract this Voyage to
try whether this ut ultra proved a Bay or no, must begin here, and proceed to
Carys Swans nest.

From this noone until midnight he stood N. E. by N. 18. leagues with much
wind and goowne Sea.

From midninght being in 15. fathoms: the weather hazy, the wind S. W. he
stood off N. E. by North 12. leagues, till noone; seeing the weather like to be
bad, and at 3. in the morning; he found his depth not answerable to his
expectation, for he had but 25. fathom, and at ^. past 3. 21. fathom; he stood
S. E. till 4. that morning, and had 30. fathom.

27. About 6. this morning he gave order to take in his Skiffe; the weather
clearing, he saw land N. and by E. about 5. leagues off, and was as the other
land that he last saw something higher; and having edged in with the land,
from this morning 6. until noone, the land was N. E. and by E. from him.

From noone until 6. in the evening, he steered E. one point without the land
4. leagues; at 6. he anchored 32. fathom. It was then slake water; for at 8.
came a strong set from N. by E. at 11, the wind S. S. W. and blew much, he
weighed and stood away N. E. with his Fore and Mision Sails.

28 At midnight he put out all sails and stood N. E. away 4. leagues, until
morning 4, having depth then 73. fathom, he edged in N. and N. and by E. upon
that tire, he found the night before, and run from this morning 4. until
noone, 6. leagues N somewhat Easterly.

This noone with bold wind S. he loost up for the shore Not certain whether
flood or ebb at this time.
to get an oppertunity, if possibly, to send his Boat on land to have found
which had been the flood, and which the ebb: but when he came within 2.
leagues of shore, he found the Bay all broken ground, and the Sea full of
breaches a good way off the shore, and some within one mile under his Lee.

The weather growing suddenly very thick, he came to an anchor at one a clock
in the afternoon, and sent the Boat on Land: but they had not been from him
half a Glass, but it grew so thick, that he caused Muskets to be shot to
call the Boat back again, at the end of 5. Glasses they returned, saying, that
having rode half an hour at anchor, they could discern no tide, no more
could he in the Ship. In this place it is a Bay full of small Isles near the
shore under the high land; and as he rode bore on him N. N. E. Easterly, and S.
W. at clock 4. the wind began to blow very much; he wayed Began here to
protract and find whether it be a Bay or me^
and stands E. N. E. of with a S. S. W. wind until 6. that night the wind
increasing to a great storm, he takes in his maine and top sails, and stands
away E. N. E. with a foresayle, at 8. a clock he had 63. fathom, and so
standing one hour longer, it began to shoald contrary to expectation, he came
into 50. fathom for that to fore running Eastward, he always depened his
water, which now shoalding he edged of E. till midnight, and they had but 44.
fathom, which perceiving, he found that he was imbayed, therefore to prevent
further danger, he struck sail and lay to Halle.

29. From midnight until 3. this morning, he lay on Hull, having the water so
shoald, and at 3. the weather clearing a little with the increase of the
daylight, he saw land from the E. by S. to the N. N. E. Easterly, which
perceiving, he set his Sails, and flats about his Ship head, and stood W. of
till noone, 4. Leagues.

Thus at noone it falling calm and hazie, he anckors with his ledge Anckor,
he feared all the coast along to be rockie ground, and being thus at anckor
at 23. Fadome, he had at 2. a Clock a little clear, and saw the Land not pastt
2. Leagues from him, from the N. to the W. S. W. which together with the Land
which he saw in the morning, from S. to the E. by S. N. E. Easterly, gave him
assurance, that he was imbayed, for that he could not be of that Eastern Land,
above 7. Leagues. 64. degrees. 30. m.


Being thus at a Non plus himself by observation, the day before, and by his
reckoning since, to be as far Northerly fully, as 65. d. It troubled him
something, and especially to see the Eastern Land to treul away Southerly:
well the wind coming about to N. N. E. he came out of this he called a Bay,
and says he was enforced therein by extremity of a S. W. wind, and yet he
says that by his not far standing from the West side, this Bay cannot be above
16. or 17. Leagues over, from Land to Land, and in his running he found the
depth of it to be not above 4. and 5. and 30. Leagues.

But as a wise Gentleman, and one well understood in the Rules of Navigation,
who having exactly surveyd these journall Vt ukra not proved a Bay.
writs in the Margent. I cannot find that it proved a Bay, nor is it one by any
thing herein written, and for other things known, is none.

About 5. in the afternoon, the wind increased to a great storm, he took in
his Sails, and went away with a free and No course so named.
sprit sail, having 46. Fadome, and between 7. and 8. he came after to 62.
Fadome, and in a clear he saw the Land E. and by S. 3. Leagues off: From the
time that he set sail, this afternoon until 8. at night, he ran 7. Leagues
S. S. W. the wind at N. N. E. At Clock 10. he stood S. E. hoping to have found
the Land to wind away, and running but. of an hour, he came to smooth water
upon a sudden, and had but 26. Fadome. And the weather being yet hazie, he
saw the Land fair by him, bearing E. S. E. very high Land, then he edged of
until midnight S. S. E. Easterly, having come since 8. a Clock, 5. Leagues.

From Midnight Land still in Verioe he edged off W. N. W. and at 2. in the
morning he came into 65. Fadome, then he edged of W. and S. W. and S. S. W.
until 4. in the morning, when the storm was so violent that he was driven to
steer away before it, with his fore course, at 5. this morning by the
extremity of the Sea, he sunk his long Boat.

All this morning he steered until S. S. S. W. 5. Laagues along the shore,
and every stache he saw the Land not above 3. Leagues from him, from 8. until
Noone he steered S. 5. Leagues, then the storm began to lesson, and he put
out more Sail: And this Eastern Land he saw to bear S. S. E. Easterly from
him, and lies as near as he could Judge S. Westerly, and Westerly.

From Noone until Midnight, he stood away S. S. E. 13. Leagues, and from
Midnight until this noone S. S. E. 6 Leagues, and 4. Leagues, S. S. W.

31. This day at Noone it was clear, and by his observation this was in 62. d.
57. m. Latitude, the wind coming to Lat. 62. d. 57m
the East S. E. and E. by S. be stands to the N. wards, desirous to keep that
Land still in sight, or at least to get the shoalding thereof, at Clock 2. the
wind increased, to the taking in of both top Sails, about 6. it turned about
to E. N. E. and to N. E. by E. he tacks about to the Southwards, having run N.
wards 4 Leagues, N. by E. about 8. it blew to both Bonnets off: and he stood
with two courses, making way until Midnight S. and by E. 2. Leagues, and other
2. Leagues, until 4. S. and by E.

10. This morning he lay to Hull, the weather extreme and August.
hazie and so thick, that he could not see a pistalshot from him, in this time
he drew 2. Leagues S. S. E. and this is to be noted that he had 3. storms in
4. days, and for 17. or 18. days last past, he had not had past 6. ho^^es
clear at any time, nor been 20. hours without a stiff blown cold and
English storm.

After 3. this aftenoone it sell flat calm, he sets both his Sails, and
stood to the N. until Evening 6. the wind about N. E. at 6. seeing the wind
would not permit him to seize in that N shore, he stood to the Southward, the
weather thick and exceeding uncomfortable his way was I. League N. N. W. S. W.
by W. 2. Leagues, and one League S. S. E.

2. From Midnight a League S. S. E. the weather thick and foggie, the Wind
Easterly.

From this day noone until Midnight, E. by S. 4. Leagues, and 2. Leagues N.
and by E. the wind hanging still to the Northwards, and hazie weather, his
depth between 70. and 75. Fadome: he coveted still to hold sight of the N.
shore, but it pleased not God it should be so: Therefore with patience he
stood away as near as he could, but ^y his standing Northwards, his water
still shoalded, so as (...), the L^^d still winded to the Eastward.

3. From Middight until Noone 7. Leagues, N. E. from thence 4. Leagues, E. by
S. till Midnight.

4. From Midnight until 5. this morning N. and by E. ^. Leagues from thence he
stood E. S. E. foggie weather with some cleeres-

From noone until 10. at night 6. leagues E. N. E. his depth shoalding from
65. to 40. sathom, the weather thick and bad; he stood 2. leagues West by North.

At 2. this morning he stands 2. leagues N. E. and until noone 7. leagues S,
S. W. and past 4. this morning he sees land And seen from the 31. unt^ll this
day
about 2. leagues off, beating from E. to S. He writes that the sight of it
grieved him much, so that now he made himself assured of that which he did but
doubt before; which was, that they join to the Eastern part of the Bay from
whence he came: but I do otherwise believe.

All the afternoon he stood a long the shore edging into 7. August.
fathom, and cross a Race, which set N. E. and S. W. and continued about half
a Glass. At 4. a clock the N. W. point of the land did bear from him N. W. by
N. about a mile of: then steering within less then one mile of this Cape-land,
for so it was; and a fair one of a low one as ever he saw; you shall have 9.
and 10. fathom: and shall open a very safe Bay, the Eastern land whereof will
bear from you E. by N. 4. leagues off.

In this Bay he handed all his sails, thinking to have rid A good Bay to
anchor in.
and watered: but his anchor being down, and his Boat almost out, one of his
Masters Mates said he descried land from the top Mast head S. and by E. the
news whereof made him wonder for that they all knew this was the land they had
seen the last year, which they tookt to be an Island. He sent up Captain
Ingram, who assured him it was land; whereupon he hoysed up his anchor, and set
sail, and stood S. and by E. and S. and came into 30. fathom: so missing this
land, he A land of fogge.
anchored (night at hand) in 30, fathom.

At 2, this morning he weighed to better his deep, and to go near the land,
he thought he had seen in 2. Glasses, he lessed his deep 3. fathom: so
steering S. S. E. he came to 46. and 56. fathom in 2. Glasses.

About 5. in the morning the wind came about to the N. by E. he stands E. close
upon a wind, and came to 125. at noone, without sight of land, whereby he was
assured that it was the imagined last years Island.

From yesterday noone, until this noone, 14. leagues S. E. by E. and 6.
leagues E, N. E. the weather somewhat clear, but not fit to make observation,
after noone the Gale hards on, he struck his lofty sails; the Sea somewhat
grown, the day cleerest and fairest of 16. or 17. days before.

From noone this day until midnight E. N. E. 8. leag. this night 11. the
weather grew bad, and he says the Sea beat of his Beaks head, at which time
he took in sails, and came to Hull.

From midnight before, until this day noone he drive on Hull 3. leagues S. S.
E, the weather foggie rain, and wind but somewhat less.

At 2. in the morning the storm being broke up, and Sea down, he set sails,
and had driven since noone before S. S. E. 4, leagues, the wind betwixt N. N.
E. and N. E.

At 8. this morning he had 50. fathom, the thick was cleared, He named this
Mancels Island.
and he see land to bear on him East.

From 2. this morning the time of his setting of sail, he made N. E. by N.
Northerly, 7. leagues; the morning was foggie, but the day proved fair.

At noone they had a good observation; and all that did Lat. 61. d. 38. m.
observe agreed in one, and to be in 61. d. 38. m. Latitude: he made way to
the shore, E. by N. Northerly, 2. leagues, and came to an anchor at clock 2. in
17. fathom, the land bearing from N. E. by N. to E. S. E.

After 3. this afternoon the wind coming to the E. N. E. he set sail and
stood to the Northward; and about 5. this evening coasting along the shore, the
Northland seemed like small Islands, and broken lands; the sight whereof made
him desirous to put in amongst them, but the wind would not permit: at clock
5. the weather thickened, and the land bore from N. E. Easterly, to S. E. from
him 4. leagues. This land was a very low and a smooth land, from hence he stood
off to the Westward till midnight; his depth from 14. to 95. fathom, his course
W. N. W. Northerly 7. leagues.

At Midnight having the same depth, the wind was at noone N. northerly, he
stood about to eastward 10. Leagues E. N. E.

Somewhat before noone this day it cleared, and in 12. Fadome, he saw the Land
2. Miles off, and upon the same he saw 5. white Bears, so standing of the
collar of his main stay broke, which caused him to bear up with the S. most
part of the Land he saw, to the intent to lend his Boat on Land for water, and
to try from whence the flood came; at 1. in the afternoon he anchored in a Bay
in 4. Fadome smooth ground, but rockie, for he could see it under him: He sent
his man well mand and armed, who found water instantly, they found not Dead
men's skulls and bones.
far from them 2. old houses broken, and fallen down to the ground, wherein
were the skulls and bones of deadmen.

Images and toys such as they found by digging with their hands, under the
ruins of the decayed houses, with some dozen August.
of small Mors teeth.

His opinion is that this were the ruins of some, who by mischance had
miscarried there by wrack of their Boat, or being enforced to water there,
made their best provision they could to endure it, but the extremity being so
strong for them, and the place neither affording means for them to repair
their Canooes, (the ruins whereof he found some) for fuel for fire to comfort
them in Winter, he gesses this killed Ruins of houses and Canooes in Mansells
I Will.
them, for had they been any other then such as were thus enforced by such
extremity, they would not have left such things behind them as they found, for
there nature is wheresoever they come to have few things of worth or value
behind them, much less does he think they have left their Images, which he
perveiveth they account their gods: And Images and Man's teeth.
there was Mors teeth, for which and the treyne thereof they make all their
Summers travells and labors.

Thus his Boat having brought him water, he ried all that day with wind of
Land, and observed that the flood came from N. and the ebb from S. making a
full stay that day between Flood came from N.
3. and 4. a Clock,

Having watered he weighed and steered until 4. this morning N. W. by W. 7.
Leagues, the wind N. N. E.

It grew thick with fogg, at 4. in the Evening he tackt about to the Eastward,
till 83. Leagues N. E. by E. the thick cause him to take to the W. ward, and
till Midnight he made way N. W. and by W. 3. Leagues.

From midnight until morning 6. he stood in E. N.. northerly 4. Leagues, he
tackt about until 10. a Clock 3. Leagues N. W. and by N.

At which time he came to an Anchor in 85. Fadome, and found the tide of Flood
to come from the N. Land ebb from the S. and ruld within 6. or 7. Leagues of
shore, it bearing N. Flood came from the N.
E. and by E.

This Evening 8. he stood with N. and by E. wind N. W. and by 44. Leagues
until midnight, at noone before he had an observation 62. d. 19. m. this day
he saw great store of La. 62. d. 19 m
geese fly to the Southwards, which he took to be a token, that the Winter
did aproach, the weather was very fair and clear.

From midnight until 7. this morning, his way W. 5. Leagues N. W. and by W.
the wind as before, the weather fair and clear, and most likly to prove so to
continue of any, he had so seen since he came for his wintering.

From 7. this morning until 2. in the afternoon, he stood to the E. ward,
and made way 4. Leagues N. E. and by E.

From 2. the wind wearing he stood to the E. ward, and made way until midnight
7. Leagues N. W.

From midnight until morning he held the same course 4. Leagues N. W.
northerly, it grew calm, and he was within 5. Leagues of a fair Head land;
he came to Anchor in 65. Fadome, the Land bare from the N. N. W. to the W. S.
W. both Lands he deemed to be distant 10. Leagues, (it being calm with
windward Tide) he wayed Anchor, hoping to get to the Northward of this fair
Head land, and that the height of that Land would bring him into deeper water.

After he was loosed, he was sagged into the Bay from 62. to La. 62. d. 38. m
50. fathom, a small gale coming on he stood off into 60. fathom, when it
fell calm he anchored again: this day was fair and clear, he observed in
62. d. 38. m. This Cape was a very fair Head land; and the northern part is
much higher then the western, but it is all, the other Land is of this
straight, except 15. leagues on this side his wintering place, which was woody,
else on this side it is all barred and rockie, but a bad shore to sail along.

This forenoone calm but fair and clear weather, and the only Summers day
he had since his coming from his wintering, being at Anchor bewixt the Cape
and the W. point, he saw the Land to make with two Bays, the further point of
the southern Bay, being from the northern Land of that Bay W. and by S.
southerly, and the North point E. and by N. northerly: And the other Bay from
this point to the Cape it self lies E. northerly, and S. westerly, at noone
he observed in 62. d. 42. m.

At 4. the afternoon he set sail, and with small wind at La. 62. d. 42. m
5. he stood with the Cape, the weather being clear and fair, he sent to the
Cape to turn the Tide, being thwart of the Cape, the point is low with an
underland, and some 2. Cables length from shore ia a low flat little Island; the
land you shall open to the Northward, lies N. W. Westerly, he boat or bore,
he edged of, and anchored within one mile of the land, having opened the land
to the westward of the Cape; he anchored 15. fathom, and rid there all night to
try the tide, for that his Boat had brought word that it was ebb tide, and
that it set to the Northward which did agree with the tide, he found on the
Eastland where he watered: but from the time he now anchored being between 10.
and 11. at night, and 3. the next morning, he set sail, he could not find
any certainty, but what followed.

This morning was calm, but the night before was full of No mention of Ice.
strange Harbors as they call them, which is a stream in the Element, like
the flame that comes forth the mouth of a a hot oven, which upon this Coast
how fair soever the weather be when you see them, yet it is an infallible
sign of a storm to follow within 24. hours after, as it proved by this and
diverse times before.

At 3. this morning without certenty of the Tide, a small gale S. he wayed and
advised with Captain Gibbins, and Captain Ingram, and with the rest, what
course was best to be taken? they resolved this Land falling away N. W. and by
W. westerly, and having 113. Fadome within a Mile of the shore, to stand away
N. N. W. alougst the shore, resolving not to leave this Land until he were
fully satisfied, standing thus until 8. at night, being some 7. Leagues of the
Cape, he saw an Island of the westermost Land, that bore from him W. N. W. 7. or
8 Leagues off, he had then 100. Fathom, and stood N. N. W. as before.

At noone the weather was close and began to blow, he Sir Thomas Button does
allow 2. points variation.
was then 15. Leagues N. N. W. from the Cape; he does not write whether true
course or no, but in all the former Hopes Advance unto this Cape: I have writ
by him according to the true course, and had 95. Fadome, which made him assure
himself, that the Land winded a way more northerly, and thereupon at noone he
stood away N. E. and by N. hoping that course would have bettered his depth,
but on the contrary, for in 2. glasses he shoalded to 60. Fathoms, then he
hayled away E. S. E. assuring what experience had often shown him, that as the
water shoalded, so the Land winded.

At 3. in the afternoon the weather thick, the wind increasing, and he in 60.
Fathom, knowing there was no better depth to the N. ward: he stood E. S. E.
till 8. at night, having 50. Fathom, the weather bad and night at hand, he
stood about, and kept it up with short sail, all that night between S. W. and
by W. and W. S. W.

From midnight till 7. this morning; as from 8. last night, till midnight, thus
standing, brought him into 80. fathom, he cast about to the Eastward with much
wind, at S. S. W. hazy and thick weather; he heeled it up in courses and
Bonnets till clock 2. they being stark calmed as it is a special note, every
Blower ends with a stark calm in those parts, being then in 65. fathom E. he
anchored and rid until 4. in the evening, when a small gale rising at S. S. W.
he waighed, and stood S. E. guiding himself by his depth, for the wind would
not give him leave to better his hopes.

17. From midnight to 8. this morning, as the night before, and after that
time, there is small worth the Luke to write upon thaverse; and his greatest
depth 140. fathom, until the next day in the afternoon, and then he had sight
of the same Cape he sent his Boat unto the 14. day before. It bore from him N.
N. W. by compass about 7. leagues, so he steered S. S. W. until midnight,
having run since he set sail at 2. in the afternoon 10. leagues S. E. and
by E.

Concluding he writes that he came to 43. fathom, which Mansells I Will and Ca.
Pembrok 10 Leagues distant.
shoalding was upon the North part of the Island he watered upon; and that this
Island and the said Cape where his Boat was at the 14. day lies S. S. E..
Easterly, and N. N. W.. Northerly, about 10. leagues between both.

This morning day light, he see the land bearing from S. W. by S. at which time
he had 65. fathom.

19. From 2. this morning until noone, he made away E. ^8 by N. 10. leagues.
At 7. he saw land on head at least 12. leagues of him; he judged it to be the
high land of the Maine within Sir Dudley Diggs his Island, and yet to bear of
him as it did, it was strange unto him: but he says that Captain Gibbons
confidence was such, as that he must not let pass unspoken of; for albeit
that he is so near in blood, as that modesty will not allow of his speaking
too much of his merit, yet he Capt. Gibbons.
will boldly say thus much of his sufficiency, as he assures himself he shall
make it appear at his return, if God please to let him live so long, as that
he is not short of any man that ever yet he carried to Sea. All that he can say
of him further is, that for his Countries good, and for the advancement of this
business we have in hand; he could wish his body were answerable to his other
abilities; which were it; not himself, but many, and bis Country most would
be the better for it. But that God that made us all of dust, will not fail to
raise up some good spirits he hopes for the further prosecution of this
business: as that by their honest endeavors, and religious Resolutions, they
will effect that which as yet is not ripe for his Sickle: but that God which
best knows what the truth of his endeavors have been in this business, he
hopes will not fail to give a blessing to some that shall follow; and for his
part he desires to be blessed no otherwise, than as he has sincerely labored in
it; and therefore he must conclude and ever believe according to the word, that
Paul plants, Apollo waters, and God gives the increase. So that until his good
will and pleasure is, all that we do cannot in this ought else prevail.

At noone the weather fair and clear he had a good observation, by which
Captain Gibbons was well assured; but himself and some others discenting from
him in the bearing of Set of Tide.
the land from them, were deceived in the set of the tide, which in his going
out last year, mightily carried him to the Northward, as now as much to the
Southward; which then, nor till now, was not found by any of them all.

He steered open of the Land N. N. E. with tide 5. leagues, until evening 4.
and at 2. he had 307. fathom.

At 6. in the evening small wind, C. Wolstenholme bore S. E. 7. leagues of the
Western point of the western Island, S. E. by S.. S. 5. leagnes off, he kept
it up that he might get about the Westermost point of Nottinghams Island; (it
lying 8. leagues from Diggs his Island, there thinking to try the tide; and
from thence he purposed to go to the N. maine between Salisbury and
Nottinghams I Will, to try the distance between them, it being all he could do
for this year.

About 8. this morning the weather thick, and he not above 4. leagues from I Will
Nottingham in 64. fathom he anchored, and as he remembers to his comfort being
ebb, he found it a very strong one from S. S. E. to S. E. and by S. But was
deceived.


At noone slack, it was a fresh gale at S. W. he waighed to get about to the
Westward of the Island, about 2; it blew hard, and was thick weather with rain
and thunder, and within a mile of the shore. It fell stark calm upon a
sudden, then he was iu a great ripling in 20. fathom water, the Sea all
breaches round about him like a Raffe, which deserying, he stood off with
little wind along the Island, and found his drift more Half an hour.
in less then in one Glass. Then he could run a head before with both
top-sayles on trip, and a stiff gale in 2. hours, he came to anchor to be
fully satisfied of the tide.

But when the tide came, it came with such force and strength A strong tide.
Not so.
out of the N. W. and by N. as he had much ado to ride at, and could not have
rid it had not he steered the ship all the tide time: the ^ight (he writes
did comfort him) for what was to be done hereafter for by the course of this
tide, and h^s own knowledge of the land, being to the Westward of that place
200. leagues, is 86. on the Sea, and might very well say one degree more on
land to the Northward, he then saw Not so.
good reason for it.

At 8. this night the weather being a little clear, with ebb he wayed and
plied to windward to get about the N. W. end of the Island; and being about the
West point, the ebb being d^ne, he saw another point open upon him that bore
N. the wind at N. W. in 33. fathoms, the weather thick and bad, he anchored,
where in less than one hour the tide of flood came most strong as before,
from N. W. and by N. whereby he concluded, having brought the Northern point
N. from him, tha^ it was the true Channel tide; for had it been otherwise,
The true Channel tide.
it would have come as the land lay, which was N. but now being open of the
land, and finding it to come from the N. W. and by N. he faith in his judgment
that course, and N. N. W. must direct whomsoever shall seek this passage
hereafter. And the rather to continue himself in this opinion, he now to late
found, that those that were this way first, and himself the last year were
all of them deceived of the set of the tide, within Sir Dudley Diggs his Island,
for there they found it come more Westerly, which was caused by many broken
Islands that lie to the Westward of it, which he never saw, until his return
homewards. And upon this tide (if I can judge says he, we cannot be deceived
for this caveat, he does Strong Tide, or 200. fathom
give to whomsoever shall succeed him in this discovery. That whenever he
loses his strong tide, or finds ground in 200. fathoms, let himself he is out
of his direct course for finding of this Voyage. So this his experience upon
his unhappy counter-course taught him, that whenever it is to be found, it
must be in deep water); and in a strong tide; and in this course that he
took, he hopes it will not be imputed an error of his; for what he did in the
directing of it; for it was to follow the letter of his instructions; For
albeit he was precisely tied to stand with Hudsons Westerland in 58. d. yet he
never came much to Leeward of 61. d. till he was encountered with land 200.
leagues Westward from Sir Dudley Diggs No mole station of Ice in all his
return.
his Island.

How much in effect I received in a Manuscript from Sir Thomas Roe, besides
diverse others, toward the furtherance of my Voyage.

But further from Abacuk Pricket, who says, they came not through the maine
Channel of Fretum Hudson, nor through Lumleys Inlet.
Lumleys Inlet: but that he came through into the Mare Hyperborum betwixt those
Islands first discovered and named Chidleys Cape, by Captain Davis, and the
North part of America called by the Spaniards who never saw the same Cap
Labradore
Cape Labradorr, but it is meet by the N. E. point of America, where there was
contention amongst them, some maintaining (against others, that them Islands
were the Resolution, which Josias Hubbart withstood until he stood himself
into the danger of displeasure: but at length it proved a new straight, and a
very straight ind^ed to come through, which resolved all doubts, but hereupon
all their plots and Iournalls. This part which came unto my hands I have writ,
thinking there may be some that will protract the same, he met no Ice in his
home coming, until he came into Fretum Hudson, and but little there.

Iournals more taken from them, and therefore who does No molestation by Ice in all these Voyages return.
desire any further satisfaction from this Voyage, must seek it from Sir
Thomas Button, only Pricket says that they were at home in 16. days.

Concerning the Voyage of Captain Gibbons, with a Ship called the Discovery,
vitled for 12. Months, in the year 1614.
LIttle is to be writ to any purpose, for that he was put by the mouth of
Fretum Hudson, 28 with the Ice driven into a Bay called by his Company Gibbons
his hole, in Latitude about Gibbons his Voyage, a caveat for others
57. upon the N. E. part o^ Stinenia, where he laid 10. weeks fast amongst
the Ice i^ danger to have been spoiled, or never to have got away, so as the
time being lost, he was enforced to return.

The Voyage of Robert Bilot yet forth by Sir. Dadley Diggs, Mr. John
Wolstenholm, Alde man Jones 16. 15. in the discovery of 55. tons burden,
Written by William Baffine.
THis Robert Bylot had been in this ship all t^^ 3. voyages April.
before viz. Hudson, as you find by Pricket, Sir Thomas Button and Gibbons,
and therefore was a man well experienct, that way his company consisted of 16.
men and 2. boys, he anchored in Lee, read the 18. April.

6 Upon this day he had sight of Groenland, on the East side May.
of Cape Farewell, that night he had a great storm, but he Ice on Capes
Farewell. 140. Fathomes above water.
kept southerly, to get clear of the Ice that lay on shore: He kept his
course until the 17. day, seeing many great Islands of Ice, some does affirm
that there is not above one 7. part of the Ice above water says Baffine, he
observed one piece to be 140. Fathom above water, this day he came to the
firm Land of Ice, as he supposed being in 61. 16. the Latitude of the S. part
the I Will Resolution, then he asked opinion concerning putting in amongst the
Ice, saying, the Sea was on the N. side of the South channel and much Ice he
must pass, and if he could get but 2. or 3. Leagues within the Ice, it would
open every Tide, and so he should get something on his way, having all the
channel to the S. on him, and with this resolution, he put in W. E. N. E.
wind: this first entrance Baffine liked not well, finding scarce a place to put
the Ships-head Puts into Ice 30. Leagues of Land.
into, being 30. Leagues from any Land, toward evening they were fast amongst
the Ice.

22. Sometimes ere day the Ice would something open, and so made what way he
could to the N. W. in for the shore* until this day, the wind all South, yet
he could see plainly, so that he seekt to the Southward do what he could.

This day the wind came up at N. N. W. and he determined to stand forth
again, for if the wind had come'd at N. E. it had beeene impossible for him to
have fetched any part of the channel again, for he thought he drove fast to
the southward with South wind, yet he had not seen the Land.

23. He was also determined to spend 20. or 24 days in Fretum Davis, to see
what hopes would be that ways, supposing there would be little good done in
Hudsons straights: for the time limited he plied to get to Sea-ward, and at
Clock 8. in the night he was cleared from the Ice, he then changed his
opinion, and stood to the N. all he could as the Ice would give him leave,
c^mming 30. Leagues to N. E. by N. in Latitude 61. d. 50. m. at Clock 6. the
wind came N. N. E.

26. This day was fair and cool, but the after noone was close and hazie, he
took in his sails and held until morning 4. all this day he past by many
beds of Ice, having great quantity to the N. of him, and having run about 21.
Leagues upon a true W. course.

27. This 27. was close foggie weather, with much snow, freezing his shroude
and tackling, but at Clock 4. it cleared, and he saw Land: it being the I Will
Resolution bearing W. about Variation allowed.
13. or 14. Leagues off, he stands to to fro, as Ice would suffer him, when
night came with W. wind, he made fast to a piece of Ice.

28. Fair weather all this day, he being fast to a piece of Whitsunday.
Ice, with W. wind and he could well perceive that he ^et faster into the
straights with the flood, then the ebb could take him back again.

29. This day the weather was fair and wind variable, he sets sail and tacks
to and fro along the Island, the n^xt morning 2. the wind came to S. S E. but he
was so postured with Ice, that with fair wind he could do little good, the
wind continued a stiff gaile all day and night, for it was not dark, and so
was set within the point of the Island, so as now he was within the straights.

This day was fair weather, the wind N. W. he saw Buttons Isles bear S. by
compass but S. S. E. with variation allowed, which was 24. degrees. Vrriation
24, June. A good harbor in Resolution.


some snow in the morning, but very fair the afternoon, the wind at W. N. W.
he perceiving the Ice to open close to the shore, made way to get into anchor,
and by Clock 7. he was in good harbor on the W. side of Resolution, where an
E. S. E. Moon makes a full Sea or halke an hour past 7. On the change day the
water does rise and fall near 4. Fathom, Flows 4. Fathomes Variation 24. d.
6. m. Lumleys Iulet 8. miles wide in the narowest.
the compass does vary 24. d. 6. m. and his Longitude from London 66. d. 35.
m. the breadth of the S. channel is 16. Leagues, and the breadth of the N. or
Lumleys Julet is 8. Miles wide, in the narrowest place.

He found here no sign of inhabitants, but the tracte of Bears and Foxes,
Rocks and stony ground, hardly any thing growing, thereon it is indifferent
high Land to the N. having one hill or summoke to the N. E. but to the South it
falls away very low.

This morning the wind came to the E. S. E. with much snow, and foul weather
at noone, he wayed anchor and stood about by the Island side, as well as the Ice
would give him leave to get to the N. shore with much variable wind and
weather, but stood fast in continuance amongst Ice, until the 8. day the wind
fell contrary, and being somewhat near a point of a Land, or rather a company
of Islands, which he called Savage Islands, having a great Sound or Indrust
between Salvage Isles.
the N. shore and them, at Clock 6. he came to Anchor near one of them, being
the E. most save one, but whiles he was forling this sail, he heard and saw a
great company of Dogs, howling and barking, that it seeming very strange,
Dogs.
after he had mored his Ship, he sent his boar near shore to see if they
could discern any people, who returned said there were Tents, and Canons, and
Dogs, but for people they saw none, this writer (being fitted) after Prayers
and supper went on Land to their Tents (with 7. others) where finding no
people, they marched up to the top of a hill, being about a flight shot where
they saw a great Canon, which had about 14. 14. Salvages in one Canon.
men therein, being on the N. W. part of the Island, and about a Musket shot
from them, so called to them in Groenlandish speech, making signs of
friendship, they did the like to them, but being fearful, and he not trusting
them also made signs of a knife, and other trifles, which he left upon the top
of a hill, and returned to these Tents again, where he found Whalessinnes.
to the number of 30. or 40. Whale finnes, with a few Seal skins which he
took with him, leaving for them knifes, beads and counters, he found a
little Bay where were the Images of men, and one the Image of a woman, with a
child Images.
at her back which he brought with him.

Amongst these Tents being 5. in number, all covered with Seals skins, were
running 35. or 40. Dogs, the most of them muzled, there were of a Mungrills
Mastiffe, being of a brinded black color, looking almost like Wolves: those
Dogs they use in stead of Horses, or as the Laplanders do their Dear, to draw
their Steedes which are shot or lyned with bones of great fishes, to keep them
from wearing, their Dogsfurnitur.
Dogs have collers and furniture very fitting.

Their apparel Boats, and Tents, with other necessaries, are much like to
those of Greneland, but not so neat and artificial: they seem to be more
rude and uncivil traveling up and down, as their fishing is in season, for
in most places Lattude 62. d. 32. m. Longitude 72. d.
where they were on Land, they see where people had been, but where their
habitation or winter abode is they know not, nor cannot conjecture.

This Island lies in 62. degrees, 32. minutes, and in longitude West from
London 72. degrees or near there about, being 60. Leagues from the entrance of
the straights: the compass does vary 27. degrees, 30. minutes, and South East
Moon Variation 27. d. 30 m.
4. degrees East, makes full Sea, it flows almost as much water as at
Resolution, the Tide comes from the Eastwards.

This day morning 6. he set sail with North wind, which continued not, but
was variable, till noone, it came to North West, he having sailed along the
shore some 7. leagues North North West, the Ice lying so thick in the Offing,
that A good Harbor.
he could not well get out of it. He perceived a good Harbor between two small
Islands and the maine, and went in, wherre he moord and stayed until the twelfe
day in the evening.

In this place a South East Moon make a full Sea, Latitude 62. d. 40. m. Lat.
S. E. full Sea.
62. degrees, 40. m. the tide does come from South East every point has his
set and eddy in this place he could perceive of no people.

Lying still in the Ice, the weather close and hazy, as it had been for 6.
days being near a great company of Islands (the wind West North West,) he
stood in amongst them and at evening, morn to one of them in a small Cove,
the, better to defend her from the Ice; here he stood all the 17. day, the 18.
being almost calm, he set sail, the better to get forth. Here was a great
company of Islands, each whereof has his several sets and eddyes, which drive
the Ice to and again with such violence, that he was in greater danger here,
then if he had been further off, the Latitude of this I Will he lay at, was 63.
d. 26. m. longitude, near 72. d. 15. m. from London, Variation 27. d. 46. m..
past 9. the change day makes Danger near shore, La. 63. d 26. Lon. 72. d. 25.
m. Variati. 27. d 46. m.
full Sea, this evening and morning he had a false gale at South East, and he
stood along by the land, it being all small broken Islands, to a point about 12.
leagues distance from the I Will he set from, it being all broken land, so calls
it broken point.

This day 12. he was about 4. miles from the foresaid point, fast amongst Ice;
and he says, he might well have called this Fairenes, or Fair Point; for from
this day to the 30. the weather was so fair, and almost altogether so calm,
that in few places else where fairer weather could not be; and until the 27.
he was so fast enclosed amongst the Ice, that one could not dip water by the
Ship sides. Upon the 29. day he see the Sun and Moon both at one time, as
indeed in fair weather is usual in those parts.

Being fair and calm, the Sea almost as steady as on shore, with his
Instruments for Variation, he went to work to take the time of the Moons
coming to the Meridian, and had a Quadrant of 6. foot Semidiamiter ready to
take Sols Almicanter, having taken the Variation of his Needle as properly as
he could, which was 28. d. 10. m.

The Suns Almicanter at the instant, when the Moon Observaton for Longitude
was upon the Meridian, was 26. d. 40. m. the Suns declination 23. d 6. m. by
which 3. things given he found the hour to be 5. a clock, 4. m. 54 secon. 4 /
4 or 67. d. 13. m. 16. s. of the Equinoctial, after noone, and according to
Scarls Ephemerides the Moon came to the Meridian at London, at 4. a clock, 54.
m. 30 s. and after Origanus, the Moon came to the Meridian at 4. a clock, 52.
m. 5. s. at Wittenberg the same day now having this known, it is no hard
matter to know the Longitude of this place sought; for according to the Moons
mean motion, which is 12. d. a day, it is in time 48 m. and to this account,
if she be on the Meridian at 12. of clock this day. tomorrow it will be 48.
m. past 12. so he having the time found by observation at this place, viz. 5.
hours, 4. m. 52. s. 4 / 4. but in this he needs not come 50. precise, and at
London at 4. hours, 54. m. 30. s, which subtracted from the former, leaves
10. m. 22 s. 4 / 4. Now the Moons motion, that 24. hours was 22 d. 38. m.
which converted into time, is 50. m. 25. s. 20. th. then the protion stands
thus, if 50. m. 25. s. 20. th. give 360. d. what shall 10. m. 22. s. 4 / 4.
give the propotionals welbes, 74. d. South, which is West of London, because
the Moon came later by 10. m. 22. s. and by the working of Origanus his
Ephemerides, the distance is 91. d. 35. m. West of West, but whether be the
truer, he leaves it to others to judge; for if those workings be not
carefully looked unto, there may be great error committed; as in the
observation, and in the Moons coming to the Meridian to the place, for which
the Ephemerider was Calulated for, and it may be in the Ephemerides themselves;
in all which, the best and most judicious may err.

The 6. of April another outward bound at Sea, by the Moons coming in a
right line, with two fixed Stars; the one was the Lions heart, a Star of
the first magnitude, the other in the Lions Rumps, of second magnitude, as
follows.

The Circumference or outward eye of the Moons being in a right or straight
line, with those two Stars before named, at the instance he took the
Altitude of the South balance, 2. d. 38. m. because he would save the time,
but in this it is good to wait a fit time, as to gave her in a right line,
with 2. Stars not far distant, and those not to be much difference in
longitude, because the Moon will soon alter, the auyle or potion, and such a
time would be taken, when the wood is in the 19. of the Ecliptique above the
Horizon, for then there is no parallel of Longitude, but only in Latitude: but
who is painful in these businesses, shall soon see what is needful, and
what is not his observations, were as follows.

Lions Heart,
degr. min. secon. Right Ascension 46. 28. 30. Declination 13. 20. 45.
Longitude 24. 27. 45. Latitude 00. 26. 30. Almicanter 33. 40. 00.

Lions Rumpe,
Right Ascension 63. 23. 00. Declination 22. 38. 00. Longitude 05. 53. 45.
Latitude 14. 20. 00.

the Moons Paralax,
Paralax 00. 47. 46. Latitude 03. 20. 00. Almicanter 37. 00. 00. Latitude of
the 56. 43. 00.

This note he says is set down for any that can, and are disposed to spend
their time therein themselves, having spent Mr. Rudston.
some, and would have spent more if leisure had served: but finding it not to
his mind, he has set down the particular work as he received it from me
Rudstone.

28 Lying here enclosed now among the Ice with fair and calm weather (as
before is said) until the 27. day at evening he set sail, the wind South
East an easy gale, all the 28. and 29. he made way through the Ice: but the
29. it was more open th^n before, in 10. days at noone Salisbury sie bare West
from him.

This day was close foggie weather, with much rain, the wind S. S. E. at
noone he was 3. leagues from the land, but July.
had much Ice by the shore. He stood to the N. and the next morning he was
feign by another small Island, or rather a company of Islands which he afterward
called Mill Island, by reason of grinding the Ice, as he had proof, the Lat. is
64. Mill I Will La. 64
driving here to and fro until clock 7. the Ice began to open and separate:
he had not past along the I Will by the East side Flood Tide from S E Ice drive
with swiftnesle*
thereof: but the Ice came driving with the flood-tyde from S. E. with such
swiftnes, that it overwent his Ship, having all sails abroad with a reasonable
gale of wind, and put him out of the stream, into the eddy of the I Will.

This Island or Isles lying in the middle of the Channel having many sounds
running through them, with many points or Head-lands encountering the face of
the Tide, causes such a rebound of the Ice and water, which ran one way and
the Ship another, the Ship having met with Ice, with the first or the flood put
him near the shore, that he was in the partition between the Ice, which the
edge caused to run one way, and the stream another, where she endured great
Danger near shore.
distress: Thus he continued until toward high water, which about one a
Clock, then with no small trouble he got into the Channel, and stood to the
North West ward, after he had past some distance from this I Will, he found the
Sea more open then it was since he put into the straights, and sailed all the
next day with a South wind, through. an indifferent clear Sea, at Clock 8. in
the morning he was come again into much Ice, and this Ice was thicker and
bigger then any he had before, where he began to be enclosed 26. Leagues Clock
7. high water.
distant from Mill I Will North West by West true course, being first amongst the
Ice he perceived a great Tide to set to and fro, and had 120. Fathom ozie
ground, at 80. Fathomes the wind coming to the North, and setting him somewhat
Southward had 110. Fathomes, thus seeing great abundance 120. Fathom high
ground.
of Ice in this place, and the more he got to the North Westward the shoalder
it was the Ice being foul and durty, as not bred far from shades, he
determined to stand to the Estward, to be better informed of the Tide.

6. The morning standing to the Eastward he brook a planck, and two timbers
in his ships bow, which after he had mended, he proceeded to the East along
the North shore, which Land stretches along from Resolution within the
streights, and is the West side thereof.

7. This day he saw the Land it being but low, and the Sea shoald in respect of
other places, having 10. or 12. Fathom about a League from shore, and some 30.
or 35 Fathomes 5. or 6. Leagues from shore, having very good channel ground,
some 18. or 20. Leagues off, as small stones and shells, but the farther of the
more ozie: Also here runs a very great Tide, to the Northward with this
evening he found The half tide between* Baffaime.
to be the Tide of ebb. For coming near the shore about Clock 7. he went on
Land with his Boat, and found it so, he stayed on Land about an hour and an
half, in which time the water fell about 3. foot and a half, and a South
South East Moon makes a full Sea. They saw no sign of people to have been
here this year, but other years before they could well see by diverse places,
where their Tents had stood, and perhaps their time of fishing was not yet
come, there being such great abundance of Ice as yet.

8. This day the wind was West.

9. This day was almost calm, and he reckoned to be near the shore.

10. This day he entermined to stand to I Will Notingham, to try the Tide there,
the wind South West, so as he turned it up until night, the wind came to
North North West 150. Fathom deep, so as he stood away to the West ward, and
left the stateth of Notinghams I Will, having a great swelling Sea out of the
West, with the wind that had blown which put him in some hopes.

11. This morning he saw Land West from him, and had no ground at 130,
standing along by the Land, which then lay North West, and by West, the next
morning he was thwart of a Bay, then standing over to a fair Cape or Head
land, he saw in the afternoon it was almost calm, being about a League from
Land, he sent his Boat to try the Tide, and they stayed about 3. hours,
going at 5 and returning at 8. and brought word that it was falli^g water, and
that whilst they were on shore it had ebb two foot: also they affirmed that
the flood came from the N. in this place, which he perceived by the Ship, she
setting a pace to the N. although it was no wind: also they might see by the
Rocks that the water was ^a^^, this made him doubtful of a passage that way.

Master Bylot named this Cape Comfort, for the reasons before, Cap. Comfort in
65
and not a league from Land, is 140. Fathom water, here a S E. Moon makes a
full Sea, the Latitude is 65 and 86. d. 10. W. from London. But this sudden
comfort was soon quailed as he says, for the next day having doubted the
Cape, and proceeded not above 10. or 13. Leagues, but he saw the Land Trent,
from the Cape to the Westward, until it bare from him N. E. and by E. and very
thick pestered with Ice. And the further he proceeded N. ward, he found
shoalder water, and more Ice, and small show of any Tide at 6. he had 130.
Fathom, soft ozie, and at noone had 150. Fad. Lat 65. 25. Long from London, 86.
10.


This was the furthest of this voyage being in Latitude 65. 25. and Longitude
from London 86. 10. for seeing the Land so far to the E. of him 9. or 10.
Leagues off, and the Ice he was fully persuaded this was but a Bay, and so
turned the ship homeward without any further search.

14. The wind at S. E. that he could make but small way back again: the next
morning it was foul weather, and he Anchored in a small Iulet near Cape
Comfort, on the N. when here he found a S. and by E. Moon to make a full Sea,
but could, not discern from whence the flood came, for it was bad weather at
Sea.

16. The afternoon the wind came N. W. stiff gale, and hazie, he wayed and
stood along the shore by the 16. at noon he went with a great quantity of Ice,
lying within the point of Land, amongst this Ice he saw a great number of Sea
Mo^s, not seeing any in all the streights but in this place, and those very
fearful, not suffering any Ship or Boat to come near them: by Clock 8. he
was come to this S. shore point, which he called Sea horses Point, where he
came to Anchor in open Sea Horse Points, Flood came from S E
Sea, the better to try the Tide, where he and all his company apparently
found, that in this place the Tide came from S. E. and the Ebb from N. W. he
wayed after he had found this, and stood over with a stiff gale of wind,
which continued all day, and at night it was very foul weather, and sour
storms By Clock 2. he was come to Anchor on the N W side of Notinghams Island,
where 2. or 3. small Isles lie off from the greater, which makes very good
sounds and harbor about this I Will, he had store of Ice, but nothing as in other
places, he staid here until the 27. day, with much foul weather, many storms,
often fogg and uncertain winds, many times he wayed Anchor to go to that side
of the I and where the Ship rod, when Cap. Button was in her finding in other
places of this ^le, the Tide of flood came from the S. E. ward, and the time of
high water upon the change of day to be at 10. and half an Bylot was with
Thomas Button.
hour past and not after, as they supposed before in 10. days he stayed about
this I Will, he fitted his Ships with ballast and other necessaries.

26. This day being indifferent fair weather, he p^ss^d between Salisbury
and Notinghams Isles, at the S. point thereof. where lie many small lone Isles,
without the which (to have Anchored) had been a fit place to have found out
the true set of the Tide: but the Mr. being desirous to have come to the same
place, where he had rod before, stood along by this I Will to the W. ward, and
came to an Anchor in the Eddie of this broken grounds, where the Ship rod at no
cetainety of the Tide.

27. This morning was soul weather with much rain and wind, that the Reager
Anchor would not hold at 8. Fathomes scope, but was driven into deeper water,
and enforced to set sail, the wind at E. and came about to N. E. with foul
weather, he stood away toward Sea Horse Point, he was persuaded that there
might be a passage between that Land and the Land they called Swan Island, so
this afternoon he saw both Swan I Will.
Sea Horse Point and I Will Notingham, the distance betwixt both is not above 15.
or 16. Leagues, they lie one from another S. E and N. W.

28. In the morning he saw Sea Horse Point, and the Land to August. He sought
no passage then.
stretch away W. S. W. so far as he saw and with Ice, wherefore he tackt about,
and stood away S. E. and by S.

29. This day 11. he came to anchor at Diggs his Island, having yery foul
weather, at this place where he rod, it lies open to the W. having 2. of the
greatest Isles to break off the fore of the flood Tide, for after the water was
risen an hour and a half by the shore, then would the Ships ride truly on the
tide of flood all the Tide after, now the time of high water on the change is
at. past 10. or thereabouts.

This day was fair weather, he wayed and stood close by Diggs September.
his Island, where presently he persuaded the Salvages to be close upon the
Rocks: but when they saw he had espied them, diverse of them came running down
to the water side, calling to him to come to anchor, which he would have done
if he could: but in this place the water was so deep, an it is hard to find a
place to ride in; which seeing, he lay to and again with the ship, whilst some
of his men with the Boat killed about 70. Fowls, for in this place is the
greatest store of those fowls which we call Willicks, that in few places else
is not to be seen; for if need were he might have killed many thousand; almost
incredible to those that have not seen it; here he had sufficient proof of
other tide: but when his Boat returned, he set sail homewards.

The Observation.
He set forth the 18. of April, and he saw the land of Groynland the 6. of May;
he made Resolution the 27. whereon the N. side he found a good Harbor, where it
flows an E. S. E. moon, and near 4. fatho. he found people at Salvage Isles,
he was much troubled, but especially at Mill Isle, he made Cape Comfort, and
found a tide, but knew not from whence it come. The land to the N. treads about
him to N. E. by E. the water the farther Northward, was but more shallow and
dirty, he returns homewards the 10. of July, his greatest deep at 180.
fathoms. In his return at Seahorse Point, he and al his people saw, that
plainly the tide came from S. E. as also at Isle Nottingham he broke in a
planck and timber of his ship amongst Ice, he might have killed thousands of
Foul at Diggs his Island; his greatest Variation was 27. d. 46. m. his
greatest Lat. was 65. d. 25. m. he saw many Sea Mors, at Cape Comfort; his
Longitude from London was 86. d. 10. m.

This day he was forced to anchor 30. leagues, within Resolution, upon the N.
shore, the next day he weighed, and the 5. day he passed by Resolution, but see
it not.

He had sight of Cape Clear in Ireland.

He came into Plymouth all his men alive, but 3. sick, which presently
recovered.

The next year being again employed in discovery amongst other Instruments he
received this; For your course you must make all possible have to Cape
Desolation, and from thence your William Baffyn as Pilot keep along the Coast
of Greenland, and Fretum Davis, until you come toward the height of 80. if
the land will give you leave, then for fear of imbaying by keeping off to
Northerly a course; shape your course W. and Southerly, so far as you shall
think it convenient, until you come to the Lat. of 60. then direct your
course to fall with the land of Yed 30. about that height; leaving your further
sailing Southward to your own discretion, according to the time of the year,
and the winds will give you leave, although your desire be, if the Voyage be so
prosperous, that you may have the year before you, that you go so far
Southerly, as that you may touch the N. part of Iapon, from whence as from
Yedzo, if you can see to pass it without danger; we would have you to bring
home one of the men of the Country, and so God blessing you with all expedition
to make you return home again.

Master Baffyne his Letter to the right Worshipful Sir John Wolitenholme one
of the chief Adventurers for the discovery of a passage to the North west.
Worthy Sir, there needs no filling a Iournall or short Discourse with
Preamble circumstance or complement; and therefore I will only tell I am proud
of my remembrance, when I express your worth to my capacity; and gal^ of any
good fortune, when I can avoyde the imputation of ingratitude, by
acknowledgeing your many favors; and seeing it is not unknown to your Worship
in what estate the business concerning the North West has been heretofore;
and how the only hope was in searching Fretum Davis; which if your self had
not been the more forward, the Action had wel-nigh been left of. Now it
remains for your Worship to know what has been performed this year;
wherefore I entreat you to admit of my custom, and pardon me if I take the
plain highway in relating the particulars without using any refined Phrases,
or eloquent speeches.

Therefore briefly thus, and as it were in the Forefront I entered to show the
whole proceeding of the Voyage in a word, as namely, there is no Passage nor
hope of Passage in the North of Davis Straight. We having coasted all, or
near all the Circumference thereof, and find it to be no other then a great
Bay, as the Voyage does truly show: therefore I cannot but much admire the
work of the Almighty, when I consider how vain the best and chiefest hopes of
men are in things uncertain; and to speak of no other matter than the
hopeful passage to the North West. How many of the best sort of men have set
their whole endeavors to prove a passage that way? not only in their
Conference, but also in writing and publishing the Work: Yea what great sums
of money having been spent about the Action, as your Worship has costly
experience of? Neither would the Vainglorious Spaniard have scattered abroad
so many false Mappes and Iournals, if they had not been confident of a passage
this way; that if it had pleased GOD a passage had been found, they might have
eclipsed the worthy praise of the Adventurers, and true Discoverers. And for
mine own part I would hardly have believed the contrary, until my eyes became
witnesses of that I desired not to have found, still taking occasion of hope on
very likelihood till such time as we had coasted almost all the Circumference
of this great Ba^. Neither was Master Davis to be blamed in his report and
great hopes, if he had anchored abo^t Hope Saunderson, to have taken notice of
the Tides; For to that place which is 72. degrees. * the Sea is all open, and of an
unsearchable depth, and of a good color, only the Tides keep a certain
course, nor rise but a small height, as ^ight or nine foot; and the Flood
comes from the Southward; and in all the Bay beyond that place the Tide is so
small, and not much to be regarded: yet by reason of Snow melting on the Land,
the Ebb is stronger than the Flood, by means whereof, and the winds holding
Northerly, the fore part of the year the great I Will of Ice are set to the
Southward, some into Fretum Hudson, and other into New-foundland: For in all
where the Channel is open, are great quantities of them driving up and down;
and till this year not well known where they were become.

Now that the worst is known concerning this Passage; it is necessary and
requisite your Worship should understand what probability and hope of profit
might here be made hereafter, if the Voyage might be attempted by fitting
men. And first, for the killing of Whales, certain it is, that in this Bay are
great numbers of them, which the Biscaver calls the Guard Bay* Whales of the
same kind which are killed at Greeneland, and as it seems to me easy to
be struck, because they are not used to be chased or beaten. For we being
but one day in Whale-^ound, so called, for the number of Whales we saw there
sleeping and lying alo^^ on the water, nor fearing our Ship, or ought else*
^or if we had been fitted with men and things necessary, it had been no
hard matter to have struck more then would have made three Ships a saving
Voyage; and that it is of that sort of Whales, there is no fear, I being twice
at Greeneland, took sufficient notice to know them again, besides a dead
Whale we found at Sea, having all her Finnes: or rather all the Roughs of her
mouth; of which with small labor we got a hundred and sixty the same evening
we found her: and if foul weather the next day had not followed, no doubt we
had got all, or the most part of them: But the wind and Sea rising, she broke
from us, and we were forced to leave her. Neither are they only to be looked
for in Whale Sound, but also in Smiths Sound, Wolstenholmes Sound, and others,
etc.

For the killing of Sea-mors I can give no certainty, but only this: that our
Boat being but once a shore in all the North part of this Bay, which was in
the entrance of Alderman JONES his Sound; at their return our Men told us they
saw many Mors along by the shore on the Ice: but our Ship being under sail,
and the wind coming fair, they presently came on board without further
search; besides the people inhabiting about 74. degrees* told us by diverse
signs, that toward the North there were many of those Beasts having two long
teeth; and showed us diverse pieces of the same.

As for the Unicorn, it being a great Fish, having a long horn borne growing
forth of his forehead or nostrils (such as Sir MARTIN FROBISHER in his second
Voyage found one) in diverse places we see of them: which if the horn be of
any good value, no doubt but many of them maybe killed.

As concerning what the shore will yield, as Bears skins, Mors teeth, and
such like; I can say little, because we came not on Land in any of those places
where hope was of finding them.

But here some may object why we sought that Coast no better? To this I
answer, that whilst we were thereabouts, the weather was so exceeding foul
we could not; for first we anchored in Wolstenholmes Sound, where presently
wedrove with two anchors on head, then we were forced to stand forth with a low
sail; the next day in Whale Sound we lost Anchor and Cable, and could fetch
the place no more; then we came to Anchor near a small Island, being between
Sir Thomas Smiths Sound, and Whales Sound: but the wind came more outward,
that we were forced to weigh again. Nevertheless, if we had been in a good
Harbor, having but our Ships Boat we durst not send her far from the Ship,
having so few men as 17. in all, and some of them very weak: but the chief
cause why we spent too little time to seek a Harbor, was our great desire to
perform the discovery; having the Sea open in all that part, and still
likelihood of a passage: but when we had coasted the land so far to the S.
ward, that hope of a passage was none, then the year was too far spent, and
many of our men very weak, and withal we having some belief that Ships the
next year would be set forth about the killing of whales which might do
better then we.

And seeing I have briefly set down what hopes there is of making a profitable
Voyage, it is not unfit your Worship should know what let or hindrance may be
to the same; the chiefest cause is, that some years it may happen by reason of
Ice lying between 72. * and 76. so that the Ships cannot come into those parts
until the middle of July, so that want of time to stay in the Country may be
some let, yet they may well tarry until the last of August: in which space
much business may be done, and great store of oil made. Nevertheless, if
store of Whales come in, as no fear to the contrary; what cannot be made in
Oil, may be brought home in Blubber, and the Finnes may arise to good profit.
Another hinderance will be, because the bottom of the Sound will not be so
soon clear as would be wished; by means whereof, now and then a Whale may
be lost. The same cause sometime happens in Greeneland. Yet I am persuaded the
Sounds before, no^ never will be clear before the 20. of July. We this year
were in Whales Island the 4. day amongst many Whales, and might have struck
them without let of Ice.

Furthermore, there is little wood to be expected either for fire, or other
necessaries; therefore Coals and other such things must be provided at home,
they will be much more the ready there.

Thus much I thought good to certify to your Worship, whom I hope will
conceive, that much time has not been spent in vain or the like business,
nor carelessly neglected, and although we have not performed what we desired
(that is to have the passage) yet what we have promised, as to bring
certainty, and a true description truth will make manifest, that I have not
much erred.

And I do boldly say (without boasting) that more good discovery has not in
shorter time (to my rememrance) been done since the Account was attempted,
considering how much Ice we have passed, and the difficulty of Sailing so near
the Pole upon a travis.

And above all the variation of the compass whose wonderful opperation is
such in this Bay, increasing and decreasing so suddenly, and swift being in
some part, as in Wolstenholmes Va^ia. 26. d.
and Smiths Sound varied above 5. points or 56. d. a thing almost incredible,
and almost matchiesse in all the world besides, so that without great care and
good observations true description would not have been had.

In fine, whatsoever my labors are or shall be, I esteem too little to
express my thankful mind, for your many favors wherein I shall be ever
studious to supply my other wants, by my best endeavors, and ever rest at your
worships command.

William Baffyn.

The Journalls of his Voyage set, forth at the charge of the right worshipful
Sir Thomas Smith Knight, Sir Dudley Diggs Knight, Mr. John Wolstenholme
Esquier, and Mr. Alderman Ioanes, with others in the Discovery, Robert Bylot
Mr. himself Pilot. 1616.
HE set from Gravesend, and went about by the W. by March. Groenland 6. 5 d.
Ireland* and the first Land he saw was within Fretum Davies in 65. degrees
20. minutes, on the 14. May the forenoone, and 6. of the people being on
fishing, came to him, to whom he gave small pieces of ^ron, and they keeping
him company with great love, suppose he had intended to come to anchor, but
when they see him stand off from shore they followed a while, and then went
away discontented as he thought.

He prosecuted his voyage being loath to Anchor as yet although the wind was
contrary, but plied to the N. ward, until he came into 70. d. 20. m. there he
entered a fair sound near Cape Davies his London coast, the people espying him
Groanlands wonder.
with great wonder, and gazing fled away in their Boats, and after this night
he saw them no more, yet they left there Dogs running to and fro upon the
Island.

At this place he stayed two days taking in water, and doing things needful,
the Tides not rising above eight or nine foot made him dislike of the passage,
it flows. past 9, upon the change day the Tide comes from the South.

At N. Sun he set sail, and plied to the Northward, with flood Tide,

He found a dead Whale about 26. Leagues from the shore, he made fast to
her, and got some sin out of her: the next day he was enforced by storm to
leave her, having stood from her not above 3. Leagues N. W. he came toIce Ice.
then, and tackt into the shore again, and a great storm ensued.

This day he came fair by Hope Saunderson, Captain Davies Hope Saunderson.
his farthest, between 72. d. and 73. that evening at N. Sun he came to
Ice, which he put into, plying all the next day to get through.

He was clear off the Ice, and not far fromshoare, the wind North East, he
put in amongst diverse Islands, the June.
people seeing him fled away, leaving behind and under a small Rock hidden two
young Maids or women, the Ship riding not far off, the Master with some
others went on Land, they making signs to be carried to the Island, where
their Tents were there adjoining.

When they came there they found two old women more, the one to estimation 80.
years, the other younger, there was also one woman with a child at her back,
who had hid Groanland women.
her self amongst the Rocks, until the other had told her how kindly they had
used them in giving them pieces of Iron, and other trifles, in change whereof,
they gave them Seal skins, other things they had none, save dead Seals, and
fat and blubber, which the poor women were very diligent to carry to the
Boat, and put into their Casks making show that the men were over at the
Maine, and at another small Island something more Eastward; then they made
signs to them that he should show them his ship, and set them where the men
were, the four youngest came into their Boat, and when they were in the Ship
they much wondered, and they gave them of his meat which they ta^ing would not
eat, two of them he set to the Island where they found the men to be, the
other two he set to their Tents again, those th^^ went to seek the men could
not find them, but came back to the Ship again, and were set over to the
other side.

This place they called Women's Island, it lies in 72. degrees Women's Island. 72.
d. 45. m.
45. minutes, the Flood comes from the S. ward, at deep Tides the water
(...) not above 6. or 7. foot S. S. E. M^one (...) full ^^^, the ^nhabitants
being very poor living ch^e^ely upon Seals flesh dried, which they eat raw,
and clo^^^ themsel^es with the skins, as also they do cover their Tents and
Boats therewith, which they can dress very well, the women differ from the
men in apparel, and are marked in the face with diverse black streak^s or lines
the skin having been raised with some sharp Instrument, when they were
young, and black color put therein, so grown in, that by no means it can be
got forth.

Concerning their Religion he says little only they have a kind of worship or
adoration to the Sun, to which they will point, striking their hand upon
their breasts, and crying Elyoute, there dead they bury on the sides of the
hills, where they he, making a pile of stones over them, yet not so thick but
that he could see the dead body, the air being so piereing, that it keeps
them from stinking savor, so likewise he has seen there dogs buried in
the same manner.

This day he set sail from thence with fair weather, the wind contrary yet
he plied it up between the Ice and shore, as it has been in a channel of
7. or 8. Leagues A Channel, 74. d. 4. m.
broad, on the 9 (...) was in 74. ^ / ^. much pestered with Ice, near ^.
small Islands lying 8. Miles from shore, where he anchored.

Those Islands he takes to be frequented by people at the latter end of the
year, as it seemed by the houses and places where their Tents had stood, but
as yet they were not come, the flood Tide was very small, not rising above 5.
or 6. foot, yet the ebb runs with indifferent stream, caused by the
melting snow from off the mountains.

Seeing that as yet he could not proceed, he determined to stand in for the
shore, there to abide until the ^ee were Harbor 73. 45. m.
more consumed, which he plainly sa^^ to wast very fast, he came to anchor
73. 45. m. here he continued 3. days without any show or sign of people.

This day there came 42. of the Inhabitants in their Canoes, they gave him
Seal skinns, and many pieces of the horn of Unicorn, and showed him diverse
pieces of Ice Mors teeth, making signs that to the N. ward were many of them,
he gave them in exchange thereof pieces of Iron, glasses and Beads, 4.
several times they repayed to him bringing always of those commodity
aforesaid, by reason whereof he called this place Horn Sound.

Here he staid 6. days, and on this day at night sets sail with little wind,
he stood to the N. ward, the wind having been contrary, the most part of the
month, bu. it was strange to see the Ice so much consumed in so little space,
Ice consumed.
for now he could come to the 3. Islands formerly named, and stand off to the
Westward almost 20. Leagues, without let of Ice, until he came to 74. 30. m.
Latitude, then he put amongst scattered Ice, plying all this month every day
gazing some what, nothing worthy of Note, hoping that he might see many of
those fishes with long horns, which they call Sea Unicorns, the weather
variable few days without snow and freezing: but Midsommer day his sails and
tackling were frozen, that they could not and them, yet the He see many Sea
Unicorns
cold is not so extreme, but that it may be well endured, he being still
within sight of Land.

He came into an open Sea in 75. 40. Latitude, which newly received his hope
of a passage, and because the wind was July.
contrary, he stood 20. Leagues of the shore, and then he stood in again, and
anchored to try the Tide, but found small comfort, shortly after the wind came
to South East, and blew very hard with thick and foggy weather; he set ^ayle
and run along the shore: the second day and the next day Sir Dudley Diggs
Cape. Lat. 76. 35.
he came by a fair Cape, he named Sir Dudley Diggs, his Cape in Latitude 76.
35. It has a small Island close adjoining to it, the wind still increasing, he
past by a goodly sound 12 leagues distant from the former Cape, having a small
Island in the middle, making 2 currents, under this Island he Anchored, 2
hours the Ship drove, although he had two Anchors on ground. Whereupon he was
forced to weigh and stand forth, he called this sound, Wolftenholmes Sound; It
has many Inlets or smaller sounds; and is a fit place for killing of Whales.
Wolstenholmes Sound.


This morning a storm began at West, that blew away his fore-course,
continuing so, that he was not able to bear any sail, but lay to Hull; and
when it cleared up, he found himself imbayed in a great Sound: then he set
sail and stood over to the S. W. side, and Anchored in a Bay, where he lost
both Cable and Anchor, the wind blowing so extremely from the hill tops, that
he could get no place to Anchor in; but was forced to stand too and again in
the sound, the bottom being all freze over, in the afternoon it was less
wind, and he set forth.

In this sound was great number of Whales; he called it Whale-sound in
latitude 77. 30. this day was fair weather, and he kept along by the land:
until he came unto a great bank of ice which was backed with land; which he
seeing, determined to stand back again some 8. leagues to an Island he called
Hauclites I Will. It lies between two great sounds, the one Whales Sound, 78.
Whale-sound, and the other Sir Tho. Smiths sound; this last runs to the N.
of 78. and is admirable in one respect, because in it is the greatest of
variation of the Compass of any part of the known World. For by diverse good
observations he Variation 56.
found it to be above 5. points, or 56. varied to the N. ward, this Sound
seems to be good for killing of Whales, it being the greatest and largest in
all the Bay, the cause why he minded to stand to this Island, was to seek for
Whale-Finnes; this night he Anchored with foul weather, that his Boat could
not land: the next day the Wind more outward, 9. the Sea grown so that he
wayed, spending two days before he could get a good place to Anchor in.

This day it cleared up and he spyed a company of Islands lying 12 or 13
leagues off from shore: he minded to go to them but the Wind took him short;
and he being loath to spen^ more time, took the opportunity thereof, and left
the search of those slles, which he called Caryes Isles.

Then he stood to the W. ward with open Sea, and a stiff gale of wind until
this day, when it fell calm and foggy, he being near the entrance of a fair
Sound, which he called Alderman Jones his sound; This afternoon it being
clear and fair weather, he sent his Boat on land, the ship being under
sail, but the wind beginning to blow, they returned, saying, they saw many Sea
Mors, by the shore amongst the ice, but no sign of people so far as they
were, nor any good place to Ancho^ in, then having the wind E. N. E. he run
along the shore, it beginning now to trent to the South, and showing it self
to be a Baye.

This day he was open of another great Sound, he called Sir Sir James
Lancasters Sound, La^^t. 74
James Lancasters Sound, here his hope of passage began to lessen every day
more then other; for from this sound to the Southward he had a ledge of Ice
between the shore and him, but the Sea was clear to the S. of it he kept
close to this Ice until this day; and then he was in 71. degrees. 16. min. and
plainly perceived the land to 70. degrees. 30. min. then having much let about
him, he stood to the E. ward, supposing to have been soon clear, and to
have kept on that side the Ice, until he had come into 70. degrees. and then to
have stood in again: but i^ proved quite contrary to his expectation; for he
was forced 60 leagues amongst Ice.
to run above 60. leagues through Ice, and many times fast that he could go
no way, although so he kept his course du^ E. and when he had gotten into the
open Sea; he kept so near the Ice, that many times he had much to do to get
clear, yet could not get near the land until he came to 68. when he see
the shore, but could not come to it by 7. or 8, leagues for the great
abundance of Ice; and this was on the 24. day of July, then he spent 3. days
to see if he could anchor to try the Tide, but the Ice led him into 65. 40.
min. latwhere he left the west shore; because that then he was in the Indra^^
of Cimberland; Inlet he knew no certainties, no^ hope of passage could be
there.

Now seeing that he had made an end of his discovery, and the year being too
far spent to go for the bottom of the Bay, to search for drift Finnes; he
determined to go for the Coast of Groenland, to see for refreshing for his
men. Mr. Hubart, and two more having kept their Cabbins 8. days: besides his
Cook which dyed the day before: and diverse of his company so weak, that they
could not labor; so the wind favoring, he came to anchor in 65. degrees. 45.
min. in a place called Cawkin So^nd.

The next day, upon an Island, we found great store of Scurnie-grasse, with
S^rrill and Orpen; the Scurnie-grasse he boiled in Beer, by means whereof,
with Gods blessing, his men were in perfect health, in 8. days, and so
continued until his Ariuall in England.

Here he rode 3. days before any of the people came to August ^
him; this day came 6. in Canooes, they brought Salmon, ^eale, and such like,
which was good refreshing for his men; the next day following, the same 6. came
again, but they saw them no more until the 6. day, when he had weighed
anchor, and was almost clear of the harbor, the same 6. and noe more, came
and brought of the like commodity: for which they gave them Glasses, Beads,
Counters, and small pieces of Iron; which they do esteem, as we Christians
do Gold or Silver.

In this Sound was such Skulls of Salmon swimming too and Skuls of Salmon in
Cawk^^ sound.
fro, that it was much to be admired: here it flows above 18. foot water;
It flows on the change till seven a clock. It is a very good Harbor, and
easy to be k^owne: having three high round hills like Piramidies close
adjoining to the mouth thereof; and that in the midst is the lowest: All this
coast along is full of good Harbors, by reason of so many Islands that lie
from the Main.

By 3. this day he was clear of this place, having a N. N. W wind, fair
weather: So God sent him a speedy passeage, for in 19. days after he saw the
the coast of England; The 30. h^ anchored in Dover Road.

A brief Discourse of the Probability of a Passage to the Western or South
Sea, with Testimonies, by me Henry Briggs.
I Thought good to add somewhat to this Relation of Mr. Baffyn, that learned
unlearned Mariner and Mathematitian, whose wanting Art of words; so really
jmployed himself in that jndustrious work, whereof here you see so evident
proof: This Map and Table would much have jllustrated this Voyage: jf
trouble, cost, and his own despair of passage that way, had not made us
willing to content our selves, with what followed of that le^aned, and in this
Argument, three times thrice jndustrious Mathematitian, Master London.
Henry Briggs famous for his reading in both Universities, and this honorable
City: that I make a further Voyage of Discovery to find and follow the remote
Passage and extent of his name; Mr. Baffyn told me, that the Tide from the N.
W. about Diggs his Island, was mis-reported by mistaking the hour 8. for 11.
and that he would if he might get employment, search the Passage from Iapon,
by the coast of Asia, or ( qua data porta) which way he could: But in the
Indies he Baffyns death.
died, in the late Armouse business, slain in fight with a shot as he was
24. trying bis Mathematticall conclusions, for the discovery of Sr. Thomas
Button: I have solicited for his notes, and received of him gentle
entertainment, and kind promises; being they forced me to stay in the City
about necessary and vr* Affairs; he would at his return seek and impart
them, since I hear that weighty occasions have detained him out of England;
and I cannot deliver that I could not receive, which if I do, I purpose to
give them out of due place, rather then no^ at all: once he was very confident
in conferrence with me, o^ a Passage that way, and said that he had therein
satisfied hi^ Majesty, who from his discourse in private, suffered the
necessity Sr. James satisfied.
thereof: And the main Argument was there too: so ^^ the Tide, for wintering
in Port Nelson, he found the Tid rising every 12. hours 15. soote: Within the
bottom of Hu(...)sons Bay, it was but 2. Foot: And in the bottom of Fret^
Davies, discovered by Baffyn but one; yea and a West win^ equalled the neepe
Tides to this Spring, arguing the Neighborhood of the Sea, which is on the
West Side of Amenia, the Summer following, he found about the lat. of 60. a
strong Race of a Tide running sometimes Eastward, sometimes W. ward; Whereupon
Josias Hubbart, in his Plot, called that place Hubbarts Hope; now if any make
scruple why this discovery was not persued by Sir Thomas Button, let him
consider, that being Prince Henry's Servant, and partly by him employed, whom I
think named the Country New Wales: The untimely death of that Prince, put all
out of joint; nor was he so open, that others should have the glory of his
discovery.

If any man think that the Passage is so far as the Mappes use to express
Ammerica, running into the West, it is easily answered that either of
negligence, or ouer-busie dilligeate Mappes by Portugalls in the East, and
Spantards in the West, have been so clearly proiected here: That fabulous
straight of Anian, as before by Frances Gauls testimony, and Navigations is
evident; and hence the Portugalls, to bring in the Moluceas to the Moietie of
the World, agreed upon between the Spaniards and them are thought to have much
curtailed Asia, and the longitude of those Islands, giving fewer degrees to
them then in just longitude is due; so the older Mappes of America, make the
land from Magdalene Sireights to the South Sea^, running North-west, when they
are rather contracted somewhat Easterlie from the North, and the like is
justly reported of their placing Periuvera; and I know not, nor they neither,
what Countries they make in America to run so far to the N. W. ward, which
Sir Francis Drake his Voyage in that Sea; his Nova Albion being little further
Northward, then Aguatulie plainly conuinceth to be otherwise; yea the late
Map of Culifirma, found to be an Island; the Saluage discourses of all the
Countries Northward, and Westward, from Virginia, the Fame whereof filled my
friend Mr. Dormer with so much confidence, that hearing of strange Ships that
came thither for a kind of Ure, or Earth; the men using Forks in their Diet,
with Caldrons to dress their Meat, and things nothing suitable to any parts
of America; he supposed them to come from the East, near China and Iapon; and
therefore he made a Voyage purposely to discover, but crossed with diverse
disasters, he returned to Virginia, frustrate of attempting that year, but
fuller of confidence, as in a Letter from Virginia he signified to me, where
death ended his design soon after; but how often are the usual Charts
rejected by experience in those Nauigations, in the works recorded. Painters
and Poets are not always the best Oracles.

For further proof of a passage about these parts into the W. or S. Sea, as it
is called from the first discovery thereof to the South, from the parts of new
Spain, whence it was first described by the Spaniards, there is mention of a
Portugal taken in a Carracke in Queen Elizabeth's days, of Famous Memory,
confirming this opinion: Sir Martin Frobisher also, from a Portugal in Ginney,
received Intelligence of such a Passage: he saying he had past it; the Pilots
of Lisborne are said generally to acknowledge such a thing: And the Admiral, ^
D'Garsia Ieaffrey Loais^, of City Royal, in the time of Charles the Fifth, is
reported by the Coast of Baccalos and Labradore, to have gone to the Moll^^a^:
Yasc^ Decor^nado writ to the Emperor, that at S^bola, he was 150. leagues
from the South Sea; and a little more from the North: Anthonio de Horera, the
Kings Coronista Mayor, makes with us also in the distance described; but to
produce some Authority more full; I have here presented Thomas Cowles, a
Mariner and Master: Michaell Lock Merchant, and after them, a little Treatis
ascribed to Master Briggs; And if any think that the Span^ard or Portugal
would soon have discovered such a Passage, this will answer, that it was not
for their profit to expose their East or West Indies to English, Dutch, or
others, whom they would not have sharers in those remote Treasures, by so near
a Passage: First Thomas Cowles auer^eth thus much.

I Thomas Cowles of Bedmester, in the County of Somrset Mariner, do
acknowledge, that Six years past, being at Lisborne in Portugal; I did hear
one Martin Chacke a Portugal, read a Book of his own making, which he had
set out 6. years before that time, in Print in the Portugal tongue, declaring
that the said Martin Chacke had found twelve years now past away from the
Portugal Iudies, through a Gulf of the New Foundland, which he thought to
be in 59. degrees. of the N. Pole, by means that he being in the said Indies
with 4 ships of great Burden; and he himself being in a small ship of 80.
Tun, far driven from the company of the other 4. ships, with a West
wind; after which he had past along by a great number of Islands, which were
in the Gulf of the said New Foundland, and after he ouer-shott the Gulf, he
set no more sight of any other land, until he fell with the N. N. west part
of Ireland; and from thence he took his course home-ward; and by that means
he came to Lifborne 4. or 5. weeks before the other ships that were
separated from his Company, and since the same time he could never see any of
those Books, because the King commanded them to be called in, and no more of
them to be Printed, least in time it would be their hinderance.

In witness whereof I set to my hand and mark the 9day of April, 1579.

A Noate of Michaell Lock, touching Freton Anjoy, through the North-west
Passage of Meta Incognita.
WHen I was at Venice in April 1596. happily arrived there an old man, aged
about 60. called commonly Iuan de F^^^a, but named properly Apostollos
Valerian^s, of Nation a Greek, borne in the Island of Sepholonien, of
Profession a Mariner, and an ancient Pylot of ships: This man came lately
out of Spain; arrived first at Legorne, and went thence to Florence, where he
found out John Dowlas, an Englishman, a famous Mariner, ready coming for
Venice, to be Pylot of a Venetian ship for England, they came both to Venice
together; and John Dowlas, being well acquainted with me, gave me notice of
this Greek Pylot, and brought him to my speech; and in conference this Pylot
declared in the Italian and Spanish tongue, these words following.

First, he said that he had been in the West India of Spain, by the space
of Forty years, and sailed too and fro, as Mariner and Pylot to many places
thereof in the service of the Spaniard.

Also he said that he was in the Spannish shipp, which in returning from the
Islands of Philipinas and China, was robbed near Cape Callif^rnia by Captain
Can^ndish, an Englishman; whereby he lost 60. Thousand Ducats of his own
goods.

Also he said that he was Pylot of 3. small Ships, which the Victory of
Mexicoe sent from thence, armed with a 100. Soldiers, under a Captain
Spaniard to discover the streights of Anian, along the Coast of the South Sea;
and to fortefie in that straight to resist the Passage of the English Nation,
which were afraid to pass through the streights into the South Sea; and that
by reason of a Mutiny which happened amongst the Soldiers, for the Sodomie of
their Captain; that Voyage was overthrown, and the Ship turned back from
Califirnia, to Noud Spania, without any effect of things done in that Voyage,
and at their return the Captain was punished at Mexicoe.

Also he says, that after the said Voyage was so ill ended, the Viceroy set
him out again in 1592. with a small Caravell and a Pinnace, armed with
Mariners only for discovery of the said Straight; and he following his
course W. and N. W. in the South Sea, along the coast of Nova Hispaniae, and
Califirnia and India, now called North America; all which voyage he signified
unto me in a great Map and Card of my own which I laid before him, until
he came to the Latitude of 47. degrees. and that there finding the land to
trent N. and N. E. with a broad Inlett between 47. and 48. he being entered
thereinto; sailing therein more then twenty days, and found the land trenting
still sometimes N. W. and sometimes N. E. and also S. E. ward, a far broader
Sea then at the said entrance; and that he passed by diverse Islands in that
entrance: and that at the entrance of this said Straight, there is on the
North-west coast thereof a great Head-land or Island, with an exceeding high
Pinnacle or spired Rock like a pillar there-vpon.

Also he said, that he went on land indivers places; and that he saw some
people on land clad in Beast-skinns: and that the land was very fruitful, and
rich of gold and silver and Pearls and other things like Nova Hispaniae,

Also he said, that he being entered thus far into the said 10
Straight, and being come into the North-Sea already, and finding the Sea wide
enough every where, and to be about 30. or 40. leagues wide in the Straight
where he entered: he thought he had now well discharged his office, and done
the thing which he was sent to do: and that he not being armed, to resist the
force of the Saluage people that might happen to assault him, therefore he set
sail, and returned toward Noua Hispaniae, where he arrives at Aquapulco, Anno
1592. hoping to be well rewarded of the Viceroy for his voyage so performed.

Also he said, that he was greatly welcomed to Mexico by the Viceroy and had
promise of great reward; but staying there 2 years to his small content, the
Viceroy told him he should be rewarded in Spain of the King, and therefore
willed him to repair thither, which he did perform.

At his coming thither he was greatly welcomed at the Kings Court in words,
but after long suite he could not get any reward there to his content; and
therefore at length he stole away and came into Italy, to get home to live
amongst his kindred in his own country, he being now very old.

Also he said, that he thought that the cause of his ill reward was had of the
Spaniards to be, for that they did understand very well that the English Nation
had now given over all their voyages for the discovery of the N, W. passage,
wherefore they feared not them any more to come that way into the S. Sea; and
therefore they needed not his service therein any more.

Also he said, that in regard of his ill reward had of the Spaniard; and
understanding of the Noble mind of the Queen of England, and of her wars
maintained so valiantly against the Spaniard, hoping her Matie, would do him
Justice for his goods lost by Capt. Cavendish, he would be content to go into
England and serve her Matie. in that Voyage to discover the N, W. passage into
the S Sea, and would put his life in her Majesty's hands to perform the same,
if she would furnish him with one ship of 40 tonnes, and one Pinnace, and that
he would perform the same from the one end of the Straits to the other, and
he willed me so to write into England.

Whereupon after this twice conference I did write to the old Lord Treasurer
Cicil, and to Sir Walter Rawleigh, and to Mr. Richard Hackluit that famous
Cosmographer, praying that 100 pounds might be sent for the charge of sending
this Pylot into England, I received answer from some of my friend^, that the
action was well liked of; if the money could be procured; After one fortnight
he went from me into his own country, where he dyed.

There are diverse other things written in the Original, as enticing
persuasions to those undertakings, and is to be read as in Sir Humfrey Gilbert
and others in Mr. Hackluit; and also other which were his collections (after his
death) incerted into the latter end of the 4th Book of the 3 part of Purkas
his works; but because these latter truths have proved them to be but the
imagination of men, I omit them as things needless to this ornament; for
although I have been careful to be as compendious as I could, yet I fear me
my readers will think me totedious.

Concerning Capt. William Hawkridge of whom I find nothing written by himself,
but what has come to my hands by manuscript or relation, as follows here.
He went bent by the West, and the 29 of June he found June. 29 Lumleys Inlet.
himself betwixt land and land, and thought he had bin in the great channel
or Lumleyes Inlet, where it pleased God by the clearing up of the weather to
deliver him from a rock he might have endangered himself upon to the E. ward.

This day he plied it out again to the E. ward finding that 30
he was in the N. or wrong Channel where he saw 3 Rocks he wondered he had
escaped, for he had run in amongst them.

This day was fair and clear weather, the wind at N, W. July.
he stood out again S, E. all the forenoone amongst ice loofing 1
for one, and bearing up for another, the current setting to the W. ward, he
took marks upon the land and by the logge the Ship run after 5 leag. a watch
and for all that got nothing, he observed by his Astrolob, and was in 62 d. 25
m. having had Lat. 62 d. 25 m.
Fogs and Mists for 6 days before so as he could not observe, Variat. 29 d.
and this day he had 29 d variation Westward, the magneticall Amplitude 83 d
true Amplitude 54.

These days were fair clear weather, the 4 was foggie. 2 3 5 6


This day the wind was E.

This day he plied to windward to weather Resolution, the wind at E, N, E.

This day was foggie wind N, E. he lost sight of his Pinnace. 7 He was the
first that entered Lumleys Inlet so far.


The 27 of June he made the Resolution, and the 8 of July he was come back
again out of the N. channel betwixt Resolution and Cape Elizabeth.

This day he met again with his Pinnace and thought to 9
have borne up, but the fogge taking him he plied to the Eastward to the intent
he might get into the great channel.

This day standing to the N-shore with very foggie weather 10 A strong Tide.
he was taken with an indraft of a strong tide, and drawn in amongst diverse
Islands about Cape Elizabeth and was in more danger then he saw, but having a
swelling Sea from the E. he followed and so escaped all dangers.

This day he had a strong ripling of a tide, his Latit. 61 d. 11 A ripling tide.
30 m. and the body of Resolution bore N, W. by N. from him.

The 12. 13. and 14 days he made account that he had kept Horst 30 leag. to S.
ward with a Current. 16
that latit. and rather to the N. ward, but he was horst with a current (he
could not tell how) above 1 d. and 30 m. Which all men know is 30 leag. so that
he was to the S. ward of Buttons Island

This day when he came to observe thinking he had bin in the mouth of the
strait, it proved otherwise, the wind coming contrary, as at W, and by S. some
hopes were taken away that he should not insist any further for that year, but
that himself had framed a sound resolution to continue and persever.

From the 16 until this day he plied to the West and was 22
fair by land, not 3 leag. of the sounding he had no ground in latit. 61. 50.

The wind N, N, E. and N, E. clear weather. 23 24


This day he espied land on the S. shore nere Cape Charles, but to the E. ward
he espied a little Island where he stood into a Bay to water, and anchored in 25
fath. fine fishing ground Bad fishing.
(but caught none) he had land bore round from the N, N, W. to the E, by N. the
Islands Lat. 62 d. 19 m. variat. 3 d. 9 m. and here he had a tide which minding
the setting and flowing may cause some Argument of strong consequence to prove
a passage that way, on this Island he caught Ducks, here he found it to flow 21
foot water the tide setting S, E. and the flood from N, W. and in this place a
S. E. Moon makes a full Sea. As at Salvage I Will.


He sent the Mrs. Mate and Carpenter with others in the boat to row about the
Island, and when it bore S. E. of them, they had 74 fath, half a mile from
land, and a strong set tide from E.

This day he set sail from this Island the wind E, S, E. much 27
wind all day.

This day in the morning he met with much ice. 30 31


This day he run 35 leag. W. by N. but the last day at night he reckned
himself to be at the westermost Cape on the N. side.

This day he run 25 leag. W, by N. but the last day he saw August. 1
land, and thought it had bin Silisbury and Nottinghams Islands, but it proved
the N. Main, he sailed along W. by N. and W, by S. with a stiff gale at E, N,
E. he found this land to be thick I know none such.
with ice, and very low, and run 30 leag* along by it.

The first of August he espied this land and sailed along in 67, 89, 10, 11,
12, 13, 14, 15, 16 fat. rocky ground, as he stood to the S. ward it was white
sand, his lat. was 63 d. 30 m. variat. 27-he found an Island sailing along the
shore, the depth between which and the Main was 70 fath.

This day he sailed along the N, W. with fair weather and 2
easy wind.

This day he stood away S, W. and anchored in 45 fath. clay 3
ground.

This morning he weighed and stood N, W. 3 leag. and being 4
fair weather, the water shoalding to 30 fath. he anchored again still
finding a pretty soaking current setting most an end N, W. and S, E.

This morning clock 8 he anchored again having but new 5
weighed because of the Fog.

This morning clock 4 he weighed and stood away W, N, 6 Swelling Sea ^om W.
W. with S, E. wind true course 5 leag. and was in 63 d. 50 m. having a
swelling Sea out of the Westerboard, the water waxed deep from 30 to 50 fath.
and the ground was hard channel ground, from 12 to 4. he sailed N, W. by N. 6
leagues, but found no ground and supposed he saw the W. land bore N, N, W. from
him. From 4 until 8 he stood away N. and by E. 5 leag at 8 he sets, tacks
aboard and stood N, E, and by S. in a deep gut, this day he had 45 fath. at
clock 4. at 5 he had 8 fath. and at 8 he had 65 the land bearing N, N, W. and
N, W.

This day at the dawning the land bore N, W. and he stood 7
along it N E. true course, he had sounding 25 and 30 fath. and anchored at
clock 8, and weighed again presently, the land bore E. and had sounding all
day, the further N. ward the deeper water, this writer says he, judged it to
be Salibury I Will, he sailed N E the forenoone some 7 leag. and in the afternoon
N N, E. for so the land did lie, toward the bottom of the Bay the latit. was
64 d. 30 m. variat. 23 d. 10 m. the part of this land bore from him N, N, E.
fine low plain land.

The 8 in the morning he was persuaded it was a bay, but that he will not say
he was this day calming and did think that there was no tide here, but sending
his boat on shore found 20 foot ebbing and flowing, and sport enough for them
all, for in ^ hours space he saw in conscience as good as 300 Fat D^^^
Dear, as fat as butter, but caught none, for his intent was to travel as
good as 2 miles, hoping to have seen the Sea on the other side but could not.

9 This day clock 8. to 12. he run 6 leag. W, N, W. from 12 he steered away as
the land would give him leave, W, S, W. and W, a fine shoalding coast, and
dainety sounding, shelly ground, from 10 to 16 fathomes, here he had a little
current, set W, N, W. this as he judged is all broken land, latit. 63 degrees. 40
min. variat. 23 d. 30 m.

10 The wind was at S, E, and by E. the farther to the Westward the shoalder
water, they judge themselves to be shot so far to the W. ward as Sea Horse
Point, because of the coast trenching to Southerly, his boat rid with her
Grapnet, and found a pretty stream.

11 This day he was in 63 d. 40 min. latit. the land bearing from him S, W. and
trenching along to the S. being in this lat. they thought themselves far shot
to the Westwards within Sea Horse point, and so returned back again for the
Bay, where they were in almost 65 degrees. to the N. wards, but he altered his mind
and stood for Diggs his Island, to try the tide, N, E, by N. Northerly from
thence where he turned out of the Bay of Sea Horse 24 leag.

12 This day the wind was E. and by S, thick weather.

13 From the last day to this day noone, he was becalmed in thick weather.

14 From the last day noone till this, he made way 9 leag. E, S, E. and 2 leag.
N, W.

14 He tried the tide and found as strong a stream at this time, as you have
here in the Thames, it set S, E. and N, W. he followed it to see whether it
would carry him, at clock 8 at night he anchored, and wayed again at 8 next
morning, and to 12. he run 4 leag. N, W, by N. from 12 to night 10 leag. and he
had sou^^^^g 60 and 70 fath. but anchored in 30.

16 This morning 4. he wayed and stood to the N. ward, but thought he was stopped
by land, and therefore bore up the helm for England, not o^ that he was out of
hope of a passage, for that he will never say.

17 From the last day until this, S. W. 8 leag. he tackt to the N. ward, this
morning he was in sounding 70, 60, 59 fath.

18 From the last noone to this, he drove N, E. 6 leag. both these last days
were thick weather.

19 To this day noone 20 knots S, E. and 10 knots S, W.

20 To this day noone 20 leag. S, E. the wind W. and foggy.

21 To this day noone he run 20 leag. S, E. thick weather, and he was in 61 d.
15 m. latit. and sounding he had 86 fath.

22 To this day noone, 15 leag. E, by S. at noone it was clear weather, and he
was in 6^ d. 40 m. latit. and he saw land to the N. off him, and had sounding
from 45, 40, 36 fath.

23 This day he was in latit. 62 d. 00 m. in the morning the land bore S. off
him, and they judge it to be the N. shore or Cape, he had sounding 9 and 19
fath, and had run from last day 22 leag. E, by N. and 6 leag. S he had sounding
along the land 17 or 18 fath. fine beach land, and stiff a gale at N, W.

24 From the last day to this 23 leag. S, E. and 9 leag. E, by S. and this
morning he fell with land which he took to be the Kings Forland, it bore S, E.
9 leag. off, and latit 61 d. 30 m. this day the Pinnace stole from them as they
think upon puroose.

25 From this day at noone N, N, W. 8 leag. and N, E, by N. 9 leag. sounding
was 40 and 45 fath.

26 This day at noone they saw the same breach that they parted from, and was
by observation in latit. 62 degrees. 10 min. I know of this breach. A confused
account.
variat. 26 degrees. the wind was at S, E. and they thought themselves on the W.
side of Mansfield I Will 2 leagues off, and had deep 16 or 18 fath.

27 From last noone to this he run 27 leag. true course N, and by E. and were
in latit. of 60 d. the wind at E, S, E. this night at clock 10 the fogge came,
the next morning it cleared but he had no ground at 100 fath. he tackt about to
the S. ward till next morning and then to the N. ward, but at noone could have
no observation.

28 This morning 8 he tackt to the S, for he saw a firm A firm land of Ice.
land of Ice, from last day to this N, E. 12 leag. and 7 leag. S, E, because of
the Ice, at clock 10 he had 80 fath.

29 From last day to this 10 leag. S, E. and 3 leagues N, E, and sounding had
no ground.

30 From last day to this was fog, they got but little to the E. ward, and
sounding had no ground, and latit. 62 d. 40 min. 31 From the last to this 10
lea. E, by S. and 8, S, E, by E. the wind at N. at 8 in the evening calm, but
clear weather, they were close about the N. shore in 80 fath. he had a ripling
of a Tide to the E. ward, the land was something low toward the water, but
double height within land, it lies W N, W. and ESE.

This day he past by an Island they took to be the W. most end of the straight
and see Sir Dud^y Diggs his Island, being high land, and see the S. shore and a
gut when it bears S, W. seems to be 4 miles over, they also ^ee Nottighams
and The open betwixt C. Diggs and Cape Wolstenholme.
Salisburies I Will and a channel between them of 8 leag. and this strait is
over about 15 leag. they stood away this day E, by N.

1 To this noone from the last 2 ^ leag. E. by S, latit 63. Salisbury September.
bore N, N, W. and the W. Cape on the N. shore bore N. E. variat. 28 d. the
wind N E, by N.

2 To this noone 21 leag. E, by S* and S, S, W. 5 leagues, this morning he was
close aboard the N. Coast, it seems high ragged land and full of guts, he was
becalmed and befogged, and stood S. wards into the chann^ll having 1 10. oazie
ground.

There is nothing else o^ note until the 7 day when Resolution bore N, W. from
him. The 9 day he was open in Davis his strait, in 59 d. 25 m. and had variat.
26 degrees.

10 This day by storm his Pinnace threw over their boat and he lost sight of
her.

This is all that is to be observed, that he entered Fretum Hudson the 22 of
July and returned from his Search the 16 of August, having been no further to
the N. then almost 65d. and upon the S. side of Fretum Hudson near Cape
Charles, the Tide came from S, E. as it does on the N. side, the rest is, he
was set at his entering the mouth of the strait 30 leag. to S. of Cape Chidley.

FINIS.
COurteous Readers, the Printer, but especially the Corrector, craves your
patience for this long Errata following, which is also my request although to
my unknowledge and in my absence, they not being acquainted with the Method of
our Sea terms, have committed all these mistakes in 6. sheets, (beginning at
N* and ending with S.) being sent to another Press for expedition; and for
others, I desire thy good construction, promising they shall be amended at the
next Edition.

Marg Page Li For Read* 113 39 sowing saving. 114 20 strong (through evil
steeridge) 116 7 one Mr. Hudson. 22 account action. 117 34 manured manned. 118
18 the he. 119 14 for from. 121 18 to I hung a plummet. 123 13 being beginning.
124 33 tire tide. Marg 125 began begin. 5 me. no* 23 so to. 29 ledge ^edge 39
trent wend. 126 12 free* fore. 24 verioe view. 30 S. ^. 3^ stache stache. 36
leave out Westerly. 13 drew drive. 24 0 30. 127 11 10 ^. 128 9 0 This 5th. 129
40 man Boats. 130 3 men men were. 9 matter Winter. Marg 3 Maut^ls Sir R^*
Mo^^ils 17 have leave. Marg 131 2 man's M^^s teeth. 18 they have They would. 24
stay Sea. 29 83 clock 8. 3. 36 ruled ride. 37 N. land N. and. 39 with N. N 40
by 44 by W. 4. 132 26 is all is as all. 29 bad bold. 1 turn try. 4 he boat^ or
^ore the Boat coming on board 4 15 fath. in 15 fath^^ 3 former hopes former
from Hopes. 133 15 E. o. 20 Luke note. 21 thaverse traverse. 135 ^ Raffe rate.
136 ^^ is 86 and 66. 21 well say well see. 6 himself himself know. 17 how muc
thus much. 32 Iournals Read in the 37 were taken. 137 7 about 57 58 and a
half. Stinenia, America* 20 weeks 10 weeks. 11 10. ^5. 1615. 138 2 he seekt
he set. ^8 n^hld and ^^ld. 25 to to fro to and fro. 139 8 maer 5 fa near 5
fath^^^ 15 Sumoche Humocke, 31 Cannons C^^^wes, 36 Cannon C^^^w, 140 4 little
^ay a little box, 12 shot sl^ad, 141 4 morue mored, 13 false fair, 142 7 so
pertise so precise, the ^uyle the angle, not come come, 13 welbes will be, 16
W. of W W. of London. 144 7 the edge eddy, 14^ 35 doubted doubled, 146 28
perswad. perceived, 147 5 4 fath. 5 f^tha^s. 156 6 ^ ^ 150, 21 he caud 8th he
came, 22 instru^ent ^nstructions, 24 your will. you William, 25 ler 26 your desi
ur desired, 29 gazing gaging, 33 land ^end.

MY PREPARATIONS to the Voyage.
GEntlemen, our Yorkshire Proverb is, Plain dealing is a Jewel; So it is,
that I was neither importuned nor entreated to this undertaking by any either
Noble or Gentle, but the Truth is, that I had been itching after it ever since
1606. when I should have gone Mate to John Knight, of whom does follow, yet I
must confess that here my ambition soared a pitch higher then my ability, as
now time has made me to know, yet his Discretion and Experience taught him to
discern of what could be in my youth, but I presuming upon some parts I had,
as the use of the Globes and other Mathematicke Instruments, (having been Sea
bred from my Boyestime, and had been in the Mediterranian, Spain, France,
Holland, Norway, Denmark, and the Balticke Sea,) thought my self to be fit
for the best employment, desired to be plucked before I was ripe; but he durst
not depend upon me in that place for the Voyage, so as I did not proceed with
him; yet I was still kept in Marine employments along the Coast and Crossing
the Sea, whereby I gained Experience, and also at the Returns home of all
Ships from thence, I enquired of the Masters Mates and others that were that
way employed, whereby I gathered by Report and Discourse and Manuscripts, how
far they had proceeded, what they had done, and what was to do: To better
which, I often repaired to Mr. JOHN TAPPE, whose acquaintance was much amongst
these men, he also acquainting me with Mr. THO. STERN Globe-maker, (whom I
have found to have engrossed all those former Voyages by Relation, Manuscripts;
and Maps;) from whom I gathered much, and must needs say, he is a very well
deserving Practitioner: So that I thought my self to be now ready for the same
attempt, when occasion should present it self.

Which fell out by former acquaintance I had with that famous Mathematician Mr.
HENRY BRIGGES, who moved me thereto and I willingly consented, so as things
could be brought to pass, the which to strengthen himself, he acquainted
that Hon: Knight Sir JOHN BROOK, whom both to* do their King service, and the
Public good, persuades with diverse of their friends to come into the Adventure.

Whereupon, we exhibited a Petition to his Majesty for the lend of a Ship for
the Voyage and countenance to the Action, who Graciously accepted and granted
both; but the time of the year was so far spent before we could make our
provision ready, as we were forced to desist until the year following: in
which process Mr. BRIGGES deceased, and the one half of the Adventure fell
away.

In the mean time and before the next year, one Captain JAMES of Bristow,
had so wrought with the Merchants of the said City for to set forth one Ship
for the same design, as they were willing to adventure so as they might share
with London, in equal honor and profit, whether Ship soever found the same,
and this as was signified in a Letter from Captain JAMES to Mr. BRIGGES, which
Letter I did see is he showed the same to Sir JOHN BROOK, they both consenting
to write back again unto him that the Request was condescended unto, of which
and for better assurance, Capt. JAMES rid from Bristow to Oxford before the
death of Mr. BRIGGES desiring, that seeing we were both to go forth in one
year that he might go in the higher place, but was denied.

In this interim came home that Honorable Knight Sir THOMAS ROE from his
Embassage to the King of Sweden, who being made acquainted with the Design,
gave it his best furtherance, when his Majesty sending for this voyages never
failing friend Sir JOHN WOLSTENHOLM the elder Knight, appointing them two to
expediate forward the enterprise. Commanding the Master and Wardens of the
Trinity-House to be assisting hereunto; and young Sir John Wolstenholme, that
now is, was appointed Treasurer.

The Ship of his Majesty's, was (of my own choosing, and the best for condition
and quality, especially for this voyage that the world could afford) of Burden
80. Tonnes, the number of men 20. and 2. boys, and by all our Cares was
sheathed, Cordaged, Builded and repaired; all things being made exactly ready
against an appointed time.

My greatest care was to have my men of Godly conversation, and such, as their
years of time not exceeding 35. had gained good Experience, that I might
thereby be the better assisted, especially by such as had been upon those Frost
biting voyages by which they were hardened for indurance, and could not so soon
be dismayed at the sight of the Ice. For beardlesse younkers, I knew as many as
could man the Boat was enough; and for all our dependances was upon GOD alone,
for I had neither private end, ambition, or vain glory.

And all these things I had contractedly done by the Master, Wardens and
Assistants of the Trinity-House. For a Lieutenant I had no use, but it grieved
me much that I could not get one man that had bin on the same voyage before, by
whose counsel or discourse I might better have shunned the Ice.

I was Victualed completely for 18 Months, ^at whether the Baker, Brewer,
Butcher, and other, were Mr. of their Arts or professionsor no I know not, but
this I am sure of, I had excellent fat Beef, strong Beer, good wheaten Bread,
good Iseland Ling, Butter and Cheese of the best, admirable Sack and
Aqua-vita, Pease, Oat-meale, Wheat-meale, Oil, Spice, Sugar, Fruit and Rice;
with Chyrurgerie, as Sirrups, lulips, condits, tre^hissis, antidotes, balsoms,
gummes, unguents, implaisters, oils, potions, suppositors, and purging Pills,
and if I had wanted Instruments my Chyrurgion had enough.

My Carpenter was fitted from the thickest bolt to the pumpe-nayle or tacket.

The Gunner from the Sacor to the Pistol.

The Boatswaine from the Cable to the Sayle-twine.

The Steward and Cook, from the Caldron to the Spoone.

And for Books, if I wanted any. I was too blame being bountifully furnished
from the Treasurer with money to provide me, especially for those of study
there would be no leisure nor was there, for I found work enough; and if the
matter it self had not been in another place when sudden occasion was
present, it had bin too late for me (like the Holland Skipper to run to his
Chest) to look upon his Waggoner book. But those things I fear, you will say
they are needless (yet give me leave to follow the fashion) and good for
nothing, but to make Courtiers and Scholars marvel at my curiosity, and
think strange that there should be so much ado about making a Ship take the
Sea.

Things in this readiness, I was brought to his Majesty, where I received his
Gracious favor with a Map of all my Predecessors Discoveries, his Majesty's
Instructions, with a Letter to the Emperor of Iapon.

The Copies of all which, Captain JAMES had.

NORTH-VVEST FOX.
MAY the 7th, Anno 1631.
The Uoyage of Captain LVKE FOX, in his Majesty's Pinnace the Charles, Burden
70. Tonnes, 20. Men, and 2. Boys, Victuals for 18. Months; young Sir John
Wolstenholme being Treasurer.
Orders and Articles for Civil government, to be duly observed amongst us in
this Voyage.
FOrasmuch, as the good success and prosperity of every Action does consist,
in the due service and glorifying of God, knowing that not only our being and
preservation, but the prosperity of all our Actions and enterprises do
immediately depend upon his Almighty goodness and mercy; of which, this being
none of the least, either of nature or quality. For the better governing and
mannaging of this present voyage, in his Majesty's ship the Ch^rl^s, bound for
the Northwest Passage, toward the South Sea, May 7. 1631. as Articles.
follows.

1. That all the whole Company, a^ well Officers as others, shall

That no man shall (...) by the name of God, nor use ^^y pr^p(...) his h^l^
(...)* upon pa^^^ of (...)r^ punishment*

That no man shall speak any vile or misbeseeming word, against the honor of
his Majesty (our Dread Sovereign) his Laws, England, but as good Subjects
shall duly pray for him.

That no man shall speak any doubtful or despairing words, against

That no man do offer to filch or steal any of the goods of the

That no man do grumble at his allowance of victual, or steal

That at the Boatswaines Call, all the whole Company shall apppeare

That all men do duly observe the Watch, as well at Anchor,

Amen.
I Set sail from Deptford, and coming by Greenwich where Erith.

This day I came to Graves-end, where having bought some Shoe and Whittaker.

This day passing by Essex and Suffolk, it being in the night Yarmouth Roades.

This day I weighed and set sail, at night I was thwart the Shield.

This day I was put into Flambrough road, with much rain

I came into Whitby road, where I stayed with contrary

I sailed along the Coast of Yorkshire, Durham, Northumberland, Scotland, to
St. Tabs-head.

I was thwart of Buckhamnesse in Scotland, where standing

I came into Durt-sound, a harbor in the greatest Island of Orkney, but could
not here be provided of a new Maine-yard.

Wind contrary.

At clock 3. in the morning I weighed, and went out between Pape Island and
Sanda: at the Northend of the two heads of this Island, there lies a Rock in
the midst which does so straiten the Flood-tyde, it bounding thereon from out
the Western Ocean, that I was two hours overhaling * of a A great flood-Tyde
from W.
mile, for thereabouts is the length of that straitness, and yet I dare say,
we went above 6. knots in half a minute.

I stood from hence N, N, W. with the N. part of Ways or Hays Island in 59 degrees 8
min; the ebb coming forth carried Courses, Latitudes, Variations, and
Distances.

The gale increasing, I was enforced to hand both top-sayles, A high Sea from
the West.
the Ship fell so deep, and shipped so much water, forward o^* in that high
Sea coming from the West.

From this day until the 23, I did not make above 17 leag. way W, N, W. it
being fair weather with easy wind upon all points of the Compass, I had no
ground at 200 fathomes.

I was this noone in 59 degrees. 5^ min. the weather fair and

This morning came a great Whale by us, the last night Orkney, latitude 59 d.
56, no ground at 335 fathomes.

It was fair weather, and easy wind, latitude 60 d. 0 min.

This day, the 28 and 29, the wind contrary, I was in traverse,

It was easy wind and close weather, and I observed in 58

It was fair, dry, calm, and close weather, since the 26, and

This day was a fair wind with wet foggy weather.

I had fair winds, but thick close weather.

This fulsome ugly morning presented the foulest child A storm.
that the whole voyage brought forth with such variety and changes of the
Elements, Air, and Water, as if all had conspired to make our destiny fatal.
I lay a try in the Mizen course, and caused the Carpenter to make loose and
strengthen the fishes, and wouldings of the maine-yard, which being done, I
caused the Mizen to be struck, and the helm to be put on weather, to try if
the ship would weathercoyle, if I had occasion, to which she obeyed presently,
so as I was then put into good assurance of her quick steerage, against I was
to enter into the Ice.

This day were many gusts of wind with small rain.

This day was less wind, and I made good way to the

Fair weather, I continued my course to the Westward, and

Fair weather, but no Amplitude, since the 26 of the last month, here was
much driftwood.

I proceeded with easy winds, but fair, thick fog, which ended in rain, the
Seas set from S, S, E. the wind changeable.

Fair weather, the Sea so smooth, as it had been made ready

Some fog, and easy wind the ship made way to the Westward,

Fair weather and easy winds, I force still to the Westward;

This longest day came in with wet, and blew, so as since Cape Farewell. Cape
Farewell.


The wind Veered to the Northward, I set all sails, and Farewell, (if I
suppose not amiss.

Close weather, the wind contrary, we in traverse, some William Brown in his
Britains Pastorals, where he writes, the Tritons wafted Thetis along the
British shores; this afternoon, the Polesaltitude being 58 d. 10 m. the
variation by Azimuth and Almicanter was 18 degrees. From hence, I haled up in N, W.
by N. for sight of Desolation.

This day was fair close weather, with dispersing fogges. Poles elevation was
58 d. 50 min. the Sea is here almost continually smooth, the water black, but
not so thick as is formerly writ of, and small store of foul to be seen.

This day and last night has been thick weather, but so as of a reported
Current, I altered to the N, W. by N. again, although after the variation
thwart Cape Farewell was found (and allowed) in my running over betwixt the
same, and the West Maine, or the West side of Fretum Hudson, I found my
reckoning to agree without any interruption, furtherance or hinderance of
Current; therefore what instruction shall as yet be laid down in this way
without good judgment, in the practitioner and liberty withal, is but as it
were to teach a blind man to see by demonstration.

This last night came by us one Whale, this day another, the

Fair weather but foggy, this noone tide I did reckon to be Orkney of my
departure, the account is but 600 from thence to Resolution. I 60 Parallel.
could not observe since the 15 day, yet I am near in 61 d. 30 m. This day we
met with overfalls, and Races of Tide or Current; at clock 4, thick weather,
and reckoning to be not far from land, I took in all sails and laid to
Hull; at 6 we were no sooner rise from prayers, but we were close by a
mountain An Island of Ice.
of Ice, hard to Leewards of us, and we had much to do to clear the same by
flatting the ship to the S. wards; the most of this evening and night I spent
in standing to and again.

This day at noone I had a little clear, and stood in to the Hull, two times
this day we see the Sun, but to no use it was so hazie.

This last night I laid in Maine sail until midnight, reckoning Latitude 60
degrees.
by all accounts that I must be in near 62 d. and thought it fit to hale in W.
true course, especially now it was clear weather, but it thickened again and
blew to both topsailes in, the wind Veering to the W, S, W. which had been
betwixt E. and S. with thickefoggy, or hazie weather, ever since the 14 day,
thereupon with clear weather, I stood to the N. W. close haled amongst
Islands, and pieces of Ice, for the Sea beating Sea undermine the Ice.
continually upon them, does undermine them, so as they fall in pieces, forced
by their own weight, to the Lee of every Island, is of those little pieces, but
are easily to be shunned. This day 11 clock I had sight of land, almost buried
in snow, being two Islands, making a Bay betwixt them, and the North maine,
whereon stood two high hills, bearing Northwest covered with snow, the Bay was
full of mash'd Ice, which it seemed the S, E. wind had enforced herein, by dead
reckoning I was at that instant in 62 d. 17 m. where presently having a good
observatio^, at that instant I was in 62 d. 25. m. the difference being but 8
m. and that to the W. ward, it does not show that there is any current
continually, to set out of Fretum Davis to the S. as is generally reported, for
from the lat. 58 d. 30 m. crossing Fretum Davis 220 leag. or therabouts to the
W side in 62 d. 27 m. and having but 8 min. difference betwixt dead reckoning,
and the observation, and that to the Northward, whether, does there any current
appear to come from the N. out of Fretum Davis or no.

Having thus met with the land I stood to the Southward until midnight, with
the waide at W. hopeing to ply up into the passage.

Seeing now that it has pleased God, to send me thus happily near to the land
being the N, side of Lumleys inlet, so named after the right honorable the
Lord Lumley, an especial furtherer to Davis in his voyages, as to many other
Lordly designs, as that never to be forgotten act of his, in building up the
peer, of that distressed poor fisher town and corporation of Hartlep^ole, in
the Bishopric of Durham, at his own proper cost and charge, to the value of
at least 2000 pounds, at my first coming thither I demanded at whose charge
the said Peer town was builded, an old man answered, marrye at my good Lord
Lumleys, whose Soul was in Heaven before his bones were cold.

Some may inquire, why I should not have incerted herein my traverse course
distance, with all my observation for latit. to which I answer, first, it were
needless, seeing that few do look or search after the Voyage, and many
before me have wrote thereof, besides it lying near upon the same parallel,
there is no need, secondly, if I had known any that would have taken so much
pains to have protracted me, I would have prepared them satisfaction,
thirdly, I fear me I should be thought to be too tedious, although I am but
newly entered, yet I do purpose to bestow some time of those needy ones
concerning this matter*

A Discourse for the same.
Setting forth and beginning my accounts from the W. most place of Orkney I
made 2 observations for the variation of the compass, evenin Amplit. the one
was 8 d. the other 4 d. but I Thick Horizon.
do give no certain credit thereunto, yet I do rather trust to that of 8 d. at
which instant, I did account I was 24 degrees. or thereabout, Eastward of the great
Meridian, and near the parralell of 60 degrees. continuing the course W. ward as
wind would serve, until I came into the Latit. of 58 degrees. 12 min. I was then
12 degrees. or thereabouts, from the place of my departure, and traversing with
contrary winds, betwixt the latit. of 59 degrees. 12 min. and 60 degrees. 20 min. at
18 d.. distance from my setting forth, I continued the course still Westward,
with so small difference, betwixt my observation and protraction, or traverse,
as I thought I might as well trust to the one, as the other. Continuing this
course in the latit. of 60 degrees. 19 m. W. N^ta.
from the first Meridian 6 degrees. I found by my observation that I was to S. ward
5 m of my protracted course, and though then I did perceive, that the Compass
was varied Westward, yet how much for want of Amplitude, or celestial
observation, could not be known.

Now the wind coming freely on, and, taking Mr. Hals account. That Cape
Farewell in Groyneland, which land first I did desire to fall with (though I
did not much regard) lies 18 d. W. from the great or first Meridian, as also
Mr. Brigges is near the same, and in latit. about 59 degrees. I directed the
course W. and W. and by S. thinking thereby to fall in fight of the said Cape.
And although there is no certainty of agreement amongst some of my
predecessors, concerning the variation there, some writing 11 d. others 14 d.
confusedly, yet I did hope that course would have brought me at least to sight
thereof, report making it to be high and Mountainous land, (not withstanding
Variation or current) especially having so frank a gale of wind, and but 12 d.
of a small circle near the 60 parallel, the distance being but 120 leag. at
most, and in that distance holding the same course, I had 2 degrees. 14 min. to
wrack upon, and within one point at most of my parallel; and nearer with a
sti^^e gale wet and hazie, I durst not hale for See Mr. Hall Davis, an^ others.
engaging my self, with an unknown Cape, which has both Islands, and Ice
lying there off, where I might have been endangered (at the least encumbered.)
Now when I had sailed 100 leag. from the said latit. I met with Ice, and as
before, in

Having an observation in 58 d. 10 min. and by my protract Variation and
Current might do this.
the same afternoon the variation taken by Azimuth and Almicanter was 8 d. 50
m. but being set more to S. ward then this allowance, I did call to mind the
current which Sir Martin Frobrisher found upon the coast of Greenland, in the Sea Frobrisher.
lat. about 62. setting from N, E. to S, W. as the land does there lie; where
they do affirm that the flood tide did run 9 hours, and the ebb but 3. I
know no other cause for this but the large distance betwixt Nova Zembla on the
E. and Groenland, in which the Ocean may take opportunity, to use his natural
agitation from E, to W. being thereunto drawn by the restless motion and
impulsion of the Heavens, and here butting upon Groenland, must of necessity
(the land lying somewhat near his natural inclination) trend along there,
setting his current to the S, W. or else, as in a huge Bay, make a Repercussive
motion (as in the Bay of Mexico) by entering in at the S. side, and wheeling
about by the bottom, must revert back again along the North side by Cape
Florida.

Now this 9 hours of the floud-tyde running, may be by this restraint of the
Seas natural course (in meeting with the land) must needs enforce all the
Sounds, Bays, Rivers, and through-lets, with quantities of waters, and in
through-lets especially, setting Westward, and wanting Limitation shall
continue his natural course the longer being assisted by that motion, until
the ebb being strengthened by the height of waters (or of course) from the W.
Sea, shall return again, according to his proper retraction.

And thus much further I am of opinion, if Sir Martin Frobrisher* See Ortelius
Universe. Map.
had pursued his course West ward in his Strait, he being 60. leag up the
same, he had doubtless sailed into Fretum Davis, for he entered upon the East
side, and after him Davis on the W. have almost met; nor will I be persuaded,
but that if there were a Dorgio, as is mentioned by the Zeni, that that (...)
of land on the S. betwixt Frobrishers strait, and Cape Farewell, is the (...)

But to come to my self and to end this digression (although I hope, what I
have here incerted will not be held any way Farewell I hold for certain, does
attract the Magnet more suddenly (coming from the East ward toward it) then
any any known Cape in the world; as did appear in all this Voyadge.

I did here reckon of 24 degrees. variation, but sailed all by Meridian compass
and have wrote this Iournall there after, therefore the allowance is to be
accounted, as the places do differ in variation.

This snowie morning I stood in again, at clock 7. I sell Latit. 92 d. 1 a
min.*
wind blows hard by puffes, standing from hence South-W. 2 leagues over
Lumleys, Inlet, we had great store of masht Ice, and was feign to bear up for
one, and loose for another, but the Sea was smooth; after this for 2 leagues
sailing it was clear, at night 10. we see land, and made it upon assurance to
be Cape Warwick, and this clear was in the Lee thereof, for standing still,
the same course over we found more Ice in the South channel, and more coming
out of Fretum Hudson, then I had before, the wind blew here bleate and unquoth.

This day we had boarded it up in smooth water, bearing a Chidlie and Cape
Warwick and were entered Fretum Hudson, and now I desire a little of your
patience; The Island Resolution so named, by whom, I know not, but sure I am,
Davis was the first of us that see it, naming the East end thereof Cape
Warwick, and it seems for good reason, for that honorable house has, and
unto this day does still cherrish, those worthy Marine enterprises, as does
appear by Frobrishers 3, Voyages to Vide Frobrisher. Lord Riv. Isles. Cumberl.
Isles.
their no small charge, as also those two Honorable houses of Darcie, now Lord
Rivers, by whom Davis named certain Islands, upon the North part of America;
wherein he found Dear, the other is Cumberlands, to whom he dedicated other
Islands; in his furthest West, in a passage he entered 60 leagues, but he came
back.

Notwithstanding those Nobles, others were, at great Capt. Davis his
appellations
charge in his setting forth, as may be observed by the naming of Lands, as
Mount Raleigh, Hope Sanderson, Cape Chidly (now, but not rightly) called
Buttons I Will, Warwicks Forland, this Cape as it was the Gulf, we passed over
the 30. of this month, so was it the North Promontorie, or first beginning of
a very great Inlet, whose South lymit at this present, we see not, which Inlet
or Gulf in the night we passed, to our great admiration, for the waters fall,
and he says, that having past the mouth of this Gulf, he fell with the
Southermost Cape thereof, which he named Chid. Chidl. Cape.
lies Cape.

Having made this Cape, which to do I stood over, as near as I could for ice,
but was at least 6 leagues off, it appeared high, and 4 distinct Islands (in
number) I judge there is more; being now assured that God had sent me into the
passage, I stood over to the North with Cape Warwick, the middle Channel was
clear of ice, and therein I had a good observation of 61 degrees, 10 min.
clear weather, and a constant gale, otherwise I durst not have stood, to the
Southwards, remembering Gibbons; Felix quem*
it blew in both topsailes, but toward night the wind lessened, and I could
perceive the ice betwixt me, and the Cape, to drive to Seaward, of which near
the shore, was great store.

The flood coming on, I caused both Topsayles to be cast over, and we thread
it, between Ice and Ice, with a well bent flood inwards, so as that we had got
above the I Will (that tide) if this fair day had not ended in fogge. A motion
was made before this, to look for harbor, but that I denied, for those
reasons given, that I did not know, what danger might fall me, if I had put
into the shore, where lay much ice (as we could see) and what ice or sunk
Rocks might be in the way, I was as ignorant of; besides not knowing whether
the wind would serve to bring me in a safe road, and how the Tide might set to
turn or sail in, as occasion might fall out, but the worst was and that was
most I feared, the wind might Souther, and then there being such store of ice
in the passage, would enforce all the harbors full, and so might cut my cable,
and put me on shore upon the Rocks, it flowing much water there, as Bassin
reports, with these reasons we were all persuaded, to ply it up amongst the
Ice in Sea room, rather then to endanger our selves in London bridge, the
bases of whose Arches, being set in the Tides course, does so restrain his
motion, London Bridge.
that the following streams, by heightning the waters, causes such a Current
as it were to ingulfe by the fall thereof, as you see the water men cannot
keep their boats even on, the Counter tide, wheeling on her, of the one side,
the eddie coursing her upon the other, not joining their separations, but
goeing as it were distracted above Cole-harbour before they come to themselves
again, to pass Westward; and all this hazard is to no purpose, for we are
safer at Sea, besides we are not sure of any refreshing, and if we were, we
have no need, being but newly come from home, and if the wind come to South
and so Eastwards to North-East, we being in the Sea, may proceed night or
day, but in harbor we cannot; and therefore to take harbor were vanity
unless to loyter, spend away and consume time, the thought whereof is
ridiculous, the Fogge and night came both together, and having the last 24
hours, quitted abundance of Ice to Seaward, which might serve as a Baracadoe,
if the Wind should come from thence, and keep us safe amongst it, as after (
blessed be God) it proved; we made fast to a piece of Ice, filld fresh water
thereupon, and went all to our beds, save the watch, this fogge night was calm.

This misty morning, made the Sun clime 10 degrees in Resolution, I had no
ground at 180 fathomes, some of my men said they saw smoke on land, and after
it prooved true, for Captain James was in harbor there all that same time, my
Master went with boat and killed 9, willicks, whereof he kindly bestowed upon
every Mess one (they make strong and good pottage.

I pressing hard for getting clear, that I might proceed, was London, who must
hasten to Market before the fish stink.

This evening the Sun set clear, the Air breathed gently from the East, and
we lay quietly all night amongst the Ice.

This morning the wind began to gather strength, from the

This morning, the ship broke loose from that piece, I was

I caused the Spritsaile to be loosed, to bind the ships Stem to the Ice,
which gave always way with the flood, which set Westward; So the East wind
forcing it back, made it cloze with the ebb, returning Eastwards, which put
me in good hope, that further within the straight, I should find all clear,
or at least the Ice so thin, as I might pass between one and another, and
with this persuasion I drew on the Company, that the S, E. winds which had
blown for 6 or 7 days before we came into this Freet, had kept in this Ice,
and those West winds, which had blown 3 days before, and at our entry,
coming (from about 140 leagues) Chidley, and the body of Resolution, and so
choked this entrance, being not above 14 leagues broad, the wind E, N, E. we
drive all this time inwards with the ice.

Now this prodigious thing we call Ice, is of two sorts, as Quantity and shapes
of Ice.
mountainous ice which is a huge piece compact, of a great quantity, some of
more, some of less; but in this Freet, you seldom have any bigger then agreat
Church, and the most thereof less, being of several forms, as some 20, some
30, some 40 yards above the superficies of the water, but far more under, of
these you may tell sometimes 7 or eight in sight, so that they are no hindrance
to us.

The other is smaller, and that we call masht or fleackt ice: of this you shall
there have numbers infinite, some of the quantity of a Rood, some a Perch, ^ /
^ an acre, some 2 acres, but the most is small and about a foot or 2, or more
above the water, and 8 or 10, or more under the water, and those are they which
do enclose you; So as in much wind from the topmast head, you shall hardly see
any water for them, but whilst you lie amongst them, it is so smooth as you
shall not feel the ship stir, only if it be much wind, make the ship
snogge, and at return of the Tides, when the ice does loozen, have all care to
the Rudder: at shift of wind the ice will make way one from another, in the
mean time have patience, and in trailing of ice on stern, if the ship do
touch but against it Tracing of Ice.
with the stem, so as the stroke suddenly stay her way, then have care to
keep the helm in midships, for your traile with its way, will come presently
against the back, of the Rudder, and it lying on either side, is in danger to
break, or set it on wry.

There is another way which is to muzzell the ship, with a piece of ice close
to his stem and bows the ice, being so swifted, the ship is to drive it, with
head sail, but this I do not commend, for that the ship not having fresh way,
shall not have her steering beside the edy water, the forced ice shall make, not
coming quick to the Rudder, it shall not command her, so as if any wind be,
she shall cast a thwart with head to the wind, and drive stern ways to the
great danger of her Rudder

This day has been wet fog, unto evening 6. then it cleared, Resolution, or
no, for there was no remarkable thing thereon, this Evening Sun kissed That is
in our sight, the same greeting was 5 d. W. from the N. and at the same
instant, the Rainebowe was in appearance, I think to Canopy them a bed.

At the beginning of flood, here is wheeling streams like edie tides, I take
to be caused by the ice themselves, one drawing more water then another, and
continues all the time of their moving, until they be settled, so as it may be
conjectured that it does run tide under other, as in most places elsewhere
all this time, since the wind came E. ward, it has not blown above course,
and bonnet Gale.

This morning the Sun rose clear, and so continued all this

This morning the Sun showed himself, through Fly-land, Vapourland.
and the Southwind drove away the vapors, which fully satisfied our mistaking
of land the last evening, yet we were not mistaken, but that we drive into the
passage all this while, this wind with tide, helps to separate the ice, (a
little) it being advantageous for the N. Main, I caused to make loose, whence
we furtherd a mile, the wind coming W. with fog caused us to make fast again,
God think upon our imprisonment, with a supercedias, this evening Sun dog, I
hope may bring some change to our good.

This overcast day proved fair, and a pretty W, N, W. gale, until toward
night, my Carpenter made straight a piece, above the back of our Rudder, which
was set awry with the ice, I caused the lead to be cast in 320 fathomes, but
the underebbe-tide did carry it so far to the E. as we could not think we
had less stray then 30 fat homes, the ground was small black sand, with long
crooked things the length of a needle,

This fair hot day is now almost near at end, we lie amongst

This hot day is also at an end, I have had an Air of wind, Compacting of Ice.
some high mountain, cleaving thereto until dissolving time of the year,
when the earth receives her natural warmness then enforced by their weight to
tumble into the Sea, carrying with them all such trees or stones as they have
formerly enclosed; God be thanked, the Ice begun to thin, and separate, this
hot weather does fast dissolve them.

This night, clock 2, came a small Island of Ice, brought up with the latter
flood, and by his draught being deeper in the Tides way then the flact or masht
Ice, had a greater motion continued by the undertyde, then that which had
enclosed us, of which we were fast unto one, of the biggest, content to wit, 3
Acres; this Island did drive right with us, and but that some few masht Ice
interposed, thereby diverting the course thereof, some 2 or 3 ships length it
had drove directly upon us, and had crushed us mainely, if not to pieces, it
being ^ or 10 fathomes above water; and if it had boarded us, being undermined
by the waters continual working, the outside thereof by that shake might have
fallen into the ship, and have sunk her; this was the greatest danger we were
in, since I came into Fretum Hudson, the fault being in the watch, who did not
call, that we might have set the ship the one way or the other, about the piece
we were fast unto, before we were so engaged, as I could do neither; about one
hour after, the said Island took his recourse back again to the East, with
the ebb faster then the other ice could do.

This morning 8, the Sun was up, before we saw it, Resolution, it now bearing
from E. and by S. to N. and by E. if Baffinn writ truly, that Resolution is an
Island separate from this, then is this another (though formerly taken for the
N. Maine) and longer as shall be shown at my return homeward, the tide does
set as the land does lie, South-East, and Northwest.

This night 7, it was an Air, far better then a younger brother, the ice
well thinn'd, I caused the ship to be loosed, and by that time the Master with
the boat was come from killing of Foul, I stood to the N. about four miles,
this fair day being at an end, I made fast, set the watch and went to Cabin.

This morning 2, an easy gale breathed from the E. by South which caused me
to send to the boatswaine to call up the Company where a chief one amongst us,
being too suddenly awaked, speaking something peevishly, I told the rest that
the matter was not great, for the children did so when they were awaked out of
their sleep; I began now to find the want of a Shallop, which at home I did so
earnestly desire, for my Cock boat would nor Row no^ Sail to any purpose, so
as I Cock-boat.
durst hardly send her from me, for when it was any billow, she was not to be
rowed, and with sail to windward she would do nothing, although I had caused
a large Lee board to be made to help her.

This Meridianall observation, the wind came West, and I was in 61 d. 57. m.
and stood in close to this inremarkeable shore, and so all the land within this
straight, may be called, for it is all shoring, or descending from the highest
mountain to the Sea. Whereon the Snow falling by degrees, does press Spring
time, when it loosneth from the earth, its own weight does force downward into
the Sea, being all composed of

I do think that all this time of our imprisonment, this North shore has
been free, as I could epsy it at Hiperions going down, which valed with a
black Skreene of moist Fogge, wet through our Coats before we see it again,
this fair days Westwind blew cold and uncouth from out the passage, we are
all upon kind terms, drinking one to another, God hold it.

This morning the Sun lickt up the Fogges dew, as soon

This morning at clock one, I called to lanche the Boat, to send to shore, to
try the Tide, and against that time that I could send to land, I had drawn
those instructions following, and giving them to John Coatesworth, whom I
appointed always to go in the boat, at whose return I expected an account.

These are the Instructions.
First, You shall take with you into the boat, one half hour glass one
half minute glass, one logge and line, clean Paper, one Pensill of black
Lead, and one Compass, with Take in the boat with you.


Secondly, One quarter Saw, two Axes, three Carbins Guns with Powder and Shot,
two or three Lances, two Swords, two Pikeaxes and every man his one day bread.

Thirdly, At your departure from the ship, turn the half hour, and when it
is near out, set your Logge to go by the half minute, that thereby you may
estimate the distance between the ship and land, as also what the boat can
row an hour.

Fourthly, When you shall approach near the shore in the Tides way, I mean
clear of Bay-point, or Rock, Anchor the Boat, sound the deep, and mark the
Tide how it does set, and by your Logge what it does pass in the half minute,
having rode there for half a Glass, weigh your Anchor, and go to land, and
duly observe, what quantity of water it does flow, or fall perpendiculer, in
one Glass, whether the heightening, or lessening be equal in every Glass,
while ye stay or not.

Fifthly, Being thus on land with your Compass, set all Lands or Islands in
sight, draw the form with your Paper and Pensill, and estimate their distance.

Sixthly, Remember I give you no liberty to go within the land, yet if for
recreation go no further then the full Sea mark, and armed, leaving two to
keep the Glass and Boat, look for stones of Orient color, or of weight,
Seamors teeth, Unicorns horn, or Whale Finne, Plants, Herbs, or any thing,
Spungy fleet out of the Sea, if you find Scurvie grass, Orpin, or Sorrill,
bring them all on board to me.

Seventhly, If you will go above the full Sea mark, look for scoting of
wild Beasts; by that, or their dung, you may imagine what they are, if Dear
do not chase them into the land, for fear of being betrayed, for the people
in those parts, are all treacherous, how fair soever they entreat you,
remember also that the loss of you or the boat, is the utter overthrow of the
whole Voyage.

Eighthly, If you find of their Tents, and they fled, do no harm to any of
their buildings, but bring with you the most things of mark, leaving in the
same place, a piece of Iron,

Ninthly, leave one Carbine, one Lance, and one short Sword, to defend the
boat, with whose (tow) keepers, you shall give charge, that if either they
shall epsy any token from the ship, as striking the maine Topsaile, Mison, and
Spritsaile, Gunshot, or Firesmoke, or be assaulted by any the Inhabitants, that
then they shall discharge the said Carbine. To the first intent, that you
repair with speed on board; to the second for their rescue, and your own
saftie; when you come cleerein the tides way, try it as before in the 4
article; the rest is referred to your own discretion, and so I pray God for
your safe return.

This morning at clock 6. the wind came fair, the weather Salvage Tents.
they found where people had been of old, their Tent walls, were of stones laid
one upon another, and square built, found one knife haft, three several sorts
of herbs, but my Surgeon knew not what they were; one piece of drift wood,
they found the dung and footing of Dear (lately made) and if they may be
believed, they affirm that in of an hour, it did flow above 4 foot water, and
that it had above 5 fathomes upright to flow to the full Sea mark, which they
could easily perceive by the beach, they being forced to row and sail 4 miles
before they could come to a place to land at, this E, S, E. wind blew on with
stiff gale and dirt, at noone it fell thick rain, and continued until 4
next day morning, in which time we made way near 30 leagues in clear Sea,
and then had like to have been imbayed, which Ices lies thick off Prince
Henry's Foreland, the South land bearing round from W, N, W. Westerly to 108
degrees Southwards, to clear which we were

This morning the Sun was veiled with drisling rain, I stood Savage Islands, so
named by Bylot, this being after we had an observation, of 62 degrees. 40 min. we
had some Variat. 29d.
circumstance about it, but he went away well satisfied, and it proved as I
told him, for at night we had Savage Islands N but noe land Northward in
sight. This evening the Sun set with a weather gall opposite, and Zephyrus
blewe on a pretty gale, at the same instant the lead was wet in 150. fathomes,
the line having 20. fath. straie to the E. and I thought the Tide set W. the
most of this day I stood away N, W. but was glad sometime to alter course, to
the N. for Ice, for the S. land lay all full, this day has bin very hot.
Before this S. wind came Wind blows up or down.
the W. is clear, fair and hot Sunshine, but the air is cold, when it
Veereth about, as once in 3. days, and by the S. it is either thick rain,
soft sleet, or warm fog, the wind E. or thereabout, these done, he changes to
the W. again, bringing the weather fair as before, I did think that this day
the Tide Hudson named all on the S. in his Strait.
set forth, this morning we saw Cape Charles 12 leag. off, S, S, East.

The Sun did rise clear, at clock 8 came on a Fogge, and

This morning was cold with some snow, and the W. wind Latit. 63 de 40 min.
degrees. 31 min. now the wind calmed, and I made loose, and stood to the N. and at
Sun setting I had sight of the N. Maine

This mornings Sun raise clear, and I stood to the N close Nicholas, from
which with a S, W. wind I stood over to the Southward and stood with the Island
I saw the 7th, day before, I hoped it would prove Salisbury; this day ended we
made fast again, for all this North Channel was thick with ice, upon which we
silled 2 hoggsheads with fresh water, I loosed again, and with a small gale
came within 4 miles of Salisburies Island, for it can be no other, it is high
land but not clifled, I caused to make fast again, for that nere the land and
the middle Channel, was all full of ice, and no ground at 120 fath. and until
6. the tide set Westward, and then it returned, what tide it was I could not
discern, although I came so nere the land for that purpose, I made loose
again presently, because the Masters mate was of opinion that it was clear to
the W. or at least that was the cleerest way, for my part I had no more
purpose, to have tried between Salisbury, and the N. Maine or Mill I Will so
named by By^ot, for Mill I Will being a great Island lying in the middle of the N.
Channel, must needs straiten all the ice that fleets from the N, W. yet for
the good of the Voyage, it was fit to try all conclusions, but thus striving to
the W. we were presently enclosed again where we lay until the next morning
all too nere the Island, if I could have got further off. This night had a
stiff gale at West with one shower of rain, the Sun was obscured 2 hours
before night, and we slept safe in our old Innes.

I called at clock 3. and by 6. with haleing, saleing, toweing Ice and F^g 2.
nemies to a discovery Salisb. I Will.
Fogge. Well, we stand again for Salisburies I Will of which I was now assured,
and so named by my predecessor Hudson, after the right honorable and not to
be forgot Robert Cicell, Earl of Salisbury, then Lord high Treasurer England,
an honorable furtherer and Adventurer, in this design as well as in others,
as appears by Sir Walter Raleigh in his Guianian discoveries, in my standing
over I espied a glade wherein I hoped if I did return I might recover the N.
Maine, wherefore I called to tackle about the ship.

The Master not seeing what was on the weather Bow bid the helm man put on
Lee, the ship obeying her helm, presently answered, so as in her winding, her
way being not fully ended she checked upon a piece or ice, and twined off her
cut water which was before the stem, thus constrained, I bore up the helm,
and went along to the East end of the I Will, and making fast to a piece of Ice,
the The f^^st ha^me and ^^l I received.
Carpenter made good again the hurt we had received, in the mean time our
men went to supper, the afternoon was more then seven hours old before this
was done, then I called again to make loose, for I thought that the ice, was
now with wind and ebb well cleared from the East end of the Island, as it
proved, but many discontented and doubtful speeches past, but to no purpose,
for I must run to discover this loss time, when motion was made to make fast
again, which I denied for these reasons, that we could see the Sea to be
reasonable free and clear at the East end from the Island, and the South
Channel would be to be dealt withal, or if not, the passage was forbidden,
until the ice were dissolved, and to fasten nere the land I would upon no
condition listen unto, for the wind coming to blow to land, I must upon
necessity be put thereon, the Ship always pulling the ice she was fast
unto, faster then the other could drive, and for anckoring there was none, if
the land had not been steep to, for the Eddie Tides, which every Rock, Bay,
or point made, would have wheeled the Ship about in the ice, so as it had not
been possible to have kept my rudder from breakeing, and amongst ice there was
no loosing of any sail to have beaten it off shore. It seems these reasons
had the force of persuasion, for we willingly past about the I Will to the South,
as well where we found all over laid with ice, so that we must make fast,
having toyled thus all day until night, I thought it fit to

This morning clock 4. I called to make loose, we

All this day, until night 7. we kept our cold lodging, and Unicorn. He A
Sea Unicorn.
was of length about 9 foot, black ridged, with a small fin thereon, his tail
stood cross his ridge, and indented between the pickends, as it were on
either side with 2 Scallop shells, his side dapled purely, with white and
black, his belly all milk white, his shape from his gils to his tail, was
fully like a Makarell, his head like a to Lobster, wherout the forepart grew
forth his twined horn above 6 foot long all black save the tip. This evening
I had sight of 20 more, the Sun set clear, and this easy gale continued from
the E, N, E. all night we stood S, W. having the strait clear to the S.

This delicate morning the ice seemed to trent, from Salisburies Sols
beautiful appearance, and at that fit opportunity, wet the lead in 60 fath.
The E end of Salisbury lying N, by E. from me about 4 leag. the W. end which is
Salisburies plain N, W. about 4 leag, of Nottingham, at that Plain ground
instant peeping out from beyond it, about 7 leag. off, I stood to the S. into.
of the channel shooting shuttles in the old loome, For Ice
and hear the lead fell down 160 fath. before ground made it stay, it brought
from thence such stones, as lie upon the most of the ice, here in this part of
the passage, especially brought from the Main, cleaving to the Ice by winters
frost, Gods Mercy, so that here may be a plain argument remonstrated, that the
Tide setting more strongly into Fretum Hudson then the ebb does set forth,
does hail in those mountains bred in the W. side of Fretum Davis, into Fretum
Hudson, as they are passing by to the South.

As also this may be noted that here, and especially nere within the mouth of
this strait, the Compass does almost loose his sensitive part not regarding
his magneticall Azimuth, without much stirring, the smooth water may be some
cause, Latit. 63 d. 20. m. variat 29.
the Ship wanting her active motion, but I should strange that the cold should
benum it, as it does us: Nay I should rather think, that the sharpness of
the air, interposed betwixt the needle, and his attractive point, may dull the
power of his determination, or here may be some mountains, of the one side or
the other, whose Minerals may detain the nimblenesse of the needles mooving to
his respective point, but this I leave to Phylosophie.

By this time the kind E, N, E. breese, has brought me nere the Island of
Nottingham, and I am making ready, to send the boat on land, (within 2 miles)
to try the tide, having cast the lead amongst shells and stones 35 fathomes
deep Sir Dudly Diggs his Island bare from me W, S, W. the E. part of
Nottingham, E, S, E. the Pole, elevated 63 d. 12 m. and coming betwixt Latit.
63 d. 12 min.
Cape Wolstenholme, and the E. end of Nottingham at noon I met the ebb coming
from the N, W. as I could perceive by the overfalls, I towed my boat into 19.
fathomes, and sent her on land, driving along the Island, until her return.

These Isles, as Resolution, Salisbury and Nottingham, are Hudson, in due
bequest to that most honorable Lord Charles Hawvrd Earl of Nottingham, then
Lord high Admiral of England, a small remembrance for the charge, countenance
and instruction given to the Search of the enterprise; and though smaller, yet
being by his Lordship

The boat went at clock 5 in the afternoon, they were away 5 glasses, it was
flood, and in one hour it flowed 10 inches, they said that it had 2 hours to
slow, and had about 2 foot to high, they brought a little firewood and 3 stint
birds, they found the foundation of an old Tent, at their coming on board, the
W. end of the land bore N, and by E. the S, E. end S* by E. I edged off, until
I brought the N, W, end N, E. the E. end E by S. there I caused the boat to
anckor in 60 fathomes, the tide came from S, E. 2 leag. a watch: We see great
store of Sea Mors, playing by the Islands side; from thence I directed the
course S, W. with carrying away with stiff gale from S, E, with both top
sails a trip all the night being twilight, clear, some few Ice was in the
way, but by the help of the same (thanks be to God) we shunned them. This
morning clock 8. I had sight of Mansils I Will, for I fell right with the North
end thereof, it is low land, but the highest is to the East; at that instant,
I had also sight of Sir Dudly Diggs his Island, and I was not certain whether I
saw the East Main or no, for a fogge came on presently; Master Hudson, also
named this Island I Will Diggs.
of Sir Dudlie Diggs, a gentleman who has planted many of the best Vines, in
this Vineyard succeeding his father and Grandfather in the Mathematics whose
learned knowledge together with his purse, added no small proportion to this
building, to whom my self and many others of my quallity, shall be still
beholden, while times age continues.

This afternoon was 2 fogges, 2 cleares, the 3 was wet fog; at clock 7. I
thought I see Cape Pembrooke: upon N. Main, at clock 4. before I had 90.
fath.; this afternoon we see many Sea-Mors, and had store of Ice, W from this
Island, of Sir Robert Mansils (I think so named by Sir Thomas Button) as also
Cape Pembrooke, Southampton and Carry Swans nest, the last most eminent of the
3. I stood as ice would give leave S, W. and to the Westward, at clock 8. we
clewd up

We stood 2 glasses to the North with wind at East to get

I set sail this day at clock 4. and thought then that I see La^. 62 d. 20
min.
land at N. it was hazie, and at clock 12 I thought I had got as much as I lost
the day before; I pusled all this day amongst the ice, and at night was glad,
to make fast to a piece, whereon was a white Bear; the ice here is not so
dirty as it has been and I judge my self now not far from Carry Swans nest.

Was foggie and calm, the wind all over, the afternoon Bear killed
of him, although he was but young, some of it we eat boyld without any taste
at all, but like beef, but being roasted it tasted oily and rammish.

This night was clear above head, but fog banks, about the Horizon, at clock
12 there was Pettiedancers or henbanes (as some write them) North in the
firmament, betokening a storm to follow within 24 hours; there was The first
sight of Stars.
many Stars also in appearance, as those of note, Charles-Wayne, Auriga,
Botes, and Antonius I could have no observation for ice and fogge, dimmed the
horizon, I thought I see land again, at clock 8. and had deep 70 fathomes.

The Master called to make loose this morning, and all those Carry Swans Nest.
We steered as ice would suffer between W, N, W. and W, S, W. and did judge
we made way, about 4. leagues and one mile, easy wind and reasonable clear
at clock 9. we make fast to the ice, a reasonable

Upon sight hereof I caused the Boat, to be anchored, between 2 miles 1 hour.
the ship and Island in 30 fathomes, the tide went E. 2 knots, the land lay E,
and West, but I could not fully say it was an Island, for it lay like a Ridge,
or to Simily it, like to the Retyres, in the mouth of the River of Saine in
Normandy.

I do hold that all those pieces of ice here are ingendered about those low
Capes and Bays, as Mansils also is, where easy tides go, they are soon
frose over, the Snow falling there on thickneth them, so that by degrees they
increases; the Pettiedancere, brought nor sent us any storm, this night ended
in rain, and it was easy wind from the E, N, E.

We made from the Ice this morning, to stand to the land

At their coming on board, their account was this; that the tide did flow,
but 4. hours, and that it heightened Flood but 4 hours. Tide out saild.
but 6. foot; and this was 2 days after the Conjunction of the Sun and
Moon, so that the flood began at. past 10. and ended at. past 2. by this a
South and by W. Moon makes a full Sea; and the tides motion ends with the
flowing; assuredly South by W. Moon full Sea.
this was Carry Swans nest, for both from East and West ends it stretches to
the North, our men chaste Swans on shore, but got none, they say there is
earth, strange Moss, Quag-myres, and water plashes; at clock 4. I tocke leave
and stood along from 6. fathomes into 30 loosing sight thereof; and from thence
I stood to the Westward^ with North-West wind close haled; leaving both the
Cape and the Ice behind me, for the Sea Mors to sleep upon, there being good
store thereabout.

From the Cape or Swannes Nest, this noone-tyde I was

This Meridian I was in 61 degrees. 37 min. at 8 the last day, I

This smooth Sea has a small set from the West, with lippering rising and
falling, as other Shallow Seas use to have; the deep last night was 115
fathomes, I made way to this 115 Fathomes.
day, 12, N, W. by W. W. 13 leagues.

This close morning hid the Sun until noone, we being Fretum Hudson where I
got none; I thank God here we have not the like leisure, here are some Seals,
but few Latitude 62 d. 20. m* Variation 26 d. 3. m.
Fowls; the latitude of noone was 62 degrees. 20 min. here appears to be more
Riplins of Tide, the variation by Azimuth, and Almicanter, was 26 degrees. 31. min.
at most, the Sun went clear to bed, and at midnight we had 60 fathomes deep.

This morning, Amplitude was 5 degrees. the Refraction is

(Joy to our Antipodes) the Henban flashing all night, was a England, in the
morning I had 58 fathomes, and Latitude 63 d. 2 m.
white Coral, the latitude 63 degrees. 20 min. the way since last day was N. 4
degrees. East 18 leagues; since clock 4, we lay Larbord Tack N. W. it was a few
drops of rain this Evening yet the Sun set clear, and we had deep 65
fathomes at midnight, and then was in the Air many Pettie-dancers.

The last night was so hot as it dried up 15 fathomes water,

All this day the fog banks has deceived me, but now I am sure I see land,
both the maine and Islands, of which there are many, lying about 2 leagues into
the Sea, all ragged and broken rocks within this land bore from N. E. by E. to
W. by S. here are great store of fish leaping, and fairer weather cannot be; I
have sent the boat to land, and to my comfort three things I could epsy by the
shore; that it was flood Tide, and that it came from the Southward, and that it
does flow and fall very much water, before we came near the Island, we came
over a bank of 8 fathomes, and nearer the Island we fell into 15. there seeming
upon the land to be Poles erected, and buildings of stone, and other hillocks
like Haycocks.

The boat went on land at clock 6. and stayed 3 glasses or one hour, and, in
which time it flowed near six foot, it was flood before they went, for while
they were rowing to shore, I did observe it had flowed at least 3 foot, by
certain rocks that were dry at our first approach, they say that it had about 9
foot to flow; at clock 8. the tide returned, and set to S. W. ward, which
shows that it runs half tide, or else the Main beyond it, is an Island, about
which the tide may have an uncontrary course, as in some of the Sounds, of the
Island of Selly, at Englands W. end; this Island does lie in 64 d. 10. m. of
latitude, and I took this place to be the N. E. side of Sir Thomas Buttons, ut
ultra; I could see to the N. E. ward of this, at least 10 It flowed here above
23 foot.
leagues, but no land at E. or S. E. it being as clear an evening as could be
imagined, the land to be seen was from the N, N. E. to the West Southward.

The news from land was, that this Island was a Sepulcher, for that the
Salvages had laid their dead, (I cannot say interred) for it is all stone, as
they cannot dig therein, but lay the Corpse upon the stones, and wall them
about with the same, Co^^ining them also by laying the sides of old sleddes
above, which have been artificially made; the boards are some 9 or Graves and
Burials.
10 foot long, 4 inches thick, in what manner the tree, they have bin made out
on, was cloven or sawen, it was so smooth, as we could not discern, the
burials had been so old, and as in Tartars and the Samoides. For if they had
remained here, there would have been some newer burials; there was one place
walled 4 square, and seated within with earth, each side was 4 or five yards in
length, in the middle was 3 stones, laid one above another man's height, we
took this to be some place of Ceremony, at the burial of the dead; near the
same A Ceremonious place.
place, was one station laid, stone upon stone, as though they would have
something remarkable; there was foul, but so skadle, as they would not abide
them to come near them, and Ravens bigger then ours, we robbed their graves, to
build our fires, and brought a whole boats loading of firewood on board,
their Corpse were wrapped in Dear skins, their A Copper Dart head.
Darts were many of them headed with Iron, (and nails) the heads beaten broad
ways, in one of their Darts, was a head of Copper, artificially made, which I
took to be the work of some Christian, and that they have come by it, by the
way of Canada, from those that Trade, with the English and French.

Our men found stinking oil in a fish gut, and some small Whale Finnes; this
Island I named Sir Thomas Rows Welcome; I stood off into 33 fathomes that
night, until clock 2, the wind West, for I was directed by the letter of my
instruction, to set the course from Carry Swannes Nest, N, W, by N. So as I
might fall with the Westside, in 63 d. and from thence Southward, to search the
passage diligently, all the Bay about, until I came to Hudsons Bay.

I was in latitude 63 d. 37 m. plying up with S, W. winds,

I stood W. about the headland, the last day showed me, in 7 ridge of stone,
but bearing with the E. thereof, I fell into 35 and 40 fathomes, the tide run
W. by S. one mile ^ / 7 in one

After this it fell to be easy wind, I sent the boat to the land, and plied
with the ship, thereunto, for that wind which was, blew from thence, and
coming near it after Sunne-set, we could see 2 or three huge Whales, playing
close by the land side, in shoale water; for we, without them in the ship, had
but 12 fathomes, I stood to the S, W. end of the Island, and there stayed for
my boat, which came at clock 11 in the night, she had been 14 Glasses from the
ship, which was thus employed. Item, in Rowing to the land 4. one in chasing of
Duckes, in the next, the water fell 9 Inches, and for 3 more in the one, it
fell 3 Inches, in the other it flowed 3 Inches, and in the 2 last it flowed 2
foot, so as it flowed about 10 foot, but I do trust to this.

In their coming on board, they Anchored in 8 fathomes at the Island point, and
that was 2 Glasses after, those formerly accounted, the Tide came from N E. and
by E. at 3 miles one hour, this point of the Island made the Tide go sharp;
by this it may be gathered that it was full Sea at past 12. it cannot be
otherwise computated, but that it flows here S: W. it being 3 days before
the full Moon. But I am not S. W. Moon full Sea.
fully acertained of this Tide as yet; for those Islands have their several
indrafts and sets betwixt one another; for at clock 1. it set W by S. and now
it has near the same set, continuing from 1 unto 10 of clock, more then 9
hours, it seems strange unto me, being a Tide, and no Current, to be better
satisfied I cannot, for the best will run at their pleasure, when they are on
land, to seek for such things as the shore may afford them, the worst, and
worst able to give account, must keep the boat; therefore this account cannot
hold with truth, nor does it, I named this Island Brook Cobham, thinking then
of the many furtherances this Voyage received from that Honorable Knight, Sir
John Brook, whom, together with Master Henry Brigges, that famous
Mathematical Professor, were the first that countenanced me in this
undertaking.

This Noble Knight graced me in the delivering of my Petition to his Majesty,
and afterward brought me to his Royal Presence, there to show the hopeful
possibility of the attempt. And after this persisting in his kindness, invited
me to his own Table, where I had my diet, continually assisting Chatham to
London, and in some with Master Brigges was at all the charge hereof, while the
Voyage was put off until the next year, when that young Sir John Wolstenholme,
was appointed Treasurer.

Now for this Island it is all of a white Marble, of indifferent height, with
many water Ponds therein, and great store of Foul, especially water foul,
they brought on board two goodly Swannes, and a young Tall Foul alive, it was
long headed, long neckt, and a body almost answerable; for it was but
pen-feathered, I could not discern whether it was an Estridge or no, within 3
or 4 days the legs by mischance were broken, and it dyed.

Our dog being on land, hounded himself, at a Stagge or Reine Dear, and
brought him to obey, Peter Neshfield, one of the Quarter Masters, followed the
chase, and having neither Dear, ^ow.
Gun, nor Lance, let him go, (it may be he took compassion when he saw the
Dear shed tears) the dog having hurt his feet very sore, upon the hard
stones, was not able to pursue him and so they parted with bloodshed, but it
came from the Dear and Dogs feet, they did imagine that there was store of
Dear, in that Island, I took it to be 6 or 7 miles long, but they thought it
to be parted in two, it is all shelves, and ridges betwixt the shore and it,
making, as it were a Bay between the North land which is high, and the South,
for all the land to South of this, is all low land, except 3 or 4 places, near
unto the West part of Hudsons West Bay, where Captain James wintered, they say
in coming on board, hard by the Island they did epsy 40 Whales, some say
less, but it seems, there 40 Whales*
were many lying there to sleep, so as they took them for Rocks, they say
there is a Cove or Harbor, made by small Islands* that a ship may ride in
safety, for all weathers, and have two ^athomes at low water, it is on the
Eastside, the Masters mate, told me he wished the ship therein, because there
was a bolt in the Stem which stuck out since the Cut-water was twined off,
and that it was dangerous to hurt a Cable, if we should Anchor, I said we
might Anchor 100 times, and yet have kept the Cable clear from the bolt, by
letting fall an Anchor of the weather bow: but to conclude

When I had stood W. S. W. away from this Island twelve Brook, Cobham, have
been, 37. 40. 35. 30. fathomes. Thanks be given to God, it is, and has been
long time fair weather, and now fair winds (from land) which makes the
better discovering, we have still of those Henbans, or Pettie-dancers, but no
storm. I Anchored a thwart a little Island, twelve leagues from Brook Cobham,
the Master with the boat went on land, where it was low water, about an hour
before 8. at night, within this Island he sees other Islands, and Ledges at low
water, so as he thought he could have gone on foot Sea-mors Fox and Scu^vie
grass.
to the Maine, from hence we see other Islands bearing W. S. W. at this Island
the Salvages had been, and there was great store of Sea Pigeons thereon, he
brought alive a dunne Fox on board, and had encountered two Seamors, whereof
he launc'd one, but for want of help they both got away, they brought on
board good store of Scurvie-grasse, which I caused to be pounded, and the juice
to be pressed forth, and put into a Hogshead of strong Bear, with command that
every one that would should have a pint to his mornings draught, but none would
taste it until it was past time, and themselves almost past means.

The Master told me he had named this Island Dunne Fox Island, after his own
name, and the Foxes color, which Dun Fox Island.
I liked well.

The Tide came from Northeast, and it flowed about twelve foot water, now I
began to know that I went from the Tide, for sailing from this Tide I lost the
passage, but I I lost the passage.
must still follow instruction and hope.

I wayed at the Masters coming aboard, clock 9. in the Evening, standing away
with those Islands the day light had showed me, the Direction was West South
West, as they

All this morning watch from four to eight it rained, but Latit. 62 d. ^5 m.
half an hours fogge, between three and four in the afternoon; after that
came North winds, rain and wet fogge, all night the steering was four
leagues West South West, the deepes from 30, 26, to 6 fathomes.

With this wind from land, I bore in amongst the Islands fearing to loose the
Maine at any time, standing in betwixt West and West North West, as the wind
veered or haled, my depth was sixeteene fathomes, but amongst those Islands we
came in sundry Over-falls, of six fathomes, and had brought them to bear
severally from me, North-East by North, North by West, West South West, South
West by West, at night clock ten, I came to Anchor in seven fathomes, it
fell three foot water after that Anchoring, the weather was wette fogge; the
flood put in fourteen foot water, it did not fall any water from clock
eleven, Notae. North wind kept up tide*
until fourteen Glasses were out, the flood was so small, being enclosed
with Islands, as it did not make the ship port, yet blowing but to Course and
Bonnet, it kept the Tide in seven hours, I durst not hazard any further
within these Islands, until I sent the boat to make trial, who sounded from
seven fathomes to ten foot; I named those Islands, Brigges his Mathematickes.

This morning the Master and I in the Maine top, might August.
see two Ridges dry, which last evening we came hard by, I do think that in
Winter, the windy storms, puts in some flowings of water incredible to be
believed, in respect of other places, for it may be perceived, that the water
has The water high.
then the usual Spring-Tydes, as also our men did perceive the same at Carry
Swannes Nest.

Being satisfied for what concerned this place, I weyed and stood to Sea in
six fathomes the least water, fearing to deal any more within the Islands,
when I was clear, I went to the old course again S. W. by S. but the land
flying me, I haled in West, and had water from 14 to 6 fathom, uneven ground,
the land met me again, stretching more to S. and had many humlocks therein; I
stood toward it W. and W. S. W. so near as I durst for shoale water, at which
time I dare presume it was seven miles from me, and yet I had but 6, 7, or 10
fathom: I run off along time before I came into 20 fathom, and in this
wearing off I came by two dry ridges that had been far without me; I Anchored
at night in 25 fathomes 10 leagues S. S. W. from the land and Islands, which I
road amongst last night, the Tide came S. S. W.

This fair morning, I waited at clock 6. and stood along Latitude 61. d. 10.
m.
61 degrees, 10 minutes, I went over in nine fathomes, and then standing
Southwest, came presently into twenty, I hoped now for a sight of Hubberts
comfortable Hope, the land lay along Southwest and Northeast, it has blown
all this day to Course and Bonnet, at night I Anchored at twenty fathomes, two
or three leagues from shore, the land is low, but within are many water ponds,
and small grown wood.

I stood along all those supposed Checkes from my last nights Road into 3.
fathomes upon the shore, the land low but now and then a Sandy knowle or
down, would appear Holland and ^landers, we made way S, W. and by W. 10
leag. and diverse times see dry shelves, between us and the shore. The Latit.
w is 60 d. 22 m. this afternoon was small wind from S, W. and I sent the boat
to the land, being about 3 miles off, my self with ship anchored in 7
fathomes, I gave a token that if the water should shoale suddenly, they in the
boat should shoot off a Musket, which before they came to shore they did,
here were many Musketoes.

The Master was in the boat, and had but 2 fathomes when they shot; all the
water within us was shoald, so that then we were glad to wade forth, although
the tide was flood, it flowing 14 inches in two glasses, but in further
examining I found no good account, only this does sustice, that as I range
along the coast I do go from the tide, and that it keeps course, with the
Moon, and that the further I speed from Sir Thomas Roes welcome, it still
flows less water, and the tides current is the easier; here on land the Mr.
found, the relics of a birch Cannowe, the footings and horns of Dear, both
small and great, and of foul, an Arrowe headed with a nail, the head beaten
broad, and put into a shaft of 18 inches long, he thought it flowed about 7
foot, the floode began about clock 8. I am sure it was slack tide at ship
then and I will be slack to write any more hereof, for I cannot season the
reckoning taken on shore.

After the boats coming on board, I stood off 3 glasses, to anchor in 13
fathom water ( Hubbert makes me hope) for now I draw nere, here the tide did
set S, W. and by W. the ebb E, and by South.

From the last day to this I made way S, S, W. 5 leag. and am Latit. 59 d. 53
min.
now in 59 d. 53 m. of Latit. standing along between 10 and 20 fath. S, S, W.
at night 10. I came to a land lying about 2 leag. from the Main, but so dry at
low water that you may go to the firm land, betwixt the one and the other,
this lies from my last nights road 10 leag. S, and by W.

At the days appearance I went to this Island, it is all stones flow 21
inches, this was when the half tide came to take his first set, and came with a
shuft, I did account that it would It flowed 12 foot.
not flow less then 18 foot, but after this shuft it flowed less and less
until full Sea that tide, the 3 first glasses did not flow above 2 foot: Upon
this Island were many corpse, laid in the same manner, as at Sir Thomas Roes
Welcome, the Salv. inhabitants had lately bin there, and left the skaddles of
their fire, they had also sunk a well, and stoned it about, for there was fresh
water therein, there was here some store of the ruined fragments of Cannowes,
and other fur wood with which we laded the boat on board, there was also
carved toys in their graves.

I did Anchor at clock 8 (now these nights begin to be long) left I might slip
by some Inlet unseene; this day was very ^ot, and a small gale from S, S, W. we
had all this time very hot days, ever since we came from Carry Swans nest, if
that the cold N, W. wind had not delayed them; this Meridian, I was in 59 d. 05
m. I stood off into 20 fath. and went in again to 15. the broken Island in
sight; since noone until this midnight, I made way S. 3 leag. and then I
discerned the land to meet upon my weather bough and a head, so I caused to
tack about, and lay N, W. by N. in wind W, by S. 5 glasses a leag. it seemed to
be higher land then I had lately seen, from 15 fath. deep, yesterday I came S.
as before upon 18 and 20 fathoms, I stood thus to the Northwards until day
light and then I see my land I was upon yesterday morning, and the land within
it, which I see yesternight, stretching into Hubberts Hope, I stood about to
the Southwards, and the day light being come H^apt Hubbert, for so I ^^ld it,
and the South land meeting E and W. the length of it at least 15 leagues, I
anchored the boat in 20 fathomes, the Tide came N. W. and this is that
supposed Tide that set E, and W. which was no more but the same Tide I brought
along with me from Sir Tho. Roes Welcome, coming all along the coast, S, W,
by S. falling into this Vain Hope, is enforced to alter his course, by
opposition of the S, side of this large Bay and there to set E, and W. (as the
land does lie) 1 mile 2 / 7. in one hour.

The Island I was upon yesterday was doubtless the Checks named by Sir Thomas
Button, for what reason I know not, except for that here his hope was crossed, he
took it as a check.

This land bore from me, to the S, E. by E. and was gently decending down to
the Sea side, the greenest and best like, I have Thames, and as it were
enclosed with thick rows of Trees between one meadowe and another, distinct
as it were Barn Elmes nere London, and at sight hereof I did think of them;
and if there be any keeping of tame Dear, or other beasts, or tillage in all
that country, I should think it to be there; for certainly there must, by
those burials be great store of people, for it is not to be thought, that they
will bring or carry their dead far to burial, and it cannot be thought also,
but that we were seen by them although they were not seen by any of us, for
we stayed not but in the night, all day we made as much way, as sails would
drive forward, so as if they would have come to us, we were gone before they
could make ready; and although they might see us, whether they durst come or
no, I know not, having as I suppose, never seen ship in their lives before, as
Hudson who sought after them in his Bay, (though far distant from hence) they
set theirwoods on fire hard by him and yet would not come to him, although he
was but in his Shallop.

But to proceed I stood along the land and had deep from 20 to 3 fath. this
morning was gray overcast, the Sun rose thinly valed, but visible, there was a
Rainebow in the firmament, and some drops of rain fell, standing along whiles
this land trented A great River.
E, and W. we see the entrance of a large river but all full of scaupes,
shelves and shoale water, which coming forth changes the Sea to be more white,
at the S. entrance of this River, was a Cliffe like unto Balsea cliffe nere
Harwich, and on the S. again, another great Bay, whose bottom was easy to be
seen, I was nere the entrance thereof, and found it was all full of shoales,
and ridges, at this was Capt. James on ground, as I found by his speeches
afterward; the S. part of this Bay lies E, and W. and at the E. end thereof
lies an Island S, and N. about 3 miles long, I stood from the mouth of this
River and Bay to go to the N. of the said Island, and came into 7. 6. 5 fath.
easy wind the ebb came 2 miles an hour along the E side of the Island, and I
stood along in 3 fath. the ground to be seen under water, at night the flood
tide came, and we were got above the S, head of the Island, and went along in 7
fath. well harrowed ^d even ground.

At clock 10. we anchored, and could not perceive by out lead, that tide did
flow. and fall above 12 foot; the tide set Latit. 58 d. 46 min.
in 58 degrees. 46 minutes.

This beautiful day was promised at Sun rising, it has blown Sol and in the
night up again, we have run along the land all day with W, N, W. wind:
Sometimes loosing too, sometimes wareing off, as the water did deep or shoale
from 7 fath. into 2. upon the shore, the land lies S. we think we saw some
pieces of ice in the of^ine, we run this day 16 leagues until clock 8. when
we anchored, the land fair in sight but low, with abundance of wood growing
thereon, at this anchoring we can make no certainty of the tides, but that it
still comes N. running easilier, and flowing less water.

This fair day we bless God for, and have plide it up for Port Nelson the
wind Veering to S, S, E. Latit. 57 d. 48 m. the shoalding we plide in was
between 7 and 2. and we could see many shelves, and high stones, lie upon the
N. side of the Rivers mouth, appearing as it were trees on land 3 times bigger
then they be, and that is through the vapors, which the Sun exhaleth: having
plide all day, in shoale water, at night we anchored in 6 fathomes.

In the mouth of Port Nelson at first coming of the tide, A Boar.
it came with a Shuft or Boar, at clock 10. for one hour, and floured upon
the Ships Bow, and it flowed 9 foot water, the tide run not above 5 hours;
and 2 knots was the speed it made, yet I could perceive the under tide to
Room an hour before the ship came up, the land fair to see both on S, and N.
side, here were many white Whales, the running of White Whales.
the tide was caused by the out-set of the River upon the Coast-tyde, there was
a ledge dry at low water hard by me when I anchored.

This day we consulted and consented to go, into Port Reasons.
Nelson, for these reasons following.

1 Considering what hazard we had undergone, for want of our Pinnace, she
being made ready for setting up, yet for the loss of time, we were content to
hazard it, having ^i^ so fair weather, as I was loath, but to make good use
thereof. 2 The wind was contrary to go Southwards, and like to be bad weather.
3 The Pinnace could not be set up in the Ship as I desired. 4 I hoped to have
some intelligence by the Salvages, and to search the head of the River of which
I did know nothing from Sir Tho. Button. 5 I was in great hope to get a Maine
yard, amongst so many trees, as also some refreshing, fresh water and fire
wood, and to rummidge the Ship, and to see her on ground, and to make her
clean or to repair what else she wanted, as Ballast, or else what.
Thinking now it was good to provide for winter, for what is formerly done is
so exact, as no discovery was more painefully followed, nor with greater
hazard, and less help; but God alone, besides the knowledge of this harbor
might more embolden my men, in staying the longer forth to follow the Search.

Now between Port Nelson and Hudsons W. Bay, all yet for a great distance not
lookd upon by any Christian we were to discover, which having done, the
perfect knowledge of this River might cause us to repair hither for refuge,
when the winter took us from our other labors, if in the mean time we should
not discover a better, or passage.

This Raynie morning with S. wind I stood in low sails This night I had many
gusts of Wind with showers of Rain.

I plide up a mile with flood, and thought to have gone beyond Essex, but not
so high; the ship being moored I went on land, and found the Nallie very
convenient to set up a Tent and to build the Pinnace in, and here we found
some store of Hogsheads, and Pipestanes, which had been iron bound, one Maine
top, a top gallant Mast, diverse blocks, and the sides of stared chests, with
diverse relics of some English Vessel, which I took to have perished, or
been left not far from hence; and indeed I did assure my self, it must be
that of Sir Thomas Buttons, but as yet I have not found a tree will make a
Main yard.

This morning early, I called to rommage, for the percels Peter Nesfeild quarter
Master, the Cooper, the Gunner, Expofer Russell, and my self to assist him,
and this day we set up the keele, and made a false keele to it, thinking
thereby to make her hold a better wind, brought on all the ground timbers, and
3 strokes on each side, while the Mr. and others went to look for refreshing.

The wind being come about to the N, N. I sent the Master word that it was fit
to bring the ship to ground, while it blew from land, (as he determined before
our coming in) and for that I would not have any thing to do, that might stay
me after the Pinnace was set up, that such things as was needful should be
taken in hand and brought to pass with all expedition.

This morning I was glad to bring the ship to land my self upon a fine smooth
sand, against the Valley, where we strengthened

And now I sent Samuel Blades, and the Surgeon, to the E. to search the
shore, and to look for a Main yard, who returning told me, that for a Main
yard there was not a tree to be had of that squarenesse, but that by a little
creek, about a mile off, they had found on, shore certain broken Anchors and
cable rope, with other small ropes, also one broken Gun, with many round and
crossebarre shot, of lead and iron, one Grapnet and store of firewood, pilde
up, with one Tent covered, with old sails, and a Cross which had been set up
but was pulled or fallen down, with the inscription raced out This night was
very hot with much lightning and some drops of rain, here are coming in with
the floode, and goeing out with the ebb, innumerable company of white Whales,
a fish as big as Porke fishes, with us and much alike in shape.

I went with the Cherurgion to the creek, and found the

This being the Lords day we rested and served God,

This fair hot day some wrought at the Shallop, others

In this day the most of our labors were brought to end concerning the ships
readiness.

The wind blowing E, S, E. stiff Gale, so as I could not Peter Nesfield, (who^
I had set out of the boat with the Master and other for lightning her, that I
might have sailed up the higher, but could not, the water was so shallow and
came down so fiercely) told me he had seen the footing of a man, but he
could not bring me to it again, so I stood over to the S. side, the boat still
grounding as I went, (where we landed) me thought the valleys was good grass,
store of wood and here we gathered black-berries, as we found in other places,
with straw, berries, goose-berries, and Vetches, with several sorts of small
shrubs and trees, and upon the shore we found, the broad footing of Dear, and
hard by them, the frame of a Tent standing, which had lately been made, with
the studdle of the fire, the hair of Dear, and bones of foul, left here, I
took leave of the S. side, and named the farthest and head Ramsdens Hall.
thereof Ramsdens Hall, after an Alderman of that Corporation, but the Master
and his man traveled by land to thwart of the ship, we have seen no Salvage
since I came, although I caused fires to burn night and day, but the woods are
so thick, as cannot be seen 12 score yards, so that none could come to us,
but by water. This day the Pinnace was brought on board, God grant that with
her help my hopes, may be accomplished, which heretofore has been dangerous.

From a board we see a Stag trotting from Port Nelson, they mist him. I caused
the Cross which we found to be newly raised, and this inscription of lead
nailed thereon.

I suppose this Cross was first erected by Sir Thomas Button 1613. it was
again raised by Luke Fox, Capt. of the Charles, in the right and possession,
of my d^ead Sovereign Charles the first King of Great Britain, France and
Ireland, defender of the Faith, the 15 of August, 1631.

This land is called New Wales.

The wind being E, S, E. I could not yet come to Sea, wherefore

This night 10. were many Pettiedancers, I hope fair weather to come, yet have
we had such as I pray our neighbors, in England have no worse, and then they
cannot have better harvest weather to have in their crop, and though this may
be thought nothing pertinent, to the History of a Sea Iournall yet having been
dissuaded from this voyadge, in respect of the ice; I may thus much write, for
the encouragement of others that may happen to navigate this way, God giving
good success to this enterprise, that a Sea voyage of discovery (to a place
unknown, and far remote and in the like clime) cannot be taken in hand with
more health, ease, and pleasure; I am sure it has been warm ever since we
came from the ice.

The wind came about, I sent the Pinnace on land, to ballast, Nelson they found
a board broken in two, the one half quite gone, whereon had been the Kings
Arms, and inscription of the time of Sir Thomas Button his own name, when and
why he took Harbor with other expressions.

This piece of board I brought away, for I was undersaile, when the Pinnace
came on board, so as I could not go on

This ebb I came to Seawards, but for fear of shoale-water, I Anchored in 4
fathom, having little wind to chase the ship, and a strong ebb, fear called
what I had observed at my in coming into my remembrance, so as I durst hazard
no farther whiles flood came; and now I must add one word or two, to what is
before, concerning this dangerous river, which I would be loath to seek in
thick weather, of either side the S. is best, but is flat a great way off, and
Rockie ground, the best of the deep is Channel to S. there is 12 fathomes in
the entrance; in one place, we chafed our Cables sore against the stones, of
which you might see 4 or 5 dry in the river, at once the last quarter ebb come
swiftest, and in Springtydes it flowed 3 foot before the tide set up; the tide
returned to the Sea, at a full Sea on shore. The Sun and Moon did It flows
S. E. Moon
both set clear this night; In this River we got no relief but one Duck,
here a N. W. Moon makes a full Sea.

I wayed again about half flood, and stood to Sea from 6. fathomes to 10. and
Anchored in high water in 9 fathomes clear ground, making ready to ply or
sail the next flood, for now I am to discover to the East, between this and
Master Hudson his West Bay, of which I must only, making a journall, their
being nothing else of note.

In the morning I took the Cocke-boat into the ship, with Latit. 57 d. 10 m.
even ground, if any occasion were hereafter to use it, the land is fair to be
seen, (at 10 fathomes deep) upon the hatches, the wind easy from S. S. W.
and we stood 2 or 3 leagues in 7. fathoms, we were at noon in 57 d. 10 m. all
this night I could well discern the land, as I stood under sail, standing S.
E. the land met us, this hot Meridian, but I was not in observation we were no
sooner landed, but we spied a black cloud at N. by W. when presently we see
the ship had handed both topsayles,

I packt away along the land, as near as can be thought to ^ whi^^ Bears
(...).
land, the Mr killed them in the Pinnace; this day we tried the tide 4 times, and
it set always from the E. wards, we are now so far from his primum mobile, as
I think it not worthy the looking after, yet account must be taken; this night
the Sun set clear as could be, and it was easy wind, I have seen all the
land hither from Port Nelson, as I did before I came there, but I cannot see
any high land, nor find any deep water, I would gladly see that comfort, and
then I would say that the M. were in the increase, howsoever I thank God, it
does make the nights grow the lighter, the ship is Anchored, the watch is set,
a mark set on the lead-line, and sleep like a thief does slily steal upon
me, at 12 this night the tide did slack.

I called to lift the anchor from the ground, and bring the ship

Prayers being ended, I called to heave up anchor, at clock 8

I had up my anchor clock 5, and stood along to the East all the land was
belaid with round Rocks, and all along the shore were ledges of the same, and
half a mile without us,

This day a N. N. W. wind has conveid away abundance of wild Geese by us,
they breed here toward the N. in those wildernesses there are infinite
numbers, and when their young be fledge, they fly S. wards to winter, in a
warmer country; I hoped by their taking flight, the wind would have continued.

This low land thus trenting makes me doubt, it will bring Hudson, and then
leave us, and fall away S. and there also must I leave it, I could not perceive
that it did slow above five foot water yesterday, and the flood set S. E. the
waters side is so flat, and Rocky, that we cannot land with the Pinnace, we can
discern the going in of many small Rivers, and there out-sets by the change of
waters, whose color is more dunne then the Sea it self.

Was thick close weather, at night 7 it wet, the night Port Ne^o^, true course
E. S. E. 60 leagues, and that I must be in 55 degr. 50 min. latitude.

This coldest day I felt since I came from Nottinghams I Will,

I road still all night for I could get nothing by plying against James of
Brist^ll, Captain James.
he came close in at our stern, and we saluted each other, he standing in
toward the shore, which was in sight, but standing

There came on board of me, his Lieutenant, his Coxen, and three more; I gave
order to my Officers to take down the 4. rowers between the Decks, and to
entertain them at several messes, and to enquire of them with what land, they
fell first, after their coming from our own Coasts, what lands they had been
at, or in what harbors, when they entered Fretum, Hudson, how long they had
been amongst the Ice, and at several times, what Islands they had seen, or
Capes formerly discovered, what was there most Northerliest latitude, they had
been in, and what day they see first this side or bottom, and in what
latitude they came over this bay in: I enquired also the like of his
Lieutenant, whom I entertained in my Cabin, so that before they went away, I
heard that they first met with Ice, at Cape Farewell, and that they entered
Fretum Hudson, the 20. day of June; they had been distressed in harbor, and had
like to have lost their ship, the fire smoke my men see on land the 23. day
of June was theirs; they had seen the Isles Nottingham and Salisbury, and was
on land on Sir Robert Mansfells Isle, having beforebeene sore pestured with
Ice: The greatest latitude North was 64. degrees. and that in this bay of Sir
Thomas Buttons, they had been troubled with Ice, talking thereof as though
they took pleasure to run against it, nay, they said they had run into the
Ice, as far as the maine mast, and that they came over in 59 degrees. of this their
Northmost latitude, of their suffering at Resolution, their grounding in this
Bay, the harm of their men, thrown at Capsten, and what else I desired to
have, I had, and that they had him on shore here, but two days before, and
killed two Partridges, they said also that there was no offering to go home,
if they found no passeage, for that the Ice could not be disolued this year,
but they must stay until the next year, to have light nights to shift
themselves amongst them, and this I did for that I did not know how we might
be separated, before I talked with Cap. James himself, and I gave order to
acquaint them, with what also they demanded of us, telling them that I had
been in Port Nelson, and that I had seen, and came along this coast, never
without sight of land, from the latitude of 64 degrees. 2. quar. and that in Port
Nelson, I had been on the S. side, and on the land also, before they came; and
had named it new Yorkeshiere, but being a barren waste Wilderness of Birds,
and wild beasts of prey (and chiefly for that it is out of the road of
trading, and the passage) where none hereafter will desire to come: I conceine
that I can have no great honor thereby, (although I have given it a name) and
therefore do leave it to those that are disposed to entitle themselves therein.

Last night I made loose and stood along in small sails until James, who was
a great way on stern; at his coming up, he sent his shallop on board of me;
who at much persuasion of my Master (although much against my Goon board the
Maria.
will) I took them in, they rowing me on board (to be better confirmed) I
did begin to reiterate the last Euenings discourse, they had aboard of me, to
the end I might understand the difference of several reports (for every man
will report the best of his own Actions) but the conclusion was, that they
came over, and fell in land with this bay in 59 degrees. I was well entertained and
feasted by Captain James, with variety of such cheer as his Sea provisions
could aford, with some Partridges, we dined betwixt decks, for the great cabin
was not bigg enough to receive our selves and followers; during which time the
ship butt in 2 Courses, and maine bonnet, threw in so much water, as we could
not have wanted sause, if we had had roast Mutton.

Whereat I began to ponder whether it were better for his company to be
impounded amongst Ice, where they might be kept from putrefaction, by the
piercing air, or in open Sea, to be kept sweet by being thus daily pickled;
howeuer they were to be pitied; the ship taking her liquor as kindly as our
selves, for her nose was no sooner out of the pitcher, but her nebe like the
Ducks, was in it again: The Gentleman could discourse of Art, as observations,
calculations, and the like, and showed me many Instruments, so that I did
perceive him to be a practitioner in the Mathematics, but when I found that
he Bonu Sperance home: our discourse had been to small purpose, if we had
not pried into the errors of our predecessors, (and being demanded) I did not
think much for his keeping out his flagg; for my ambition was more Aetheriall,
and my thoughts not so ayerie, so to set my sight toward the sky, but when I
either called to God, or made Celestial observation; to this was replide, that
he was going to the Emperor of Iapon, with letters from his Majesty, and
that if it were a ship of his Majesty's of 40 Pieces of Ordnance, he could not
strike his flag (keep it up then quoth I) but you are out of the way to Iapon,
for this is not it: he would have persuaded me to take harbor to winter in,
telling me that Sir Thomas Button took harbor the 14 of this instant; Quoth
I, he is no precedent for me, I must parallel my poverty with poor Hudsons,
who took no harbor before the first of November; and that then I durst not
take harbor until the midst of the same, besides I was not come to do so much
as another man, but more then any, as I had already done, and i (I did forbear
him in this, or any other thing, it was because I was on board of him, and had
made some former observation, of which I acquainted my Master with, that
thereby we might the better brook, what might be offered, as boasting of our
selves, or the like, for it was enough for us, that we had so great odds in
the discovery, he said I was to winter; I told him he had the copy of my
Commission, as also of all my letters, that I was limmited) but so as having
sought all this bay, from 64.2 quar. to 60 leag. E, S, E. from Port Nelson,
both my self and men having visibly beheld all the land along, and that I must
see the N, W. from Nottingham, as both he and I were instructed, and I would
perform; after I had joined Hudsons W. bay, with this land now thwart of me;
to which words my Master before him preferred me his hand, to be willing to
the same, which I gladly excepted, although within three days after, he
^aponed; we parted not until the next mornings dawning; and this 17 hours,
was the worst spent of any time of my discovery. My men told me his men gave
them some Tobacco, a

Whilst we were on board of Captain James, we stood

I came on board with the Mary early this morning, we Came from abord Captain
James.
made fast our pinnes, and set sail; I called to take my leave, as I came by
him (for I could ouer-hale him, as the winding of a Clew) but his men told me,
that he was in his Cabin, I gave him 10 Muskets, one Falconet, and presently
I haled in, to the land, for we were 8 leagues off by account, and in 36
fathoms deep, it was morning, 6. when we parted, at 10. I had the land fair
by; I stood S, W. in, for that I knew I could see so far, to the W. ward, as I
was when we both stood off, I bore as much sail (until I had the land bold)
as the Ship and masts was able to stand under, and all the time I had the Maria
in sight, I did observe that she went away, S. or S. S. E. I made way 10.
leagues that day, and ankored at Clock 8. in 8. fathoms, Thwart of a River,
low land, and wooded, it was fair weather, and easy wind all night.

This day morning I stood E. Southward, as the land did September.
bear, it being sometimes higher, sometimes lower, one knoale bearing S. W. was
higher then all the rest, here seems to be rivers and bays; our deep this
day has been between 7. and 11. fathomes; I ankored at night 8. in 7.
fathomes, having come from shore two hours in shoale-water, stony ground,
the wind continuing N, W. does drive a great Sea, before Lati. 55 degrees. 14. min.
it into this bay; the Meridian latitude, was 55 degrees. 14. min. I did account
95. leagues from Port Nelson, and if this strong ground do not deceive me, it
flowed 12. foot; the flood ran but 4. hours; here a good way to the E.
seems to be the opening of some great river, or the land does wind S. wards;
here is in sight, two ledges of great stones, that lie almost as far off, as
we ride about 6. miles of the main, bearing S. E. this night was fair
weather, and clear Moonelight.

This morning early, was the ankor upon the bow, and I here was thick
Riuer-water, and small drift wood, such as usually drive out of Rivers, without
whose months lie always Nelson.

This day being thwart the land, I saw yesterday when I supposed it: the W.
point of some River, or else the winding of the land to S. wards, and could see
no land to the E. of the same. I made motion at dinner, for the N. W. (to the
Master and his mate) declaring that now all this vndiscovered land, betwixt M.
Hudsons and Sr. Thomas Buttons, was now perfectly finished by us; for that the
land now trenting from this Cap, S. ward, must assuredly be the cheek of Mr.
Hudson his Westbay, as may appear by those Maps, brought whom by Bylot, after
he was exposed, and now the further search of a passage, this way was
hopeless, and their needed no more search, in all the side of this Bay. From
64. degrees. 30 m. circularly to 55. degrees. 10 m. and seeing that we could not
attempt the N. W. from Notinghams I Will (as I was instructed) for the heavy
quantitys of Ice, which had choked all the 3. channels; at our entering in the
middle of July, now I did hope were disolved, or else never, and it was best to
make trial thereof, whilst this good wind lasted, and withal charged them
with their promise made, at my parting from Notinghams, which was to have seen
a trial before their going home, at what danger soever, (though then there was
no attempting) if no passage proves else-weere, and to this same purpose, did
wish me to write what I would, and they would set their hands thereunto, which
for some concealed reason I did manifest, showing them also that we had long
time to spend, for Mr. Hudson did not harbor until the first of November, and
for S. Thomas Button he Passage, or bring home a good account, which I could
not do, if I did not speed my Commissionith what have I could, and for
harboring there was none until the midest of November.

Now how I shall spend all this time, and be able to give that account, his
Majesty does expect, I know not, if I do not go to the N W. For besides it I
am not instructed to search, which being put into practice, if it prove not to
be had there, but that the land does stretch to the E. as Baffine reports in
65. Sr. Dudlies Diggs I Will, and Cape Wolstenholme, into the bottom of Mr.
Hudsons E. Bay, and there winter. Which if we do, we must stay until August,
as experience had shown us. (Which was near a whole 11. months) and therefore
now would be the best: but to write truth, the Mr. would give no consent, but
to keep all safe by seeking for harbor, but his mates answer was.

Captain, if there be any thing more to be done? let us fall to it, whilst
the wind is good, so grace being said, I came foroth and weering out the maine
sheate, commanded him at helm to go away N. E. by E. when coming more open
Hudsons Bay, the wind at S. blowing, but to both top-sailes on taunt, there
came so high a Sea from S. E. as if it had come from land 200. leagues
distance, it came so naturally ^oamming, and therefore I do believe, that the
E. side of those Bays, lies farther E. wards toward the River of Cannada,
and the Longitude thereof is more Easterly then is placed in the Marine Maps,
standing hence as before we fell into 20. and 30. fathomes, making way 7. or 8.
leagues the watch; this day was fair weather, in the night was much lightning.

I named the Cape I last parted from, Wolstenholmes vltimum vale, for that I do
believe Sr. John Wolstehholme will not lay out any more moneys in search of
this Bay. And yet thus much, if he had been wanting herein; I am of opinion,
that the most of those discoveries, had never been attempted: for my own part
I can say, for so I find, that he has been, for 8. Voyages the principal
adventurer in stock (and Treasrror) supplying the slack adventure, when the
stock came slowly in, and I dare affirm, concerning this Voyage of mine; that
he was at least 400. l. out at my home coming, although I did return in 6.
complete months: saving 12. months vituall and pay, and besides, I am
confident, that he cannot be less out then 1100 l. about this discovery.

Yet I am persuaded that upon good grounds (of which I do know him to be
very able to judge) that no subject in this kingdom parrallelling his degree,
would sooner advance to the furtherance of this, or any other design of such
worth, which he thinks may redownd to his Majesty's honor, and

This morninges W. wind brought in a Sea so high, and High Sea.
grimme, as though it had in fury overthrown all lands, and shoales,
enterposing the passage betwixt us and Iapon; it swelled so Mountanous high
from the N. W. as who of seamen had seen the same, would have said, that
there could be noe Much wind
land from whence the same came not of 6. or 700. leagues, and my self also if
experience had not shown me the contrary. I was in latitude, 57. degrees. 28. m.
and from my setting from Vltimum Vale 48 leagues the wind came from N. N. W.
and stripped me into a lease of cources, or 3. lowest sails, almost as much
wind as at any time since I came from home, and more behalf then I found,
since I entered Fretum Hudsons, or 300. leagues beyond, toward night I laid
to the West in maine course, for fear I might hazard my self in the night,
amongst hose Islands which M. Hudson (for good reason) calls by the name of
Lancasters Isles; all this night I had deep 47. 44. 40. 54. 50 fathomes.

This day morning I tackt to N. wards, at noone was in 52. Latit. 57. de. 55.
min.
fathomes: lati. 57. de. 55. m. both top-sayles cast over the lowsayles,
Bonnets, I made way in Try 6. lea. S. W. and 12. 2. m. N. E. this night came
the wind S. E. a pretty gale, it was over-cast with darkness, we came by a
small Island at clock one, the highest I have seen since I came from Brook
Cobham the deep 70. fathom: I named the I Will Sleep.

I made way from last noone, to this 30. leagues N. and this morning was some
slight.

I was constrained to break up the Pinnas (now grown Pinace gone.
leake) although I did soar doubt the want of her, what ever might befall me:
but she being a dragge at stern, and it was too could and wet, to keep men in
her, to have kept her at sail, and as much hinderance to shake the ship in
the wind, until she were made dry; besides my men were pittilully wet. I
cut out the toughts and nails, and saved as much as I could, and sent the
rest to hazard, though against my will, for I did think if she had stood
tyght, she might have afforded me some help in the N. W. whither now I am
going, and if it prove a Bay, or trent, E. wards, then God willing I will
hazard to winter in Port Nelson, to the intent I may the next year search vt
vltra, where the passage I hope does lie. For if Thomas Buttons ankoring last
upon the W. side, and Carry Swanns-Nest, nor at this hoped N. W. then it is not
to be looked for, to the W. of Groynland; and though as yet I have not tried
the N. W. yet by what I heard from Bilct and Baffin in their life time (which
was Baffines Report
that if there had bin hopes, they would have persisted. But quoth Baffin,
there I will never go to seek it) my self, have far greater confidence,
that it should lie nearer Sr. Thomas Rows Welcome, being moved by the high
flowing of the Tide, and the Whales, for all the tides that flows, that Bay,
comes (near) from thence.

The Master is not in health, the Boateswaine has not been Mr. sick
upon the vper deck these 2. or 3. days, all else are in health, thanks be
unto God: this morning the hoary frost hung in our Roapes.

This cool afternoon, the wind veered N. N. E. it blew at most but to
course and bonnet: our ship begins to make water, when she comes to be wrunge
with low sails. We were much troubled with stockadge of Coals, before we
came into the passage, and here again which Coals we brought for fiering,
if need should stand, the winds are variable here: this night was calm, this
easy gale S. E. brought us since last day 13. leagues N. W. 2. parts N.

We made way from last day 12. to this 12. 34. leagues by La. 61. d. 15. m.
was 90. fathomes; all this day with E. S. E. wind I stood N. E. by N. close
hailed, 13. leagues: this night I see the land, by my account about Carry
Swanns-Nest, from whence I departed the 21. of July, the morning was sleete,
the day after was fair, and frost. Now the Master and three men more are
down, God better it; I think if I had not come forth upon the Deck as I
did, we had run a shore upon this low land, I caused presently to tacke
about, and we stood off a gain into 70. fathomes, we had but 14. presently
after we were tackt.

We were in 62. degrees. 21. m. the land true North 6, miles Pembrooke 2 or 3.
leagues distance N. E. from Carry Swans-Nest with this S. E. wind I was feign
to plye it up for Seahorse point, hoping as before for change of Winds, until
then we must bite upon the Bowline, this Amplitude was 21. degrees. the Land does
make Bays, and Capes, lying one from another about N. E. it is still fair
weather, and we have carried both Top-sayles out since the 4. both day and
night.

By this we have plyde up another Cape, the deep of whose Bay, betwixt the
same: and Cape Pembroke, makes the E. side thereof lie near S. and by E. I
was in 7. fathom. in the Bay, after this Clear Sunne-rising, fell a short
fogge, the blowing away thereof, blew in both our Top-sayles; when I doubled
this Cape, the Land stretched to the N. in dutiful remembrance I named it Cape
Linsey; at some boords we gate but little, as I could perceive by the Land,
and yet I cannot discern any Tide to come against us; the Land lies now N. E.
last night were many Petty-dancers, we had in both Top-sayles, and stood off,
and on, between 20. and 80. fathomes, the Sea came high, and we purchased
nothing.

This fair mornings clear air blew hard, I cannot conjecture Thomas Button
does write, that the Flood does come from N. W. at Isle Nottingham, I am sure
there is another comes from S. E. at the same Isle, Those two meeting should
both set into the Bay of Hudson, and Button, and especially upon this W. side,
passing from Seahorse Point, by those Capes to Carry Swannes-Nest, should
strongly be forced here, being backed by those Winds, but I find no such thing,
for notwithstanding the Sea coming Compter from Hudsons Straights, and about
Manssils I Will, (from the E. Main) yet I gained, yea and in low sails, when
much Wind compells in my Top-sayles, which does show, that of the two, the
Tide does set with me, these cold mists, thicks, and drops, does make many men
droope, and those who formerly complained, are not willing to come above-decke.

This mornings fresh brief, shakt both my Bonnets off, and Sea to N. E.
stripped us into over-lowest sails, for all this in 48. hours by the Land, we
had gained about 6. leagues, by which it may be discerned what Tide goes here.

I stood off 19. leagues S. no ground at 80. I made way 20. leagues, in again,
N. N. E. every night here are Pett^-dancers and red fire flashes in the Air,
most fearful to behold; I Thomas Buttons Boat was at, where the small Island
lies there off, all this day I was in three courses, the Ship beat sore in
this Counter Sea, and no ground at 80. fathomes.

This night was all Rain, as the day before in part was sleet, at clock 2.
the Rain became Victor, which before was food to the Wind, that in his Calming
came S. and then I directed the Course N. N. W. thinking to have fight of my
last headland, and from thence to have gone along to Seahorse Point, in sight
of land as I might have done if the S. W. wind had continued, this clear Sun
shining Meridian, I was in 62. degrees. but the Horizon was not clear, this sight
of the warm^ Sun did marvellously cheer up our men, yet the weather is now
very Cold.

From Noone I stood away N. E. by E. with flowne Sheat, Po^nt Peregrine
the Wind veered again to S. E. o^en of the Bay betwixt Point Peregrine, for
so I call the last Head-land, having the Knowle thereon, I had from 70. to 100.
120. 80. and to 30. fathomes, this equally arbitrated, day and (...) with wet
hazle. I stood in two Top-sayles, over my Courses N. E. by E. 24. leagues.

This day morning, I met with Land, I took to be S. W Seahorse Point, and
this 120. fathomes was open upon the Bay, betwixt point Peregrine, and this
Land, where for anything yet known; there may be a through-let, this land is
of an indifferent height, descending by degrees to, the Set, this night was
thick wet fogge, here was ye put into this Bay, as might be suspected by the
S. E. Winds, which had blown so long before until now, I stood near to see,
if any thing of note were upon the Land, but coming near Ye, we Tacked to
Sea again.

This morning was slight fogge and rain, but after prayers Prayers are good.
the Sun shone, and thawed our men, and made them more limber, I was in 63.
degrees. 41. the Horizon was thick, but I think I was not far amiss, at past
12. it fell calm, the weather began to thick; I Anchored in 55. fathomes,
the Tide came from the W.

For so lay the Land, and I have boulted it upon a Bowlin, with more or less
Wind, ever since the 6. day, I rid at Anchor this night, and at past 1^. the
ebb Tide did not leave his course but only stacke from 7. to that hour, the
Wind at N. blew of the Land, and the Ship came not to Wind-road, I had duly
marked the Lead-line, and tried diverse times how the Tide did flow, and at
s^a^ke water, I found it to have slowed 20. foot, and this was 24. hours
before the conjunction, and as I do remember Mr. Baffia says, that on the
other side of this Point, it does flow a S. and by E. Moon, this night I did
sit up on purpose to be satisfied herein.

Henceforth I do write true course, variation and wreke allowed, the Compass
has near 26. degrees. hear, this night clock one, I was under Sail and Run
4. Leagues E. N. E. when I met with ye (but small as chafe) and at the
dawning of day, I did by this ye assure my self, that I was the length of
Seahorse Point to the E. For that this North wind had blown the mash't ye
from above the North side of the Point, and so it proved, this ye was both
small (and small of it) and thin, we Run through it without stay, or
abatement of Sail.

I stood away from hence close haled, E. N. E. 25. leagues 2. Mills Isle, so
named by Bilot, because of the Ice grinding against him like the grinding of a
Mill, and also of Salisburie, bearing S. E. and Mill I Will, from N. E. to N. N.
E. this day and night were hazie, the lands had much snow on them, our Sails
with wet fogge and frost were stiff as Vellome, standing this Milners Isle
along, in the night came off, either small mash't Ice, or else the shadow of
the Moon deceived me, to try whether I durst not but cast about to the West
again along the Isle; thinking here in this mild Channel to try the Tide,
that all obstacles being removed, the difference between Baffine, and Sir
Thomas Button, might now be reconciled, before I put to the N. W. from
Nottingham (in practice) as I was instructed, all night I stood to and again,
and found a good flood Tide, set to N. W. the Mr. was up this night, but was
not able to continue.

This morning I plyde it up to the West end of the Island, Hurins Through-let,
for that he upon the fore-yard conducted in the Ship; in the entrance of this
Harbor lies a Rock in the middle, which is covered at Tide; we borrowed
Hurins Through ^^^.
the sound, about 3 flight shot over, the Tide did flow about 4 fathomes, the
flood does set through it to the N. it lies NE. in a S. S. E. Moon, makes
full Sea.

This Island lies along E. S. Nottinghams I Will, lies from Salisbury, S. S. E.
the North Main N. W. all in sight at once, and yet it was none of the cleerest
days, there is 6. goings out and in, to this sound: 5. to the N. and but one
to the South.

I went on land this morning, to hasten our men to fill water, John Coatesworth
struck her through the neck with a Lance, that all the water about the boat
was bloody; the young and damme went down, and once again mounted, but after
we see them not; I have heard the Mors killers say, S^a* Mors.
that their skins are so tough, as no Lance will enter, it does yield so; and
therefore to kill them, they must be before them, to prick them upon the
nose, that she by casting up her head, may stretch her skin tought at her
breast, wherein the lance will enter with more facility (but this proved
otherwise)

After we had watered and come aboard, the flood bending with easy wind N.
N. W. we could not ouer-haile, to get forth the same way we came in, but
turned it to the N. westward with tide, and came out at the W. most sound,
where in the N. Channel I found it to come more then 3. hours Tide, after
full Sea on shore, and that very sharply, the next nights A sharp flood.
flood I plied up to the N. main.

This morning flood I plied up, by the N. main, and stopped E. and N. from the
same; I named it King Charles his Promontorie with another Cape to the N. the
land being there N. and Maria in a most bounden, The Kings Promontorie. 64.
degrees. 461. m.
and dutiful remembrance of my King and Queen, because if this prove a
passage, these are the most remarkable, and of greatest note, and most
eminency, drinking their health, with the young Princes; I had no observation
since the 14, but do account the Kings Promontorie to lie in 64. degrees. 46. min.
the Queens about 8. leagues distant N. from thence, there lies to the N. W.
of the Kings Cape, 3. Islands, passeable round about, Trinity Isles.
standing like an Equilaterall triangle, which I named Trinity Isles, in the
remembrance of the house of Deepeford Strand: A 4th Isle Cook, thinking of my
good friend and countenancer, Mr. Walter Cook, an assistant in that
Corporation.

This little recreation we had, at this Celebration, has much comforted our
men that were above, and something cheered those that were down; as the
Master, the Boate-swaine and his mate, the Gunner, Carpenter, Exposer Russell,
yet they seem to be the worse, since this certain trial of the tide to come
from S. E. with his constant flowing and ebbing, does make them conceive, that
this hard labor is in vain: Yet they say nothing to me, but that the N. W.
tide was mistaken; for the Masters of the Trinity House were very careful that
I should be well manned, so that I had not above 5. but were capable of an
account, and therefore the easier to be governed, and more helpefull to the
design, thus we ended the evening in feasting, and reposed until clock 12.
in the night, and then we weighed ankor again, Mr. Hurine and my self,
hoping by this fair means to jndure our sufferings, thereby to see the hopes
of the supposed passage this way: This ebb we held it up vnder-^aile (and
ankored not.)

This day we plide about the Queens Cape, the S. side The Queens Fore-land.
thereof is all Rocks, small Islands, shelues, and ouer-falls, from 45. fathoms
into 20. the land to the N. of the Queens Cape does lie N. E. this Cape does
lie in above 65. degrees. 13. min. of latitude, it has been showers of snow all
day; I ankored at Clock 5. in 30. sathomes; blew oaze, the ebb was come on
and therefore we came to a sharp bitter, before our ship staid, this Tide run
from the N. E. as the land wended 3. ^ / ^ miles an hour.

The night Tide I plide up N. E. 6. leagues, and stopped in 23. fathomes, clammy
oaze, 4. leagues from land, at first coming Counter-tyes.
until the flood be past, and then he retains his constant course; It is
now and then snowing.

I rid now in latitude about 65. 50. min. the day came on, and

I made way from 11. that I weighed anchor, to 5. 12. leagues N. E. by N. when
I raised a point, or head-land of good height, decfending to the Sea, or W.
wards, the Throughlet, or Bay on the Starbord (as I did coast the E. side) I
could not see the bottom, not of 7. or 8. leagues deep, I had 43. fathomes
oazie ground; from this Cape the land does trent to the S. ward of E. the
further I came to the N. wards, I have still darker nights, the Moon is
waineing, and it is could weather.

Coming near unto this Cape, I see many ouer-falls, and races in the Tides
face, being deeper, and with more breacke then heretofore, so as I caused an
ankor to be made ready, having then 20. fathomes, but before I came to the
first ouer-fall, I had but 7. 8. 10. differing as fast as the lead went down: I
anchored in 8. the Cape bore S. S. W. 2. leagues off, at the full Sea slack, I
could see betwixt us and the Cape, all broken grounds, and the ebb came on so
swiftly, as it was bent, before we could get up our anchor, thinking to fall
from those ouer-falls, and we were just at the S. end of those broken grounds,
the land stretched away S. E. from hence, it runs about Tides, for the broken
grounds were dry within us, before the Tides return.

To conclude, I do account this Cape to lie some mi. within Artick Cirkle.
the Artick Cirkle; it stretches E. wards as before, which in hazie weather,
as in the night is easy to discern in those parts, for the land lying hid in
snow, does cause a white reflexe; in the Air all night, as though it were
dawning or twilight, before and after sunset, this Cape I named my Lord
Westons Portland.

Having weighed ankor, I stood off N. by E. and N. N. E. 10. leagues (thinking
to stand with the W. side, that thereby,

Now you shall understand, that the ankor had Cadged a great while, when
coming to take (a sudaine) hold, broke the two Lashers of our stoppers, and
haled the Cable about the bitts, the tide taking the ship away E. 4. knots she
having driven an honre, or more before: In the morning the land bear S. by W.
from us, so that we though we had run through it the last nights ebb, when
it proved the former, as Lord Westous Portland, for in that bearing i seemed
like an Isleland, the deepenesse of the Bay, to the S. E. took away the sight
of any other land, for making account, that the ebb set W. standing as before,
10 leagues from the Cape, it should have been so, but finding it otherwise,
as we stood with ebb. S. W. we were drawn into the Bay on the S. side of
the Cape, where we espied the land to stretch, as it did the day before, with
the same for me which I drew then.

I knew that for certain it was the same Portland, we stood I returned.
along S. S. W. this ebb, and got not so much, with both ebbs and wind, by 2.
leagues as we lost the flood, betwixt them.

But ^ot the Sea-mans better understanding (of this) I conceive it may be made
appear by a familliar example, nearer our own doors, and especially by both
example, and demonstration: here as follows may better satisfy, then the
history it self can j^lus^erate.

The Example.
ADmit a ship to be nere the shore, to the N. W. of the point of Portland in
Dorset-shiere with easy S. S. W. gale, standing W. close haled, the Flood-tide
being coming in from Note Seam^n.
about the Berry, into the Bay of Lyme, falling S. E. into the Race, shall take
the said ship upon the Lee-bowe, and in despite carry her into the Race, at
the S. point of Portland, it setting E. where then she shall stem the same,
whose greater force (she not being able to ouer-haile) shall tacke her about
the said Point, and then setting E. N. E. and N. E. upon her wether bow, shall
carry her into the grass, now with same wind same tide, and same winding, she
shall bring the same land, W. S. W. or S. W. upon her; this same happened to
me at this new head-land, which being in the night, did not a little stumble
me to find out, until my remembrance questioned with my experience, to find
the cause, which otherwise we must have thought, that we raised a new land;
for which similie, as, other jnducements, to the furtherance of this entrance,
I have named the same fore-land my Lord Westons Portland.

Here follows the Demonstration.


The tides do abate, to morrow being quarter day, the last

This day we see the Sun but to no use, I drive along the coast with an easy
breath from N. (some snow fell.)

Standing along this coast, betwixt the Queens Cape, and Westens Portland. I
named another headland Cape Dorchester, remembering Captain Davis writeing of
Secretary Walsingham, who says that at his death, this Voyage was left
freindlesse, though I am sure this Noble Successor revived it again with his
best furtherance, and my encouragement, I came to this Cape at 6 this morning,
I had along the land 20 fathomes there are store of Sea Mors in this Sea; the
land does lie full of Snow, it freezeth, the very Ship side and steep tubbes,
the Capes as L. Westens Portland, and Cape Dorchester, are distant about 20
leagues, the land stretching to the S E. to the North of L. Westens Portland, I
named Fox his farthest, the deep Bay or Inlet to the S. betwixt the same and
Cape Dorchester; I named the North side Point Barte, that on the South browe
Carleton.

This Meridian I was in 65 d. 30 min. Cape Dorchester bore S, E. by E. 4
leagues, I have come back again from L. Westens Portland 26 leag. S, E, by S.
which is about 1 degrees. 5 min. and I was to the W. of it 12 min. added makes 1
degrees. 17 min. to 65 degrees. 30 min. makes 66 d. 47 min my furthest N. this day the
wind was all over, at clock 4. it came to the North, and having stopped the
flood tide going 2 knots and. I wayed and came along S, S, W. and S, W. by S.
as the land did cost, and fell into 40. 60. 78 fathomes; and then it being
night I did recount I was past the overfals, to S the Queens Forland, then I
directed the course to be S.

This morning Aurora blushed, as though she had ushered Mill I Will bore S, E. by
E. the North Main from the Kings Promontory, stretching E. away; Prince
Charles his Forland so named by Bilot, bearing E, N, E. and at the East^ide of
the said Forland, goes in a very fair sound, I named Variat. 29^* by
Amplitude.
^t the Prince his Cradle, an Island on the West, I named his Nurses of this
Cape 1 league. I had 120 fathomes, the Prince his Forland does lie 5 leagues S,
E. from the Kings Promontory yesterday the Carpenter laid down, having not
Henbans and Pettidancers, a common incident to these parts in clear nights.

This fair day, we came along the North Main, E, S, E Dorcet, and 3 leagues
to the East of that, is another I named Cape Cook, in due respect to Sir John
Cook Secretary of State, The Lords Comissioners.
with a deep Bay betwixt them, as it were half incircleing an Island remote
from the Main, I named it I Will Nicholas, the former names given, as Cape
Linsey, Cape Portland, Cape Dorcet, Cape Dorchester, Cape Cook, I gave in
duetifull remembrance, of those Lords Commissioners for the Admiraltie, whose
furtherance, and countenances, in my dispatch, for his Majesty's Pin^ace the
Charles. I had toward the accomplishment, of this design. I Will Nicholas, I
named it in remembrance of Master Edward Nicholus Secretary to the said Lords,
whom I have often troubled, I named those Capes, as the occasion in my
discovery offered it self.

The land to the East from I Will Nicholas along the North Main, lies in sight
North East by East and the same Main from Cape Dorcet, by Cape Cook lies
East by North about the former distance, at the end thereof there is no land to
be seen to the N. I directed the course from I Will Nicholas E, S, E.

This evening clock 8, I was distant as before from the I Will 8 leagues and
Salisbury was from me West by South one half Southerly 12 leagues, I lancht
away from hence (true Course, as all is set down) East South East.

This noone I had steered this course 4 watches, 25 leag. Salvage, Isles and
Prince Charles his Cape, upon the South Main, at this time the body of the
^orthe^most I Will bore from me N, N, E. one half N about 6 leagues, the night
was close, but fair weather, this night and last day we came by many small
Islands of Ice all the small chattered, which this strait laid so full of being
desolved, and gone, for we see none since we came from Sea Horse Point, this
day was some Snow God continue Charles, bore S, W. by S 1 / ^. S. about 12
leagues off. These Islands called Salvage Isles, lie N. W. from one greater
Island; I cannot say it to be the North Main, because it does bend to the
Northwards, both from the W. and E; and therefore, the W. end I take to be that
named the Queens Cape, at the E. end do lie 2 Islands, the one bigger the
other less. I named the one Sackfield, the other Crow, after Sir Sackfield
Crow late Treasurer to his Majesty's Navy; from the W. to the E. of this land
or Island is many shows of Sounds or Bays ragged and high; the land being
barren to sight.

From the last noone to this I made way 32 leagues nere Gods Mercy, and Salvage
Isles, all upon the North side of Fretum Hudson and nere those bearings of land,
my Latitude was 62 degrees 40 minutes.

From the last Meridian unto this, I made way 13 leagues Sackveile, N, E. by E,
2 / ^. E. 7 leagues off, at this present, I had sight of the land from
Resolution, and it bore from me from the N, N, E. to the E. about 9 or more
leag. This day and night was fair weather, the one by sight of the Sun, the
other by the Moon, although the wind came against our wills, to the S, E. by S.
with a frostie fog, turning up to the North land it was clear, but at Sea it
was thick, and thus plying up to the Eastward, came within 4 leagues, of this
land, which lay from East to N, N, E. and was the same, we drived along,
immured amongst the Ice; at our entrance inwards, we got little by plying with
contrary winds, and yet I durst not put into a Sound for harbor, of which we
might perceive some, as also Roade-steeds made by Islands, lying nere the Main,
our weather side was froze, as also all our ropes were a quarter of an inch
thick about.

The wind continued contrary, and I stood off into the Channel, and on again,
with frostie fogge, and very cold, but the wind blew not to above Course and
Bonnet, this day

With wind contrary I plied it, to the Eastwards, the Air was both thick and
clear, as I was near or far off the North Maine, sometime it blew to both
topsailes, and sometime was eafie wind; The evening 8. I stood to the S. ward,
being S. W. from the E. point of the N. land, stretching toward Resolution 4
leagues; I stood over until this day clock South* maine.
one, S. S. E. wreck and variation allowed 28 leag. at what time we thought we
had sight of the S. Maine, about S. W. by S. 5. leagues off, very high land.
This night was hazie, and blew to Course and Bonnet, coming between 2 Islands
of ice, the Sea had beat much, from off the weathermost, which lay floting
betwixt it, and that to Leeward; so as I loosed for one, and bore up for
another, for the space of the 60 part of one hour, and this was all the
trouble the ice put me unto, homeward bound.

This first day it blew less wind, but all the morning was Aquavita, Beer, as
well Oatemeale, Meal, Rice, Pease, and Beef, for salt fish our men can eat
none, nor do I hold it fit they should.

These 2 days were spent in plying to the E. sometimes in Fretum Hudson, which
upon a sudden change, we may happily expect.

From last day noon unto this day 12, I stood upon a bowling, Chidly, since
called Buttons Islands, E. 4 leagues from me, whereupon I stood to the North
because I could not carry it about the Cape until this day 5 in the morning,
and then tackt to the E. the Fretum Hudson, against me that the ship struck
in, the Spritsaile yard and bowlspright under water; I much fearing that the
springing of our yards or Ma^ts settled the topsailes so to ease them, that I
thought I did but double the Cape with much ado, it was high land, consisting
of dive^s islands, seeming as they were to be sailed betwixt, these were
covered with Snow, as also Resolution, whose Cape Warwick I see, bearing N.
and by W. at that instant after I had brought this Cape or Isles of Chidly W, S.
W. either the Tide or Current did set me fast to the Tide or Current.
S. ward: this day it froze so sore with the ships dipping in the Sea, that our
head, and wet tackling were Canded over with Icesicles, and many Snowie showers
in earnest were sent from Boreas his frozen forge; And for the hair of our
faces to be of his hoary color, had been no noveltie to us these 4. weeks.

I stood from the Cape bearing S. E. Southerly, variation

From thence until this 12 E. by S. 54 leagues, at what time Charles his
Waine, to the best advantage) fearing that if I had sprung any of my Masts, The
ships name.
yards or tackling, (or wrong the ship) it might have been supposed I had done
it upon purpose, that then if I had stood need of excuse, for fear or neglect,
I might have used that false color, blessed be the Almighty, who never fails
those that depend on him truly; this warmeth we find in the open Fretum
Hudson, we had been constrained back to have wintered in Hudsons Bay, or
elsewhere, for the most of us were ready to fall down with the rest, that
were down already.

After I was got clear, I had for some reasons thought to have home come by
the N. but the weakness of our persons, the long nights, the cold dark weather,
with the decayed Moon, altered my purpose, although the N. by Orkny, was the
shortest cut, and so nearer some refreshing, yet this being the warmer, and in
dark nights the more comfortable; I directed the course to fall with the Island
of Silly, having yet great care day and night, specially to look out for the
Ice, which I supposed See for Ice.
might be set from off Groenland, or out of Fretum Davis, but God be thanked we
see none, (after we came from the Cape.

The daily courses and distances homewards were follows, the wind as in the
Margent.
Our sick men are as yet able to do nothing, the Master is S. E.
laid down again; we had last night, and especially this morning a whole
storm, the afternoon it faired, and the wind came about with Sun to the
West, we carried both top sails a trip.

This day considering the great want I found of the Boat. John Coatesworth in
his room, for his diligence. This day was reasonable weather, we made way the
8 day, and this 56 leagues 2 miles E. S. E. Southerly.

This day was top sail Gale, last night the wind Southering, S. W.
made us hand them both, we made from last 12 to this 49 leagues E. S. E. S.
the wind veered S. ward but staid not.

The wind was fickle but we made way E. S. E. 34. leagues S. W.
and were in 57 d. 35. latitude.

The wind variable, our way S. E. by E. 27 leagues.

After midnight the wind came to S. E. with much rain, I S. E. S. W.
took in topsayles, and clued up the foresaile, forting the yard, Arms,
thigh; after clock 4, the wind favoring came to S. W. and I made way by
account as before 33 leagues South-East.

This day the Master came abroad again, and not since the S. W.
was 47 leag. S. E. by East.

Thick fog, and the way from last day to this 47 leagues W.
latitude.

The way was S. E. 8. d. E. wards. 36 leagues ^ / ^. Betwixt S. W. and W


The way 30 leagues E. S. E.

The way Veering, 37 S. E. 4 d. E. wards. The wind veering from S. W. to S. S.
E. and S. E. by*


The way 57 S. E. 5 d. E.

The way 17 ^ / ^ E. by N.

The way true course 26 E.

The way 28 ^ / ^ E. 4. d. N.

The way 33 E. S. E. latitude 51 d. 16. m.

The way 42 E.

The way 35 E. 4 d. N.

The way 14 E. 4. N. latitude 50 d. 9 min.

These courses were all true, variation allowed.

The way ^8 ^.

This day in the morning I had sight of Si^^i^, distant four leagues off.

The 31 blessed be Almighty God, I came into the Downs with all my men
recovered and sound, not having lost one Man* nor Boy, nor any manner of
Tackling, having been forth near 6 months, all glory be to GOD.

To whom this may concern.
Answer to uncertain rumors, or (a^^ersions) given forth against me,
concerning my return home from the Northwest this year (given at my
home-comming.)

AS wherefore I had not found the passage, and why come I home and did not
Winter, has he fulfilled his Commission, how far has he been, and those
that had more insight, inquired whether I had been North-West from I Will
Nottingham or no, with, Why did he not bring letters from Captain James, some
concluding that I have done nothing.

I did attempt the Discovery toward the Northwest from the Isles of Nottingham
and Sa^i^bury, about the midst of Julie, and had at that time proceeded
according to the letter of my Instruction, if I had not been prevented by
these following means, viz.

1 I had been immured with Ice, from the first day of my entering Fretum
Hudson, being the 23 day of June, until the 4 of July following, after which
time, I got clear, and coming unto Salisbury Isle, I lay fast again between
the South and the North Maine, about 7 days amongst ice, where being near the
said Isle I could easily discern the Tide come from the East, through Fretum
Hudson* and not from the Northwest.

2 Getting clear of the ice, I trent about the said Isle to the South, as also
Nottinghams, where sending the Boat on land, brought word that it had flowed so
much water, as in my Iournall is mentioned of, and that the water had more to
flow, and after that running off into 60 fathomes, and anchoring the Boat, I
found the Tide come from the South-East or through Fretum Hudson.

3 Standing along the said Isle to W. ward, until I brought the same, I mean
the W. end N. E. it began to be full of ice, in the W. Channel, betwixt
Nottingham and Shark Point, as before betwixt the North Maine and Salisbury, so
as the Master his Mate, and my self conclude, that there was no entering the
said Northwest* as yet, or until the ice was dissolved; and to that point, the
Master and Mate, wished me to write what I would concerning that impossibility
of passage until the ice were gone, and they would sign the same, promising
that they would be willing to see the same, before their going home, if no
passage proved elsewhere to be found.

Whereupon considering, that that Tide came not from the North-West for
certain, which is the absolute ground of my instructions, but from South-East,
disproved also by Master Bylot, (who was in the same Voyage and ship, with Sir
Thomas Button) saying that both he and all his Company, did plainly see the
Tide come from S. E. at Cape Comfort, and also the I Will Nottingham, averring
that they which took that account were mistaken, in the time, taking 8 a
clock for 10.

Now as it was not possible as yet to enter for ice, the wind being liberal I
directed the course toward Carry Swan^^^ Nest, hoping to follow the
instructions, in the search of B^ttons and Hudsons Bay, (of which there was as
great hopes as at the Northwest, and were there as many, and as strongly of
that opinion, as of the other) and come back again thither, by that time the
ice was dissolved, which I hoped would be about the fine of August or not at
all; if no passage proved in the said Bay to be had, but finding none* I
proceeded from that search, having first finished the search of the foresaid
Bay as follows in brief.

Being come out of Hudsons Bay, and Anchoring at Sharke Point, I found the Ebb
to go with good Current from the West, but the South-East flood Tide did
slack the same, when it came, but how it did flow and what water I cannot
report for want of my journall, it being now out off my hands, but I did find
the same flood-tide to answer the report of Master By^o^s journall writ by
Baffin; and I found some quantity of ice between Cape Pembroke, and Sharkes
Point undesolved at that time, being the foureteenth of September.

Having made those observations, I stood over (with North-winds) for Mill
I^land mentioned in my inst^uctions, but for no intent to coast the East Side,
for I had with that wind much ado to fetch the same, with bording and turning
under the South side of it, two Tides before I got into a Throughlet, at the
West end thereof, whereinto I put, and there found it to flow at least four
fathomes. The Tide running half Tide, and coming from South-East, as well
upon the North and Southside, as upon the South of Nottingham at my departure
from thence, whereupon I plied up with North-West winds every Tide, being
forced to stop the Ebb, nor could I recover the West side with those winds,
until I attained the Cape I have called Lord Westo^s Portland in the latitude
about 66 d. 47 m. where I found the Tide of flood to come still along as the
coast did lie, which was to coast from Northwest to North, to Northeast and to
East, and to Southeast the deepest water not above 30 fathomes (as I remember)
five leagues from land, the Sea slight and smooth with these winds, so as it is
easy to conjecture thereof, either ice or land was not far off, for we
found good store of undesolved ice at Sharke Point, whereupon I stood 10
leagues from ^ence (as I supposed) for the Westside which I could not attain,
and if I had continued this course, for the West side, with this wind, I must
have stopped the Ebbes, and Baffin writing of 130 fathomes deep there, the just
length of my small cable-shoat, I must have bid the ship to have stoopt for the
rest, and to have done the same by my biggest, I had not strength enough to
have wayed the same from ground again, likewise I had no reason to follow the
East finding it to Trent away South East from that Headland, which for
resemblance and ^^mile, to this of ours. I named L. Westons Portland, from
whence I do persuade my self, the Ebb does take his half course, through
those Islands of Cumberlands into ^retum `Davis, the blood cannot be great
(which conjecture may say should come through that straight, and meet ours at
Portland) being hindered by these foresaid Isles* where Davis says he met a
strange Tide from the South-West, may be the cause, which by that straightness
may retort the ^loods way.

But to the purpose, the winds were North-west, nor could I stay the change
thereof, for the most of my best men, as Master, Gunner, Carpenter, Boatswaine
his Mate, and one or two of the common men were down, the rest complaining of
cold pains, and no marvel, they having been over-toyled in the bottom of
Sir Thomas Buttons Bay, (and that undiscovered betwixt him and Hudson) with
watching and warding day and night, manning both Ship, Boat, and Pinnace,
both in Anchoring and Sailing (but especially at Lead, when in all the time of
my Sailing the said Bay, there was never one from keeping the same.

The weather had been for about 3 weeks before, nothing but Snow, Frost, and
sleet at best, our selves, ropes, and sails froaze, the Sun seldom to be
seen or once in five days, the nights 13 hours long, the Moon wayning, and
in conclusion, I was enforced either to seek for Harbor, or freeze to death
in the Sea.

Whereupon I sent Master Urine, to ask the Masters opinion, who brought unto
me, that he thought the Tides setting from S. E. almost round about to E. would
give good satisfaction (for this N. W. search, begun by a wrong report of the
Tides coming from thence) to the Adventurers, and that he held it fittest to
return. Yea, and the best also, as I thought, and homewards, and for good
cause as hereafter follows.

First, I refer it to the judgment of indifferent men, whether having
proceeded in these Discoveries, further then any other my Predecessors, in
less time, and at less charge, have closed up all the expected hopes upon the
W. side of Buttons Bay, from 64 circularly to 55, and on the Point from Swans
Nest, to Sharke Point, not perfectly discovered but now by me, and carried a
Tide, coming from South-East through Fretum Hudson, all along that East side
to 66 degrees 30 minutes, or thereabouts, (things not known heretofore) that I
should hazard the loss thereof to my Country, If I should have perished in
seeking an unknowen Harbor, in long nights and cold weather, with so many men
sick, who could not have recovered in the wintering, howsoever their helps
would have been wanting, in lying, or Barracadoing the ship from ice, for
wheresoever I had wintered, I must have h^led the ship high on shore, and
Barracadoe; as also in making my provisions of fresh victuals, and fuel. The
necessity of this, Sir Thomas Button is able to approve to his dear bought
experiment.

Well, if I had wintered it must have been with intent to make search, to the
North of Sir Tho. Roes Welcome, for in all the hopeful places else I was
denied, and there, and not far from thence, as about Vtultra, it is, for to
give a wise Gentleman his right (who perusing Sir Tho. Buttons journall about
that place, quoteth in the Margent) these words, I do not find it is proved a
Bay, this was suspected by him before, I came to that knowledge thereof, which
I have now, but to proceed, how should I be able to do this service, when the
winter would have consumed all the best of my comfortable stores, as strong
Beer, strong waters, sack, spice, fruit, Rice, Wheat meal, and of my
Surgery; and if no releife had been otherwise got from land, to have
lengthened the most of the provision, as Beef, Beer, and Fish.

Yet had I had no more then would have brought home the Ship, if my men had
stood, and if by their death, or relief of birds or Dear, I had store
remaining, yet I doubt the remaining stomachs, would have been too weak
(before the long winter there had left them) to have endured salt meat in the
Summer, so as the more victual the fewer hands for labor, and there would be
no sparing as I conceived by short allowance.

All these and many other sufferings endured, is but all for the next years
Search, about which I have showed, I had no reason to stay, to put so much to
hazard knowing what I had inquired from some, both of Sir Thomas Button, and
Mr. Hudsons men of their sufferings, and yet it was July, before they could get
well to sea to return home. And it does appear by Sir Thomas Buttons own
words, that he would have proceeded the next year if he had not been disabled.

For when, after my home coming, I told him he could not be certain of the
Tide he took at Notingham, was true; for that his boat was never on land, his
answer was (God a mercy for nothing) for I had not above 8 ^ound men; so this
does appear as I did co^ceive, before my return. I conclude that these things
in part known to me, in part imagined, that if I should not have made good use
thereof, having discovered so much as I had done, if I would thus have
suffered, I had bin well served, to have come home unpittied.

The benefit ensuing by my coming home this year.
INprimis my sick men are (God be glorified) all recovered. The account of my
service by my self and others brought home, I hope to the satisfying of my
King and Country, and more then ever was formerly done by any of my
predecessors by much, and at far less charge.

The ship and tackling all safe, and without any loss of either, which was not
done without great hazard, going from the Latit. of 55. in Hudsons Bay, into
the Articke circle toward the end of September.

There is also 6 Months pay and victuals saved at above 75 pounds per month,
amounting to the some of nere 450 pou^. and if they do not set forth the next
year, then there is 11 months pay and victuals saved, there is one Summers
time gained, for if this be distrusted or more required (I mean in discovery)
who is so pleased may set forth the beginning of May, and satisfy their desire
this next year, with ship newly repaired, newly manned with fresh men, and
untainted with skurvie, crampe or cold pains, but more and better able to
perform, the enterprise, then the Winterer can be.

To conclude I refer it to the judgment of reasonable discretion, whether it
may be held fit, that I should suffer, either by want of liberty, good reward
or imputation (as has been wished) until the return of Capt. James, who had
no intent as by his answer does appear, who when I inquired of him, why he
being so late had not attempted the N, W. as we both were instructed, answered
that Baffine satisfied in his ^ournall, that the Tide came from S, E. and that
himself had been no more N. then 64. the latit of Mill I Will, and then having
come over to the W. side of Sir Thomas Buttons Bay, but in ^9. and discovered
but from thence to 61 leag. E, S, E. from Port Nelson, where we met, having
this year neither bin at N, W. as before said, nor made any discovery, betwixt
the Southside of Hubber^^ Hope to 64. where the chiefest hope was (as I had
done) nor joined Hudson and Sir Thomas Button, it may be thought, he being a
Gentleman of quality, will not come until he have done as much as I being a
man of meaner Rank (in his conceit, for I have heard since that his ambition
has abused my worth and name) I told him my further intent, which was to
attempt the N, W. this year, all which to do he must stay the next year, as
my self would, if he had left me in the like case, nor can no unkindnesse be
laid to my charge for not bringing of letters from him, taking a fair farewell
of him, for he had time enough in two days to have writ, nor was I certain as
then of my return, which now I do thank God for. If this will satisfy to
stop the mouth of Rumor, which has already touched too much upon my deserts, I
shall be glad; otherwise, I wish they would suffer themselves to be judged by
performing the like labor.

These rumors like ill News rid poast, for they came to Court; insomuch as
coming by Boat with a Gentleman from Oatlands to London, where I had been to
deliver my Accounts to his Majesty, it pleased the Gentleman to say, that now
is Captain James in the Mare del Zur, and will come home by Cape Bon Sperance.

I was so confident that he could do no more for that year I did leave him,
and for the year to come, that I replied with three wishes or desires to my
good or ill.

The first was, that if Captain James did pass through and come home that
way, that I might be severely punished according as I did acknowledge I did
deserve.

The next was, that if at his home-comming, (for which I prayed unto Almighty
God,) that it did appear upon examination (equally balanced) that he had
done as much as I and no more, I might have reasonable Reward, for so I had
deserved.

The third, that if he had not done so much, that I might be rewarded with
what I had saved, to wit; Eleven months victual and pay, at 75. pounds per
Month, and according to the wearing and tearing of Cordage and Tackling that I
had saved, which he would spend.

Now since he is returned home, and has neither been through nor performed
so well as I by very much, I desire to be rewarded as before; and for that this
was rehearst before his home-comming, and when I did not know where he was.

That there is a Passage, has been proffered to be proved very Learnedly by
Sr Humphrey Gilbert Knight, four several ways, as follows.
THe first by Authority, alleging America to be that Island called by Plato
and others Atlantes, sailed unto by the Carthagineans, and that it is bound on
the East by the Atlanticke sea from which it is named, on the South by Magelan
straights, on the West by Mar del Zur, on the North it is severed from
Groenland by the Sea, through which the Passage does lie. And to confirm the
former Discovery, he brings in Money found by the Spaniards in the Gold mines
of America, having the stamp of Augustus Caesar, and since that time the
discontinuance has been, for that it has been swallowed up and overflowen
with water through a mighty Earthquake, so as the Navigation thereunto was
since that time lost, until the year 1492. that Columbus did after discover
the same, (although Malga Prince of Wales was before him) pretending that since
its appearance again, the Seas about it are made deeper, and the Northwest
made more easy to be sailed, confirming the Conclusion by the Cosmographers of
those modern times, especially Ortelius, who makes both Groenland and America
both Islands, dis-joyned by a great Sea from any part of Asia.

The second is by Reason; for sailing from Iseland to where this Freet should
be, its thought to be more deeper water, and that if America were not an
Island, it and Asia should participate of each others animals, or things of like
shape or condition as Men, Beasts, and others, of which there has ^in found in
either; also he alleges, the Seas natural and circular running from the
East ^o West. Following the di^rnall motion of Primum Mobile, it carrying all
inferior and moveable bodies; so as the Current from the East coming about
Cape Bona Spei, cannot be digested by the narrow strait of Magellane, must
needs be spe^^ about the North by some passage through this Fre^t, as also the
Current setting from forth the ^cythian Sea does spend it self in this Strait;
and also, that these Curre^ts could not have been maintained until this day,
had it no been for the same passage, that by its circular mot^on it might
meet again to maintain it self; ^ee concl^^des, that this current was found
in the Mare del zur by Barnard de la Torre sent to the Mollucas, by the vice
Roy of new Spain who sailed 750 leag. on the N. side of equatar, and met with
a current from N, E. which drove him back again to Tidore so by this motion
thus continued it does pass by the Mollucas, and thence again by Cape de Spei.

The third is by experience, Paulus Venetus, says he dwelt many The Strait of
Anian is wide Sea.
years in Cataia, affirms that he sailed 1500 miles upon the coast of Mangia
and Anian, toward the N. E. the Sea always open before him, both as far as
he went and as far as he could discern.

Also Francisco Vasques in his Voyage to Sierra Nevada, found a great Sea
wherein were certain ships laden with merchandise, on their proves were
pictures of certain birds called Acatrazy, A good Reason.
made of Gold and silver, they made signs that they were 30 days in coming
thither, those must come from Asia, for that in all the discovered America
there has not bin found any ships.

He proves also, that the Cosmographers of China have extended This makes our
Passage the shorter.
their Sea coast N. E. to 50 degrees. Latit. being the furthest that the Portingale
had knowledge of, and that they know no other but they might continue it
further.

The 4 by circumstance, he offers to prove by 3 brethren which sailed through
from Europe, as also by ceertaine Indians driven by t^mpest upon the coast of
Germany and out of Pliny through the abundance of moisture to the North those
and other Indians must come to the North-west, and here is as much as is to any
purpose in this.

Mr. Wills tries also to prove this first, by the 3 brethren out of Gemma
Friscius, themby a Port^^gal^ from Sir Martin Frobisher; Andreus Vrdaneta a
Friar of Mexico, which he prefers also who came out of the Del-zur into
Germany this way; this Friar (says he) was a great discoverer and his Card
was shown to many Gentlemen.

Again, from Sebastian Cabotta that the entrance hereof does lie nere the 318
Meridian betwixt 61 and 64 d. of Lat. and that it does continue that breadth 10
d. W. where it open eth S. erly more and more until it come under the tropic
of Cancer, and so runs into Mare del Zur, avouching this Strait to be at
least 100 English miles wider then Magelans, persuading still upon this
circuiler motion he demands from whence I pray you came that tide Sir Martin
Frobisher met when he had sailed no small way in his strait if there were an
Ismus of land, which since that time we find to be the 3 hower^ ebb which
camethrough the Islands of his strait out of Fretum Davis f^^ dit^ the East of
Anian.

And here is in effect what is alleged to prove this passage both by Sir
Humphrey Gilbert and Mr. Wills which though they make little for our purpose
yet they give us to know what they knew in former time for all these arguments
as I conceive are but Phylosophiall conjectures and seeing Sir Martin Frobisher
is the last spoke on as whence I pray you came that tide Sir Martin Frobrisher
found and as Mr. Wills requires.

Hear his own opinion.
That the curr^nt setting forth of that Bay of Mexico says he dothwash upon
the S, W. part of Iseland as he found in his 3 voyage a current carrying him
one point to the N. ward of his course, which current he thought to be
coutinued toward Norway and other the N, E. parts of Europe to the Scythian
Sea, and by the strengthening help of the Mare Gluciale from the E. rebounds
again from thence Westward by his natural reverbor^tion which will not be
resisted but must strike upon his object Groneland nor says he it is
unpossible that so great course of ^loods currents and so high swelling Tides
can be disgested here without u^burthenin themselves in some open Sea beyond
this place.

And here Sir Martin Frobisher was not amiss for we find that on the W. side
of this Meta incognita or as we call it Groneland, Mr. James Hall found the
tide to flow 3, and a half fadoms, which tide Bylot and Ba^^ine found to flow
less and less, as he p^st up to the bottom of his Bay; so as if he found
nor a new tide from the West, there was no hope of a Passage to Catai^, and so
it proved, for at the botto^e thereof it ^lowed but about two ^oote and proved
a Bay.

The like of Mr. Hudson who found the tide at the I Will of Gods Mercy, to flow 3
^ / ^. fath. and following of this Tide into this Bay it flowed but 2 foot, so
that it does appear here evidently that those great quantity of waters are in
part consumed with ^^owing and reflowing into 2 Bay^s.

The rema^nder may be spent along the coast of America from Cape Chidley
Southward, for Mr. John Knight before his death written, that ^^^ Tide came from
the N. and Oliver Brown after his death writes, the Current came from N. Capt.
Waymouth also says, the Ice drive from the North, and by this it is probable
that here is the period of this irregular Current.

And to conclude with these 10 Fathoms it flowed up and down, can be by no
other means then some such Receptacle there, to restrain this great Oceans
flood; as at Garnsey in Normandy, and in Severn^ betwixt England and Wales, the
Tide coming out of the Ocean about Ireland i^to the one, and from thence
between Silly and Vshant into the other, for want of issue being thus
affronted must perforce elivate his waters to those great heights until the
Floods retract.

We have now made visibly appear, the best Arguments these times did afford;
for believe me, if I could have picked out any better I would not have left
them forth, they being pertinent to the purpose I have in tax, yet hereby we
do not find any certainty thereof, as that the 3. Breth^^^ came through our
Freet, or that any Indians were cast upon the coast of Germany, or that a
Portingall who for his pains was banished into Afric^, or that if we will take
such commodity upon credit, you may have more of Andreas Vrdanatus, and I
think we may have also of a Spaniard that past it of late in King James his
time, and to bind up this rabble put to Johannes de fuco, the Greek Pylot.

Your Philosopher Plat^ nor Pliny, your Cosmographers of these modern times
Ortelius and Mercat^r does not all give us any thing that we can make
reasonable a^^urance or that we dare adventer upon, yet see how apt we are to
take those neighboring fables into belief, whereby we may deprive our selves
o^ our honor before we obtain it, for it may credibly be affirmed that this
Virgin is yet pure and untoucht either by Christian, Indian, or other nation
although many great dowries have been spent about her, and some brave Knights
have bid fair for her, yet it is not to be doubted but that the English have
imbrac^^ her about the middle. Only these make for our purpose, that the
^hinois extend their coast to the N. E* into 50 d. and know no other but that
they may continue it further.

The other is Paulus Venet^^ who sailed along the coast of Mangia from Cataia
toward the N, E. 1500 miles, this does argue that we have not straits or
passage to sa^le from so far W. as we have bin to the end of our Discovery into
Mare del Zur. Resting my weary invention, upon the staff of this opinion for a
while to be better satisfied concerning this Current, which the most Authors
insist so strongly upon, as makes me doubt if I were to follow thereby to find
the end of this Ded^l^s ^^pon.
his Laborinth, I should very hardly have any hopes of returning again the
same way, because they urge so vehemently upon this natural motion of the
Orbs, (so as in Magellans* Strait men are violently driven back) inferring
thereby, that all things included shall by consequence follow the same; so that
I should fight against the stream to Return the same way. But while I am thus
pondering out this doubt, its prompt into my mind, that if all things included
must follow, then should also the Earth walk in the same Revolution with his
neighbor the Sea, as also my self, and yet keep at the same distance so as I
am never the nearer, nor further for my purpose (by those Circular motions.)
But now my Judgment wishes me to stay nearer home, and let these wandering
travels of the thoughts past, for that my own experience is better able to
satisfy me then, all those Elimentary cogitations, and thus in few words, as
thou did carry a flood tide along with thee through Fretum Hudson to
Swans-Nest from the E. out of the Hyperborian, so have thou found another on
the W. side thereof, coming from the W. out of the Mare del zur, which shall
bring the home again with the like expedition whreby thou were carried forth.

The Probability.
We have observed in the former Iurnals of Sir Martin Fr^brisher, Davis,
Waymouth, Hall* Knight, and Mr. ^udson, that the current does set from the E.
side of Groneland over to the S, W, and W, and that nere the coast it sets W.
in, wherein we have floated all this time and thereby are brought to harbor in
Resolution where it flows 5 fathomes right up and down, and if the account
brought unto me by my men At least 7. fathom^ not far from thence.
may be believed that the flowing does far surmount this and that a E, S, E
Moon makes full Sea, it does also appear b^ Mr. Bylot that farther within
the straits as at Salvage I Will a S, E. Moon brings high water and that it
flowed ^quall water with Resolution, as also at the Isles of Gods Mercy by Mr.
H^dson Tide from S* ^.
it ^lowed above 4 fath. they being almost in the half way the distances being
nere 85 leag. the course W. N. W. 31 degrees. and differing in Latit. nere about 1
d. from Salvages to Mill I Will is 59 leag. W. by N. where it ^loweth nere 4 fath.
and a S, S, E. Moon, and in all those three channels in which I have been
viz. betwixt Sir Dudly Digs his I Will and Noti^ghams I Will 3, Cha^nels trya^l of
the tide.
betwixt that and Mill I Will, as also betwixt Mill I Will and the Kings Promontory,
in all these 3 I say for I have had sure trial, and so had no man before me,
that the tide of the flood does come from the S, E. running half tide and with
as swift a current as goes in the River of Thames, from Mill I Will to the S.
side of Sea Horse Point, they being distant 25 leag. I found the tide to flow,
as nere as I could take it by the lead line 20 Horse Point
foot, and a S. by E. Moon full Sea, the tide of ebb there holding his
course does but only slack for the time of flood about 4 hours which strong
tide in the two N. most channels betwixt Nottingham and the Kings Promo^tory by
all likelihood does conti^ue his pasiage between Cape Comfort on Portland.
the West, and my Lord Westons Portland on the East, returning their waters
into Fr^tum D^^is by the Isles of Cumberland. Cumberland I Will.


For the tide that comes on the South Channel, between Cape W^lstenholme and
Salisbury I Will, are consumed in strength and flowing, setting into Hudsons Bay,
between Swans nest, Swans-nest.
Sir Robert Mansils I Will, and Sir Dudley Digges, the most part of the latter
flood falling into Hudsons bay.

From Seahorse Point on the West to Caries Swans-nest, the distance is about
58 leagues, there it does flow but 6. foot in height, and but 4. hours in
time, (for Hudsons Bay has devoured the latter flood) so as here wants both
tide and time, to wit, from near 5. fathomes to 4. to near 4. to 20. foot,
but now to 6. foot; yet this flowing is continued according to the Moons
course, to wit, from E* S, E. to S, E. to S, S* E. to S, by E. to S, by W.
Which is an evident and assured token, that this Tide was fed and continued
from the Eastern Ocean, coming in betwixt Cape Farewell in Groynla^d, and the
North ma^^e of America, but now ended here into this great Bay, and ^bly
^etu^ned ba^ke again at the recourse of the tide. For in Mr. Hud^^^^ Voyage
the tide of flood (the ship setting on ground upon a Rock) was found to come
from the E. the ^^be from the W* which was no other, then the Tide and that
came in and set forth betwixt Cape Wolstenholme and Cape Digges.

It is now probable that this Tide of the S. Channel, coming from the East,
is not an end; and that Tide on the North is turned away* as I have found by
experience at Carry Swannes Nest.

Standing from hence 7^ leagues into the latitude of 64 A new blood.
10 m. which is to the North of that high land called Hopes Advan^'d, I found a
Tide setting from the North, as the land did their coast which Tide did flood
above 20 foot water, in the dead neepe, (as it was at my being there) and that
it did run half tide being full Sea about clock 11. So as about a W. S. W.
Moon makes full Sea, I was commanded by the letter of my instruction to make a
perfect Discovery either by Ship or Boat of all that undiscovered betwixt this
latitude and Port Nelson, and also that betwixt Port Nelson and Hudsons West
Bay, in which discovery I now came to find that I was out of my way, for
sailing from this land, Roes Welcome.
where I found this new Tide, which land I have named Sir The* Rows Welcome, it
being on the Northmost known part upon the West side of B^^^ons Bay, whereas
there it flowed so much water as before, and a W. S. W. Moon now coasting
along this West side upon a S. W. by S. true course as the land did lie about
18 leagues to an Island I named Br^^ke Cobham, there the best observation that I
could make, I found that it flowed a West by South Moon, and but 10 foot the
neepe Tide, but indeed I do distrust this account, as in my journall does
appear. Coasting from hence to Port Nelson, 130 leagues, I found it there to
flow a N. W. Moon, and in the neepe Tide, but 9 foot water, and the best
Spring Tide assisted by the wind brought in but 14 foot water* and after from
thence toward Hudsons West Bay, it flowed less water vet^unne with course,
for the time of full Sea went with Sun^e, so as it was easy to conjecture that
I went from the Tide which is especially to be incerted to make this Treatise
to be better understood, and how this tide does waste it self. Now it cannot
be denied but that this Tide that is moved according to the course of Tides,
with his constant ebbing and ^lowing so great a distance as about the West side
of this Bay, c^^cuting near betwixt Hudsons Bay, and Sir Thomas Roes W^lcome,
the distance of it near 253 leagues, having many rubbes and checkes by the way
amongst the islands and shoals, should be able to repair and recall again this
huge quantity of waters every 12 hours, if it were not fed and ^upplyed from
some great and waste Ocean, nor Waste Ocean.
if there prove to be a passage, as is most likely, as hereafter shall follow,
it cannot be conceived but that it must be so spacious, as cannot be visable
between land and land, and why may it not be that there is no straight but
that the Sea lies open to the North (as at C. Finmarke) after that the land
does trent Westward, as may be suspected by the want of ice, C Finmarke
that the land being far remote to the North or West, the South does keep it
self from frigitating by its continual cha^ing and adjectating, as we see by
the isles of far shotland, and Orkney standing in and near the same parallel
with our frozen, Fretum Hudson, where no Snow will lie for any time in Winter,
the cause may be by the Seas moving about them their circuits being so small as
the Seas breathing through the Tides and winds contiuuall chafing, about them
does evaporate some part of his warmenesse into the Air, whereby the frost is
restrained from the exercise of his power, for the Sea has a kind of
temporature betwixt too hot, and too cold, in the hot and cold Zones. it is
much to be hoped by this want of ice, that as at the North Cape of ^inmarke,
N* Cape*
(although I do assure me that this passage lies South-wards off that
parallel, and about the Articke Circle) that this Continent of the
Septentrionall part of America, may incline to the West Southward about this
latitude, as that of Europes does to the East, for by this flowing of water in
60 d. 10 m. near 4 fathomes (as at Resolution in the East) it cannot be far
to the winding of the land Westwards.

The next is to inquire from whence this Tide should come, for that is the way
to the passage, for it cannot be said to come from the East through Fretum
Hudson, for there need no more to disprove that then what went before, when
that Tide did end at Carry Swans Nest, in flowing but 6 foot and 4 hours, as
it does at the height, of all Rivers being far from the Sea.

Should it come from the North, then it should as well Current that land on the
East side of this Bay to Carry Swans Nest along that small distance of 40
leagues, if such a thing be at all or no, as upon the West side. For, 250
leagues of now known discovery setting from the North, it should divide equal
waters betwixt them, which is found to the contrary, and if such land does lie
40 leagues along from Swannes Nest Westward, then is there not above 30 more
for the brenth of the passage, from through whence this ride does come which I
should think were to narrow to let in and out so much water in the time
mentioned; to bring any flood on this side, now in handling, for at Swannes
Nest the flood set West, and the Ebb East; and if this Tide going West, were
met with more water, from thence, it must flow extraordinarily high at the Nest
(as in great Rivers in time of land-waters, the Sea flood meeting, puts up the
waters to such heights, as does enforce all their bounds) and rejected the
Tides course, which I found to be constant, for that I was there two floods one
ebb and a half.

How can it now be imagined but that the T^de does come from the West, and so
coasteth along the same side, as we may observe upon all Tides from what sea
soever they come, look upon what side they enter, they Current the same, and
so does this, for that called Vtultra, never proved Bay yet, and who has named
the same, might as well be deceived here as at other places by fogs, banks,
for if this part be protracted, I cannot see that there is any discovery made
at all on both sides (between Hubarts vain hope, and Swanne^ Nest) worth the
noting.

Therefore it must be confessed that this Tide does come from the West, so
inclining to that shore, and that it is a Tide has been proved, for I do not
think that there is any that will pretend inundating, impulsing, or ingulfing,
and that Instruction
it does proceed from some great Ocean, is without all contradiction; for
coming to this West side, I found great store of fish playing at the crust of
the water, and of great fish which is a maine argument, for there was Whales,
Sea-mors, Whales, Sea mors.
and Seals, of which there are infinite, which fish do not hive in Winter but
in deep Oceans, and that those Whales must come from the West, is certain,
for all the way from Cape Farewell, in all that distance of near 500 leagues;
we did not see one until I came there, which if there had been any lying so
long becalmed and amongst the ice, having light nights, we should have seen
them, for they are fish that affect to play and breath above the water.

The maine land was high within Sir Thomas Roes Welcome, as in all the
straights besides, with deep water to shore, whereas discovering Southwards,
it fell to be low land with shallow shore, at 11 fathoms, we could but see it
upon the hatches. This is much contrary to the Oceans, who are bounded with
high mountainous climes, steep Promontories, ragged Rocks, and inamoled
Islands, subsisting upon insearchable deepes, salt, and greene-coloured waters,
wherein live the great sishes.

Now let us compare this Tide with some others nearer our own home, with which
we are the most familiar; as to begin at the mouth of the River Thames, toward
which, two Tides resort.

And at the mouth thereof it flows a S. and N. Moon, at the S. Foreland, S*
S. E. in the Channel of the I Will of Wight, S. E. or S. E. by S. at Plimmouth E.
at the Gulf where the Ocean does first enter our Channel, E. N. E* this
reckoning goes against the Sun and Moon, yet this is the way to find the
Sea from whence the tide does come.

Likewise, along stthe North coast, there comes another tide to the said
River bringing the like flowing, and almost answerable at the same distance,
for from off Harwich, it flows S. S. E. at Yarmouth, S. E. at Laresnesse, E.
by N. at Whitby, N. E. at Barwick, N. N. E. at Backha^^nesse N. by E. in Orkney
N. Now we know that both those Tides, the one from the North, the other from
the West, came both out of the Western Ocean, and that from the North by the
lands trenting his channel, his Current from the West Eastwards, to S. E. as
at I ^mmouth to S. S. E. as at St. Lawrence W. to S. E. as at Hambrough, to S.
as at Hull to S. W. as at Harwich, and to W. into the said River of Thames.

So as here it is made manifest, that both Tides coming out As West in ^ y^
m^^^n of Thames.
of the Western Ocean E, does in the end go or set just against themselves, as
they set at their first coming from the Ocean. And therefore why we you not
think that the land to the West in this passage shall bend toward the South,
into Mare del Zur, as it does here trented within this Bay, S. W. by S. from
latitude 64. 1 / ^. to 59. but to draw these points to a head, it is said these
Tides met at the Ke^tish ^nocke, and turn their streams into Thames, it not
being able to retain them both the other parts are turned along the coast of
Flanders, Holland, Frisland, and Zutland, where those sides do end, by reason
of the Baltickes Seas bottom, it being far unto beside the strait Channels
between it and the sound. It is made now hear to appear, that he that will
seek the Ocean, as the Atlanticke to the West, or the Hiper^orian to the
North; for the mo^th of the River of Thames must follow the Tide, one thing is
to be observed, that it ^loweth more water upon this coast of England, then it
does upon the other coasts mentioned, the reason may be because England
stands nearer the West Sea.

Listen now again how places far remote from these See Master Hall.
our neighbor Channels does correspond with them as in Gr^enland it ^lowed E.
and W. Moon, and following the tide 1^0 leagues to Resolution, it flowed E. S.
E. as before, and so O^ Cape War^icke.
the ^id^ ^etting in with the Sun until it flowed S. by W. at Swa^^es Nest,
and there is lost in Hudsons Bay, so that it holds the same quality in the
process of time with the former from the West and it is apparent that to seek
the Ocean from the bottom of Rivers deep B^yes, or within lands, as the
M^diterrani^n, or the B^l^icke, we must find the flood tide, and follow it
down^ the hill of time, I mean proceeding against it, we shall shorten the
flood, as this day we shall Shorter flood.
be where it flows a S. Moon, which we account to be 12 of the clock, to
mor^ow we shall be where the same Tide flowed but 9. So that I being but
allowed what experience does make due unto me both near home and else where, I
make no doubt but to prove this passage.

It follows now to par^all^ll this supposed passage with those formerly
declared and certainly known, beginning at Port Nelson, where I had the
ex^ctest account of his flowing point, and climing the flood, for so he must
conceive that sayleth against Tide, found that it flowed there a South East
Moon at the Checks, where I was on land it flowed E. S. E. at B^gges his
Mathematickes East, at Brook Cobham E. be N. at Sir Thomas Roes Welcome, E. N.
E. Now it is prooved that the course time and change of this Tide does
correspond with all other Ocean Tides, it running also half Tide, (which is
the floods running still the way of s^ood, until it be half ^bbe on shore,
the ^bbe running likewi^e his course, in continuance until the water be half
flowed upon the shore) so as it cannot be said to want any joint or member of
an Oceans flood, but may rightly be termed a limme thereof.

It may be objected that although by all likely hood that is a passage, yet it
may prove to be a great distance to sail through, and how shall a man do to
know when he is through, that thereby he may direct his course Southward.

I answer it can be no great distance, for that the water does heighten in
Spring-Tydes, almost as much water at Sir Thomas Roes Welcome in the Spring
Tides, as at C. Warwick which stands in the edge of the Hyperborion Ocean,
and therefore how can this Tide come far from his sea, and bring constantly
as much water as it flows in any place that stands near the Oceans lips;
How can then the Mare del Zur, be far from hence, for the distance between
Cape Warwick and Swans Nest, is not above 200 leagues where this Tides quite
consumed, so at the like distance from Sir Thomas Roes Welcome, This new Tide
along that Bay holds the same until in the bottom thereof, it be consumed,
for I have heard from some, that if North winds does not enforce the Tides that
they do not flow above two foot in Hudson^ E. and W. Bay,

Me thinks there is three material proofs that makes better for our
purpose, for to answer and free this doubt, though all the rest of Sir
Humphrey Gilbert and Master Wills, makes for the passage.

The first is that the Cosmographers of China do extend their coasts to the N.
E. even to the 50 d. of latitude, and may do further for any thing they know.

The second is Paul^^ Venetus, that lived there, and sailed from Catta^ 1500
leagues North-East, and might have gone further for any land he see.

The 3. is Barnard la Tore, the 4, may be the ships found by Francis* Wasques
at Sierra Nevado not being of America but were a month in coming thither from
Asia, all making that this passage cannot be long, for that they of Asia extend
the breadth of their country so far to East.

Beside Francisco Gaul the Spanish Pylot reports of a high set of a Sea from
the Northward in his passage from Jap^n to Callyfornia, which he says,
continued howsoever the winds blew, this does show the Sea to be open to the
N. for the like may be observed upon our N. coast about Whitby where the
highest set of the Sea comes from the N, N, W. although that point blows
oblicke to the coast, yet there is more Sea therewith then the N. E. wind
brings, that blows opposite; the reason is, that the land to the N, N, W. is
the furthest remote, all open toward the Pole where these winds Eastwards off
N. do blow, but from Greeneland and the N. Cape at furthest, whose greatest
distance being not above 370 leagues must want space to raise his swelling
motion, but contrary at the entrance into our Channel from W. you shall have a
Between England and France.
continual set into Sleeve, which shows the distances of land to be far to
the W. and S. wards, and the like must be granted to this set of Francis Gauls,
and also by that current that set la Tore to Tidore, it must come out of a wide
Sea from the N, E.

And for knowing when thou art through, be assured thou shall have as great a
Sea from the del Zur as from the W. into our Sleeve, and the strength of tide
along the coast will leave thee, then thou shall not fear to direct thy course
to Tartaria Cataia, or Ja^on.

It may also be said that the Articke Circle is far N. and that it will be
frost, Icy and cold, and that there is but two months in the year to make
this trial, for in the rest it will not be nauigable.

I answer, that the Articke circle is not so far N. as the Cape of Finmarke
near in 73 d. where there is few or no Ice at any time, and thereby it is
Navigable at all times, but that there is no trading in winter; besides the
Sun having great declination South, it is all night. But what is this to the
Sea that is clear of Ice, the like may this be for any yet known, for after I
went from Swannes Nest, I see no ice to the N. nor do I think there was any
to the West, for the wind blowing from the air was as warm as in England in
the latter end of August, and the land had no snow thereon, although it be very
high land, and surely is inhabited, for else how could there have been so many
corpse inwalled at Sir Thomas Roes Welcome, yet passing from hence S. ward into
the bay it was colder, and yet warm enough.

And for those Ice which are engendered in this shallow sandy Bay is but as in
other places in Europe nere the same Latit. for those that have gone timely
into the Balticke Sea has found ice coming out of the Sound, and it is no
marvel to see the same froze over, which in those parts is as usual as to
have a noose, to have the shipping froze all the whole winter therein, and for
wagons to go in winter where Ships ^aile in Summer for many miles; for it is
well known that those Sandy Eastern low countries, as Sprutia, Denmark,
Frisland, and the Nether lands, are in winter subjected to violent frost, then
why should not we allow this low sandy country and Bay the like, being about
the same parallel, and a Bay as the Balticke is also from thence, which Latit.
where it freezeth so hard, is from 52 to 57d. but elevate the Pole to 73 d.
there at that time of winter in the same continent, there is no ice but that
you may sail Sea free into the coast of Russia, why should then this our
Western passage be denied of as good an opinion but that it may be Sea free as
well as theirs to sail into the Mare del Zur to Cathaia, being doubtless to
the Southward of that parallel; these a places of Europe and America, thus
answering one another both in quality and clime.

Go to Iseland as the Fishers do now in March the North part lying in the
Articke circle, and yet those Fishermen are not so troubled with Ice but that
they can sail about it, and for the ice they find there they conceive to be
engendered in the Bays, Rivers, and Inlets of Groneland, and not about the
Island nor in the Sea: It now appears as I said before that this country does
but comply with those countries Eastward, and the like may be expected by them
that is found by the other, nor can this channel be narrow, that in 6 points
of the compass being but 4 hours. of time, to wit, from Sir Thomas Roes Island
to Port Nelson, does send a flood and ebb it back again along the coast for
150 leag. known in so short time and this to accord with the Moon.

To remonstrate this by example* Admit I were sent out of Russia to discover a
land that I have heard lies far S, W. which supose to be, Atlantis or
America, now it must be thought that I know of noland to the W. of Europes
continent and therefore when I am come about the C. of Finmarke I direct my
course to the S. and W. wards as soon as the land will give me leave. For I
do know that it does trent so, and that the coast of Norway is bonded with an
Ocean, now bending toward to the W. of S. not knowing of great Britain I
direct my I course gainest as I conceive, imagining that at shall meet with no
land to the W. of Europe, but thinking thus to proceed I find the land to
meet me to the W. as I thought to have sailed to wit the coast of great
Britain, and there I find a tide going along the land to the S. ward, I
follow this coast hopeing it may cast about to the W. and as I proceed so does
this tide keeping the height of his water still, so by this ebbing and flowing,
course and Latit. I do assure it to my self that it cannot be any part of the
maine continent of Europe, nor adjoining thereunto, and thus persuing to the S.
in long distance I find that this tide does still continue his height of Calis
and Dover.
water so by that I speed on with more comfort, at length I come betwixt a
maine lands, and doubting some alteration or imbayment, I keep still the W.
side for thereby I must obtain my intent if at all, but now when I come to
make trial of my tide I find, it has left me, which to fore convayed me many
leag* along this unknown coast, and now my tide of flood comes from the W,
ward and against me as I should ^ayle, shall I not then assure my self that in
pursuing against this tide that it will bring me into a new Ocean by which I
shall obtain my desire which is the Atlanticke Sea, yea and I shall find it
so, for as that tide which came along with me, from the N. out of the Sea which
I have failed from, will direct me back again into the same Sea, so shall this
new tide from the W. in following his ebb, bring me into his Ocean or the
Atlantic which I desire.

Even so may this tide of mine in persuing his ebb from the place where I
found it first bring me into the Mare a^l Zur.

Again a Comparison fained to be sailed into a Sea through our own Kingdom
from the East Sea to the West.
ADmit I come from Hambrough or the Eastern Sea to expediate a Voyage through
a great Ocean in a Country I have heard to lie far to the W. directing my
course W. ward I met with land sooner then I did expect in coasting this land
W. wards, I find an entrance which I follow for by my account I am but newly
come to Sea and must be far short of my intent, but following this entrance I
find there is ebbing and flowing which I pursue and find it to be a River,
which conceive to be the river of Thames, I go therein with the tide without
debar or hinderance, yet finding the further up that I do proceed the tide
heightneth less water and runeth less time, so as knowing I go from the
East, W. ward as I desire, yet I do not know what will become of this hazard,
but not knowing how to mend my self I must now play the game this way, at
length I come to the head of this river, which conceive to be at Kingston,
there I find this tide which I followed out of the Eastern Sea, to fall into
a spacious and large Mare or Ponte which Mare I enter. Now it must be
conceived, that all the Country between Kingston and Severn near Bristow as
part of Surry part of Hampshire, Wiltshire, Glostershire, Oxford, Buckingham
and part of Middlesex.

To be ingulfed and turned into an inland Sea round about, being entered in this
Ponte I begin to circuit about by the S, S, W. and comes to W. side where I
find an Inlet to wit the river In Glostershire.
at Barkly coming from the W. Sea out of Severne ebbing and flowing into the
Mare as that did on the E. side by which I entered, now I intend to venture into
this ebbing and flowing of waters from the W. and thus persisting against the
tide by observation, as yesterday it flowed a W. Moon, this day it flowed a W.
by N. Moon keeping this constant flux and refluxe from the W. Eastward so as
sailing I shorten the tide and is come in short distance, to the place where it
flowed S. W. the same tide I took at my entering this river or inset to flow W.
I may now assure my self that those tide streams are supported by waters from
an Ocean which by pursuit I find to be the Atlanticke,

It is to be observed in discoveries, as is found in other places by
experience, that in sailing against the flood-tide we shorten the time of
flowing, and in sailing therewith we lengthen the same.

This comparison stands thus.
HAmbrough is England, from whence we sail to Fretum Hudson, which here is
conceived to be the Thames, whose head as Kingston, is Carry Swans Nest, the
Country, Pont or Mar, so ingulfed is Hudsons or Buttons Bay, the W. Tide
coming out of the Ocean at Severne is that new Tide I found at Sir Thomas Roes
I Will, which pursued will bring me into the Mare del Zur.

Let it not now be said, that there is no passage by the N, W into India, for
that the best Cosmographers, those learned in the Mathematickes and all Arts,
have in former time consented that America is an Island and separated from any
other continent, by which great Princes have been persuaded to adventure and
countenance with great Sums, (nor were their hopes mistaken, although as yet
God has not appointed the time) as also the Nobility, Gentry, and Merchants,
when in the Voyage of Sir Thomas Button, were about 160 adventurers.

My comfort is, that the quantity of Whales and Sea Mors that place affords
(although it may be thought that I did not see the 100 part) will (when Whale
oil comes into request) drive the Merchant to send the Mariner to visit the
I Will of Brook Cobham for the Whale, and with their shallops range N, wards to
search for Unicorn horn, Mors teeth, and Whalefinne, to come where Sir Tho:
Roe will bid them Welcome, and by these inticements they will be persuaded to
inquire after this tide, and at length bring home the good news (which I
expect) of this so long sought for.

For my part, I have now washed the Black-moore these five years, having yet
received neither Sallery, wages or reward; Labored in vain.
except what some few Gentlemen has, I know not whether in courtesy or charity
bestowed upon me having to fore had my means taken from me in the time of
wars, betwixt France, Spain and us, so as I am utterly unable to prosecute
the same though I wish well thereto, knowing it is now to be done at very small
charge.

And this is more for their great comfort, that it has pleased almighty God of
his great mercy, always so to preserve those employed this way to search in
this discovery, that no ship ever perished, but howsoever they suffered, the
account was brought home, and we made acquainted with their actions; all
which, we must acknowledge to be the providence of Almighty God, who has thus
preserved those seeds we have ^owne and will do still until the time come
which he has appointed, to send some happy man to pluck the fruit. Here
lye^h the way to ^^lcos, and be that finds the same, b^^^g home the Go^ae^
F^ecce.

The fifth of the known (and supposed passages) to that rich I^^ies, is by the
Pole it self, yet never attempted; the gainest and most hopeful of those
three, yet unknown, and the shortest of them all as from our N. parts of
Scotlands Isles, from the latit. of 60 d. to the Pole it self, is but 600 leag.
of which it has been sailed to the 82 d. by Captain Thomas Marmaduke of
Hull, his furthest visible mark to the N. From thence was certain Islands he
named Sheffields Or^ades, in duty to his most noble favourer in his Northern
designs, was Edmond Lord Sheffield, now Earl of Mulgrave, and at that time
Lord President of the North, by whose great assistance, charge, and
countenance, with the Merchants of the same Corporation, he was still set forth.

By which means in his discoveries N. ward toward the Pole, it was his good
fortune to enter into a harbor in Greenland, where he found one Jonas Poole,
and Nicholas Woodcocke with others in a ship of London distressed, for that a
fall of an Ice had sunk their Ship. Which subjects, with their oils,
Whale*finnes, and Morsteeth, who must have miserably perished there if he had
not brought them home, to this noble Lords perpetual honor and the future
encouragement of that trade, now the most rich and safest that we have. And
this is the best by prescription or any other claim the City of York and the
Corporation of Kingston upon Hull can plead for the continuance of their Trade
thither; I make no doubt, but that they do acknowledge his Lordship for the
same with all thankfulness. This Greeneland was first seen by Mr. Hudson, who
was countenanced by Sir John Wolstenholme, in his N E. coursaries.

There may be something objected against this passage. which may with ease be
answered; and this Treatise better supplied, but this I leave to Capt.
Goodlade, whose great experience this way, and to the E. ward thereof, is the
best able to supply or confute, if he be pleased so to show himself.

From the Pole to the known Coast of China in Asia, latit. 50 d. is but 800
leag. more, and yet the most Cosmographers have extended the land of Tartaria
and Scythia N. ward, to the 60. 70. and 80 Parralell, Septentrionall latitude,
and on the America side, is discovered to the 50d. So that the greatest
distance is but 1400 leag. nearer by one third part then any other of the S. My
pen and self now is grown weary, and hoping some other brave Spirit will
enter the Lists, and attempt the Enterprise, I rest.

FINIS.
To the Worpfull, the Masters, Wardens, and Assistants of the Trinity-Houses,
but especially to these of Dedford-Strand, and Kingstone upon Hull, with their
whole CORPORATIONS.
WORSHIPFVLL GENTLEMEN,
ANd Foster Fathers of my Academie, I present you here, neither with Iasons
voyage to Colcos, nor the Golden fleece as yet, but with the best of my
endeavors to the North-west, which we poor Discoverers are so ^eered about,
(with so much Philosophy) as though these Voyages have spent so much time and
treasure as it is not able to redeem it self by being guld with the false.
Sea cards or fabulous reports of strangers, for no Nation in the World knows
so much of this as your selves, nor need we neither the arguments of
Philosophy to examine so much variety, and that so various as the Schoolmen
find out, nor (for their inquisitions or disquisitions) their Mr. Aristotle
did not know, what time since his has brought forth, and since him we have
almost found out the reason for the Tide, about which some of them have writ he
drowned himself because he could not, nor you need not got to the N. W.
passage to seek the Philosophers-stone, having one of your own by which you
have angled, levelled, and brigged over the Ocean, from this Monarch to the
furthest East and West, the touch thereof has made you attended home (as the
shadow the substance) with the Tawny Peruian and the Sunne-burnt Black-moore
Affricans Gold, the rich Sparkling Diamond, the night shining Carbunckle, the
Physical Beazer, the Emerald, Sapphire, and the Orient Indian Pearl, adorning
the Lilly necks of the most dain^iest Ladies, with other of pleasure and price;
besides the Drugges, Vigitables, Simples and Balsoms for health; and all these
and far more ^emm^ of wealth and treasure has the virtue of your Adamant
stone exported hither, to the enriching and honoring of our Nation.

I pray that when this abortive shall come to your view, that you pass over
its deformity and imperfections (which nature in have stamped it into, in which
it still remains, both for want of means and Art) and your private
admonition shall cause me amend it at the next Edition, for with this I am glad
I have not overcharged the press (as fearing) the worst part of which is
already befal^e (in Erataes) for which if I should excuse my self, I know both
the Compositor, and the Correcter will witness with me in taking the fault
upon themselves, I have done my endeavor to correct the most palpable, as
mistaking words or nonsense, which not being acquainted with our Sea terms
they might easily commit, and for the faults in letters, I know your
Arithmetic can make whole numbers of Fractions, if these faults had been
committed by my self in the Copy I might with some reason have pleaded an
excuse, being no Scholar and having had no help, which I did kn^w was very
needful, but was not able to buy it, and I was told it would not be had for
naught, especially by the Scholar that was acquainted with the language of the
Sea; therefore now I feel the want of Mr. Hackluit, and so I doubt will others
in time to come, who for the good of his Country stored those Journals at his
own charge.

Whereupon not knowing otherwise how to proceed, I was enforced with such
Tackling, Cordage, and Raftage, as I had, to Rigge and Tackle this ship my
self. I hope she will sail the better in this Trimm^, if you be pleased to
conduct her, which I doubt not but you will, having heretofore observed your
favors in cherishing and preferring young Seamen, with your charity (...)
others, not only in your Almsdeeds to the Fatherless and Orphans, but your
continual maintinance with all necessaries to aged poor Widows and decayed
Mariners, your compassion and relief to the distressed ship-wrackt-Seamen
far from home, and others, your privilege to ^ai^^ed Men, with the right in
Justice you dot to those that are not able to wage law for the same, deserves
to be enrolled amongst the greatest acts of Christian charity.

And for that your helpefull care toward my furnishing (...) with all
materials for this service, your loving aspects and bounty since my home
coming, has obliged me to acknowledge your favors, with thanks, I desire
your kind acceptance, and the rather because it is the Present of your younger
Brother,

Lvke Fox

Resensui librum hunc, cui titulus est [ Northwest Foxe] in quo nihil reperio
quo minus cum utilitate publica Imprimatur, modo intra sex menses proxime
sequentes typis mandetur.

December. 1. 1634. Sa. Baker R. P. D. Episcopo Londinensi Cap. domest.

Errata.
Page Li For Read. 259 15 South Sea. 60. 10. 64. 10. 261 36 St. Lowrence
Laresnesse. 3^ Hull Soale. Hambro Haisbrough. 2^2 2 why we why may we not. 4
tre^ted tre^t. 264 38 any yet any thing yet. 266 10 gainest, at gainest. at
shall at I shall.


