A COPY OF THE SVBMISSION, WHICH THOSE OF THE REFORMED Religion in France
requested the Viscount of Doncaster, Ambassador extraordinary from his
Majesty of Great Britain, to present in their behalf to the King their
Sovereign.

Printed An. Dom. 1621.

A COPY OF THE SVBMISSION, WHICH THOSE OF THE Reformed Religion in France
requested the Viscount of Doncaster, Ambassador extraordinary from his
Majesty of Great Britain, to present in their behalf to the King their
Sovereign.
SIR,
WE, your Majesty's most humble, most faithful, and most obedient subjects,
who in your kingdoms, and sovereignty of Bearn, make profession of the
Reformed Religion, do in all humility remonstrate to your Majesty, that as
we never affected any thing more then to be preserved in the honor of your
favor, (which we have promised our selves in regard of our constant loyalty,
always witnessed by us and ours, toward the good of your service, and the
greatness and strength of your kingdoms) so also could never any thing prove
more to our coffeehouse, then to see our selves thereof deprived. In which
regard having recourse to your goodness and royal clemency, we beseech your
Majesty, that, with return of peace to your estate, you will be pleased to
restore us to your favor, and repossesse us of the benefit of the Edicts,
declarations, graces and grants affoorded us both by your Majesty and the
deceased King Henry the Great, of immortal memory; for which we protest and
vow never to depart from our most entire subjection, faith and obedience. And
if your Majesty has taken offense at some of our actions, we humbly beseech
you to believe that they were against our intention; which was never otherwise
then to render all true faithfulness, obedience and respect unto your
Majesty; and that what we have done, has been by extreme and urgent
necessity; which you may be pleased not to impute to us as a crime, but rather
to remit and pardon all, wherein we may have displeased your Majesty. For
these respects (Sir) we in all humility beseech you to grant us a safe
conduct, as well for such as it shall be needful to send to the Provinces and
principal persons of our Religion, as to your Majesty, to the end that
prostrating our selves at your feet, we may confirm the true protestations of
our sound fidelity, obedience and subjection, and obtain of your clemency
and goodness whatsoever shall be necessary for the quiet and safety of our
Churches, under the benefit of your Majesty's Edicts. And we shall be bound to
iterate our continual and most fervent prayers to God for the prosperity of
your Royal person, and conservation of your estate.


