A Caveat for France, upon the present evils that it now suffers. Together
with the remedies necessary for the same.

Translated out of French into English by E. Aggas.

LONDON Jmprinted by John Wolf. 1588.

A warning unto France concerning her present calamities: together with the
remedies necessary for the same.
THese three years and more has France ben tormented with this war. The wiser
sort did in their judgments foresee the mishaps, and the foolish by the
feeling thereof are waxen wise. As well the one as the other that do endure
them do complain both of the tediousness of the mischief, and of the
slackenesse of the remedy: yea and which is more, weenning to have succor at
the Phisicians hand, they find him entangled in the same disease, and so a
patient himself. It is expedient (as we see in this extremity) that all good
Frenchmen should gather their wits together, that the patient should help the
Phisician, yea and in some sort become a Physician himself: That he should (I
say) for the full atteyning to the cure enter into perfect notice, not so much
of the disease which he does but too much feel, as of the true cause that
breeds it. But we can not judge either better or more soundly than if we
ascend to the original of these troubles, and thence as it were with a full
view set before the eyes of our minds all that have sense happened as well on
the one side as on the other.

Truly it is evident, and all the world knows, that in the year 1585. about
the month of March when the league began to stir, this realm was in
tolerable estate, the king imagined only how to establish peace more and
more: his subjects gathered the fruits thereof under his obedience: his
Majesty's mind was busied, not so much about the consolidating of the wounds
of his realm, which the peace had already reduced into scarres, as to restore
it into the former dignity, force and strength. The borderers began already
in part to respect her, and in part to fear her: and undoubtedly a few such
years would have reduced our France into a state rather to be enueied than
envious of the former.

The league which had long bin practicing against the state of this realm did
suddenly and to no purpose break off the happy course that we had taken,
whereof the house of Guize procured themselves to be termed Captains and
leaders. A foreign house, neither was it meet (for it had been against
nature) that France should be molested or overthrown by other then strangers,
yea it seems almost fatal that these men should do it, whose fathers and
uncles had stirred up all the former mischieues in this Realm.

It may be that some bitter injury might hereafter have brought the subject
out of his right byas and wrongfully armed him against his Prince or country:
or a man's desperate estate, who willingly would amend himself with others
loss. But these are vehement passions which do not always harken unto reason:
howbeit in this case that was no such matter. For those of this house held and
did possess the greatest benefits and chief dignities of this realm, and all
this through the bounty of our kings: and as for favor, authority and
credit about his majesty, they had more than the princes of his blood, how
catholics soever, who nevertheless did in silence and patience bear
therewith, preferring, as always they have done, the least tear or grief of
the people before their own just sorrows. These men (as all the world know)
did enjoy their souls in liberty, their honors in authority, their lives in
safety, and their goods in tranquillity. All causes that might breed
coffeehouse were far from them: and all such as may make a subject
content, they had: yea they had them in such measure that they wanted no more,
but to reign: and indeed (to say the truth) that also rather in title than in
power or effect.

Hereupon who so list well to consider what might move them to stir up our
estate which was in quiet, or not to be able to bear their own which was as
good as might be wished, shall be forced in these men to confess an
unbridled and infinite ambition which cannot be tamed by any apprehension of
the overthrow of a state, together with the extreme misery and calamity of so
many millions whom it entangleth, which likewise could never be limited with
so much authority, greatness, and honor, sufficient (as they were well
divided) to content all France.

It was (as it was very well noted even at that time) correspondent to the
ancient purpose of their predecessors who made themselves Charlemagnes heirs,
so to ground a pretense to this realm, and perceiving that they could find no
hope to come to their purpose so long as it continued whole, endeavored by the
continuation of the troubles, to scatter and destroy it. And indeed these men
a year or two before procured a book to be printed purposely, which (though
falsely) proved them to be descended from thence, and so consequently true
heirs, and our kings usurpers of the crown, for the which the auctor made
amends honorable in the kings full counsel. But when they see the Duke of
Aniou deceased, the king to have no children, and the king of Navarre, chief
Prince of the blood, through his religion (as they thought) estranged from the
peoples favor, they imagined the way to be then open to their extreme
ambition, and the season to grow fit for the hatching of their driftes. Then
began they afresh to kindle their practices and conuenticles to search out
all malcontentes, whether justly or wrongfully, to treat with the king of
Spain, and such other potentates as envied our realm, whereof in short space
sprung up this curssed war of the League, which since has kindled and
consumed our poor estate. Then by their public protestation they required the
king to name his heir, and the same a catholic prince, namely, the Cardinal
of Bourbon, so to exclude the king of Navarre. This did they, because that they
knew that they could not climb so high but by degrees, and they would either
govern or rule in France under the wings of the said Cardinal: and now
imagine you what a presupposition this was, had there been no deceit, that the
said lord Cardinal a prince already very old, should survive our king being
in the flower of his age. The king of Navarre, whither by his right or by his
virtue stopped their passage: hereupon they declare him to be an heretic, and
so do pretend him to be deprived of all the rights belonging to the blood of
France: but note that the king of Navarre always protested that he submitted
himself to a free counsel, offering thereby to be instructed, and protesting
that until then he could not be deemed an heretic. They do so fear least he
should return into the Romish church, and thereby their practices be
overthrown, that whereas were they moved by charity or religion, they should
open him the way, they do now shut the gate against him, denouncing him to be a
relaps, and fallen again into heresy, and so consequently incapeable to hold
any dignity, much less to reign in the Church. Also whereas he had
pertinently answered, that whosoever is not first denounced an heretic can not
be declared a relaps: that having submitted himself to a counsel, he can
not, but by the same, be condemned: moreover, that whatsoever he did being
forced by extremity can not be so imputed unto him as to make him a relaps.

Contarie to all these so peremptory reasons: contrary to all the doctors, and
contrary to all the Cannons of the Church, they do stir up Pope Sixtus
bull, the Popes (I say) whom they have circumuented, as himself has
confessed, who without any formalitie, and contrary to all form does at
once declare the said lord king and the late lord Prince, uncondemned,
unheard, yea uncalled, to be heretics, relapsed, and excommunicate, and so
fallen from all rightes both present and to come. A bull whereby they pretend
to have a free judgment to exclude these princes, who stopped them in the
midde way: but indeed such a one as contrariwise is already preiudged both by
the kings and parliaments of this realm, who have condemned and openly
rejected it, as erring both in matter and form.

Thus are they rid, as they think, of these two the nearest princes, but
now there rest the Catholic princes of Bourbon, against whom these
exceptions cannot be opposed: for as for the Cardinal of Bourbon, it is enough
for them that he live so long, as for the nourishing of their authority they
shall stand in need of him, as being past age and danger: thus think they to
get them children: Then against the Catholic princes descended of the late
lord prince of Conde, they arm themselves with another exception brought into
consequence out of the bull: That is, that the said lord prince their father
died an heretic denounced, whereby he had forfaited all his rights and
actions both for himself and his: neither let the duke of Montpensier or his
posterity ween to escape, though being engendered of a father as devout a
Catholic prince as ever was, for having likewise followed their vagaries in
this point. For they of the league do think by their principles to have well
enough provided for them: in that they write that the crown is theirs before
either Merouee, Charlemaine, or Capet: This is then long before Saint Jews,
from whom they are descended: when by their books, they pretend that beyond
the tenth degree, there is no longer succession neither in heritage, fees nor
kingdoms, and so consequently we must have recourse to a new election: for
all the rest of the house of Bourbon are far beyond that: When to the end to
raise up the foundations of this estate they do by express books call into
doubt the Salike law, whereby it has so many ages defended it self from
strangers, to the end that after this no alteration may seem strange.

These were the discourses which they published in their writings scattered
among the people at the beginning of this war, whereby their drifts did
evidently appear to all wise men. The king had no children, neither was there
any great hope, thought they, that ever he should get any. The Cardinal of
Bourbon was unmarried, and under his shadow their power might serve against the
rest of the princes. The king of Navarre, and late prince of Conde, were
denounced heretics: the Lords princes of Contie, Cardinal of Vendosme and
Earl of Soissons descended of a prince that fancied heresy, and so by virtue
of the bull, entangled in the like degradation: The duke of Montpensier and
princes of Ombes very far off, yea beyond the tenth degree, which (said
they) stopped up their gate to the succession, and opened another to the
election of a new prince. Thus you see, they have rid and swept the way to
come to the crown, neither is there any other question but to employ labor
and force whereby to bring the state violently into their faculty.

The enterprise was high and difficult: for the Frenchmans nature still draws
to the right: It was a hard matter thus to exclude a prince in respect of some
diversity in religion, yea such a one as craves to be instructed in a
counsel: also the house of Bourbon has so well these many ages deserved of
the state, and that is so well imprinted in their minds, and as it were
incorporate into all good Frenchmen, that they were in great doubt, lest the
wrong that should be done thereto would be very sensible to all the degrees
in France. It was therefore necessary for them to be assisted by some
foreign, rich and mighty prince, who^ to that end they were to call into part.
Whereupon, before the blow they practiced with the king of Spain: they got
great sums of money from him, which they distributed among their partakers: they
promised as a pledge of their faith to commit into his hands the best towns
that they could take, namely Bourdeux and Marseilles, which they made sure
account of: farther alluring him with some hope to procure the crown to fall
into his daughters hands, by abolishing the Salique law: and to begin withal,
they should bring him into Britain. Matters discovered by their own letters
and remembrances: matters which the king and his especial servants know well
enough: yea they had gone so far that the said king of Spain a while had his
army ready and under sail to fall thereupon, had he not in time been
prevented: yea he had his reasons ready composed by the Spanish doctor,
whereby he pretended to justify his descent in Britain, as by right unto him
appertaining, even as he had made his usurpation in Portugal. Their discourse
was (for they supposed themselves to be crafty enough to cause all the
ambition in the world to bow under theirs) that this prince was old and
decrepit, and could not live many years: that at his decease he should
leave his estates scattered and in danger of troubles, which would keep his
heirs from looking any farther: and that in the mean time they should get
help and succor in their present necessity, and that it rested only
hereafter to look to that might happen.

But this prince, who is but too skillful in his own affairs was wise enough
to take his time for the obteining from them as an earnest penny, a great
piece of service, yea such as peradventure will boil for ever in this realm.
For perceiving that his states of the low countries had sent their deputies to
the king to yield themselves into his arms and to give him their persons. For
a first service that he demands of our masters of the League, he wills them
to take arms at the very instant that his majesty was to resolve upon the
proposition of the said estates, otherwise he protests against them and
means not in time to come any way to assist them with his ability: whereby
they were driven to hasten their entering into arms certain months before
their time: whereof it insued that the state was troubled, the said deputies
sent away without doing any thing, and the crown frustrate of that great and
goodly increase that was then offered. Hereby therefore let all France judge of
the nature indeed strange of the captains of this League, who to the end to
warrant the K. of Spain from an uncertain loss, do cast this realm into an
assured shipwreck: who do redeem the Spaniards danger with the Frenchmans
death and his diminution, with the utter subversion of France.

But these their wicked intents did they cloak with very beautiful
pretenses: for the uppermost painting was a certain devotion, a zeal to the
church: as if the king, who was an example to all men, stood in need of armed
solliciters to bring him into the way: but this hypocrisy was likewise as
soon descried through the visarde. And indeed the king by an express decree
declared them to be rebels and guilty of treason: and so would have all his
good subjects to take them: yea, and to the same end he writ to his courts of
Parliaments, to all his bailifs and stewards, and to his principal towns: and
advertised his ambassadors resident with foreign princes, charging them to lay
open their conspiracy against his person and crown, expreslie commanding all
good Frenchmen to ouerrunne them and their adherents, and desiring all princes
his neighbors, allies, and confederates to assist him against these with both
men and money. These dispatches, I say, which his majesty sent every way both
within and without the realm, do faithfully show what his judgment was of
them when he termed them Partakers of a public peace under a false shadow of
religion: when in express terms he confesses, that they shoot not at his
crown only, but also at his person: likewise the speeches which with his own
mouth, he used both in the Parliament and town house, which we all may yet
remember. And this profession was neither suborned nor wrested by art or by
sorce, but put forth of his own and the most inward motion of his mind: for,
as it has sufficiently since appeared, what force or counsel had he about
him to urge him against the league, albeit contrariwise there were some near
to his majesty that used violence in their behalfes.

And in deed his commandments were then so taken and construed, neither was
there any subtlety sought out but according to the bare letter: for sundry
companies of those of the league that were in sundry places defeated by the
governors and the dukes of Ioieuse and Espernon, with his majesty's forces made
open war against them, as also the lord Marshall Matignon, with the advice of
the court of parliament of Bourdeux imprisoned the lord of Vailac their
partaker, and thrust him forth of Castle Trompet, and likewise the lord great
prior governor of Prouence, apprehended those that had enterprised in the
behalf of the league against the town of Marseilles, and were favored with
the succor of six galleys of Florence* which waited the execution of their
purpose, to the end, to take possession in the king of Spaines name, whose
process was made by the Parliament of Aix with great solemnity, according to
the tenure whereof they were put to death in Marseilles. These synodall
testimonies and sovereign decrees were sufficient interpreters of the kings
intent against those of the league, and the rather because these witnesses,
judges and executioners were the very same that saw deepest into the kings
inward mind, as having showed greatest rigor to the Huguonets in the former
wars, and were therefore to them suspected of stomach in matter of their
religion, but free from all suspicion, or exception to those of the holy league.

Now let us note the behauiours and actions of the king of Navarre at the same
time: he see himself personally assaulted, he perceived that he was both
the subject and object of those of the league: The speech was of no less
matter, then to take from him both his life and honor, and to murder all that
he loved, or that ioued him. This had been enough in some to have bred a
stupiditie rather then a patience: It was enough to have moved a war
abruptly, much more to defend himself from that which was already moved. On
the other side he perceived the King highly offended against the league: he
saw that he daily wrote unto him, that he took both the quarrel, and the
war to be his own: that he perceived that they shot both at his estate
and life: That his name and religion were but pretenses: but withal, that it
was requisite to let his people understand as much, whom under the false
shadow of religion they had miscarried from their duties. This, besides the
equity of the cause, had also been enough to arm him both with title and
authority against the League: And had he thus taken arms, no man would have
blamed him, whereas through want of doing it in time, he now finds
himself in trouble. In the mean time he besides the right and natural
feeling, being nevertheless (as all men know) wise enough in each other
thing, did yet resolve himself from the Kings hand to wait for the remedy
for these mischieues. He contains all his friends and servant in
patience, and the Protestant towns in peace and silence: he disposes
himself to serve his majesty upon his token, and in time convenient: he
will not for his own part undertake any thing, which may either kindle this
war (which seemed to happen fitly for him against the League) or that any way
may be a let to the quenching thereof.

Contrariwise (and indeed we must needs remember it) these were the speeches
which for the maintenance of peace he then used. In matter of religion he
declared to the King, also to the states and all degrees of this realm that
he had been therein even from his youth brought up: That after he came to
years of discretion, he had neither seen nor heard any thing that might turn
him therfro, That he believed that he was in the right way of salvation,
wherein he had perseuered in the midst of dangers, and maugre the intisements
of the world: Nevertheless that he was ready to learn of the Church in a
free Council, whether he would bring both aptness and attention to learn:
for it did evidently enough appear that his perseverance in his religion was
neither ambition, nor obstinacy: that ambition, if he were therewith
possessed, might be much better satisfied on the other side: as for obstinacy,
it was too prejudicial unto him, since it consisted upon his quietness, honor
and state. That at this day as well in this realm as throughout Christendom
these matters were grown to these terms wherein even the college of Sorbonne
was wont to say, that either part should bear with other, without taxing each
other with heresy until a good counsel consented unto and accepted by both
parts had concluded and decreed thereupon: that is a great number of learned
men of either side, towns, provinces, nations, common wealths, and whole
estates, holding as well for the one as for the other. A most certain argument
that all these will not of a iolitie damn themselves: Arguments likewise that
the controversy rests in matter disputable, since that among all nations and
so contrary climats, all sorts of people do cleave thereto, yea after a
thousand torments even to the death. Wherefore Christiandome has now as great
need as ever to have a free and lawful council. That the counsel of Trent
could not be alleged to have been such, wherein the parties were heard:
wherein also the party most accused, and which needed greatest reformation sat
as judge: and against the which our most Christian kings immediately after the
battle of Dreux, together with many wise Princes, expressly by their
Ambassadors protested nullitie, and namely because therein they would not
deal with reformation of doctrine to the rule of the holy scriptures, but
only in outward show. Whereupon even in the most rigorous times, and after
the bloody Bartholmew is was rejected both by the masters of Sorbonne and the
courts of paliament of this realm: that in matters of less consequence the
primitive Church never denied the reiterating of counsels. That the council
of Basil had bound the Pope and the church of Room to hold a council every
ten years, a term already expired since that at Trent.

Again how far more seemly it were for the Church, and with how much
less peril to this realm to reiterate a council than a civil war, a
conference in words, than a battle? That particularly his person and
dignity were of such importance that they could not well deny him this path
to justice, considering that sometime there had bin three or four Councels
holden for the reclaiming of some one private person only: considering also
that the statutes of this realm, sworn unto the king and his counsel,
allowed by his courts of Parliament, etc. had foreiudged of this case,
forbidding the title of heresy in both parts, and expressly suspending it
until the decision of some free and holy Council.

Concerning their pretense of the state, the said lord King most humbly
besought his Majesty and admonished all the states of this realm to consider
how unfit a thing it were of it self, and principally for these men to intrude
themselves into such novelties: that the king was not of any such age, that
with the knife at his throat he was to be forced to nominate his successor to
this Realm, especially considering what successor they pretended to force him
to name, whom they ought not to presuppose to be able by the course of nature
to out live his Majesty. Also that in case matters were at that point, yet
were there other more practiseable means and such as time out of mind had
been put in practice in this estate: but to anticipate a danger to come with a
present one, an uncertain with by an vnfallble, a suite of a matter not yet
fallen, by a civil war, was as much as to prevent a fear with death it
self and a sickness with a poison. That of this war begun upon a
iolitie must needs ensue the overthrow of the people, the diminishing of the
nobility, the empouerishment of the clergy, the disanulling of all
godliness, the bastardie of justice, the abolishing of all good laws, the
total corruption of manners: to be brief, confusion in all things and
desolation of the whole estate. So far should we be from looking for that
beautiful reestablishment and new golden world which they promise: for every
war is an instrument of destruction, but especially the civil, which is a
headlong desolation, as being the sharpest disease of a state. Moreover albeit
he were of such calling in this realm that whatsoever concerned him ought
thoroughly to be considered as touching his Majesty and the common wealth, yet
since they had taken him for their adversary, he most humbly besought his
Majesty, either to the end to eschew the danger of his person, to suffer him
to end this war with them, as being assured to find friends and servants
enough to compass it, so as he should not need to troble himself therabout,
either else for avoiding the destruction of the people, to determine it by a
combat of his person against the D. of Guize and the late lord Prince against
the D. of Maine the captains of this conspiracy, as being assured that God
who rules the weapons, is able enough to reveal his judgments in their
punishment.

Neither propounded he these things in any flying pamphlets subject to
disaduow, as many of theirs are, but in formal and authentical manner, viz.
by declaration written and signed with his own hand bearing date the tenth of
June 1585. and presented to his Majesty by the lords of Clereuant and
Chassincourt, and in a full assembly of the privy Council read word by word
in his Majesty's presence, the said lords of Clereuant and Chassincourt
requiring his Majesty not to mislike that it were exhibited to our Masters of
the court of Parliament of Paris. As also to the same effect the said lord king
of Navarre did write to our Masters of the Court; whom he desired to judge and
bear witness of his behavior, to our Masters of the three estates, each one
severally foretelling the mischiefs that he foresaw and which themselves have
since seen: to our Masters of Sorbonne who judged his submissions to be not
pertinent, and contrariwise condemned the rashness used against him. To the
Princes and common wealths, neighbors, and confederate with this estate, who
partly by the succor which they have since sent him for his defense, and
partly by their counsel to the king, to minister justice unto him do
sufficiently show what their judgments are, as being far from our passions: of
the ambition of the auctors of the league, of the king of Nauarres moderation
and patience, of the good entertainment that the one deserves at the kings
hands, and of the punishment due unto the other.

Finally the fatalitie which seems to thrust forward this poor estate to her
destruction: also the collusio^ of bad cou^sellers, who willingly do set to
their shoulders, and are in troth fatalitie it self, caused that the king of
Navarre might not be heard in his just declarations, caused peace to be made
with the league to his cost, and caused that his patience was imputed to him
for a transgression, and contrariwise, the violence of these of the league
allowed and acknowledged for a notable service.

The king of Nauar did through his discretion, considering the constellation
that then reigned together with the muttering co^spiracies then practiced,
sufficiently foresee that they meant to dissolve the whole cloud upon him, for
the safety of others. To hold the room that he held in this realm, and to
have so great interest in all treaties the^ made and not to be called, neither
so much as to be once spoken withal, was sufficient to make him believe that
the tretie with those of the league was indeed a contract against him, and the
co^cluding of a peace with the^, was a plain denou^cing of war against him.
Neither wanted he advise or persuasions from his partakers, who seeing
themselves in evident danger reproved his ouerlong patience, wherefore they saw
well that they must suffer. Al which notwithstanding he never stirred: but
reposed his confidence in God the protector of his right and innocence, upon
the king and Queen mothers word, who had so often and expressly promised him
that they would neither do nor suffer to be done any thing to his harm or the
prejudice of the edicts of peace. And indeed who would have imagined that for
strangers sakes they would have sacrificed their own domesticals? or stanched
the insatiable thirst of those of Loxraine with the shedding of the french
blood and loss of their own?

Well, peace was concluded with those of the league: their edict of peace was a
decree of banishment against the king of Navarre, the late lord Prince and
their partakers. To be brief, all the war was at once and without knowing any
cause why, turned against this poor Prince and the french armies put into the
hands of the house of Lorraine for the executing of this violent edict with all
outrage. A matter never before heard of in any justice: (but likewise who will
seek justice among so many iniustices) that the parties, considering their
stomachs, should be made both commissioners and executioners in their own
plea? But will you plainly see that the causes which in their writings they
allege for their justification, were but vain pretenses? They had promised
relief to the people, reestablishment of dignity to the Nobility, and the
ancient authority and liberty to the Clergy, and to the same end of some
they had gotten the persons and from others the coin: howbeit when they came
to treat, there is no speech of any such matter: they had sworn to the lord
Cardinal of Burbon that they would cause him to be nominated successor to the
crown: yea they would rather be buried then depart therefro; that likewise
they had forgotten. Their only drift was, to be still armed, under whatsoever
pretense, and to place all their family in good governments or in the strongest
holds: and having once won that point they presumed themselves to the
arbitrators of France. And in deed, for the compassing thereof they renounce
the rest, they renounce them to the people, to the Nobility and Clergy, to
the eminency of the state, and to the zeal of the Church. But all this is
found to be swallowed and drowned in their particular ambition, and since that
time we have seen no more of it, there has been (I say) no mention or
memory thereof.

Thus do we see on the one part these of the league thorough their violence
armed with the kings name and armor, and on the other side, the king of Navarre
furnished with the kings will, (but unarmed) against the league. All that he
can get is certain secret excuses: That they are very sorry for it: but they
could not otherwise rid their hands: that they must needs yield to this rage,
etc. In the mean time on every side they came upon him: the edict of
pacification is infringed in favor of the league: throughout the realm are
nothing but proscriptions and banishments: such as assisted the king against
the league, being both sent for and commanded by his Majesty, of good
servants, even in one day, are become offenders: yet can he not at once abandon
all patience: he will commune with the D. of Montmerencie, a peer of France,
and chief officer of the crown, one that is not suspected of religion. They
meet at S. Paul of Cadeiouz in Alby: they remain there certain days to
confer: his Majesty's deputies are heard give out the speeches aforesaid,
whereupon they resolve manfully to withstand the mischief, which otherwise is
remediless, the king of Navarre: the late lord Prince and the Duke of
Montmorencie, nevertheless by an express protestation of the tenth of August
declaring that to their great grief through this precipitation they are forced
to have recourse to weapons: that as all the world knows, they have
tolerated until all extremity, but that seeing the enemy ready to fall
upon them they could do no less, but take counsel both of necessity and
nature. That they had offered and again did offer in matter of religion to
yield to a free counsel, and in matters of state to a lawful convocation of
the states, yea to submit themselves to the hazard of a combat, albeit with
their inferiors, rather then to see the desolation of this state and calamity
of so much people: but if either violence or bad counsel had stopped up their
ears to their just reasons, that they declared before God and all the good
subjects of this land, that they had not taken arms but for the kings
authority and liberty manifestly oppressed, yea and that with his own
consent voluntarily testified by so many his declarations, letters, decrees and
ordinances: that they neither have nor will have for enemies any other then
those who^ of his own mere motion he had denounced enemies to his life and
the peace of his realm: that in respect of religion they would make no
distinction of the kings subjects, but would cherish and embrace them all with
like affection and countenance, only requiring them to the end to be the better
distinguished, to separate themselves both from the counsels and dealings of
the league: protesting all the miseries and calamities that this estate is to
suffer to be unto them both sensible and sorrowful, who are the blood and
members thereof, but not so to those that are but grafted in and that very
slightly, moreover from the bottom of their souls calling for Gods wrath and
curse against the authors of so many mischiefs and upon their practices and
enterprises, a vow which God has in troth heard, if we list to see it
throughout the whole progress of this war of the league.

Well, the war was earnestly begun, and see, we are now come to the third
year: now let us call to mind the goodly speeches they then used to bring us
in taste with it. The king Navarre (said they) within a few months would be
shut up in some one of his houldes without all hope of succor and forced to
forsake the realm, and not to find any assured place where to soiourn. The
Protestants hands within the first year should in part yield for fear at the
first brunt of their weapons, and in part be won by force if they obstinatly
durst resist.

For the second year they should not have past three or four left, and
those, by their saying, rather to practice then to trouble the^. As for their
succor, it was but in vain to speak of any: for they had taken so good order
in Germany that there could be no leauie made for the king of Navarre, and if
there should, yet did they promise to fight with it, yea even to go to seek it
to the very borders of the Rhine.

The foolisher sort and such as with their passions were drunken, believed
these things and felt even to the bottomes of their purses to see these
miracles, so stoutly affirmed by these triaclers. If wise men, and experienced
captains purposed to declare all these things to be vain. If they alleged
that our kings had employed 25. years in vain: that there was never a sinew in
this realm but had bin strained, or never a vein but had bin launced and
drawn dry, then they said that these enterprisers were of a far other sort,
and that they knew other secrets the^ they found. So greatly does the world
delight to be deceived at her own cost, yea so far does this age (enemy of her
felicity) delight to abandon her self to the first potticary. Now let us see
what this mountain will bring forth.

The kings armies are delivered to the authors of the league: the king
abandoneth all his force and authority into their hands: they also without
sparing do put thereto as much as their credit will reach. They have
Lancknights, Switzers and Reisters, the Clergy do endeavor themselves to pay
these armies, eue^ with the sale of their temporalties, though not without
repentance: the king and his people do spend four years profit in one: the
king of Spain employeth one part of his Indies: to be brief, in this realm we
have now that which was never seen before, viz. eight armies at once in the
field, and every of them able to besiege, every of them painfully employed,
each in his quarter.

In the mean time the king of Navarre has all this while neither succor nor
assistance from any place: all his enemies have condemned him to the death, and
all that loved him do despair of him. What may a just cause do in the assurance
of a courage against all endeavors? this Prince was never seen stoop less,
and that does every one know, or set himself more stiftely against adversity:
but indeed, what is not the almighty able to warrant those that walk
uprightly? He breathed upon all these armies, and they scattered of themselves
before they had done any thing: saving there was some sconce or village taken
which cost us millions, neither does it appear that ever they were, unless by
the destruction of the country or desolatio^ of the people. For in the
weakening of the king of Navarre, or of his partakers, nothing can be known.

Now let us (I pray you) grow to account and leave robbing of our own purse.
In the government of Guyen they have both employed and displayed all their
miracles and powers: who then would not rather have Taillebourg, Royan, Talmont
and Fontenay then Monsegur S. Bazeile and Castillon? And Castillon I say, the
labor and triumphs of the L. of Main, the sepulcher of so many me^, and the
bottomless gulf of so much coin, recovered again by the L. of Turenne in one
hour with ten shillings worth of ladders? In Languedocke who would change S.
Pons, Lodeue and Capestan for Marueiolz? or in Dauphine wherewith shall we
counterpeize Montlimar, Ambrun and Dic? And all this gotten in one night with
ten pound of powder: whereas a small castle must cost us both months, store
houses and armies: neither can we say that in recompense hereof they have lost
more men. For it is well enough known that the assailant always loses a
hundred for ten. The overthrow of the L. of Vius, the recovery of Montlimar
and the battle at Coutraz would say somewhat hereof where we lost so much
nobility without any reciprocal loss on their side, where also so much good
French blood was prodigally spilled, which might have been better employed
else where, whereof also we imagine our selves well comforted poor wretches
that we are, when in the palace they rore out unto us the overthrow of the
Switzers. And all this before mentioned did he without any foreign succor,
albeit both England and Germany did in the beginning make sufficient show
there of their gooodwils to this prince and his affairs. Whom God thus guided
through his wonderful providence to the end every man might well perceive that
the king of Navarre and his alone and without any support might be able to
maintain themselves against the league: that the people likewise might note
their fraud and boasting when they made this enterprise so easy, and so
became wiser and less passionate hereafter: but especially that such as fear
God and do assure themselves to march under the conduct of his providence might
the more evidently perceive his blessing over the justice and innocence of
this prince, more evidently (I say) in his weakness then in his force, and
contrariwise his wrath and curse over the violence and injuries of those of the
league in the greatness of their power and vanity of their effects.

But mark now I pray you. Now that they be recreant and able to do no more,
the king of Navarre whom they should have chosen to the end of the world, does
in our view keep the field, forces out towns with the Canon, gathers new
strength, and before our noses in the midst of France dare give us battle,
and never vouchsafe to attend the succor that he is far of. Behold also on
the other side the strangers came in with a mighty and terrible army which
these our masters should have through their diligence choked in Germany, or
at the least have defeated upon the border of Rhine: and yet even in their
presence it passes the heart of Lorraine, goes through all their governments
without any one alaram, and is felt even in our bowels: and when these good
mariners have cast us into the storm, or brought us upon the rock, not
knowing to what saint to vow themselves, they leave us to the oar, and without
any speech steal them selves into the skiffe, accounting themselves
sufficiently discharged with a save who save can.

Truly it is now therefore time for us to think upon our affairs, for we
have let our selves run too far after their wrongful passions: Too late
do we perceive their malice and our rashness, for long since have they
purposed to take to themselves spoil of our own wrecke. It is high time for
us all with like endeavors to set hand unto that holy anchor which is able to
warrant our vessel from shipwreck, and which only in this peril may stand
us in steed of a haven.

To what purpose, will ye say, is all this large discourse? Truly to the end
we may rather late then never perceive that we prosecute a wrongful and
unprofitable war, and therefore that by some end we shorten the course of our
follies. Wrongful I say, and therefore we are assured of Gods curse upon our
souls, unprofitable also, for who can prosper against Gods will? And what have
we in the course of these three parts seen, but a mere going backward and
funerals in liew of triumphs? But you will reply, In whom is the fault that
we have not peace? also how often have we caused it to be motioned? went not
the queen into Poitou to the king of Navarre? But this prince (men say) is
shie, and will not easily be handled: truly with all such as have not haunted
him he is to be pardoned though they think him not tractable: for considering
how he has ever since his youth been entreated, they may have good cause so
to believe, since the most patient man in the world might have grown out of
patience, the most phlegmatike into choler, the easiest and most tractable, to
be distrustful, backwarde and implacable.

But let us judge of his humors by his behauiours: he came to the war upon
great extremity and that as late as he could: it is then to be believed that
he will not be slack to come to peace: he saw himself and his partaker
persecuted with all rigor, confiscate, banished, disgraded, condemned,
executed, murdered, and all under color of the religion which he professed:
all which notwithstanding he never altered his manner of proceedings: he
never molested any for religion: he kept their promised liberties and
safety: he preserved under his protection such Catholics as were not of the
League, yea he pardoned even those of the league and being taken after the
heat of arms he gratified them, and if he used a contrerigour we could not
tell what to say: for we all do sufficiently know that the first is guilty
of the second. We must therefore confess that he has a very temperate
mind, besides his nature: he I say, whom so many wrongs, griefs and
injuries could never make passionate or to alter. It has also been
sufficiently noted that so long as there was any hope to see him overthrown:
or that his enemies had any advantage of him, they were still assisted with
all help, without any spare: they never propounded unto him any meet
condition: albeit the next day after a victory of his, he sends to the
King, he bewaileth with him the shedding of so much blood as is spilt, he
offers with all his heart to do him service in the stanching thereof: he
returns most of the prisoners of account, either infinitely commending his
courtesy, or if they conceal it, of all men condemned of ingratitude.

Truly he, who being rashly dealt with in so many sackings, and yet was
never seen out of course, no not being caused with full bridle, cannot but
have a sure head and mouth, neither is there any let, but in our good help,
that he may do very well. To be brief, in his adversity we have seen him
victorious, in his prosperity a conqueror of himself: in the sorest smart of
his injuries clean from all revenge, in the swiftest slidings of his good
hap, void of insolency: always ready to admit the reasons of such as have
offended him particularly, and to give over his most boiling passions to
common benefit. Let us then believe that he flies not from peace, but
desires it: and that he is not so shie and malicious as men make him. But
indeed the Rose pricketh when we do not take hold of it where we should, and
if we consider well, we shall see that all that has yet ben done, and as it
seems of set purpose, has tended only to drive him into despair.

To prove this to be so, let us see how they have dealt with those of the
League, and how with the king of Navarre: he a household child, they
strangers, not so much as of the family, though they be of the realm. The
Guizians are not so soon (though without cause) up in arms, but the Queen,
all things set aside, goes to them, yea she seeks after them even to the
lands end: them, who had they been courageously assailed were not able any
whit to abide it. Contrariwise the King of Navarre being for the safety of
his own person, constrained to take arms, is left alone fifteen whole
months to dry up the blows, he is on all sides shot at, to make an end
of him: so long as they think to see him either besieged or beaten, they
speak never a word, but wait the end: But when his enemies are no longer
able to assail him: when they have discharged even their last piece in vain,
when having long time fenced and borne off the blows they see him sound and
safe ready to repay them, then begin they to vouchsafe to speak unto him,
and that as it seems rather to hale the enemies out of the prease, then any
way to content him.

The Queen coming near to the Guizians for fear of scarring them, causes
all her power to depart, cease all hostility, lets escape all occasions to
harm them, gives them leisure to gather together both their spirits and
helps, yea, both Reistres and Suitzers: Contrariwise (and that was the good
counsel of the good Frenchmen that assisted her) at the very time of her
coming to parley with the King of Navarre, did the army of the Lord of
Ioyeuse most force it self in Languedocke, where it put all that it could
force to fire and sword, as also did the army of the Lord of Espernon in
Prouence: yea hardly will she permit after many formalities and iournies to
and fro, that the Marshall Biron should stay beyond Loire.

The Queen, to content those of the league, promises that the Germans that
come to the Kings succor should not enter, and suspendeth their leauie,
albeit the issue of the negotiation were doubtful: Contrariwise she requires
the king of Navarre for a preamble, first of al under the uncertain hope of an
uncertain peace to suspende and stay his foreign army.

But will you see after so many ceremonies what conditions are propounded unto
him. That is, That all exercise of his religion cease in all the towns within
his authority and part. That himself and all his resolve with themselves
utterly to renounce the same, and never more to speak of it, otherwise let
him never look for any peace at the kings hands, whereas for satisfying those
of the league al exercise was taken from those of the contrary religion: that
is, so far as might be, they had given them both their bodies and souls. These
are the speeches which the queen very earnestly commanded the lord of
Touraine to impart to the king of Navarre, from the which she never departed.
And then think you what likelihood there was after forty years fire, and
five and twenty years war that the Huguonets would suffer themselves to be
brought back to their A B C. yea imagine whether they whom so many troubles,
namely these last, had made cannon proof, who durst abide the cannon in poor
milnes rather then to force their consciences, were capable of this article,
and that a hundred towns more, which their best armies durst not once look
upon, would yield thereto. Thus was al broken off: and note in the inequality
of the persons and causes the arsiuersie inequality of the proceedings: that
which ought to have set forward this negotiation, was the cause to break it
off: For they of the league, who fear nothing so much as a peace feared also
the shadow thereof: and indeed, to the end to trouble it, the shuffeled they
cards anew, they procured the seizing upon some strong holds in Picardie
missed of others: places free from suspicion, especially far from religion,
yea by practices they attempted against the kings person and life: matters
known both to their majesty's and all others, whereupon the Queen founded an
argument to return to his majesty to prevent it, and so did the negotiation
resolve upon nothing, for fear of displeasing them: whereas truly it had been
the means to reunite al France into one: to join together again all the
blood against the common enemy of this estate, and to give the abused
evidently to weet, that there was no longer question of religion, and that
these men had bewrayed themselves in seizing upon the Catholic towns, and in
opposing themselves against the king at that very instant, when by their
suggestion he warred most sharply upon the Protestants. Thus to the end
again, to restore those of the league to the country, was the whole treaty
of peace, begun with the king of Navarre, set aside, albeit the Queen had
promised to send passeports for the safety of the deputies whom the said
king purposed to send for assistantes of that treaty, whereof we have never
since heard any speech.

What then? must we, will you say, to the end to obtain peace, tolerate that
religion? I would to God we were well so, and that we had no other matter then
that to decide, We shall like well enough that the Pope for a miserable gain
shall suffer the Jews freely in Rome, and yet be termed Most holy. That the
king of Spain, to the end to be at rest with his Hollanders, by express
treaty shall not only grant them their religion throughout their country,
but also abolish his own, and yet be nevertheless Catholic: And yet our king
must forfeit his name of Most Christian, because he suffers the Christians
that believe the same scriptures and beleefes that he does: he may not
forbear, until the decision of a council in consideration of the Princes of
his blood, who offer thereby to be instructed and taught in consideration of
so many thousands of souls that have tried both fire and sword, and that so
many years: not for the obteyning of some, I wot not what gain, but for the
redeeming of a total loss: neither for the saving of some corner of an estate
far off, but for the warranting of al his own realm from utter and
inevitable ruin: yea, to be brief, even all that he is and all that he has?
And while we dispute and play the Sophisters about the difference between a
knights fee and a simple tenure, or between the suburbs, the city, and the
shire town: we perceive not, like doltes as we are, that al retayneth into
one, by the confusion of the nobility fallen into villenage, the towns and
suburbs into heaps of destruction, and this estate, if we provide not
betimes, into pieces?

Let us not flatter our selves in the state of our France, we I say, who do
peradventure corrupt our selves in her and with her can not well perceive her
diminution to be such as it is, so as if we had taken a nappe of five and
twenty years long, at our waking we should know neither her nor our selves.
The manners dissolved and near to a Gangrene: the laws no less venall than
the offices: the consciences more than the benefits: the riches which
aforetime have been a good state of the body brought into a small number, and
that by bad ways, tumors properly against nature and very plagues to the
body. The forces a token of weakness: our fathers regimentes thirty years
ago stronger than our armies: and their companies then our regiments: their
capteines more presumpteous at their first issue out of their pageship then
their fathers after three battles: moreover no respect either to labor,
either to desert, or to years, neither to degrees of either honor or nature:
no more reverence to the name of God, love to the Prince or duty to the
country. These are now the diseases sufficiently discerned in our estate, but
who is he that cares for it? So far is every one from setting to his hand
earnestly, but every man's delight is privately to discourse that the state is
sick, that it falls into decay, that he must look to his affairs, every
man I say with his hands in his bosom stands gasing upon the shipwrecke,
gives over his work, looks to cast aside some coffer or table for himself,
and thence think upon our hereditarie governments, one of a castle, an other
of a town, an other of a whole province. The small wasters do march under the
great, and the great for the atteyning to their purpose do league themselves
under one head. O miserable estate! O miserable king, when his own either
citizens or subjects in lieu of dying for him, will abandon! O miserable both
citizens and subjects that build your greatness upon their destruction: a
destruction undoubted (and who can warrant you from it) that will oppress you
all under it self.

Ween not that ever you, who upon a rage rather then by discourse, do wish
for it, shall ever be able to have any joy of it, The vapors of your
ambition do engender those dreams in you: kingdoms and mighty estates
according to the proportion of their greatness, have also their periods long,
whereto man's age cannot reach: Their crises or judgments are not gathered upon
odd days as ours are, for their sharpest diseases do outlast our whole
days. After the physicians have given them over they bury them, yea before
themselves do, they bury those that are the causers of their death with all
their ambition, vanity and glory. Marius and Caesar are down, but the senate
was at jar long time after, and the common wealth which they had wounded did
still pant. These changes are whole worlds. The fathers do die by the way: The
sons after infinite calamities stay at the borders, yea the childrens
children: when they ween to have woone all, they are ready to be beaten from
all, according to the proverb: To be at rest you think peradventure that the
utter extinguishing of our race may breed your peace, and yet do not mark
that the eldest of them is younger then you, and when you shall be stricken in
age they shall be young. Or I pray you do you think your selves only in this
realm ambitious? Is there ever a gentleman in France but when you have brought
the crown to spoil, will not think to have as good right to it as you?
having broken the laws, as you go about to do the Salicke law, do you not
call in all the neighbors to ear France in pieces? even those that first
married the kings daughters, who will be more fresh, mighty and rich then you
to defend their titles? At whose hands when you have done your best, and
endured much mischief both you and your shall be made bondmen, yea you shall
become their mocking stocks, pray and spoil, and no man to move you. How
many domages must this estate encurre during these alterations? how many good
families destroyed, how many good towns laid wast? how many widows and
orphans? how much land be untilled? and how many poor households must die for
hunger? France through these long robberies will grow to a forest: The Goths
will devour the remainder of the Hunnes: and the Vandales of the Goths. Upon
this miserable carreine will all the beasts of the earth feed: A thousand
worms, and a thousand serpents shall breed therein, and there engender to gnaw
it: petty tyrants in a country, in a castle and in a town. To be brief in
lieu of a scorpion, a Basilisque: and for an adder, a viper. But I fear, I
preach theses curses to the deaf. The childs mother, when Solomon commanded
it to be divided, chose rather to lose it, yea to let her adversary have it,
then to see it cut in sunder: her blood was troubled as also were her bowels:
the other respected not the dividing of it: she thought she had enough if
she might have her share, albeit bloody and unprofitable: so sensible are the
natural and lively affections, whereas contrariwise the strangers are dead
insensible and obscure: yea so difficult is it for the French blood to conceal
her natural affection to France and for the stranger to borow, counterfeit or
falsify the same.

These mischiefs which the course of these wars do bring in are evident,
neither was there ever other end seen: mischiefs, which if they be not
speedily prevented will grow mortal and incurable: mischiefs which can not
be remedied but by peace, by a sincere and faithful peace, which hide not an
other war in her bosom, and is free from after thoughts, such a peace as
may grant heart burnings time to quail, and duty and amity to recover, which
also takes all hope and appetite from our perturbers to stir, as not able to
infring it without loosing themselves. Such a one will it be when the good
frenchmen shall rely themselves and one bear out an other, when they shall
either grant or suffer to each other what so ever shall be requisite to mutual
rest, but why should they deny this one to an other, since they all shoot at
one common mark of their salvation in the life to come? yea every of them for
that having a common interest to live or perish together. Such shall it be when
every man shall in this realm be accounted as he is: the king obeyed, the
princes cherished and honored, the householde loved, the strangers in their
places gratified, every one paying and receuing both what he owes and what is
due to him, and that he also think it reasonable to preserve those who^ god
himself has preferred by blood, by degree or by dignity. God who in his
council has fore judged all this process: God who does al his works in order,
and ministers al his judgments without passion, bring this to pass. Such, to
be brief shall it be when every man both for making and preserving thereof,
shall bring whatsoever he is or has. The prince his faith, the magistrates
their authority, and the subjects each in his calling, their due obedience. God
by his holy spirit grant unto the king (for it is he only that holds it in
his hand) that he may shortly find both the means and way. God grant also
(for him must we win with hearty desire and humility) that the people may
become easy and pliable to solicit the same with hearty desire and burning
zeal.

God likewise grant all and every of us well to remember all the mischiefs
that we have endured, that we may have such a feeling as may never decay, to
the end we may detest all civil miseries, and no less abhor the authors
then the effects.

That also we may shortly in peace with one heart and mind in the vocation
whereto God has called us, seek the good and perfect health of this realm,
the purity and sincerity of Gods service, and redress of good manners and
health some laws, the perfect bonds of the king to the people and the
superiors to the inferiors, whereof do depend the weal, peace and
prosperity of the king, subjects and state. Amen.

FINIS.

