THE CHARGE OF SIR FRANCIS BACON KNIGHT, HIS Majesty's Attorney general,
touching Duells, upon an information in the Star Chamber against Priest and
Wright.

WITH The Decree of the Star Chamber in the same cause.

Printed for Robert Wilson, and are to be sold at Graies Inn Gate, and in
Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the Bible. 1624.

THE CHARGE OF SIR FRANCIS BACON Knight his Majesty's Attorney general,
touching Duells, upon an information in the Star Chamber against Priest and
Wright.
MY LORDS, I thought it fit for my place, and for these times to bring to
hearing before your Lord-ships some cause touching private Duells, to see if
this Court can do any good to tame and reclaim that evil which seems
unbridled. And I could have wished that I had met with some greater persons,
as a subject for your censure, both because it had bin more worthy of this
presence, and also the better to have showed the resolution my self has to
proceed without respect of persons in this business: But finding this cause on
foot in my predecessors time, and published and ready for hearing, I thought
to loose no time, in a mischief that grows every day; and besides it passes
not amiss sometimes in government, that the greater sort be admonished by an
example made in the meaner, and the dog to be beaten before the lion. Nay I
should think (my Lords) that men of birth and quality will leave the practice,
when it begins to be vilified and come so low as to Barbers-surgegeons and
Butchers, and such base mechanical persons.

And for the greatness of this presence, in which I take much comfort, both as
I consider it in it self, and much more in respect it is by his Majesty's
direction; I will supply the meanness of the particular cause, by handling of
the general point; to the end that by occasion of this present cause, both my
purpose of prosecution against Duells, and the opinion of the Court (without
which I am nothing) for the censure of them may appear, and thereby offenders
in that kind may read their own case, and know what they are to expect, which
may serve for a warning until example may be made in some greater person,
which I doubt the times will but too soon afford.

Therefore before I come to the particular whereof your Lordships are now to
judge, I think it time best spent to speak somewhat.

First, of the nature and greatness of this mischief.

Secondly, of the causes, and remedies.

Thirdly, of the Justice of the law of England, which some stick not to think
defective in this matter.

Fourthly, of the capacity of this Court, where certainly the remedy of this
mischief is best to be found.

And Fifthly, touching mine own purpose and resolution, wherein I shall humbly
crave your Lordshipps aid and assistance.

For the mischief it self, it may please your Lord-shippes to take into your
consideration that when revenge is once extorted out of the Magistrates hand
contrary to Gods ordinance, Mihi vindicta, ego retribuam, and every man shall
bear the sword not to defend but to assail, and private men begin once to
presume to give law to themselves, and to right their own wrongs, noe man
can foresee the danders and inconveniences that may arise and multiply
there-vpon. It may cause soddaine storms in Court, to the disturbance of his
Majesty, and vnsaftie of his person. It may grow from quarrels, to banding,
and from banding to trooping, and so to tumulte and commotion, from particular
persons to dissension of families and aliances, yea to national quarrels,
according to the infinite variety of accidents, which fall not under
foresight; so that the State by this means shall be like to a distempered, and
imperfect body, continually subject to inflammations and convulsions.

Besides, certainly, both in Divinity and in Policy, Offenses of presumption
are the greatest. Other offenses yield and consent to the law that it is good,
not daring to make defense, or to justify themselves; but this offense
expressly gives the Law an affront, as if there were two laws, one a kind of
Gowne-law, and the other a law of reputation, as they term it, so that Paul's
and Westminster, the Pulpet and the courts of justice must give place to the
law (as the King speaks in his proclamation) of Ordinary tables, and such
reverent assemblies; the year books and statute books must give place to some
French and Italian pamphlets, which handle the doctrine of Duells, which if
they be in the right, trans^amus ad illa, lets receive them, and not keep the
people in conflict and distraction between two laws.

Again (my Lords) it is a miserable effect, when young men, full of
towardness and hope, such as the Poets call aurorae filii, sons of the
morning, in whom the expectation and comfort of their friends consists, shall
be cast away and destroyed in such a vain manner; but much more it is to be
deplored when so much noble and gentle blood shall be spilt upon such follies,
as if it were adventured in the field in service of the king and realm, were
able to make the fortune of a day, and to change the fortune of a kingdom. So
as your Lordships see what a desperate evil this is; it troubles peace, it
disfurnisheth war, it brings calamity upon private men, peril upon the
state, and contempt upon the law.

Touching the causes of it; The first motive no doubt is a false and erroneous
imagination of honor and credit; and therefore the King, in his last
Proclamation, does most aptly and excellently call them, bewitching Duells.
For, if one judge of it truly, it is noe better then a sorcery that enchanteth
the spirits of young men, that bear great minds, with a false show, species
falsa; and a kind of satanicall illusion and apparition of honor; against
religion, against law, against moral virtue, and against the presidents and
examples of the best times, and valiantest Nations, as I shall tell you by and
by, when I shall show you that the law of England is not alone in this point.

But then the seed of this mischief being such, it is nourished by vain
discourses, and green and unripe conceits, which nevertheless have so
prevailed, as though a man were staid and sober minded, and a right believer
touching the vanity and unlawfulness of these Duells, yet the stream of
vulgar opinion is such, as it imposes a necessity upon men of value to
conform themselves; or else there is no living or looking upon men's faces: So
that we have not to do, in this case, so much with particular persons, as with
unsound and depraved opinions, like the dominations and spirits of the air,
which the Scripture speaks of.

Hereunto may be added, that men have almost lost the true notion and
understanding of Fortitude and Valor. For Fortitude distinguishes of the
grounds of quarrels, whether they be just; and not only so, but whether they
be worthy; and sets a better price upon men's lives then to bestow them
idely, Nay it is weakness, and disesteeme of a man's self, to put a man's life
upon such ledgier performances; A man's life is not to be tryfled away, it is
to be offered up and sacrificed to honorable services, public merits, good
causes, and noble adventures. It is in expense of blood as it is in expense of
money, It is no liberality to make a profusion of money upon every vain
occasion, nor noe more it is fortitude to make effusion of blood except the
cause be of worth. And thus much for the causes of this evil.

For the remedies I hope some great and noble person will put his hand to this
plough, and I wish that my labors of this day may be but forerunners to the
work of a higher and better hand. But yet to deliver my opinion, as may be
proper for this time and place; There be four things that I have thought on,
as the most effectual for the repressing of this depraved custom of
particular Combats:

The first is, that there do appear and be declared a constant and settled
resolution in the State to abolish it. For this is a thing (my Lords) must go
down at once, or not at all: For then every particular man will think
himself acquitted in his reputation, when he sees that the state takes it to
heart, as an insult against the Kings power and authority, and thereupon has
absolutely resolved to master it, like unto that which was set down in
express words in the edict of CHARLES the ninth of France touching Duells,
That the King himself took upon him the honor of all that took themselves
grieved or interessed for not having performed the Combat; So must the State
do in this business, and in my Conscience there is none that is but of a
reasonable sober disposition, be he never so valiant, (except it be some
furious person that is like a fire-worke) but will be glad of it, when he
shall see the law and rule of State disinterest him of a vain and unnecessary
hazard.

Secondly, care must be taken that this evil be noe more cockered, nor the
humor of it fed; wherein I humbly pray your Lordships that I may speak my mind
freely, and yet be understood aright. The proceedings of the great and noble
Commissioners Marshall, I honor and reverence much, and of them I speak not in
any sort; But I say the compounding of quarrels, which is other-wise in use,
by private noble men and gentlemen, it is so punctual, and has such reference
and respect unto the received conceits, what is before hand, and what is behind
hand, and I cannot tell what, as without all question it does, in a fashion,
countenance and authorize this practice of Duells, as if it had in it somewhat
of right.

Thirdly, I must acknowledge that I learned out of the Kings last proclamation
the most prudent and best applied remedy for this offense (if it shall please
his Majesty to use it) that the wit of man can devise. This offense (my Lords)
is grounded upon a false conceit of honor, and therefore it would be
punished in the same kind, In eo quis rectissime plectitur in quo peccat. The
fountain of honor is the King, and his aspect, and the access to his person
continues honor in life, and to be banished from his presence is one of the
greatest eclipses of honor that can be; if his Majesty shall be pleased that
when this Court shall censure any of these offenses in persons of eminent
quality, to add this out of his own power and discipline, that these persons
shall be banished and excluded from his Court for certain years, and the
Courts of his Queen and Prince, I think there is noe man that has any good
blood in him, will commit an act that shall cast him into that darkness, that
he may not behold his Sovereigns face.

Lastly, and that which more properly concerns this Court, we see (my Lords)
the root of this offense is stubborn: For it despises death, which is the
utmost of punishments, and it were a just, but a miserable severity, to execute
the law without all remission or mercy, where the case proves capital. And
yet the late severity in France was more, where by a kind of Marshall law
established by ordinance of the King and Parliament, the party that had slain
another was presently had to the gibbet, in so much as gentlemen of great
quality were hanged, their wounds bleeding, least a natural death should
prevent the example of justice. But (my Lords) the course which we shall take
is of far greater lenity, and yet of no less efficacy; which is to punish,
in this Court, all the middle acts and proceedings which which tend to the
Duel, (which I will enumerate to you anon) and so to hew and vex the root in
the branches, which no doubt, in the end, will kill the root, and yet prevent
the extremity of law.

Now for the law of England, I see it excepted to, though ignorantly in two
points; The one, that it should make no difference between an insidious and
foul murder, and the killing of a man upon fair terms, as they now call
it. The other, that the law has not provided sufficient punishment, and
reparations for contumely of words, as the Lie and the like.


But these are noe better then childish novelties against the divine law, and
against all laws in effect, and against the examples of all the brauest and
most virtuous Nations of the World.

For first for the law of God, there is never to be found any difference made
in homicide, but between homicide voluntary and involuntary, which we term
misaduenture. And for the case of misaduenture it self, there were Cities of
refuge; so that the offender was put to his flight, and that flight was subject
to accident, whether the revenger of blood should ouer-take him before he had
gotten sanctuary or not; It is true that our law has made a more subtle
distinction between the will enflamed, and the will advised, between
manslaughter in heat, and murder upon prepensed malice, or could blood, as the
soldiers call it, an indulgence not unfit for a chollericke and warlike
Nation, for it is true, Ira furor breuis. a man in fury is not himself. This
privilege of passion the ancient Roman law restrained, but to a Case, that
was, if the husband, took the adulterer in the manner; to that rage and
provocation only it gave way, that it was an homycide was justifiable. But for
a difference to be made in case of killing and destroying man, upon a
forethought purpose, between foul and fair, and as it were between single
murder and vyed murder, it is but a monstrous child of this later age, and
there is noe shadow of it in any law Divine or humane. Only it is true, I
find in the Scripture that CAINE enticed his brother into the field, and slew
him trecherously, But LAMED vaunted of his manhood, that he would kill a young
man and if it were in his ^^rt: So as I see no difference between an insidious
murder, and a brauing, or presumtuous murder, but the difference between
Cain and Lamed.

As for examples in Civil states all memory does consent that Grecia and Rome
were the most valiant and generous Nations of the world, and that which is more
to be noted they were free estates, and not under a Monarchy, whereby a man
would think it a great deal the more reason that particular persons should
have righted themselves; and yet they had not this practice of Duells, nor any
thing that bare show thereof; and sure they would have had it if there had bin
any virtue in it. Nay as he says, ^as est et, ab host doceri, it is memorable
that is reported by a Councellor and Ambassador of the Emperors, touching the
censure of the Turks, of these Duells; There was a Combat of this kind,
performed by two persons of quality of the Turks, wherein one of them was
slain, the other party was conuented before the Council of Bassaes; the
manner of the reprehension was in these words; How durst you undertake to fight
one with the other? are there not Christians enough to kill? did you not know
that whether of you should be slain the loss would be the great Seigneours?
So as we may see that the most warlike Nations, whither generous or Barbarous
has ever despised this wherein now men glory.

It is true (my Lords) that I find Combats of two natures authorized how justly
I will not dispute, as to the later of them.

The one when upon the approches of armies in the face one of the other
particular persons have made challenges for trial of valors in the field, upon
the public quarrel.

This the Romans called, pugna per-prouocationem. And this was never, but
either between the Generals themselves, who were absolute, or between
perticulers, by license of the generals, never upon private authority. So you
see DAVID asked leave when he fought with GOLIATH, and IOAB when the armies
were met, gave leave, and said, let the young men play before us, and of this
kind was that famous example in the wars of Naples, between twelve Spaniards
and twelve Italians, where the Italians bare away the victory; besides other
infinite like examples worthy and laudable, some times by singles, sometimes
by numbers.

The second Combat is a judicial trial of right, where the right is obscure,
introduced by the Goths and the Northern Nation, but more anciently
entertained in Spain; and this yet remains in some cases, as a Divine lotte
of battle, though controuerted by Divines touching the lawfulnes of it, So
that a wise writer says, Taliter pugnantes videntur tentare Deum, quia hoc
volunt vt Deus ostendat et faciat miraculum, vt iustam causam habens victor
efficiatur, quod saepe contra accidit. But howsoever it be, this kind of fight
takes his warrant from law. Nay the French themselves whence this folly
seems chiefly to have flowne never had it but only in practice and
tolleration, but never as authorized by law; And yet now of late they have
been feign to purge their folly with extreme rigor, insomuch as many
Gentlemen left between death and life in the Duells (as I spoke before) were
hastened to hanging with their wounds bleeding. For the State found it had been
neglected so long, as nothing could be thought cruelty which tended to the
putting of it down.

As for the second defect, pretended in our law, that it has provided no
remedy for lies and fillippes, it may receive like answer; It would have been
thought a madness amongst the ancient law-giuers, to have set a punishment upon
the lie given, which in effect is but a word of denial, a negative of another
saying. Any lawgiver, if he had been asked the question, would have made
Solons answer, that he had not ordained any punishment for it, because he never
imagined the world would have been so fantastical as to take it so highly.
The Ciuilians they dispute whether an action of Injury lie for it, and rather
resolve the contrary. And Francis the first of France, who first set on and
stamped this disgrace so deep, is taxed by the judgment of all wise writers,
for beginning the vanity of it; for it was he that when he had himself given
the ly and defy to the Emperor, to make it current in the world, said in a
solemn assembly, That he was no honest man that would bear the lie, which
was the fountain of this new learning.

As for words of reproach and contumely (whereof the lie was esteemed none) it
is not credible (but that the Orations themselves are extant) what extreme and
exquisite reproaches were tossed up and down in the Senate of Rome, and the
places of assembly, and the like in Grecia, and yet no man took himself
fowled by them, but took them but for breath, and the style of an enemy, and
either despised them or returned them, but no blood spilt about them.

So of every touch or light blow of the person, they are not in themselves
considerable, save that they have got upon them the stamp of a disgrace,
which makes these light things pass for great matter. The law of England, and
all laws hold these degrees of Injury to the person; slander, battery, mayme,
and death: And if there be extraordinary circumstances of despite and
contumely, as in case of libells and bastanadoes, and the like, this Court
takes them in hand and punishes them exemplarly. But for this apprehension of
a disgrace, that a fillippe to the person should be a mortal wound to the
reputation, it were good that men did hearken unto the saying of Consaluo the
great and famous commander, that was wont to say; A Gentleman's honor should
be, De tela crassiore, of a good strong warppe or web that every little
thing should not catch in it, when as now it seems they are but of copwebbe
lawne, or such light stuff, which certainly is weakness, and not true
greatness of mind, but like a sick man's body, that is so tender that it
feels every thing. And so much in maintenance and demonstration of the wisdom
and justice of the law of the land.

For the capacity of this Court, I take this to be a ground infallible, that
wheresoever an offense is capital, or matter of felony, if it be acted, there
the combination, or practice, tending to that offense is punishable in this
Court, as a high misdemenor. So practice to impoison, though it took no
effect, way-laying to murder though it took no effect, and the like, have
been adjudged heinous misdemeanors punishable in this Court. Nay, inceptions
and preparations in inferior crimes (that are not capital) as suborning and
preparing of witnesses, that were never deposed, or deposed nothing material,
have likewise been censured in this Court, as appears by the decree in
Garnons case.

Why? then the Mayor proposition being such, the Minor cannot be denied: for
every appointment of the field is but combination and plotting of murder, let
them guilde it how they list, they shall never have fairer terms of me in
place of justice. Then the conclusion follows, that it is a case fit for the
censure of this Court. And of this there be presidents in the very point of
Challenge.

It was the case of Wharton, Plaintiff against Ellekar and Acklam Defendants,
where Acklam being a follower of Elleckars, was censured for carrying a challeng
from Ellecker to Wharton, though the challenge was not put in writing, but
delivered only by word of message and there are words in the decree, that such
challenges are to the subversion of Government.

These things are well known, and therefore I needed not so much to have
insisted upon them, but that in this Case I would be thought not to innouate
any thing of mine own head, but to follow the former presidents of the Court,
though I mean to do it more thoroughly, because the time requires it more.

Therefore now to come to that which concerns my part, I say, that by the
favor of the King and the Court, I will prosecute in this Court in the Cases
following.

If any man shall appoint the field, though the fight be not acted or performed.

If any man shall send any Challenge in wrighting, or any message of Challenge.

If any man carry or deliver any writing or message of Challenge.

If any man shall accept or return a Challenge.

If any man shall accept to be a second in a Challenge, of either side.

If any man shall depart the Realm with intention and agreement to perform
the fight beyond the seaes.

If any man shall revive a quarrel by any scandalous bruites or wrightings
contrary to a former Proclamation published by his Majesty in that behalf.

Nay I hear there be some Counsel learned of Duells, that tell young men when
they are before hand, and when they are otherwise, and thereby incense and
incite them to the Duel, and make an art of it; I hope I shall meet with some
of them too, and I am sure (my Lords) this course of preventing Duels in
nipping them in the budde, is fuller of clemency and providence then the
suffering them to go on, and hanging men with their wounds bleding, as they
did in France.

To conclude, I have some petitions to make, first, to your Lordshipp, my Lord
Chancellor, that in case I be advertised of a purpose in any to go beyond the
sea to fight, I may have granted his Majesty's writ of Ne exeat regnum to
stop him, for this Giant bestrideth the sea, and I would take and snare him
by the foot on this side, for the combination and plotting is on this side
though it should be acted beyond sea. And your Lordship said notably the last
time I made a motion in this business, that a man may be as well, fur de se as
felo de se, if he steal out of the Realm for a bad purpose, and for the
satisfiing of the words of the writ, no man will doubt but he does machinari
contra coronam (as the words of the writ be) that seeks to murder a
subject; for that is ever, contra coronam et dignitatem. I have also a suit to
your Lordships all in general, that for Justice sake, and for true honors sake,
honor of Religion, Law, and the King our Master against this fond and false
disguise or puppetrey of honor, I may in my prosecutio^ (which it is like
enough may some times stir coals (which I esteem not for my particular, but
as it may hinder the good service) I may (I say) be countenanced and assisted
from your Lordships: Lastly I have a petition to the noblesse and gentlemen of
England, that they would learn to esteem themselves at a just price. Non hos
quaesitum munus in vsus, their blood is not to be spilt like water or a vile
thing, therefore that they would rest persuaded there cannot be a form of
honor, except it be upon a worthy matter. But for this, Ipsi viderint, I am
resolved. And thus much for the general; now to the present case.

THE DECREE OF THE STARCHAMBER IN THE SAME CAUSE.
In camera stellata coram concilio ibidem 26o die Ianuarij anno vndecimo Iacobi
regis.
The Presence.
THO: Lo: Ellesmere LORD Chancellor of England. HON: Earl of North: L: Privy
Seal CHARLES Earl of Notting: Lo: high Admiral of England. G^OR: Lo:
Archbishop of Canterbury. JOHN Lo: Bishop of London. Sir EDWARD Cook Knight,
L: chief Justice of England. The Earl of Suffolk Lord Chamberlain. (...) Lord
^o^che. Sir Hen. Hobart Knight Lord chief Justice of the common pleas.
WILLIAM: Lo. Knolles, Treasuror of the Household. EDWARD Lo. Wotton Controwler.
IOH: Lo: Stanhop, Vicechamberlaine. Sir JULIUS Caesar knight, Chancellor of the
Exchequer:
THis day was heard and debated at large, the several matters of Informations
here exhibited by Sir Francis Bacon Knight, his Majesty's Attorney General,
the one against William Priest Gentleman, for writing and sending a Letter of
challenge together with a stick which should be the length of the weapon. And
the other against Richard Wright Esquire for carrying and delivering the said
letter and stick unto the party challenged, and for other contemptuous and
insolent behavior used before the Justices of Peace in Surrey at their
Sessions, before whom he was conuented. Upon the opening of which cause his
Highness said Attorney general did first give his reason to the Court why in a
case which he intended should be a leading case, for the repressing of so great
a mischief in the commonwealth, and concerning an offense which reigns
chiefly amongst persons of honor and quality, he should begin with a cause
which had passed between so mean persons as the defendants seemed to be;
which he said was done because he found this cause ready published and in so
growing an evil, he thought good to lose no time, whereunto he added, that it
was not amiss sometimes to beat the dog, before the Lion, saying further,
that he thought it would be some motive for persons of birth and countenance
to leave it, when they saw it was taken up by base and mechanical fellows,
but concluded; That he resolved to proceed without respect of persons for the
time to come, and for the present to supply the meannesse of this particular
Case by insisting the longer upon the general point.

Wherein he did first express unto the Court, at large, the greatness and
dangerous consequence of this presumptuous offense, which extorted revenge out
of the Magistrates hand, and gave boldness to private men to be law giuers to
themselves, the rather because it is an offense that does justify it self
against the law, and plainly gives the law an affront; describing also the
miserable effect which it draws upon private families by cutting off young
men, otherwise of good hope, and cheifely the loss of the King and
Commonwealth, by the casting away of much good blood, which being spent in the
field upon occasion of service were able to continue the renown, which this
Kingdom has obtained in all ages, of being esteemed victorious.

Secondly his Majesty's said Attorney general did discourse touching the
causes and remedies of this mischefe, that prevails so in these times,
showing the ground thereof to be a false and erroneous imagination of honor
and credit, according to the term which was given unto those Duells, by a
former proclamation of his Majesty's, which called them bewitching Duells, for
that it is no better then a kind of sorcery, which enchanteth the spirits of
young men, which bear great minds with a show of honor in that which is no
honor indeed, being against religion, law, moral virtue, and against the
presidents and examples of the best times, and valiantest Nations of the world,
which though they excelled for prowess and millitary virtue in a public
quarrel, yet knew not what these private Duells meant: saying further, that
there was too much way and countenance given unto these Duells by the course
that is held by noblemen and gentlemen in compounding of quarrels, who use
to stand too punctually upon conceits of satisfactions and distinctions, what
is before hand and what behind hand, which do but feed the humor; Adding
likewise that it was no fortitude to show valor in a quarrel, except there
were a just and worthy ground of the quarrel; but that it was weakness to
set a man's life at so mean a rate as to bestow it upon trifling occasions,
which ought to be rather offered up and sacrificed to honorable services,
public merrits, good causes, and noble adventures. And as concerning the
Remedies, he concluded: That the only way was, that the State would declare a
constant and settled resolution to master and put down this presumption in
private men, of what-soeuer degree of righting their own wrongs, and this to
do at once; For that then every particular man would think himself acquitted
in his reputation, when that he shall see that the State takes his honor into
their hands, and stands between him and any Interest, or prejudice, which he
might receive in his reputation for obeying; whereunto he added likewise, that
the wisest and mildest way to suppress these Duells was rather to punish in
this Court all the acts of preparation, which did in any wise tend to the
Duells, (as this of Challenges and the like) and so to prevent the Capital
punishment, and to vex the root in the branches, then to suffer them to run
on to the execution, and then to punish them Capitally, after the manner of
France, where of late times Gentlemen of great quality, that had killed others
in Duel, were carried to the Gibbet with their wounds bleeding, least a
natural death should keep them from the example of Justice.

Thirdly his Majesty's said Attorney general did by many reasons, which he
brought and alleged, free the Law of England from certain vain and childish
exceptions, which are taken by these Duellists: The one, because the Law makes
noe difference in punishment between an insidious and foul murder, and the
killing of a man upon Challenge and fair terms, as they call it, The Other
for that the Law has not provided sufficient punishment, and reparation for
contumely of words, as the lie, and the like: wherein his Majesty's said
Attorney general did show, by many weighty arguments and examples: That the
Law of England did consent with the Law of God, and the Law of Nations in both
those points, and that this distinction in murder between foul and fair,
and this grounding of mortal quarrels upon uncivil and reproachful words,
or the like disgraces, was never authorized by any law, or ancient examples,
but it is a late vanity crept in from the practice of the French, who
themselves since have been so weary of it, as they have been forced to put it
down with all severity.

Fourthly, his Majesty's said Attorney General did prove unto the Court by
rules of law and presidents; that this Court has capacity to punish sending
and accepting of Challenges, though they were never acted nor executed; taking
for a ground infallible, that wheresoever an offense is capital or matter of
felony, if it be acted and performed, there the conspiracy, combination, or
practice tending to the same offense is punishable as a high misdemeanor,
although they never were performed. And therefore that practice to impoyson
though it took no effect, and the like, have been punished in this Court: and
cyted the president in Garnons case, wherein a crime of a much inferior
nature, the suborning and preparing of witnesses though they never were
deposed, or deposed nothing material, was censured in this Court, whereupon
he concluded, that forasmuch as every appointment of the field is in law but a
combination of plotting of a murder, howsoever men might guilde it: That
therefore it was a case fit for the censure of this Court; and therein he
vouched a president in the very point, that in a case between Wharton plantife
and Elerker and Acklam, defendants. Acklam being a follower of Elerker had
carried a challenge unto Wharton, and although it were by word of mouth, and
not by writing, yet it was severely sensured by the Court; the Decree having
words, that such Chalenges do tend to the subversion of government: And
therefore his Majesty's Attorney willed the standerds by to take notice that it
was noe innovation that he brought in, but a proceeding, according to former
presidents of the Court, although he purposed to follow it more thoroughly then
had been done ever heretofore, because the times did more and more require it.
Lastly, his Maieesties said Attorney general did declare and publish to the
Court in several Articles his purpose and resolution in what cases he did
intend to prosecute offenses of that nature in this Court, That is to say, That
if any man shall appoint the field, although the fight be not acted or
performed. If any man shall send any challenge in writing, or message of
challenge: If any man shall carry or deliver any writing or message of
challenge, If any man shall accept or return a challenge, If any man shall
accept to be a second in a challenge of either part: If any man shall depart
the Realm with intention and agreement to perform the fight beyond the seas:
If any man shall revive a quarrel by any scandalous bruites or writings
contrary to a former Proclamation, published by his Majesty in that behalf,
that in all these cases his Majesty's Attorney general, in discharge of his
duty by the favor and assistance of his Majesty and the Court, would bring
the offenders of what state or degree soever to the justice of this Court,
leaving the Lords Commisioners Marshall to the more exact remedies, adding
further, that he heard there were certain Council learned of Duells, that
tell young men when they are before hand and when they are otherwise, and did
incense and incite them to the Duel, and made an art of it, who likewise
should not be forgotten, and so concluded with two petitions, the one in
particular to the Lord Chancellor, that in case advertisement were given of a
purpose in any to go beyond the seas to fight, there might be granted his
Majesty's writ of Ne exeat regnum against him: And the other to the Lords in
general, that he might be assisted and countenanced in this service.

After which opening and declaration of the general cause, his Majesty's said
Attorney did proceed to set forth the proofs of this particular challendge and
offense now in hand and brought to the judgment and censure of this honorable
Court; whereupon it appeared to this honorable Court by the confession of the
said defendant Priest himself, that he having received some wrong and
disgrace at the hands of one Hutchest, did thereupon in revenge thereof writ a
letter to the said Hutchest containing a challenge to fight with him at single
rapier, which letter the said Priest did deliver to the said defendant Wright,
together with a stick containing the length of the rapier, wherewith the said
Priest meant to perform the fight; whereupon the said Wright did deliver the
said letter to the said Hutchest, and did read the same unto him and after the
reading thereof did also deliver to the said Hutchest the said stick, saying,
that the same was the length of the weapon mentioned in the said Letter. But
the said Hutchest, (dutifully respecting the preservation of his Majesty's
peace) did refuse the said Challeng, whereby noe further mischief did ensue
thereupon. This honorable Court, and all the honorable presence this day
sitting, upon grave and mature deliberation, pondering the qulality of these
offenses, they generally approved the spech and observations of his Majesty's
said Attorney general, and highly commended his great care and good service
in bringing a cause of this nature to public punishment and example, and in
professing a constant purpose to go on in the like course with others; letting
him know, that he might expect from the Court all concurrence and assistance
in so good a work. And thereupon the Court did by their several oppinions
and sentences declare how much it imported the peace and prosperous estate of
his Majesty and his kingdom to nippe this practice and offense of Duells in
the head, which now did ouerspread and grow universal, even among mean
persons, and was not only entertained in practice and custom, but was framed
into a kind of Art and Precepts; so that according to the saying of the
Scripture, Mischief is imagined like a law. And the Court with one consent
did declare their opinions. That by the ancient law of the land al Inceptions,
preparations, and combinatio^s to execute unlawful acts, though they never be
performed as they be not to be punished capitally, except it be in case of
treason, and some other particular cases of statute law: So yet they are
punishable as misdemeanors and contempts: And that this Court was proper for
offenses of such nature, specially in this case, where the bravery and
insolency of the times are such as the ordinary Magistrates and Justices, that
are trusted with the preservation of the Peace, are not able to master and
repress these offenses, which were by the Court at large set forth, to be not
only against the law of God, to whom, and his substitutes all revenge
belongs as part of his prerogative, but also against the oath and duty of
every subject unto his Majesty, for that the subject does swear unto him, by
the ancient law, allegiance of life and member, whereby it is plainly inferred
that the subject has no disposing power over himself of life and member to
be spent or ventured according to his own passions and fancies, in-so-much as
the very practice of Chiualry in Iusts and Turneys, which are but images of
martial actions, appear by ancient presidents not to be lawful without the
Kings license obtained. The Court also noted, that these private Duells or
Combats were of another nature from the Combats which have been allowed by the
law as well of this land as of other nations for the trial of rightes or
appeals. For that those Combats received rection and authority from the law,
whereas these contrariwise spring only from the unbridled humors of private
men. And as for the pretense of honor, the Court much misliking the confusion
of degrees which is grown of late (every man assuming unto himself the term
and attribute of honor) did utterly reject and condemn the opinion that the
private Duel, in any person whatsoever, had any grounds of honor, as well
because nothing can be honorable that is not lawful, and that it is no
magnanimity or greatness of mind, but a swelling and tumor of the mind, where
there fails a right and sound Judgment; as also for that it was rather
justly to be esteemed a weakness, and a conscience of small value in a man's
self to be dejected, so with a word or trifling disgrace as to think there is
no recure of it, but by hazard of life, whereas true honor in persons that
know their own, worth is not of any such brittle substance but of a more
strong composition. And finally, the Court showing a firm and settled
resolution to proceed with all severity against these Duells gave warning to
all young noblemen and gentlemen that they should not expect the like
connyuence or tolleration as formerly have been, but that justice should have
a full passage without protection or interruption; Adding that after a straight
inhibition, whosoever should attempt a challenge or combatte, in case where the
other party was restrained to answer him (as now all good subjects are) did by
their own principles receive the dishonor and disgrace upon himself. And for
the present cause, The Court has ordered, adjudged, and decreed, that the said
William Priest, and Richard Wright, be committed to the prison of the Fleet,
and the said Priest to pay five hundred pound, and the said Wright five hundred
marks for their several Fines to his Majesty's use. And to the end that some
more public example may be made hereof amongst his Majesty's people, The
Court has further ordered and decreed, That the said Priest and Wright shall
at the next Assizes to be houlden in the County of Surrey publicly in face
of the Court, the Judges sitting, acknowledge their high contempt and offense
against God, his Majesty, and his laws, and show themselves penitent for the
same. Moreover the wisdom of this high and honorable Court thought it meet
and necessary that all sorts of his Majesty's subjects should understand and
take notice of that which has been said and handled this day touching this
matter, as well by his highness Attorney general, as by the Lords, Judges,
touching the law in such cases. And therefore the Court has enjoined Master
Attorney to have special care to the penning of this decree, for the setting
forth in the same summarily the matters and reasons which have been opened and
delivered by the Court touching the same, and neuer-the-lesse also at some time
convenient to publish the perticulers of his speech and declaration, as very
meet and worthy to be remembered, and made known to the world, as these times
are: And this decree, being in such sort carefully drawn and penned, the whole
Court thought it meet, and so have ordered and decreed, that the same be not
only read and published at the next Assizes for Surrey at such time as the
said Priest and Wright are to acknowledge their offenses as aforesaid; But that
the same be likewise published and made known in all Shires of this Kingdom.
And to that end the Justices of Assize are required by this honorable Court to
cause this decree to be solemnly read and published in all the places and
sittings of their several Circuits, and in the greatest assembly, to the end
that all his Majesty's subjects may take knowledge and understand the opinion
of this honorable Court in this case, and in what measure, his Majesty, and
this honorable Court purposes to punish such as shall fall into the like
contempt and offenses hereafter. Lastly this honorable Court, much approving
that which the right honorable Sir Edward Coke knight, Lord Chief Justice of
England did now deliver touching the law in this case of Duells, has enjoined
his Lordship to report the same in print, as he has formerly done diverse
other Cases, that, such as understand not the law in that behalf, and all
others may better direct themselves, and prevent the danger thereof hereafter.

FINIS.

