The true dyffere^s between ye regal power and the Ecclesiastical power
Translated out of latin by Henry lord Stafforde.

illustrated title page

To the high and mighty prince Edward by ye grace of God Duke of Somerset, Earl
of Hertfor be, Viscount Beauchamp, lord Seimour, uncle to the kings highness
of England, Governor of his most rial person, and Protector of al his Realms,
dominions and Subjects. Lieuetenaunte general of al his Majesty's Armies,
both by land and see, Threasaurore and Erl^ Marshall of England, Governor of
the Isles of Garrisey and Iersey, and Knight of the most noble order of ye
Garter. Henry Lord Stafford to his grace most bounden wyssheth health felicite
with increase of honor.
AMong other great Plages that this Realm of England encreced whylest the
scryptures were unknown (right excellent prince) there was none greater tha^
that by mere ignorance of gods word by a long process of years, falshed was
received for truth, evil for good, superstytion for true religyon. Whereof
ensued no less peril to our selfs than manifest dysorder in the public
estate and governance, whylest the people habandonyng the obedience due to
their souerayn Lyege lord and King, did in stead of him adhere and clean to an
usurper and tyrant, who not only keep their bodies, but their souls also in
most miserable seruytude and subjection. I mean that Antechrist and head of al
abomination the Bishop of Rome whose bondage and thraldom yt we be now
delivered and made fre. The hole cause and benefyte is to be ascrybed to the
illustration and setting forth of gods holy word. And as the thank thereof
is given to almyghtye god, who admytteth no partenets of his glory So next unto
him above all Mortal me^, are we bound to the worthy Prince of eternal memory
king Henri the eight. Who puttyng on the armor of gods word drove out of
this Realm the wrong vsurp^t of his power and auctoryte Regal, and delivered
his people fro the captyuyte, wherein the Bishops of Rome had long time kept
them. Yet like as the temple of God in Jerusalem, was begone by Dauyd, and
fynyshed by Salomo^: so many kinds of supersticio^ were abolished by the said
good King and no fewer left to be reformed by his gracyous and most lauful
son our new soueraygne lord King Edward the syxt. By whose happy and bly
syd procedynge hitherto it is euydent to the world that god is his guyd
directyng his passage to the parfectyon of al virtue and godlynes. A notable
experyment whereof we have, by the holsom and holy laws that proceed from his
grace in this his mynoryte and chyldhed, to the advancement of Gods word,
and extyrpatyon of al hypocrysy, and falls religyon. For the which benefyte how
much the realm of England to bounden to his magesty, my pen can not
suffycyently^ set it forth. But this must al men confess, that as long as the
memory thereof shall remain, so long shall the honorable fame and praises of his
grace be fresshe and grene in all true Englyshmens hearts. Which I suck not so
much for the syngular benefytes by your grace extendyd too me prevail, as for
the great wealth and commodyte redoundyng to al men universally. Wherefore
deuysyng with my self in what wise I might show my self thankful, or at the
least not unmindful o^ so ample merytes me thought I could do nothing, either
more grateful to your grace, or more profitable to my country than to help
forward in this cause of relygyon, And seeing the manyfold error and confused
heretofore sproyng in this Realm by reason that the true dyfference between
the power regal ecclesiastycal was either not well known or not well defyned. I
bethought me of a book lent me by my friend master Morison written in the laten
tongue, wherein the dyfference of those two powers, with ye lymyt^s of either of
them is so plainly set oue^, so pureli explaned, and so dystinc^lye dysclosed
by scriptures as no man (I suppose) oneles he be to set drowned in the dregs
of popery and superstytion, can be in any doubt of ye throuth the vtylyte of
which work well weyed with the late controversy about the same matter, moeued
me first to ye translation thereof, maruaylynge that a matter so prouffytable
and necessary to be known should be so long suppressed, or that the higher
powers had not in so long time provided to set her abroad as well the English
tongue as it is in the latin Never the lose rather than my Country, should be
utterly frustrate of so great fruit as might grow by redynge thereof, I
thought it a well bestood labor to even it into English the translacion,
whereof I submyt to the indyfferent Judgment of al learned reders, requeri^g
their aid where either I have erred or else not parfytly re^dred the sentence
of the author. Wherefore pondryng my weykenes and want of connyng I pray aid of
your grace to whom for my better defense I dedycate my labors, yt they may
pass forth under your protection of whom if in stead of praise I receive
pardon of my boldness it shall be to my suffycyent recompense. Almyhty god long
preserve your grace to the aduau^cement of his glory to ye honor of the
kings Magesty and prouffyt of his People.

Amen.
Here after follows the Table of this book.
Ambrose of the vicare of Christ. folio. ix, Augustyn. folio. xiii. All
preistes in Peter received the keys, of heaven. fo. xiii Another text whereby
papists challenge authorite for the bishop of rome, folio. xiiii. Al bishops
and prestes have equal autorite with Pe. fo. xv An evil preiste of his
pristhed gettith rebuke, folio. xvii Alexandre and Antiochia were the seats of
Peter before rome, folio, codem. Auguste^ of the questions of the new
Testament, fo. xxi A priste and a bishop al one, folio. xxvi At Alexandria
pryestes chose one of them self to be ruler and called him bysshope. folio.
xxvii A saing of saint Augustine a sermon to ye people, fo. xlvi, A private law
is writton in the heart of men. folio, lii. All things were done in the house
o^ God at the commandment of the King, folio. lxvi, Almen ought to pray for
Kings. folio. lxxi. Athanasius complayneth to Constantyne. Fol. lxxvii An act
made by Kings that no man should apele out of the Realm. folio. lxix A
preiste for murdre and vycyouse living shall be deprauyd of order and promocion
folio. lxxxi Adelston king did make a law of tenthis. Fol. lxxxii Aluredus
King, folio. lxxxiii A pressed that denies baptime shall dye. folio. lxxxiiii
Abbotte of batel may save a thief. fo. lxxxvii
.B.
Bishops that were most virtuous took leeste upon them Folio. v
Bysshoppes of Rome symonyackes. folio viii By Peter is vndersta^did the
universal church. Fol. xiii Bishops have suffered the contrary to their law to
be kept and know it. folio. xl Boniface the third gate prymacye by the help
of the Emperor Folio. xxx. Boniface did arm ye see of rome with the sword,
fo. xxx Bysshoppes of rome have labored to bynd men to keep their decrees.
Folio. xxxix. Bysshopes made a law that clerks should not be ^ued before a
seculer Judge Fol. xi Bysshoppes of Rome subtle, Folio. xii. Bisshops of rome
affirm that they have al power. fo. xli Bishops of rome went far backward from
Christ. fo. lvi Boniface the.viii. loved prehemynence. Folio. xlix Byshopes
were elect by the cathedral sees. fol. lxxxxii. Bishops of rome Scribes and
Pharisees. Folio. C Bishops of rom has married ye church of ge^tils. fo. eod.
Bysshopes of Rome called the father of the church of England but not in deed.
Folio. Ci Bishops of rome use to exalte their kinsmen, Fo. C. ii Bysshopes of
rome challenge asmoche to ^e their own as they list, Folio. eode^ Bysshoppes
of rome made lately execrable ordinances for stipendes Folio. C. ii Bishops of
rome has set the church in darkness. fo. c. iii Bysshopes of rome ponyssheth
men after they be deed and is an enemy to England, Folio eodem
.C.
Crisostome in his sermon, Folio^. x Congregation in the acts, folio. xi
Christ chose Peter before he was bish. of romans fo. xviii Christ forbade to
swear by Jerusalem, folio. xix Christ chose Jerusalem to byld his temple,
Folio eodem Children be void of ambicion, Folio. xxii Clerks may appele
from their dioces, Folio. xxix Causes should be determinid within their
proui^ce, fo. eod Christ forbad superiorite amongst his disciples, fo. xxxi
Consilium Chartage Folio. xxxv Christ paid tribute to ye king or Emperure,
Folio. lxvii. Christ and the Apostles did evermore obey the Ciuel powers
Folio. lxix Constantin to the bishops in the counsel of dyre. fo. lxxvii
Constantyne the Emperor caused hethen men to honor god and know god. folio,
lxxviii Childernt suck the milk, Folio. lxxxxi Clerus Anglie gladium Petri
habet, folio. lxxxxv Correccion of the clargi committed to the bish. fo.
lxxxxvii
D
Difference of the ecclesiastical and regal power, fol, iiii Division of this
work into.iiii. parts, Folio. vi Dystin.xl. chapter multi, Folio. xxi^ Desire
of primaci causes confusion, fo. xxii Distin.lxv mos antiquo folio. xxvii
Distin.iiii, cap statuimus, Folio. xxxviii, De consecratione, Folio. xxxix,
Dygnites of the church were given to Aliens, fo, lxxxx. Devotion is decayed.
Folio. eodem
E
Eneas siluins, Folio. x Ecclesiastica historia, Folio. xxiiii England did
resist the popis provisions, Folio. xxxix Enterpretacion of this word clerks,
folio. xliiii Ezechias king put away the abuses of the ecclesiastical power,
Folio. lxii Ezeckias commanded the prestes and levites to puryfy themself
Folio. lxiiii Ezechias commanded the people to offer, Folio eode^ Every man
that confesses christ to be the sone of god may be called peter, Folio, ix,
Every man that seeks the word of Peter is the seat of Peter, folio, xvii
Ezechias commaundid the people to give part of their goods to the prestes
Folio. lxv Edgarus king made spiritual laws, folio, lxxii, Edmundus king
made spirituali laws, folio, eodem, Epistel of king Wyllyam Conqueroure to the
bishop of rome, Folio. lxxxix. Epis^ola Cassidori, Folio, C Exortacion to the
reders to love the truyth, Folio, C, vi
.F.
Fathers of the primative church shrunk from ye unite of the primacy fo, xxvii
Fraeltie of men is evermore compasing and busy. fo. xlix.
.G.
God by ye prophet says I will dwell in Hiel'm. fo. xix. God some time suffers
tyrranycall power to punish his people. Folio. xx. God gave bysshopes
authorite but no dominion. fo. xxxi. Gregorye would not be called the head
Bishop. fo. l. Gregorius ad felicem. Folio. liiii. G^^ by his own mouth
made kings rulers. fo. lvii e^ Governance kings appears by natural things.
fo. eodi. Gregorius ad mauricium, Folio, lxxii. Gregorius was obedient to the
Emperor. fo. lxxii. God shall requere it of the kings whether ye peace and
faith of ye church be increased or diminisshed. fo. lxxvi. Grant of ye king
to ye monasteri of Glasto^buri. fo, lxxxiii Gentleness over much oppressid and
greuid seeks for the truth. Folio. C. v.
.H.
Hieronimus super mathe.xvi. Folio. ix. He proves by a similitude of the
Emperor that the successors in the seat of Peter can by no reason challenge
the prerogative of Peter. Fo. xvii. How much christ set by Jerusalem. Fo.
xi^. How kings serve god as kings. fo. codem. He called the church of
England our mother. fo. lxxxx. Hit is expedient for the kings and the nobles
of the realm to defend ye church from Tyranni of ye bishop of rome. Folio. C.
iiii Here he prays god to bring the Bysshope of Rome out of ygnorance.
Foli^. codem Hit is like that the primacy was left in Herusalem. folio. xx.
Jerusalem was consecrate with the blod of Christ, fo. xx Hieromunus ad
Ioginiarum folio, xxi, Hit is like that the council of Nicen did althynges
justly, Folio, xxiiii. Hit is lawful for no man to name himself universal or
hye Bishop, Folio, xxv. He y^ names him self universal priste or hye bysshope
goes before anticryste. floio. xxvi. He that is made bishop without consent
of ye metropolitan should be no bishop, fo, xxviii Hit was decrede in ye
council in aphrica yt the bishop of rome should not be superior to al other,
Folio, eodem He yt is excomunicate in one dioces ought not to be received into
another Fo, xxviii. He that wylbe hyeste shall be loweste. fo, xxxii. He that
does notrenounce all that he has ca^ not be the dysciple of christ Fo, xlvii,
He yt clymeth hiest must needs come down ward again Folio, l. He yt is ladde
with ye sprite of god is at lybertye. fo, lii. Hit is to be feared yt ye ca^no^
law lose his autorite, fo, liiii Hit belongs to kings to minister Justice,
Folio. lix. Here is noman exempte from the obediens of kings Folio, lxviii,
Holy scryptures of ye new Testamente give pristes no judicial power. Fo, lxix
How so ever ill be committed the coreccyon longs to the regal power. Foli,
lxxiii He serves god otherwise because he is a man and because he is a king,
Folio, lxxiiii
I
In Jerusalem only was the hye pristehod. Folio. xix. In consilio mileuitan.
Fo. xxviii. If the bishop of the mother church be negligent. fo. ode^ John
Bishop of Constantynoble was the furste that named himself universal
bishop. Folio, xxx, If decrees of bishops do bynd our co^scyens, fo. xxxvi
In the primative church the decrees of cou^celles were called cannons Fo, xxxvi
If Bysshoppes have authorite of god to make laws, Folio. xxxvii If possession
of the church be of god it shall stand, fo, l In doubteful matters the hye
priste and the hy Judge at jerusalem gave sentence fo. lxiiii If kings and
rulers were Judges of the law of god much more of the law of man. Fo. eodem
In salomons time prestes were born prestes. Fo. lxvii. Justinian Emperor made
laws to confyrme ye law of god. Fo. lxxix, In France they eat flesh all
Saterdayes between Chrystinas and Candelmas. fo. code^
K
Kings should be chosen of the same nation, folio, lviii King Saul gave
sentence of death upon chymeleche the hye bysshope folio. lxi. Kings did put in
and elect the hye preyst. folio. lxvi. Kings made and ordained bishops.fo,
lxxxiiii. Kings did institute Judges as levites. fol. lxiii.
L
Laws of popes be innumerable. folio, xxxvi Laws be two, folio, lii, Laurence
Archebysshop of Cantorbury did refuse all such foren power fo. liiii Laws made
by king Camula concerning spyrituall things. folio. lxxxi Littera willi
regis. folio, lxxxvi Lands given to the church of England. fo. lxxxxi.
Letters written from the parliamente of England to the bishop of rome. folio.
lxxxxvii.
M
Magna est veritas foli. i Mark ye word of Gre. to the church of England fo. lv
Many shall receue ye Sacrame^te, iii, in the year. fo. lxxxx Many resisted the
bishop of Rome. folio. C. v Many be rycher when they be religious me^ then
when they were secular. folio. xlv
N
Another power riches nor humilite can make a Bysh. hyer or lower. fo. xxvii.
None ought to be called the chief or bed bishop or his pressed. folio. xxviii.
Negligence in the service of god and mysbehauor in ye clerge. folio. lxxxxiiii
Nabugodonosor correct by miracle made a law that no man should blas^eme god,
folio, lxxiii Noman can dispense with the law of god, folio. liii. None
expounds this text of the ecclesiastical power but papystes. etc. folio.
lxx.
.O.
Obediens is necessary in the bishop of Rome. foli. xi. Our father did not
admit all the cannons, fol. xxxvii Of fornicacion with a man's wife. folio.
lxxxiii. Of servants working on the sunday. foli. eode^ Oration regis Edgari.
folio. lxxxxiii. Of them that were within orders. Folio. lxxxii Of tenthes
payeng. folio. eodem. Of sorcere and wytche craft folio. eodem Of a wife
commyttyng aduoutery. folio. lxxxi Of him that commits theft being in
orders. fo. lxxxiiii.
P
Peter nor his successores were not they against whom the gates of hell did
preuayll but the confession of Peter. folio. viii Peter was compelled to make
answer of his faith. fo. xi Peter made solemp sermon. folio. xviii Peter was
Bishop of Antioche before rome, folio. xix Patriarchs were not subject one to
another. foli. xxiiii Phecas Emperor. folio. xxix. Prelates should not medell
with ye Emperor. fo. xxxiiii Paul was Judged before lay Judges folio. eode^
Powere of punishment longs to kings. folio. lxi Pristes and prophets were
the expounders of the law of god. fo. lxiiii. Popes require and did extort
tapis in portable. fo. lxxxxii, Paul apelid to Caesar the Emperor. fo. lxxv.
Pope Adrya^ gave clerks auctoryte to choose the bysshope of Rome. folio. lv.
Q
Quomodo regibus anglie co^petat authoritas in rebus diuinis. folio. lxxix.
Quicquid co^cedit regali Autoritate concedit et estendit regale^ autoritate^.
fo. lxxxvii.
R
Rome is called Babulon. folio. xx. Riches and possessions which draws man's
mind ^^o god. fo. xliii.
S
Super omnia venit benignitas fo. i. Sum grant power given to bisshops but by
ma^s law folio. v Simon is interpretate obedyence fol. xi. Some good men that
were Bysshoppes of Rome did refuse primaci. foli. xxix Solomon condemned the
bishop Abiathares. folio. lxi Solomon did order ye office of pristes. fol.
lxii Some by the sword understand power eccles^astical. folio. lxx Some say
there was no power given to kings in spiritual things. fo. lxxi. Some
bishops of Rome did not deny but gave kings power Ecclesiastical. fo.
lxxxiiii Saint Dunstan gave council to the ki^ge to buyld many monasteris, fo.
lxxxxvi Scotland has alwais pertained to England. fo. lxxxxviii The dyfference
of the regal and ecclesiastical power must be sought by scripture. folio.
iiii The opynion of them that interpretate scripture sumpti of Ecclesiastical
power. fo. eode^ The church was not bild upon ye person of peter, fo. viii The
text of Mat. was not spoken of ye person peter. fo. ix The church is the
multitude of faithful people. folio. x The number of Christen people is of
more superiorit^ then the City of Rome. folio. xii The power of bindyng and
losing was given to all the Apostles. fo. eodem To feed the sheep of Christ is
to confyrme them that believe in Christ, folio. xiiii The third text whereby they
challenge prymacy. fo. xiiii That was spoken to Peter was spoken to al ye apo.
fo. xv There was but one flock which was fed of all the apostles. fo. eodem
The Gospel is the seat of peter folio. xvi They yt tech their one traditions be
falls prophets. fo. eo. The seat does not make the priest. fo. eodem They that
teach not the law of Christ sit in their own chayres, and entering at the window
as thieves. fo. eod. The Gospel is the seat of peter. fo. eodem There
contynuyth succession in the seats but not in virtue and merits. fo. xviii.
The miracles of peter in Jerusalem..fo xix The apostles strove for
superiorite. folio, xxii The appostles were equal. Folio, eod. The dygnyte of
the apostles was estemyd by priorite of time. fo. xxiii. The interpretacion of
this word patriarch. fo. xxiiii The bysshopes be superior to preistes by
custom and no^ by the law of god. fo. xxvi. These did continue at anynion a
long season. fo. xxxi The church has no power to constrayne fo, xxxiii The
kingdom of god is not of this world, fo, xxxiiii The office of a bysshope, fo,
xxxv The ordyna^ces of ye apo. were not al received, fo, xxxvii The Canons have
not shoyre authorite by the maker, Folio xxxviii The clarge keeps not ye fast
of, lx, days before Ester Folio, eodem The power was deuyd with kings and
princes, fo, xii, The largenes of their power is like a streme of water Folio.
xlii. The clargye should refuse possessions, Folio, xliii The interpretacion of
this wordy clarke, Folio, xliiii, They that be seperte of our lord can
possess nothing besides the lord, Fo, xiv. The power of ye Cyty of Ro^e is
not so large by god. fo. l The comen law gives place to ye private law, Fo,
liii The sea of Rome cannot dyspense norchaunge statutes of the old fathers,
Folio. eodem The good of ye church are ye goods of ye power, Fo, xlix The hye
prestes called the kings their lords, Fo, lx, Thurstan Archbysshop of York,
Fo, lxxx The examynacyon of the manners and living of the clarge partayneth to
the king, Fo, lxxxxiii, The whole perliament denies to answer before the
Bysshope of Rome. Fo, lxxxxix. The Shepcherd that has dyspersed the People of
god shall be grievously ponysshed, Fo, C, iiii, Thelesphorius ordained the clergy
to fast, xl, days before Easter fo, xxxviii They put down kings when it
pleases the^ and set up other fo xiii. The papystycal power has oftentimes
troubled England, fo, liiii The pope calls the king vycar of god, fo
lxxxiiii. The vow of Wyllyam conqueror, fo. eodem. The power of the bysshope
of Rom never stood a man's life without resystence fo, xxxix The opinion of the
papystes concerning the power of the bysshope of Rome, fo, iiii The opynio^ of
the^ yt make al me^ equal with small wisdom confyrmed, fo, v The power
ecclesyastycal was given to al Apostls, fo, xxi, The bishops of ye east resyst
ye bysshopes of ro^e, fo, xxv The bysshopes of Ro^e were not content to have the
tenthe. fo. C. ii. The time is h^^y when men may se the troth, fo, Cvi
W
What is comprehendyde under the Ecclesyastycall power, fo, vi, Wydows shall not
mary within.xii months, fo,.xxxi, We must be Justified by faith which works
by charity, foli, vii What soever is the foundation of ye church christ must be
the hedde, fo, vii What is under standed by the gates of hell, fo, viii, When
he was called peter which was called Simon before, fo, ix, What is vnderstandyd
by ye sete of Moses, fo, xv Why peter was called the head of the apostles, fo,
lxviii Why bysshopes were ordened and made fo xxvi. What partayneth to a
bishop, fo, xxxv, What the crown of pressed betokens, fo, xliiii, What is
laweful for lay people fo, eodem What thing a pressed must forsake, fo, xlvi,
What authoryte is given to kings by god, folio, lvi We should not abhore the
true name of honor, fo, li What lo^geth to aki^g or a prince and what to a P,
fo, lviii What the duetye and authoryte of a king, fo, lix, What is the proper
office of a king, fo, lxxv What authoryte ki^gs had i^ co^secracio^ of Bys,
fo, lxxxv Urban made an act that no clerks should take any promocyon spyrytual
of any king and Lay men, fo, eodem What things be more spirytual fo, lxxxv
What pertayneth to a king of a realm fo, lxxxxiii, What text of scripture is
prynted in the heart of the bishop of Rome fo, Ci ^ozimus bishop of Rome, fo,
liii
Finis tabule.
Sith it weth is of such preemyne^ce and dingnitie that she nether gives,
Super omi^a vicit veritas iii, esdre, iii
place to time Auctorite nor power but always reside^t i^ her high perfection
and trone gives eueri man an enter oftymes surely very hard and also
encombryd by man's malice and manifold forsenses and yet nevertheless blameles
in ye judgment of god and also laudable by ye confession of me^ if any would
ernestli and with good intent labor to come thereto, Magna est veritas quo
preualet,, iii, hesdre, iiii,
this labor which we take upon us is not to be disalowed sith the honor and
zele of reverend treweth has moved us to treat the things that follow here
after with diligence and mature deliberacion.

The things which we entend to speak of, shall want the entysement of
Novelties, But even the asisteryte and roughnes of the treweth shall
sufficiently content the good nether is it taken as a thing ratified by
judgment when any sentence is pronounced against the truth we shall therefore
think it sufficient to plead the truths cause to take our way to her
Judgment seat, and to bestow our labor in ye Illustracion and setting
furthe of her name, so that all Dyssymulacion, Dysdayne, envy, pertinacyte with
al'maliciouse and Corrupt affleccions be exiled from us, which we for our
part do most abhor, but if none of these things can be imputed to us
let those impedymentes of foryn judgments be also removed from us, which
we Laufully obiecte and lay against the ill and froward, lest thorough
pretense of the truth, while they set forth their own malice, they disturb ye
public quieter let the former Judgments of the good stop the mouths of ye
ill, that it be not laufull for every man, to enter medel with every thing,
but that, that is done with godly entente that, is set fourth with moderacio^ and
sought with great reverence, let it also proceed forth with great favor and
liberti so yt we bear no blame for rehersynge those things which other men
have both written and done with praise, we will not leave to our own Judgment, we
will not follow our own brain, we will invente nothing, we will feign nothing,
we will nothing blame, or peruerte unjustly, but faythfulli, sincerely, and
incorruptelye we shall rehearse the holy Scriptures, and the sente^ses acts and
deeds of other men, which Determine and agree upon the thing that we propone.

Nether take we this studi with out avisement, ne came to this labor and
province by his enduced by sensual affections but religion moved us, charity
did exhort us and a zele of the truth drove us forth and compelled us being
otherwise loathe to meddle For he did certainly se in how laborious busynes in
how inextricable maase this power named ecclesesiastical has entangled many
me^, which of what soever beginnynge it sprange up first, surely now it is
depraved, and corrupted with wily craft, we were not ignorante that the malice
of men, is great upon earth, and that nothing is so good under the sone which ye
iniquite of al persons does not subuerte. But there with all it came to our
remembrance that god does greatly regard those things which he him self
has peculiarly ordened that he has given his holy Scripture contaynynge that
is necessary to be Known, and most undoubted professores of the treuth
further that though the riches of gods wisdom be deep and unsearchable yet
it is given by Scripture to man's knowledge that some time by the frut we may
know the tree and after that prove the Spyryttes whether they be of god or of
men and if it be in your power to prove and to discern good from ill it is no
marvel if relygio^ has moved us charytie has persuaded us finali zele of the
treuth has thus for dryue^ us as profou^dely to study depely to cast in our
mind furste what may be the reason of the a^biguite of this power and after
that to mark well and considre whether al things be consonante unto the rule
of the verite that is to say to the testymonyes of Scripture whereby this
ecclesiastical power and what soever at this time is contained under that
apellacio^ is bolstard up, and stayed For thus thought we with our selves, if
this power was first constituted by the ordinance of god having so larg and
ample fundacyon and if so huge a buildinge was so reared up with so ample
fundacion, as in this time it seems to be usurped than list we only to make
this exclamacion, the inserutable devises of god whose providence we se not in
these bodies full of darkness. But if this auctorite has been only permytted
by god, for our tra^sgressyons that we might be scourged and that we might be
wayle our sins we are in bli^dnes yt we see it not, that disease is very
perylous which we feel not, and vnmiserable is our condition yt where as god
does seuereli punnisshe us we enterpretate it as gentle deali^g with us and
accept this ungodly and Tyrannical power as a great benifitte, undoubtedly
all powere is of god as the apostle says and whosoever resists the power
resistith the ordinance of god But it is a very noisome error to put no
dyfference betwixt power given of god and Tyranny permytted of god and that we
bering favor to our own si^nes will not acknowledge the very vengeance of god.
Rom, xiii,
The difference of the ecclesiastical and regal power must be sought by
scripture.


But at the last it came, to our remembrance that the sure dissolucion of
this ambiguite should be required and sought out of the holy Scripture wherein
ever at this day lives and breaths that confortyng spirit that christ did
promise to send to his to teache them all veryte for other wise if we should
leave to men's traditions ye matter has been diversely demed

For sundry men have have had sundry opinions, vari opinio^es be potestate
pont, Roma.
The opinion of them that i^terpretate scripture since ^ele of the
ecclesiastical power.
some as it seems leaving to the sincere sense of scripture and after the
dyscrypcyon thereof measurynge the foundation of this power. do dyffyne and
limite the ecclesiastical power only to be ye ministracion of the word of god
and they affirm the bishop of Rome with other bisshoppes to be given instede
of the apostles which should observe gods word after the lymyttes of his
commandment and should teach and preach that that is taught in the
scripture adding nothing thereunto ne taki^g any thing thereof away as though the
deuyne providence neded any help of man's industry wherbe he might the
better provide for the health of man other so enlarge, The opinions of the
papists concerning ye power of the bishop of rome,
and extend the lymyttes of the Ecclesiastical power, that the appointe the
ends thereof hyme and his submyttyng to that power al holy and profane
things, heavenly and wordly as for the bysshope of rome they make him not
aministre of the word and a servant but the vicare of god They give unto him
autorite of Dominyon, that he may do all thing saufe that is not his pleasure
to do that he may Judge al men, and that none ought to Judge him that he has
domynio^ over Emperoures, and kings and infewe words that he has preemynence
over all men and is more over above a general counsel some other make al
christen men equal and yt was spoken unto ye apostles with small dyscresion,
The opinions of them that, make all men equal with small wysdo^ confyrmyd
they apply to all Christen men, Confounding al orders of christen people
being clean repugnant unto the othere sort and as the other without almeasure
did attribute to the bysshoppes of Rome al power, some grant power given to
bysshoppes but by man's law, some co^tende it to be given by God
so these with no like fault seem to take al power awey. Therbe some that
grant a power, but not with sta^dyng they dissente in ye cause and the
origin and where as the bishop of rome would calenge his premacye by the law
of god, they styfly affirm that it was ordained by ye law of man.

Bysshopps yt were most virtuous take lest upon the^
The roman bysshopps their selfs do not agree among them selves, among
whom as every on did exselle the other in hollines of living and religion, so
he did require and take upon him yt less power, and some again coud not
refrain there hands from almost holy things nor forbere the scriptures of god.
whereof ye authorite intendyth to proceed upon,
Which altercacion of opynyons and conflicte of sentenses in themselves
disagreinge, do give us just and laufull occasion to search out ye origin, of
this so great, so ample and so mighty power that we may clearly se, whense it
came how it did proceed, how large it was given, how it was extendyd by
usurpation, what was granted by god, and what was added and adiected by the
will and pleasure of man, finaly what bishops have taken from pryncys, and
ki^gs, and what they have usurped to them selves, the certainty of all which
things must be taken out of the holy scripture, which is most sincere and
incorrupte testymonye and if the sense of scripture shall so plainly appear,
that no man can doubt thereof,

That it shall not be dysconuenyente to confyrme the same with recyting the
deeds and acts of other men wherefore we shall furste of all assaye to search
forth, Diuiso operis The division of this work i^to, iiii, parts
and pondre how the ecclesiastical power as it is usurped now adays, has
not his authorite by the law of god. Secundly in what facion this power is
extended by the law of god? Thrydly how moderatly good bysshoppes have used
this power fourthly how far ye power now called ecclesiastical partayneth
proprely unto kings and fo to go in hand with ye thing which we did
propounde in the furst place ye shall furst understand, ^, i, et, c, translato
de co^se, what is comprehendyd vndere the ecclesyastycall power and it is
vsurpyd now adays
ye under ye appellacion of this ecclesiastical power now a days, is contained
authorite to make laws and statutes, which may bind al christian men with
authorite to compelle al men yea even kings and princys so yt they shall make
their answers in all manner causes (if any offense be pretendid) the first part
Cap nouit de iudice
before the bishop of rome and make there plees in matters of trauerse before
him to depose princes out of ye admynystracyon their realms to absolve
subjects of the oath of their obedyence set upon other whom it shall please
him to excommunicate, Cap ad oppostolice de sen and reiudi libra, vi,
to enterdicte to cast down from alive into hell or other whom it shall please
him to send up in to heaven, de sent, ex, per tot,
and breffely to conclude to do al things and more to and they go about to
confyrme this power by certain places of holy Scripture which textys we will
examyn syncerly.

And in honest sort and the chef place is math.xvi. The examinacion or the
textys of scripture wherbi the papists challenge this power of the first, text
math. xvi.
Thou art peter and upon this stone I will edifye my church and the gattes of
hell shall not prevail against it of yt which text if it were granted yt
this were the intelleccion thereof yt it should sygnify the church to be
buyldid upon peter tha^ should follow as they sey manifest probacio^ of full
powere which thing for all that is not to be granted for all though Peter
were chyfe and highest of the Apostles and the church edified upon his pryuate
person, (which were an inconuenyente as we shall herafter show) yet what
soever fundacyon the church of christ had, what soever, is the foundation of
ye church christ must needs be her bed by whose blood it was redeemed and
norysshed by faith in christ
it must never theles be redemyd by the blood of christ and grew up by faith
in christ, consiste and be joined to gether by the laws of christ of the
which christ if the church be the true and propre spouse she must have him
only as her lord in sovereign lyberte, in him as in her head she must co^siste,
in hi^ she dependith, by who^ it is brought to pass that we be no longer under
the law, but under grace by his fre gift, so waxi^g big, that we being
delivered and loused from the charge of the scole master, and inspired with the
holy ghost thorough his grace. we must be Iustyfyed by ^ayth which works by
char^t^.
Of him we may be justified by faith which works (not by coercyon, not by
imposicion of ponysshementes not by thretenyngs and terioures / but by unfeigned
love.

But it seems not to be proved by that text that the church was builded upon
peter. The church was not builded upon the person of peter
Onles under the name of peter ye understand ye universal congregation of
faithful, and true christen people or else the very confession of peter, for
what could be spoken more than that the gates of hell should not prauaile
against the church?

But if the gates of hell (which after the mind of hierom orygen and ambrose
be vice and sin) cannot prevail against the church no man can sey that this
is understand of the bishop of rome, What is understand by ye gates of hell,
which is a man and mortal: Pro, xxiii^,
since it is written that seven times in ye day offendyth a just man, Heb, v,
and as saint paul says every bishop taken from amongs me^ is co^pased with
i^firmite and therefore he is bound to offer for Sins as well for his own part
as for ye peoples and thus ye must also considre ye of ye Bishops of Rome
many have been symoniaks Some of the bysshoppes of rome have be^ symonyakes,


Some ydolaters some sysmatickes some heretyckes, so^e withother vices
Some idolatres other sysmaticks other heretics othere wrapped in other vices
and some almost culpable in all as the Cronicles testifye which contaynyng ye
acts of ye bishops roman of whom though all or many did repent of their
format leude life at ye last and therefore against them by reason of their
faith in christ ye true fundatur of ye church, helgates. and sum preualed not
in ye end, yet ye same prevailed against other which died no better then they
lived, but heapi^g sin upon sin had amore onhappye death tha^ they had life
whose ill end does make us amanyfesse certificat yt peter and his successors
in the church of rome. Peter nor his successors were not they against whom the
gattes of hell did not prevail but the confession of peter,
Were not they Against whom the gates of hell should not prevail, but the
faith, and ye confession of peter, Ambrosius de incar domini sacramento
for as saint Ambrose says in his book of the mysterye of the incarnacion of
our lord, yt is not spoken of the person of Peter, The text of matthew was not
spoken of the person of Peter but of his confessores,
but of his faith for ye gates of hell shall not prevail against it, and the
same ambrose upon the epistle to ye Ephesians, our lord said to peter upon this
stone I will build my church, Ad ephesios capitulo, ii,
yt is upon this confession of the catholyke faith, I constytute faithful
people to lift Jesus, christ being the head corner stone in whom every
building cowplede to gether grows unto an holy temple in our lord in whom
ye also are build to gether and made an habitacion, for god in ye spirit.
Hierom super math, xvi,
This says he is the sense whereof our lord spoke upon this stone I will build
my church / and saint Hiero^ wrytteth ye after the symilitude of a stone it is
conveniently spoken. I will build my church upon the which sentence saint,
augustyne confyrmyng says, Augustinus, upon the words, diuini sermonis,
upon this stone which thou have confessed, upon this stone which you know,
saing thou arre christ ye son of the living god I will build my church,
that is to say upon my self the son of the living god, I will build my
church upon me I will edifye the and not me upon the, Why he was called Peter
which was named Simo^ before.
for as he was named Simon before after yt (as Hyrom, and Bid do say) for the
strengeth of his faith and the constance of his confession our lord gave him ye
name of Peter / so likewise we, Hieroni super math cap, ^vi
Origenes super math homilia, i
as orige^ says, if we by the reuelacion of the father to us which is in
heaven do confess that Ihesus christ is the sone of the living god, Every man
yt co^feseth christ to be the sone of god may be called peter,
we are callede conuenyently by the name of peter, for the stone is every man
that follows christ The stone is christ our lord and savior which after
the saing of Bid to him that knew by faith, Beda super, math, cap, xvi
to his lover / to him that confessed him did give the perticipacion of his
name. That is to say that of this word Petra ye stone, i, ^or, iii,
he should be named Peter, upon the which stone the church is builded, for no
man can lay any other foundation but that that is laid all redye, which is
christ Jesus this stone is so firm this foundation is so substancial, that it
will not suffer that is builded upon it any time to fall or else to shrink.
For it is a coruerd stone a constant streghneth a substa^cial stacion a fyrme
foundation of the church and so we read it called in many places of holy
scripture, Chrisostum i^ sermon de pe^thecost,


And also Crysostome in the Sermon of Penthecoste upon this stone he says not
upon this peter for he did not build his church upon man but upon his faith,
what is this to say upon the stone, that is to say upon the confession, for
if christ by these words had so understood as the church should have been
builded upon Peter, ye it should have been governed after ye pleasure of him and
his successors Also in what place he said, if thy brother trespass against the
show it unto ye church, Math, xviii,
that betokens unto ye multitude of faithful people, The church is ye
multitute of faithful people or ye judge institud by ye multitute
or else, unto the Judge institute by the multitude, or unto the general
council, he would have said, show it to Peter and his successors, Eneas
siluius other wise called pope pius ye second
which sins Eneas Siluius does reject saing on this wise, the yock of christ is
easy and the burden of christ is light. But tell me how light? if christ
command yt is impossible, if he should command all criste^ people to go unto
Peter, in all causes of conte^cion he should comau^d yt is inpossyble for how
could Peter seek for the church so sore disparsed and al christen me^ from
door to door by towns and vyllages, Congregation in ye acts of the Apostles
were called ye church, ex regest lib. iiii, epistola. xxxviii
wherefore in the acts of the apostles congregacions which were had were called
the church saint Gregory also upon the same matter writes thus. if I be
displeased when I reprehende other then it remains that I should show it
unto the church.

Furthermore eneas siluius Eneas siluius
upon this words tell it to the church expoundi^g ye church to be ye general
council, Peter, was sent to ye counsel as to his superior,
says thus lo Peter was sent unto the counsel, The veryte sent the high
bishop unto ye council, and wherefore was that? surely that the popes of Rome
should not dysdayne to know some power in earth above them which they should ask
counsel of in high matters and to be obedient to their determinacions where of
as Rabanus Rabanus,
thinks, Peter otherwise was called Simon which after the interpretacion of
the Ebreu tongue is to say obedience that every man mayght perseaue that
obedyence is necessary in the bysshoppes of rome. Simon is interpretate
obedient
obedience is necessari in ye bisshoppes of Rome, Garson,
Gerson in his book of oblacion of the spowse of the church, does approbate
this sentence sayng in times past peter by dissimulacio^ did follow the ryte of
Iwes, Gal, iii
and Paul did manyfestly resyst and hold against him. Peter brought in new
facions into the church of god, Act, x, and, xi,
entering into a Centurion a capten of a hondreth men being a gentyl, wherefore
great murmr arose in ye church of god i^ so much that Peter was compelled to
follow ye doctrine which scripture teaches that is to say that he should
prepare Peter was compelled to make answer of his faith and belefe before the
coun^ell,
him self before all the whole church to give the^ manifestacion and a
certitude of his believe and of his hope, so Simachus Simachus,
so blessed marcellius, Marcelline,
so Gregorye his self and so many other did submite them selves unto the
Judgments of ye counceles, Gregory
not of humilite and voluntarye condiscendinge thereto as some do Imagen but
because they were obligate and bound thereto. And saint Hierom Hierom
writing to Euagrius does affirm that as touching authoryte the hole number
of chryste^ people to be of more superiorite than the cite of Rome and that in
these words show it to ye church, The nombre of chryste^ people is of more
superiorite then the city of rome.
ye multitude of christen people is sygnifyed the apostle does prove saying. I
have surely thus determined, that he yt has thus comytted you being gathered
to gather with mispryte) i, Coryn, v.
be taken to Satan

and upon the same text saint augustine Augustyne
makes this exposicion, I have judged of this manner that you (he speaks to
the multitude) congregate to gether in on with out any dyssencion, with whom my
aucthoryte and ye virtue of christ shall work to gether, be take such a man to
satan bysydes that, Bid super mathe. xviii,
that this powher of the church was granted unto Peter in the name of ye
multitude. Bid upon ye xviii chapter of matthew) upon this text if thy
brother trespass against the) does prove writing in this manner this power of
ye holy church was specially committed to bysshoppes c. But generaly, suerlye
it is supposed to be given unto the universal church. The powere o^ ^^ndynge
and lowso^^ was given unto all the Appostles
For where as in another place our lord does give unto peter this power of
binding and lowsing of a truth it is not to be doubted but in peter which bare
the figure of ye church it was given unto al thapostles, August super Johan
the which wryttynge saint Augustine upon John does show in these words Peter
who he took ye keys did signyfye ye holy church For if the foundacyon of the
church were not in Peter our lord would not have said unto him I will give the
the keys of ye kindom of heaven saint, Peter signifies ye hol church
Augustinus
Hierom and saint Augustyne do prove the same upon this text, take ye the
holy ghost whose offenses you remit they shall be remytted unto them and I will
give to the the keys of the kingdom of heaven, which Augustyne names the
sciens and power to dyscerne but also Ambrosein his book of the dignyte of
prestehode. does affirm that in saint. Peter the apostle all priests
receyueyd the keys of the kingdom of heaven, likewise orygen says. All
prestes in peter ar ye keys of heaven.
Think thou that the keyse of ye kingdom of heaven were given only to Peter
and ye none other good men shall receive them. Origin super math homilia, l,


But if that is spoken is common amongst al men, I will give the thy keys of
ye kingdom of Heaven, how is that, that althyng which we have refrreed before
unto peter do not apere to pertayne unto every man (For in the Evangelist
Iohan^e Jesus giving the holy ghost unto his discyples, Johan ii.
brethinge upon them did say, receive you ye holy ghost, whosoeuers synes you
remette, they shall be remitted unto them, whosoeuers synns you retain they
shall be retained, as though he had spoken to al those that were constitute as
Peter was and wheare as in another place Christ spoke, Peter I have prayed for
the that thy faith fail not, Luc, xxii
but when thou art converted, strength thy brethren, Another terte whereby
that papists chaleng aucthoryte for the bishop of rome, August i^ quest note
q, lxxv
does this be token the preeminence of peter as though it were peter only upon
whom ye church was edifiede all other being excluded, saint Augustyne says
did he pray for Peter and prayed not for Johan and. James I hold mi peace of
other Therefore it is manyfeste, that in Peter, all the other be contained. For
christ in John does say, I pray for them yt thou have given unto me, By
Peter is understand ye universal church,
wherefore it is manifest that by Peter we understand the universal church as
it euidentli appears in mani places by saint Augustyn, August super psall,
specialy where he says certain things be spoken which although they apere
to partayne peculyerlye to Peter the Apostle, yet have they never many^est
sense but when they be reffered unto the church, whose person in ^ygure Peter
did represente

as it is apertely known, but now let us come unto the words of christ in
the last chapter of John, Johan vitimo
which words, The, iii text waer by they challenge prymacy
these that affirm this high power do so ernestly regard that is to wit,
peter love thou me, Feed my sheep To feed ye sheep of christ after the saying
of Bid Bid
is to confyrme them that believe in christ that they shrynke not from the faith
and Instantly to labor and dylygence yt they dayli more and more take increase
in ye faith Therefore they as saint Auguste^ does say yt feed ye sheep of christ
in this mind that they would have them to be their sheep and not the sheep of
christ do confound them self that they do it not for ye love of christ, To
feed the sheep of christ is to confirm them that believe in christ and to
encreate the^y faith,
August, super Johan, vltimo
but for covetousness either of glory or dominion, or of lucre. Not for
obedyence, August de ago, christo, cap xxxx,
not for intent to help the^ or for love for to please god, and in this book
of the agony of a christen man, he says that it was not without cause
amongst al thapostels that peter did represent the person of this catholyke
church, that was spoken to peter, was spoken to al thapostles,
and that the keys of the kingdom of heaven were given to this church, and
when it was spoken to him it was to al, love thou me, feed mishepe, and so
these wretches while they in peter do not understand the stone and will not
believe that the keys of the kingdom of heaven were given unto the church they
have lost the^ out of their hands. Bid also upon this last chapter of John
says thus yt was spoken unto peter was spoken unto all the dyscyples of christ
for the other of the appostles were the same that, Peter was, There is but one
floke which was fed of al thappos^ses with God consent who^^ peter receuyd
with (...) with (...)
they very sheperd al there is but on flock showed which was fed of all ye
appostles with out agreement or consent and syns that time is fed by the sucessors
of them with mutual and comine dyligence, bysides this ambrose in his book of
the dygnyte of presthodde upon these words feed my sheep, Ambrosius
does assente unto the sentence before rehearsed, saing which sheep and which
flock not only Peter them receuyd but he receuid them with us, Glosa
ordinaria math, xvi,
Al bysshopps and priests have equal, aucthoryte with Peter and why peter
rece^uyde them specially,
and all we receuyd the^ with him, But where as all bysshoppes and priests have
equal aucthoryte with Peter.

Not with standinge Peter receyuyd it specyallye that every man might perceive
yt he that sepetateth him self from the unite of ye faith, ca^ne neither be
absoluyd of his sins, nor enter into the kingdom of heaven. And saint Hierom
Hierom
said, from the unity of the faith not from the unity of peter, What is
understand by ye seat of moses and by the seat of peter,
of the Bysshoppes of Rome, but whosoever supposes rome to be the seat of
peter, or any other place, may well appear yt he does interpretate amysse the
words of christ, in the xxiiii. chapter of matthew, For when christ does say,
Math, xxiiii,
the scribes and ye phariseis did sytte in the seat of moses, by the seat of
moses there is no man doubts but the law of Moses given by god and the pure
doctrine thereof is sygnyfyed and non other exterior seat. So ye seat of peter
is rather the seat of christ in ye which Peter and all the other apostles satt
is manifest to be nothing else but the pure gospel of christ. The gospel is
the seat of Peter,
And even as christ did admonish his, yt they should beware of the leaven of
the pharyseis which is their learning besides the law so he does command us
to beware of false prophets that is to say from them that teach their own
tradicions and not the words of christ, which interpretacion, They that teach
there one tradicions he false prophets,
August super Johan tract xlv. i,
augustyn upon John does confirm expo^ding these words ye scribes and pharisees
sit upon ye seat of moses do as they say but do not as they do.

What thing else did he say says augustyne but here you the voice of the
shepeherd by the hired servants, T^ry ye teache their own tradycyons seek not
yt is christ's but there own.
for syttyng upon the seat of moses they teache the law of god, than follows
yt by them god tech yt if they would tech their own tradicyons here it not. do
it not, for suerly such seek that is there own, and not that is christ's
whereof it is manifest that the seat of moses is ye law of moses and the
seat of christ in ye which peter and the other apostles sat, is the gospel,
and al such that teach not the law of moses nor the word of god sit not in
the seat of Moses nor in the seat of christ or Peter or of the apostles,
They that teach not the law of christ s^t in there own chares and enter in
at the windows as thieves
but in there own chayres and seats which co^ing before christ and enteri^g in
by the window and not by the door which is christ, be thieves and robbers and
takes honor unto the^ selfs, not called of god as Aaron was upon which
se^te^ce chrysostom writing says every christen, Chrysostom ho^^^. xxx. s.
man that takes the word of peter is ye seat of Peter, Every man yt takes y^
word or peter is ye ^e^e o^ peter
and Peter sytteth in him and likewise in a another place. Take ye head my
brethren how ye set upon the seat, Item, xl, did. ^apite, bid^ hi^^om
ibide^ cap, iii,
for ye seat does not make the priest. But the priest the seat, nor the place
does sanctifye the man, but the man the place, The seat does not make ye
priest but the pressed the seat.
he that sits well upon the seat, takes the honor of ye seat he that
syteth ill does iniurye unto the seat, An il priest of his presthode geteth
rebuke
and therefore an ill preeste of his presthedde gets rebuke and not dygnitye.

If we should grant thus also that the seat of Peter were the place or the
seat where he before sat, Gregorye, Gregorius (...) regu, lib^^, v^, cap, xx.
never the less does (...) the church of Alexandria or of antioche the seat
of Peter, as well as the church of Rome, Alexandria and anthioche were the seat
of Peter before ^ome
therefore (of yt we have showed before) it is manifest that, that the power
ecclesiastical which some enlarge and extend so ample in the bysshope of Rome
has not her foundation in the scriptures which ar alligate, for if the
private person of Peter be not the foundation of the church as we have proved
before, but upon Peter as representynge the person of al, or as pronounsing the
confession of the faith of christen men which is the fute and substa^ciall
foundation of the church, He proves by a similitude of ye emperor that ye
successors in the sete of peter can by no reason challenge ye prerogative of
peter
it has no more reason wherefore by that title of Peter his successors i^ his
cathedral seat or Bysshoperyche should challenge any prerogatyue of Peter, more
then he which shall succeade the Emperor in the kyndomes of Spain, shall
therefore challenge the empire of the romans, because ye king of Spayn while he
lived had that dyngnite for Peter was not, Why Peter, was called hedde of the
apostles,
therefore called chyfe of the apostles or foundacio^ because he was head of
this church, or that but for aspeciall prerogative of his merits he was
elect alone of al ye other, which should stand instead of the other, whose
confession another flesh nor blod has reuelate but ye heuenli father which is
in heaven, even as another caesar at this time is Emperor of rome, because he is
king of spayn But because he was elect of them in whom is ye acthorite of
eleccion

Christ chose Peter, Christ those Peter before he was bisshope of rome
before he was bishop of Rome, which place it is put in dowbte whether he ever
saw or no christ considered his qualites and not his person, There contains
successyo^ in the seats, but now in ye virtue and merits,
in there setes and bisshoprichis, they contayn ethsuaession, but in their
vertuse and merits there is no succession, and they that be good do succeed
the ill And the ill succeed the good. if Christ had given this authorite unto
the seat of rome it should have remained after the death of peter now vereli
since there is no mention made of rome why do we give rome superiorite before
authioch and why do not we prefarre authioche which seat peter first obtained
but wherefore does not Jerusalem excel al other where the seat of peter was
mani years before he saw Rome where he receuid ye holy ghost where first he
enflamed with the spirit, why be not jerusalem and authioche preferred before
rome.
Act, ii,
Peter made, iii, solemn sermons,
began first to put in exersice his office of preaching ye word of god, and
where he made four solemn Sermons, Act, i,
one of the eleccion of mathias to be apostle in the Rowme of Judas, Act, ii,
a another of the sendynge down of the holy ghost The third unto the people
where he restored his lymbes to him which was borne lame of his mother Act, iii,
Act, iiii,
The fourth unto Annas and Cayphas and the residewe of the preystes seniors and
scribes, what shall we say that in Jerusalem he did so many miracles that
they brought forth in to the streets their sick people and laid them in their
beds and cowches that when Peter came by the shadow of him at the last
might come over them and ye multitude of the other Cities nere unto them ran
also to Jerusalem bringing there sick people and such as were vexed with
uncleanly spirits, which were healyd all, Act, v,
The miracles of peter in jerusalem,
also to this that christ evermore set so much by Jerusalem. That when he
sent forth his apostles into al ye world to preach remission of synes not
only to the Iwes, Now mache christ set by jerusalem
but also to al nations of ye world he commanded them to begyne at Jerusalem
he forbadde yt they should not swear by that City because it was the cite of
the grette king, of this cite Esaias did before time prophesye, Luc. xxiiii,
out of Sion shall come a law, and the word of god out of Jerusalem. Matthew,
v,
There oneli in old time was the hie preisthode, Christ forbad they should not
swear by jerusalem
there was ye temple and ye altar, The holy of most holy sacrifices and
oblacions, Esaia, iii
sith the time / says our lord that I brought my people out of ye land of
Egipte I have not elect any City wherein any house should be build in my name,
In Jerusalem only was the high preesthode with in the temple
but I have chosen Jerusalem that my name should be in it, Christ chose
Jerusalem to build his temple i^^,
and he says I will give Jerusalem an Euangelyste and wisdom (by whom
autours will that christ the sone of god and the second deuyne person is
betokened) says in the holy cetie I have rested and in Jerusalem my power,
Gal, xxiiii,
zachar, viii
God by the prophet says I will dwell i^ Jerusalem,
and by Sacharye our lord speaks I will dwell in ye mids of Jerusalem. And
Jerusalem shall be called the city of veryte lo I will save mi people of ye est
part and of the weste part and I will bring them and they shall dwell in the
mids of Jerusalem, and they shall be my people and I wylbe their god in verite
and Justice and all the whole scripture is replete with the lauds of the City
of Jerusalem contrary wise rome is called babylon to whom our lord i^ ye
apocalips does threaton malediccion if we will give credence unto Hierom or
Tertulian it is much more like that this primaci or superiorite was last unto
Jerusalem which city god always did most favor of the which city christ
specially took cure of which he left to peter by name and not Rome, Rom, is
called babilo^ to who^ god threateneth malediccions,
It is like ye the premacye was last at Jerusalem,
Peter was bishop of anthioche before rome,
but also he took the bysshopryche of Anthyoche before the Bysshopriche of rome.

Wherefore if it be that peter for soke first Jerusalem and after ye anthioch,
and than came to Rome Then we may say that the elecion of Peter did constitute
the premacye, and not ye confession and grant of god, and the premate
authorite in that church is by peter, a man as they say and not of christ
being god, having no foundacyon in holy scripture but as they may contend it
to be by the sufferaunce of god. God sometime suffers tirranical power to
ponishe the people,
By which reason al power co^myth of god, asmoche as tirrannical power, which
verily god sometime does not hinder or let but suffers for to afflycte and
punisshe the people and sometime does send it, but if they contend the
preragotiue of peter to be at Rome rather then any where else by the reason yt
it was consecrate with the blod of peter why should not the church of
Jerusalem, was co^secrat with the blod of christ as rome with peter's blood
Jerusalem, by that reason much more expel, which was santifyed and
consecrate with ye blood of christ But now we wile come to speak of that
power ecclesiastical which we purpose to speak of in ye.ii. Of the power taken
after ye second manner
place which doubtless is confyrmed by holy scripture and semith to have taken
the limittes of her power by the same, first I will show how ye this power
ecclesiastical is not so, The power ecclesiastical was given, equally to all
thapostles
the taken as granted unto one before al other but equallye given unto all
thapostles, after yt I will show you, how it was given me sureable so that it
pertayneth not to those things which be usurped at these days under ye
title, and that this power was not given to one but to many diverse exposytors
of scripture do testifi, Math vltimo Johan, ii.
for when it is in scripture. Go you and teach al people, and receive you the
holy ghost, and whose sins you shall remitte. etc. They write on this manner
what authoryte says Chrysostom can be found more universal or greater after
the mind of augustyne by these words the law and power ecclesiastyall is
understood to be given and by the sentence of hierom and Ciprian all the
appostles equallye took authorite and pastural cure al indifferently upon on
day that is to say in pe^thecost as says Augustyne) Augustinus, de quest
noui, testam q, lxxxx in,
Hierominus ad Ieniuian, Cipren desunplicitotepre lator,
the law was given upon which day the holy ghost come down upon ye disciples
they should take authorite and know to preach the law of the gospel what
thing could more manifestlye show the equalite of Peter and the other
appostles than those elocucions so generally expressed besides this when the
disciples did ask Jesus who should be highest in the kyndome of heaven. August de
quest noutest, q lxxxxv,
Math, viii,
By and by he set a child in the mids amongst them and said verelye I say
unto you onles ye be converted and become like children ye shall not enter into
the kyndome of heaven. Therefore who soever does humble him self he shall be
most in ye kingdom of heaven. The apostles st^^^e for super^orite
Bid does sa^e that this question was asked of ye apostles for because they
strove for ye prymace or superyoryte, and therefore christ did sit a child in
the mids among them. Childer be wi^de of ambi^^on and desire of preeminence,
That they might learn that they should not seek for superiorite for children
be clean void of ambicion desire of pre-eminence and al affeccions of enui,
They that be Am^^^ious co^not to heaven onles ye repent
and ye gloss does interpretate this place of this fasshiononles ye be clean
converted from your elacion and indignacion in the which ye be now and al
become as innocent and lowlye by virtue as little children be. By there age,
Hieronimus, super matheu cap, xviii
ye shall not enter into the kyndome of heaven, hierom does say that although
that sentence may be general a Against al them that offend any man yet
after the dependinge of ye text it may be understood to be spoken also
against the apostles, which by askinge this question who should be hiest of
them in the kingdom of heaven did appear to strive and contend of preemyne^ce
of dygnite, and if they had continued in ye offense they might by there
offending have lost them, whom they brought unto their faith, sei^g the
apostles dispute among the^ selves of honor and prymacy crisostome agreinge
to the same says, Disto, xl. capi multi
whosoever desires primacy in er the shall find confusion in heaven, Note,
nor he shall be committed among ye servants of christ, Desire of premacis
causes confusion.
whosoever medlith of supiorite or preemine^ce and therefore saint cipryan and
anacletus Ciprian anacletus
did agree and consent that all the appostles received equallyte of lawshype and
eterenal honor the appostles were equal,
honer and power and Paul writteth unto ye corinthyans, I was in nothing
inferior unto ye hieste apostles and thus speaks of him self which being so
excelent apostle would not have spoken if he ought to have known any
superioryte i^ peter And in another place agreinge to the same sentence I
think my self nothing inferior unto the othere apostles, ii. cor, iiii,
and in another place again he writes on this manner, let a man esteem us on
this wise, as ye ministers of god, and disposers of the secrets of god, and
upon these words of the same paul in his epistle to the galathians where he
says that he did confer or comen of ye gospel with the other apostles the
gloss Gloss
interliniat addithe I have not learned of other as of my superiors. Ad galathi,
1^
But I did comen of the gospel with them as with misrendes and coequalles and
saint ambrose upon these words of Paul when peter came to anthioche I with stood
him in ye face, Ambrosius ad gal, ii,
he says he durst not have done so, onles he had known himself equal with
him for they did add nothing unto me but I added to them upon, this words of
the same Paul. James and John which seemed to be pyllers gave to barnabas and me
their right hands of felowshipe that is to say of equalyte and he says they
gave their right hands and not commandment whereby verelye equalite might be
perceived saint ambrose confyrmeth the same saying other apostles seemed to be
superious because they were before this Paull lost because he was called last
vereli not in me^ites or authorite but betokens the dygnite of the apostles
to be esteemed by reason of time as though in other things the Ambrosius, ii,
^oren, xi, xiii, c^ glosa ordinar in cap, i, ad gall The dingnite of ye
apostles, was estemede by plente of time
were equal of this that is rehearsed before it is manifest, what power and
how great was given by christ unto men of ye church yt is unto his apostles
and given to all ye, apostles of one measure and not given for intent of
primaci which is challenged now at this day, The prima^ne church d^ not admite
or head or prema^
For if by ye ordinance of god one should have been superior or head unto the
other how chanced yt that in ye beginning of the church the contrari was
observed does not the storye ecclesiastical bear witness yt when the holy
bysshoppes did mete together in ye council in Nicen there were.iii patriarchs
present there. Ecclesia. i^^ histor (...) h, iii, (...)
At the (...) of ^i^en (...) were at (...) time (...) ^^kes, (...) there (...)
pa^^^ (...) rome (...) sent be^^^ ^^der (...) ^^der,


And the bishop of Rome which was the fourth in order was absent. If one by
the law of god is father of fathers and al moust be reduced into a unite why
by the word patriarch which is half greek, The ^^ter ^^tation of (...) word
p^^arks
half laten are there rekned four patria^kes ye is to say four Fathers of
Fathers which be joined together by nomutual relacio^ i^ton other, The
patriarchs were not subject one to another,
but as though they by diversity of power were rulers of othere men and they
subject to no man And in that order the bishop of Rome is hinder most.

Whom if he ought to be ye hiest by ye law of god it was uncharitable done to
put him so hinmost in order and if he were hiest he law or constitucion of
man, it was done unjustly, But in so holy a counsel as was then at Neceny it
is more like ttwith yt al things were observed done and constituted very
iustli and equally and if the bisshope of Rome ought by ye law^ of god to be
taken hedde of ye church, It his like ye the council of Necen did al thing
Iustli and in counted most holy and lawful
Foundation of ye church, Chiffe of ye church, The only and supreme vicarre
of christ it is not credible those holy fathers to be so ingnorant, yt they
know not what they ought to do Nor so ungodly yt they would not do that they
ought to do. But ye council is counted of every man to be most holiest, Libro,
ix, cap et historia ecclesiastia libro v, ^ap, xxiii,
and most lawefully congregate. And as it appears by the storye tripertite
ye. The byshopspes of the este did resist the Bysshopps of rome
Bishops of the este did resist the bishop of Rome boldeli. And as
concerning the obserua^ce of ester The Bishop of Rome could obtain nothing of
the Bishop of London Also pelagius Pelagius,
the second writes yt it is lawful for no man to cale^ge unto him. It is
lawful for no man to name him self vniuarsalle or hye Bishop,
The name of ye universal Bishop his words contain one this manner. Pelagius
Pope writes to al Bysshopps sayng let non of ye patriarchs take upon him the
name of ye universal Bishop. lxxxxix, disto cap millus
For if one of them be universal ye name of patriarks is diminisshed or taken
away from the other. But god put away this (says he from (...) the prestes do
know them self b^ the custom of ye church to be subject unto him that is
made ye head gouernoure, The bysshoppes be superiors to prysts by custom and
not by ye law of god,
so let ye bishops know yt they be superioures unto the pristes more of
custom than by any ordinance by the law of god. And the same Hierom in a
another place conserninge his sentence before in a pystle to Oceanus says.
Hieronimus, ad Oceanus,
Among our old predicessores prestes and Bishops were al one For ye one is
the name of dignite ye other of age. Why Bysshoppes were ordained and made
And to Euagrius he writes thus. It is manifestly proved a pressed and a Bishop
to be al one. But after where as one was elect which should be superior of the
other it was done to put away sismis. Lest every one drawinge after his mind
ye church of christ should perturbe and corrupt it. For at Alexandria from ye
time of mark ye Euangelyst unto the time of Heracla and Dionisius bisshopes ye
prystes always chose one among them and set him in a hiegher place degree and
called him Bishop Even as the oste should choose them a captayn: At Alexandria
prestes chose one of the^ self to be ruler and called him bisshope,
or as if the deacons among them should choose one in genius man and call him
archdeacon or chief deacon and a little after. Where so ever the Bishop is,
other at Rome, or at Engubii, Neither powere riches, nor h^mylyte ca^ make a
bisshope hyer or lower,
or at Constantinople, or at Rgim or at Alexandria, or at Taue he is of one ye
same. And the same presthode, another power of Riches nor humilite of pouertye
cane make a Bishop hier or lower But al be ye successors of ye Apostles,
Anacletus In consiliis isidori de ordin episcoporum
and where as anacletus show with if these be ^nacletus works that are ascribed
to him that the sea of Rome is the first and these of Alexandria second and so
furthe. When he does make them al and call them patriakes, it is manifest ye
they be rulers or heddes of other and not subject unto other, and where as one
patriarch is chief, The fathers of the prymatiue church shronke from ye unite
of prymacie
ye other have non authorite there, in so much that by this manner of
distruccion of ye patriarchs it may well apere yt the first fathers of the
church did shrink from the unity For in the council of nice^ ye words that
follow be had, In historia ecclesiasti libro x, chap, vi,
it is ordained that at alexandria and in the cite of rome the old ancient
custom be observed that the one have the over sight and cure of Egipte and the
other to have the ouersyght of the churches with in the diocese of Rome Did,
lxv mos antiquis, et in co^cilio niceno ex Isydoro


Which in other books is written with these words, let ye old coustome be
kept in Egipte Libean and penthapolys so yt the bisshope of Alexandria have
the power over al them, for the bisshope of Rome has like manners and customs.
Likewise at anthioche and other provinces let their preuyleges be observed in
their churches, di, lxv, cap v
and this is manifest and clear generallye, He that is made bishop with out
consent of the metropolitan should be no bishop
yt whosoever be made bishop with out the consent of the Metropolitan the
grerte sinode or council has determined that he should ought to be no
bisshoppe but and if he be made by the comen and reasonable decre of all and
approbate after the ordinances of the church of two or.iii. did, lxv, cap
sane,
It was decreed in the council in aphrica that the bysshope of rome should not
be superior to al other,

Inconsilio aphrica, iii, cha xxvi, disto, lxxxxix, chap. primo


after their proper contencions say against him let the sentence of the more
perte take effect, and in the council of Africa many Statutes ar found
which plainly show that it was inacted and obseruyd that one Bishop as the
bishop of rome should not bear rule over al other. First it was decred that ye
bishop of ye firstse should not be called chief or hedde of all prestes, Non
ought to be called they chiffe or head bysshope or he priest,
or the highest priest or any such name but only they Bishop of ye first or
chief see. For there was at that time three patriarchs of whom every one was
called Bishop of the hiest see, In co^silio my leuitan
that is to say the Bishop of Antioche of Alexandrya and of rome, He that is
excommunicate in on diocese ought not to be reduced in to another diocese,
as Gyrald does write in his Chronicles, and in the council of Mileuitan in the
xviii. Chapter. Whosoever be excommunicate in Aphrica if they gopreuely into
other parts beyond the sea, there to be taken or receuid into comunion of
christen men he shall thereby lose his clarke ship and Run into Danger of
Irregular and in ye xxviii. chapter. And if so be that in ye mother church ye
bishop be necligent against heritickes let the other Bisshopes nighe about
him diligentli assemble them selfs to gether, If ye Bishop of the mother
church be neclige^t he should be warned of the other bysshoppes nighe about,
and warn him of his necligens that he may not excuse him self. But if it so
be that with in six months after this assembling If the excucion thereof be in
his province, he do not labor and sewe to convert them to the unity of the
catholyke faith let him not receive or minister Sacraments till the time, he
fulfill it. If the doctor or executour com not to the places let not the wit be
ascribed to ye bishop, And in the.xxiii. Clerks may Appeal from diocese unto
ye bysshoppes next about and from the^ to ye councils or primaces of the
prouynces
chapter also it pleases us yt prestes deacons or other infer^or clerks in
causes as shall chance the^ to have if they compain of ye Judgment of their
own Bishop, let ye Bisshops ye be nigh unto the^ here the^ and finisshe
betwixt the^ what matter soever it be, so they be chose^ by them and with consent
of their bisshops, and if it shall be thought necessari to apele also fro^the^ ye
shall not apeale but unto ye councils of Aphrica or else unto ye primaces of
there provinces. And whosoever will apeale unto other perties beyond ye sees
shall not be suffered in Aphrica to receive the communion of christen men. Conci
niceuo cap. v
And ye council of Nycene has ratyfied yt causes should not be determined out
of ye proui^ces where they began, Causes should be determined within ye
provinces where they begone,
and whosoever were excommunicate in one province should be receyuid of no man
in communion in any other province and the bishop of rome is not except Of
this matter treatyth an Epistl of the council of aphrica unto pope Celestyne,
In concicartage vi, in fine
in so much sureli yt this day ye church being well increased does forbydde
nowhyt but (si the such unite is not necessary) Unite is not necessary but
there might be, xx, heddes,
there might be twenty constituted which thing it is very like that the
bishops of rome did fear least hit should have come to pass. Phocas
emperor,


And therefore boniface did sew unto the emperor Phocas that ye prymacy of the
churches of Rome having then nosure ground work Some good me^ that were
bysshoppes of
might be constituted and confyrmid by his commandments and laws for old
bysshopes of rome did refuse that universal primacy and prorogatyue offered
freely unto them in the council of chalendonense andone of them used the same
honor, rome did refuse the prymaci offered to the^ freely in ye counsel Paulus
decimus de gest rone, li, xviii, Gregorius in regist, li, iiii,
and first of all that durst name himself the universal bishop was John
bishop of consta^tinoble, John bishop of constantinoble was the first yt
named him self universal or head bysshope
for the which cause he gate him great envy and troubled all ye world with his
contencion, but the Bysshoppes of rome resysted him stiffely first pelagius and
after gregorius and yet they took not upon the^ that honor. But only they
thus suppressed the intent of Johan. Bonifacius ye iii, gat the primaci by ye
hell be of the Emperor phocas
Till at the last arose Bonifacius the.iii. which by the ayede and help of
phocas the emperor gate unto him and his successors the chief honor and
primacye But not without great contencion and striffe because ye bishop of
constantinoble did stiffeli affirm that ye preuilege belonged to him here may
Rome understand if she be not unkind and or forgotting of benefits done to
her, how much she is bound unto bonyfacius the.iii, De ina^ et obedie^ in
extrera cap, vna^ sa^ct
and the.viii. of the which.ii. bonifacius the first did arm his seat with
one swerd ye other did arm it with twain, Bonifacius the, iii, did arm the sea of rome with on sword boniface the, viii, did arm hit with twaen,
Insomoch they took away from princes there sword but where as he does
permytte them of his gentylnes and so did amplyfye his domynion. With so great
and extreme desire to bear rule that he was not content to be ruler of one
world, The bisshops of rome were not co^te^t with the rule of one world but yt
y mouste spoil purgatori and rule, ii worlds
as the sainge is of Alexandria, but he began, to Raygne in hell that by his
authorite he would Robe or spoil purgatory and so have domynion of two
worlds. But the first bonifacius did obtain his primace by ye commandments
of and Statutes of Phocas. Constantinus had ordained ye same before as Martine
does write in his Cronicles, Phocas emperor
But in deed Justinian ye good Emperor does show in his laws, Co^stantinus,
Emperor,
that ye cite of Constantinople.iii. Iustiniam emper,
spirytuall things did enjoy the preuilege of old Rome. And after that time
in the prouynce of Auynion the prerogatyue did contynewe and consyste
Successiuelye which is called the seat of Peter, These did co^tinew at
auinion long season and is called the seat of peter,
which prerogative if it had be, belonging to any place and the proper
Iurisdiccion of the city of Rome by the law of god it could by no means been
translated thense. But and that prerogatyue were personal it was exinete with
the person of Peter But as we in peter do understand his confession or else the
person of a bisshope in which case it should be consequent yt, ye power does
not pertayne belong to them that sit in the seat of peter but to them yt
succed unto his confession or into his dignite. Hieronius ad Euagriu^,
That is to say, as sait hierom reherseth, that that power should be understand
to be given to bishops by god in what place so ever they be, God gave bisshops
authorite but non dominion,
not withstandyng when he gave them this authorite he gave them not domynion
wtall For where as he speaks of dominion he says thus luc.xxii. kings of
the gentilles have domynion over them but it shall not be so with you, Christ
forbeddeth superiorite amongeste his dysciples,
but whosoever is hiest amongst you let him be as the loweste and he that is
chief as he that does minister, of the which words barnarde does playnelye
affirm that the apostles were interdute al diminion and thus does he inuay or
speak against them that would challenge to them dominion, Barnards de
consideracion ad engeniu^ li, ii.
he says then go to be bold and usurp as a lord, ye office of apostle or
else being apostle, take upon the lord ship and dominion for surely thou
art prohibit from both if thou wylt have both attones together thou shall
loose both or elses thou shall be of that number of whom it is spoken they
have raygned but not by me.

Unto this agreethe very well that, Ex quadrunio
that is written inquadrunio let him use the sword that has receuyd authoryte
of the sword. For verelye Authoryte or power was constitute by god that they
should take the sword to the punischeme^t of the ill doers, And unto ye praise
of them yt do well, of them ye usurp or take upon them the sword it is wryttyn
every man that takes a sword shall perish with the sword, ponder there the
words of christ if thou profess thy self to be ye discyple of christ,
Prices of ye gentiles beat rule over them and they that have, authorite over
the ar called gracious lords, but you shall not be so, He that with highest
says christ shall be lowest,
but he that wylbe highest amongst you let him be your servant.

If thou take upon the, they ministry of seruis of christ if you refuse not
the yoke of our lord abide in the same estate in which thou waste called, i.
Pretri, v
and suffer lay men to have the dominion of the people. Likewise blessed Peter
in the.v. Petri, v,
chapter of his first epistle says, I desire you prystes which am also a
priest my self, as much as lies in you, feed, the fllocke of christ have ye
oversight and cure thereof not as compelled thereunto, but with a good will not
desiring unlawful lucre, but with a good mind, not as excusinge dominion or
authorite over ye charge but that ye give god the example unto the flock. And
Barnardus upon these words of Peter writing unto Engenius says thus Did he
leave dominion unto his successors? Barnardus, de consideraci one li, ii
Here peter him self, not berynge rule he says and lest he should think he
spoke yt only for humilite and not for truth it is the saying of our lord in
the gospel. Peter left no dominion, to his successors
Kings of the gentilles bear rule over them. etc. Furthermore paul in his
second epistle to the corinthians says. ii, Cor, i^^
We be not as lords over you under the title of faith but we be helpers of
your ioyr. Chrisosto^, li, ii, dialog cap iii,
Chrysostom co^fyrminge the same sentence says. We have no dominion, for
these yt be without seculer Judges Imeane, when they have subdued all lewd and
ill persons do show and excercyce great power against the^ and refrain them
whether they will or ^o from their old and vyciouse manners and vnthristines.
But in the church it is necessary to convert them that be wyllyng and not by
coaccion or compulcio^ for we have no power given to us by the law that by
aucthoryte of sentence we may constrayne any man to refrain from his offenses
and vices: The church has no power to co^trayn or to ponishe,
unto the which sentence hierom in his epistle to Helidorus in ye exitaphe of
Nepotianus does agree and assent sainge a king rules men whether they will or no
A bishop them that be willinge. The king makes them obediente and subject
with fear or dread the Bishop is given to serve me^. Besides this Gregory
bishop of rome did commytte the examinacion of worldly causes to them which
had knowlage and learning of exterior things, Gregorye in Job cap, xxxi,
Worldly causes long to lay Judges and not to sperytuall men,
as seculer and civil causes. And from them that be endewed with spiritual
goods he takes away all business and solicitude of worldli things that they
may the better entende to serve and order the superioure goods when they be
not compelled or bound to dispose the Inferioure goods. What thing could
more plainly declare that bysshopes and prelates should not intermedle with
Empire or dominion than those words of christ in the Euaungelyste John.
Prelates should not meddle with empire or dominion which pertayneth to kings
Johan, xviii
My kingdom is not of this world. That is to say, after the commen gloss, I
am not to rule or raygne as with temporal dominion, for that is the office of
kings as ye may gethe^ of these words in the acts of the apostles. Acts,
xxvii^


I stand at the Judgment seat of Sesar where I ought to be Judged also I
apele to caesar by ye Paul was judged before say Judges and did apele to the^
power
which words the comen gloss, does understand the place of Judgments of
Emperors and kings, to be singular and peculyar and yt al compulsiue
Judgment of the prestes ought to be clean taken a way. For christ in John
does teach his apostles, The ki^gdom of god is not of this world
that is to say those that are sent, and also other which take upon them the
doctrine and aucthorite of thapostles ought not to chaleng or enterprise here
any^ kyndome or domynion, for he says, my kingdom is not of this world of
the which I came to teach as the comen gloss says, as though he would say
as saint Augustyne says here you Iwes and gentilles, Augustus (...) Johan
tracte xxxv
I do not let your dominion in this world what would ye more, come you by
faith unto the kyndom which is not of this world for what is his kindome. But
those that believe one him. Where fore let bysshoppes and prestes ouerse and
look to those things yt partayne to god, The office of Bysshoppes i^, Paralip
^ts
as we read it commaundid to Amarias the priest in the old testament, and
after Hierom upon the book of Leuiticus, These.ii. Distin, xxxvi, cap, s^
things be the office and excercises of a bisshoppe to larne of god, Redinge
ye holy screpture And with much meditacion to teache ye people and teache them
those thingis which be larned of god. and not of his own mind not by the
understanding of man, But by ye wiche ye holy gooste teachith, also in ye
council of Carthage the iiii. Cons^^ist carthage, iiii,
A bisshopp should only give him self to studyeng prayer, and preaching of
the word of god. And in Secular and wordli business let them be obedient to
princes and potestates, i, Tim, iii,
o being the Commandments of them, And redye to all good works. So Paul
did warn or council Titus, The things rehearsed before do confirm the
ecclesiastical power. But it deniethe dominion they give aucthorite but noe
Iurisdiccion To admonish, What pertayneth to Byspe,
to exhort, to comfort, to desire, to teache to preche, to mynyster
sacraments, charytablye to rebuke to blame or find fault with. To entreat
for gods sake to increase and augment the hope and trust in god, to fear
sum by the terryble threteninges of Scriptures is the proper office of them,
yt are in the stead or place of ye apostles, and also of them unto whom it was
said, whose sins Someuer ye Remytte shall be remytted etc. And laws,
ponysshementes. Judgments restrayntes. Sentences, What long to princes
kings and emperors
and such othere long to Emperous kings and other powers which
enterpretacion of holy scripture, does most agree unto ye preachinge and
techinge of christ of the liberty of the gospel. Or else if christ had mente
thus yt even as in the old testament Moses, Gal, iii,
and the law were given unto the people of ye Iwes instead of scole masters:
If decrees of bysshopes do bind our conscience we be i^ worse case tha^ the
Iue^ in ye old law,
so the Bishop of Rome a mongest christen people should have that office that
he should make and put unto the people, laws and Instruccions (as they call
the^) which should hold and bind men's consciences. Then Christ had not
permitted or changed seruytude or bondage with liberty, but bondage with
bondage in very ill and heuye condition, That is to wit where as the Iwes did
follow the law, commaundid by the mouth of god, and that a certain law: we
that be christen men should be commaundyd to be guyded by the laws of men
being of dyuersytye of minds. And often times mutable, whose laws also be mo
in number, The laws of Popes be innumerable and intolerable,
than ye capacite of man ^an other understand or else remember. But that
power to make and ordeyne laws is added and adicte unto that other power
granted by god, of yt which we speak before, and the yoke of christ which
christ him self in the gospel does call so gentle and light, Matthew, xi,
the bysshoppes of rome have much more hard better and intolerable tha^ was
the bondage of the Iwes and therefore the fathers of the primytiue church when
they had In / In the primitive church yt decres of cou^seles were called canons
or rules and not laws
uented honesti and wholesome tradicions by the which the rude Ignorante and
confyrme people might be ordered. They did make difference between their
tradicions and laws with moderacion of their name, and lest that they should
appear to take upon him more then they thought they had by ye grant of god,
they did not name the^ laws or statutes but canons that is to say rules or
Instruccions as contayninge ordinances profitable unto a christen life as they
supposed and yet not utterly necessary, for all have not observed thordinaunces
made by thapostles. The ordinances of the apostles were not all receued and the
laws of bisshoppes be as ye rules of Benet Francis and such.
But after the opinion of some men they be counted a mongest those which be not
authorized and even as the rules of Benete / Fraunces, Dominicke. and Augustine
be received and admitted of some and have not ye stryngthe of laws. But as we
bind our selfs unto them nor we receive the^ as laws with necessite of
obedience, but as rules and informacions honestye and vertuose, pleasant and
acceptable to god and we that like them, do profess them.

That we going the same steps and following these good fathers as they
followed christ should lead our life in the spirit of humility with sobernes
and mekenes. So our fathers did admit the rules of the bisshops rome and
their Informacions as long as they seemed vertuose and to set forward only the
glory of christ and not al but some, Ou^e fathers did not admit all the canons
of the bisshoppes but some as they thought good and vertuose,
that is to say as every province (as ye rules or Canons contain) did follow
their own minds. Nor they receiuyd the^ as laws and statutes but as they
pretend by their name, that is to say, as rules and Informacions. For they
were called evermore Rules or informacions. Till bysshoppes that came after did
add and put unto them the name or term of laws that they might thereby usurp
necessite of obedience, and get it by use and custom, by which ways it was
brought to pass yt it is called the canon law. If bysshopes have aucthorite
of god to make laws and bind menes consienses all men are bound to keep them,
but ye contrary is observed,
For if it be given to them by god to him aucthoryte to make laws which
should bind, and onerate the conscience of men it should follow with all that if
they have aucthorite by god to make laws yt other men are bound to obey them
which thing if it were truth no manner custom contrary or repugnant to the
canon law might by reasons be diffended and yet the same canon laws do
consent and confess that notwithstanding such customs contrary may consyste
and stand, Distin iiii cap statunnus.
for vereli Thelelphorus Archebysshope of the city of rome has ordained that
al clerks shalde abstain from flesh. Thelesohorus orde^ned the clargy to
fast, xl, days before Ester,
vii. wykes wholye before Ester. But this decre, as gratianus says because it
is not approbate by the custom and manners of people does not condemn the^ yt
do other wise as gylty of offense or tra^gression wherbi it is manifest yt the
canon law byndethe no man of necessite, yt now ye cano^ laws as we call the^
have not their streighneth and virtue by ye auctoryte of Bysshoppes that be the
makers thereof. The Canons have not there authorite by ye makers but by ye
consent of ye receuers Laws req^^e obedience.
But by the people receyuinge them willi^gly, where as otherwise virtue and
strength of the laws is such yt it requires of other men necessite of
obedience, lest the Aucthorite to make Laws should by contempt, be had in
derysyon or little regard. And so it is the best and most surest conclusion
if we be not bound in pain of deadly syne, by the commandment of god to
receive all their ordinances. Then ye bysshope of Rome or any other Bisshope
has not auctorite to institute such Canons under yt or such pain. Again if
we be bound to receive them all of the Clarge ar bound at these day as many
as ar called unto the lotte of our Lord to observe the fast of.lx. The clargi
ke ^ith not ye fast o^ ^l days before ester,
days and because they keep it not, it is offense which by contynuaunce of
time is not minisshed but augme^ted. Notwithstanding they consent of all
chrystente for ye most perte has by long use and custom Judged the
contrary, De consecratione distin iii, cap sabate, In france thy eat flesh
all saterdayes between ch^^^te man (...) ^as de^^^
and Gratian does defend them that keep yt not from ye pain of
transgression, which thing also ye church of France not keeping the fast of
the Saterdaye between the natiuite of christ and the purificacion of the pure
maid and mother mary. Although it were comaundid by pope Innocent that it
should be kept every weke does euydently prove the same for as it is writton
in a another place as we have rehersid before every prouynce or cou^tray is
abundant or stidfast in his own, meaning nor at this time al Canons which we
call the Popes law, have not therr hole streinght and virtue in every place with all men, In the which thing if god be offe^did if ye power given of god be
violate their is very great slackenes or sufference in them which much regard
that thing that, is it not lawful for the bysshope of rome by the Popes law
to provide for promocions or benefices in all places and with every man which
law of theyrs ye bysshoppes of rome in times past have labored ernestlye that
it might be receyuid as a law which should bind every man that should
intend nothing to the contrary nor make any resistance or repugnance against
it, The Bysshoppes of Rome have la^ored to bind men to keep there decrees
and notwithstanding in England after it had obtained and taken effect long
all men with stood it, England did resist ye popes provisions for p^omocions and
made a law to the co^trarii
so that there was a law made against the transgressors and estabished with
sever commaundment amongst whom there is no doubt but there was many good
men / and there be some yet that could not away with these popes laws in
that behalf unless the bishop of rome did certyfy or show yt they were
wirtton by the hand of god, Bishops made a law that clerks should not be
suyed before secular Judges but ye contrary was always observed.
also bisshopes of Rome have decreed that clerks should not be brought before
seculer Judges for any manner cause, But this statute is kept no where. And
although many laws and canons concerning that matter be publisshed with
grette and dangerous pains yet the contrary is every where observed without
any danger or fear, wherbi it manifestly appears yt these canon laws (as
they call them) Be nothing else but rules and informacions which are wont
always to take place or effect as ye people does admytte the^ or dissanul
them, for by ye same reason yt some may be reiecte, al may be contempnyd and
forsaken, for it is not in the choice or eleccion of the people or subectes
that they may determyne to which they will obey, to which they will not, but
if their aucthorite be of god, and if we may apply to this intent, this sainge
of the gospel. They sit in the seat of Moses which teach and do not but do
you as they say but do not you as they do, Matthew xxiii
al we are wrapped in great peril and danger of hell which have contenned the
precepts and laws of the bysshoppes of rome some one ways. But every one in
some manner point and that not by Ignorance. But we have observed the contrary
knowinge willinglye and saying, Bysshopes have suffered ye contrary to there
laws to be kept and knew hi^.
and yet the bysshopes of rome heringe perceiving senge, and feeling these
things by dissimulacion have suffered the pastoures or Sheperdes of the church
which without any doubt if they had thought so (for the cure and charg of
souls that they have) other would have broken and adnihilate their own laws
which make so many christen men offenders or else they would have taken pain
to se them obseruid with more dilyge^ce. But where as another of these things
has been done with such diligens and cure as the grauytie of cause requires.
Does it not well appear that the Bishops their selves do doubt of the
aucthoryte of their laws? and that they have thought that their laws might
not be admytted of every man without any danger of soul? or when they myslyke
them, they might be forsaken or reprobate of the^ which they call their
subjects, The Bishop is of Rome Subtell.
but grette was the police and subteltye of the bysshoppes of rome / for whom
they did first go oboute to abtayne ye chief Empire and supremyte, they did
deuyde the power and jurisdiction with kings with very louinge and gentle
terms or titles, The power was divided with kings and princes,
and so that they might be made lords in spiritual things they did permyt to
kings all temporal things. For other wise ye hie bysshoppes do caleng both
the swerdes, The bysshoppes of Rome affirm that they have al power and that
the temporal power descendyth from the^ to kings,
and they do affirm that they have all power and Jurisdiction in their
authoryte: and that the power which we call temporal is derived from them to
kings, that is to say Caesar has thempyre divided with Jupiter and where as they
have taken away many things from princes bilonge usurpation and have
translated it to the^ selves, yet they handell it so that they make it as
their liberalyte and gift what so ever power or aucthoryte kings have now a
days. And when it shall please them they put down: They put down kings when
it pleases them and set up other,
some kings and set up some, and they do great things for they be mighty. And
the sword (which they have sharpened by the gentilnes and permission of
princes and endewed with worldly riches and possessions by the gentle and
lyberall gift of princes) they excersice and draw it out against them when
they think best.

Seeking that is their own pleasure not that is christ's following in their
doing not that the father of heaven has showed eueri man in his holy scripture
as in example or a ma^ke that we should follow. But that, that the flesh and
blood has reuelate unto them preferringe an humayne and worldli counterfette
felycyte in berynge rule before the true and perfect beatitude in christ, and
by this means, ye gretnes or largenes of this power did encreese. The largenes
of there power is leke astreme of walter,
Which like a grette streme of water passing over her banks or damime has
flowen and Corrupt all the world. Let me not be envied for speaking the
trewethe. No man cane serve two masters or lords whylle he looks to thoue he
little regardethe the other he that serves god dispiseth Riches. And paul
says, No man that serve god will entremedle or trouble him self in worldly
business. ii, Timothe, ii
Which thing the forfathers of the church perceiving, although they knew
that there is no ill which a man may use well yet never ye less even as paul
does writ to all men of wine. Eptes, v,
Be you not overcome and inebriate with wine, in whom is lecherye. And that
they should abstain not only from that else But from that, ye has lykenes or
contagion of ill, The clargie should refuse possessions and have nothing proper,
and should utterly avoyde all causes and occasions of ill. So these fathers
inducyd by the aucthorite of scripture, do ernestly conclude, that the clargi
should utterly refuse faculties and possessions as they call them, and that they
might the more effectuouslye persuade and enduce them to contemn them, they
did manifestlye deny yt this was convenient ye for them to have dominion or
proprietye. Not because that riches is ill or because that they only do
corrupt a man, for that, that enters in at the mouth or such other exterior
things do not defile a man but that that comes out of the mouth does of
treweth defile, and has infeccio^. Math, xv,
Riches and possessions which draws a manes mind from, god
But because riches and possessions do other whiles move away man's minds
from their places and seats, and bring them down from the contemplacion of
heavenly things unto the vile business and consideracions of worldly things
and other whiles so do tangell them that they can scantlye oftetymes ride and
lift up them selfs (as our lord, Math, xiii
does playnelye show in a parable. Wherefore with agret and whole consent they
took away from the clargi al propriete and dominion) for that entente (as Paul
writes) that they taken from amongst men as bysshoppes should appear
constituted and ordained for men in those things that appertain to god. Ad
hebreos, v
^i, q, i, ca quest duo sunt
So writes saint hiero^ to acertyen leuite. There is two manner of christen men
one manner or kind is the which is ordained and mancipate to serve god to
contemplacion and praiet for whom Two manner of christen me^ Spiritual and
temporal
it is mete and convenient to sease and not intermedle with any corporal
business, The enterpretacyon of this word clarke which is a lot or part^
as clerks and religiouse men and conuersis. Cleros in the greek tongue that is
to say clerks in ye late^ tongue signifies a lotte, and therefore such men are
called clerks as chosen by lotte, for god chose them al for his. These surely
be the kings that rule them selves and other in virtue and so they have their
kingdom in god and that betokens the crown upon their heddes this crown
they have by the ordinances of ye church of rome in the token of ki^dome which
is looked for in christ and the shauige of their heddes betokenyth ye
forsakinge of al temporal things for they being contented with meat drink
and cloth should have nothing proper amongst the^ but althinges should be
common. What the crown of ye pressed does be token,
What the shauinge of there hedds betokens,
A another manner of christian men there is as lay men, for laos in greek is in
English people, for them it is lawful to posses temporal things but only
for to use them for there is nothing more miserable the^ for money to condemn
god to them it is granted to marye wyfes to till ye grunde to Judge between
man and man to plead causes to set oblacions upon the aulters to give the
tenthe and so they may be saved if by well doing they avoid all vices. What
is lauful for lay people.
xii, q, i, cap, clericus,
Hierom to nepotianus confirms the save. Therefore a clarke which serves the
church of christ, let him first enterpretate his own name and when he has
the enterpretacion the dyffinicion of his own name let him labor to be
agreeable or like unto yt he is called. For cleros in ye greek, in laten is
called a lotte or part, therefore they be called clerks other because the be
of the lot or part of our lord or because our lord himself is the lot or
part of the clarge and whosoever other is him self the part of our lord or
has our lord for his part should so behave him self yt he might both
possess our lord and be possessed of our lord. The that be they part of our
lord can posses nothing besides they lord,
Whosoever possesses our lord and do the say with the prophet my part is
our lord he can have nothing bisides our lord. For and if he have any thing
besides our lord then our lord is not his part as in this example if he have
gold, silver possessions chaung of household stuff, god will not be contented
to be his part with these parts but if I be the pate of our lord and a
particion of his inheritance and take no part a monge other tribes. But as a
leuyte and a priest do live of the truth and seruith the altar live of ye
oblacions of the auter having meat drink and clothe I wylbe content with this,
and the bare cross I will follow bare and pore therefore I pray the and I will
repete it again and again and admonyshe the that thou think not the office
of a clarke as a manner or kind of your old exercise. That is to say that in
the service of christ thou seek not worldly lucre, and have no more in
possession than when thou begannest to be a clarke lest it be said to the.
Their clarkeshype shall not profette them many be rycher when they be
religiouse men then when they where secular, Many be rycher when they be
religios me^ the^ when they were secular,
and some clerks wax rich and possess riches under pore christ which they
had not under the devil rich and deceatfull that the church might sorrow to
se them rich, which the world had before in poverty, also saint Ambrose of
the forsaking of ye world writes thus, Ambrosius de suga secuie, capitule, ii
he that has god of his portion should take heed of nothing but of god lest he
be let with business of some other office for that labor that is spente about
other business is plucked away from the honor of religion and from this our
office. What things a priest must^ forsake
This is ye very thing that a pressed should fle for he yt has chosen to serve
god must forsake his household mey / nigh he must absent or put from hi^ those
that he loves most and absent him self from his friends. Hilarious upon
the.xxxix. psalm confyrmeth also the same sentence on this manner the childerne
of Levy shall have no portion or lot in ye mids of their brother for our
lord god is their part. Therefore the law given would no part of worldly
possessions to be given to them that serve god. Because ye god was their part.

And also Peter the preacher of the gospel does proteste that he had mo part
of humayne or worldly possession when he answered to him that asked him alms
sainge I have another gold nor silver but that I have I give ye Possidom^us
also of the life of saint Augustyne says thus As it happened as it is wont
that ye people enuyed the clargye, ^ctoru^, iii,
Aseane of saint Augustyne in A srmon to the people for sakyng posse: ssions,
because of there possessions he spoke unto ye peo of god saing that I had
lever live of the gifts and collacions of the people of god, Than to abide the
charge and ministracion of these possession^^ and that he was ready to do after
their minds that all the servants and mynysters of god might live on that
fassion as it is read t^ tholde testament.

that they that did serve at the altar should take part and live of ye alter
and after that we know that he did refuse certain possessions not because that
they were unprofitable for the pore but because he thought it justice and
equite that it should be possessed rather of the chylderne or parents or of
the kinflolkes of them yt were deperted whom they would not bestow it upon
there death bed and after he oftymes said that it was more sure and of less
Ieoperdye for the church to receue the bequestes of them that were deperted
given to them there possessors full of business and hurtful and the bequestes
rather to be offered and proffered than to be by extremyte required. Also in his
book named of the comtempte of the world (...) the same Possidomus has these
words yt here after follow. Whosoever does not forsake and renounce all that
he possesses cannot be my disciple he yt speaks to every man that would that
his disciples should have nothing proper, He that does ^ot renewouce all that
he has can not be the discyple of christ,
he yt possesses any thing in earth is clean removed from the doctrine of
Crist had they an ithing proper to whom their master had commaundid ye
contrary take noting with you in the way of whom Luke the Euaungelist does
show that they had al things commen mark what peter said to Jesus. Lo we
have forsaken al and have followed the. They which had less althynges had
reserved nothing for them selves. Then how can they take upon the^ aucthorite
to lowse and bind which do (...) sum to have any possession in earth which be
not ashamed to say our lord is the part of my inheritance where is this
saying of the apostles what concord has christ with Beliall why do they
eat the sins of the people which will not leave worldi possessions? If they
receive the tenthe, with the children of Levy how can they take any part
amongst ye other tribes if they would consider the Interpretacion of their
name, whithei be called clerks or lottes. But because our lord is ye lotte or
part of and heritage of them, Barnardus (...) declumationibis super euangelio
dixit Simo^ petrus ad Iesum.
saint Barnard leaning to this sentence says that clarke that has part in
earth shall not have perte in heaven. Also if a clarke have any thing besides our
lord, That clarke that has his part in earth shall have no perte in heaven
our lord shall not be his part, as in example if he have silver if he have
possessions if he have abundance of household stuff our lord does not
vowchsaff to be his part with these things and after he says let him live of
the altar let him not wax proud let him not be rioutouse let him not wax
rich let him not build him goodly palaces of the goods of the church
chaunginge square bulding to round let him not fill his coffers thereof let him
not spend it in vaniteis and superfluus things let him not extol his
kynesfockes with the goods of ye church let him not therewith marie his necis
I will not say his daughters it is taken to be a crime or offense much like to
sacrilege not to give to the poor that that is the goods of the poor suerlye
the patrymonye of the poor, be ye goods of the church and it is with holdo^
from them with uncharitable crueltye whatsoever the mynisters and bayliffes and
not lords and possessors take to them selves besides meat drink and clothe,
do you here in these words before that they be called the goods of ye church
and denied to be ye gooddes of ye clargye? The goods of the church be the
goods of ye pore which to keep from the power is much like sacrilege.
and yt he has nothing confyrmed to them whose perte or portion god is which
things if they be spoken of all the clargye generalli, shall it not much more be
spoken of ye bysshoppes? If the bishop of Rome be not alaye man, after the
mind of Hierom: he must needs be a clarke which makes but two manner of
chryste^ me^ if he be a clarke he has renounsed not only all that he had in
possessions but by his own deleccio^ when he chose to be a clarke he semethe
to have refusyd all dominion and propriete as those holy fathers think and say
whom we have recited before. Let bonyfacius the.viii. Bonifacius ye viii,
loved preemynence and named him self lord of all the world.
reuyne again from death of, Diotrephes of his time which desired and loved to
have preeminence in the church and plead his matter and make a reasonable
answer why he named him self lord of all the world, which could challenge
nothing as his own in all the world, onles he make or can prove the bishop
of rome to be a thryd manner or kind of me^ clean different from clerks and
lay men. The frayltye of man is ever more compasi^ge and busye,
But this is the condition and frayltye of man that is evermore in contunial
mocion compasing ente^dinge and business. For whatsoever comes of affeccion it
never rests but as long as any matter remains it is ever busye. They that
desire dygnyte, honor, and riches, having no measure therein ever labor to
come to the hiest and supreme preeminence, and when they can clymbe nor go no
far they must needs come bakewarde. Whosoever has read the stories of ye
bisshoppes of rome shall plainly perseaue and see what time first they set their
minds to honor dignite, and possessions: He yt clymeth to ye hiest must needs
come downwarde again,
and to have labored always in that thing that they might come to the hiest
and yt they took more head and diligence upon Temporal things than up on
spiritual things. If possessions of the church be of god it shall slande if
not it shall no^ continewe
And this is as other humayn things, which albeit they go forward pleasantli
in sight yet have not they any contuance scripture bearinge wytnes If it be of
god it shall stand, if it be of man it shall faule. And yt these things which
bysshopes have taken upon them in this behalf are not of god The authorite
rehearsed before do manyfestiye confyrme and ye end yt it is like to come to at
these days is like to prove ye same, full unadvisedly they take upon them
dominion of al things which by right can take dominion of nothi^ge. But it was
worth a man's labor in pondering this papistical power to consider also that
thing which we promised to speak of in the iii. The power of the city of rome
is not so large by god,
place whether bysshoppes of rome sometime have so behaved them selfs that they
also have showed by words and deeds that the authorite of the sea of Rome was
not so ample and large by the law of god, nor that it was competent for them
to have so universal a power as we se it usurped now a days, whose sentences
if they might take effect and might take away from the bishop of rome and
eueri one suppose in this case or that when should manyfestly se that Esope
tellethe of the crow in his fables apoore naked and without feathers. Did i,
lxxxxix. cap nullus Gregory would not be called the hedde bishop,
First of all gregorye took away the name and titles of honor and as it
seems the prerogative of preeminence for he would not suffer him self to be
called universal or head bishop, which thing surely he would not have done
onles in his consience he had thought (when he was bishop of rome) that he was
not the universal bishop. We should no^ abhore the true names of honor.
Where as if that were not when are taught by holy scripture that when should not
abhor from the true names of honor specially when christ did answer unto
his disciples, Ihoan, xiii
you call me master and lord and ye say well for I am in did. Thereby it is
manifest that Gregorye the bishop was moved by no other cause yt he would
not be called nor writon universal or head bishop the^ lest he should offend
scripture in that part where it is said let no man take upon him honor but he
that is called of god like as aron because he knew him self not universal
highest bishop he would not be called universal or head bishop nor be called yt
he was not when he might not answer I am so in deed. Heb, v,
^xix, q, ii, cap, due,
Pope urban writes thus there be two laws he says one canon / There be, ii,
laws the canon law and a private law
the other private that is a comen law which was confyrmed of ye holy
fathers by writing as the canon law which was made and institute for
transgression as in example it is decreed in ye canons that a clarke should not
go out of one bishop priche into another without let testimonial of his
bishop which was institute for vnthristes and viciouse persons lest any
bishop should receive Infamus persons for they were wont when they could not
be suffered in there one bishop priche to execute their service in a another
which was forbidden and dissanullyd by laws precepts and writings a private
law is which by the inspiracion or mention of ye holy ghost is writton in
men's hearts as the apostle speaks of some which have ye law of god writton
in their hearts and in a another place where as ye gentles have no law if they
by nature fulfill that that is ye law they be the law to them selfs. A
private law is writton in the hearts of men.
If any such retain the people in his church under the bishop and live
secularlye. If he be Inspired with the holy ghost and will save him self in any
abbay or reguler convent because he is Induced or moved by a private law
reason will not constrayne him to be bound to the comen law for ye spirit of
god is a law and they yt be led by ye spirit of god be ordered after the
law of god and who is he yt ca^ resist ye spirit of god worthily, He that is
led with ye sprite of god is at liberti although his bishop say yt
cou^^^rye and r^s^^^ him
and therefore whosoever is led by this spryte let him go at lyberte by our
authorite although his bishop say the contrary for the law was not made
for Iustmen but there as is the spirit of god there is liberte and if ye be
ladde by the spirit of god ye be not under the law of which text it apertlye
appears that by the sentence and opynion of Urban that these things partayne
not unto the consyence of men which are decreed by the bisshoppes
commandments or laws but that they are frustrate by the law of the
conscience for the comen law gives place unto the private law. The comen
law gives place to the private law,


Innocentius, papa, No man can dyspense with ye law of god they may with ye
law of man
Pope Innocente does so lymitte the popes power that he can do nothing against
ye law of god for this he did write there is so grette difference between
gods law and man's law that against ye law of god no man can dispende and
in the laws of man dispensacion may be had as necessite and proffitte shall
require, zozimius Bishop of rome, xxv, q, i, cap co^cro,
zozimus pope does yeat more straytlye lymytte the power of ye bisshopes of
rome which thus writes to make ordeine or to change any thing against ye
statutes of the old fathers partaineth not to the authorite of this se But let
antiquite be in strenght and virtue with us without contradiccio^ by whose
sentence al thing should be brought unto the old and prisciue state of the
church and those things which bysshoppes of rome have ordained or constituted
sith ye time should bereprobate and reiecte: The sea of rome can not dispense
nor change the statutes of the old fathers,
At which time if the authorite and cure were distributed into diverse and
sondrye pertes so it should proceed and go forward at this time and gregorye
wrote to Philip ye bisshope agreing to ye same sentence. Gregorius ad felicem
in registir libro, xii episti, xxxi,
If I should undo or distroye these things that my predecessors have
constituted I might be well proved to be not a builder with them but a puller
down the voice of ye treweth beringe witness. Every realm divided amongst
them selfs shall not stand and al sience and law divided against it self
shall be distroyed: It is to be feared that ye canon law lose his authorite.
in which thing it is to be feared that the same Gregorye be proved a true
proffecte: And that the canon law at this day by doubtefulnes and proplexite
of contrarityes be dissolved which by labor of mani years was made and build
the stones not well Joined together this papisticall power truly of ye see of
rome has oftetymes so far gonne from her own cost yt it has often times
Injuriously handled vexed and perturbed this realm of The papysticall power
has often times trobled England, But good bysshopes did resist and defend there
own Iurisdiccion and excludid al foren power
England verry far distante from them which power not only sage and wise
kings. But also the prudent and the holy bysshoppes of the realm repelled
and put back nor would not suffer it to take his pleasure but they keep and
defended there own Iurisdiccion and authorite and excludid all such fore^
power as it may evidently appear to every man which have read over the Cronycle
of England, Laurence arch Bishop of Cauntorberie and dunstone archbisshoppe of
the same and Grosted aperfitte man bishop of Lincoln did refuse al such
foren power,
in which it is had manifestli. How Laurens Archebisshop of Cantorburi and
saint Dunstan archebisshop of the same see and Grostede a very perfect man
bishop of Lyncolne did refuse and forsake all such foren power. Gregorye
writynge to augustine in a another place does manifestli show ye same that ye
laws or canons of ye se of rome take noe effect with al men and yt men should
not take more regard to observe xii, distin cap, nouit,
them then of they edifininge of ye faith of people in christ. These be the
contents of his words: Mark the words of gregori to ye church of England,
You know brother the custom of the church of Rome in which ye remember yt
you were norisshed and brought up in / but it is minded yt where soever ye have
found other in the church of rome or in the church of France or any other
church that may better please god that ye shall instruct and inform the
church of England which is newly and latelye come to the faith and now in the
setteling with the chief and most godliest ordinances that ye can gether of
all other churches, for ye things be not to be believed for the place. But the
place for the things therein. Therefore of every church whatsoever it be that
that is godly that is vertuose that is just and good choose out and bind them
together in a bundel and graf or prynte them in ye minds or hearts of English
me^ by custom, of which text also this appears that these canon laws have
not obtained strenght by exact obedyence but by inticementes of there good for
so writes gregory that they gathered to gether in a bundel should be inculked
in the minds of ye people of England by custom and not to be required or
extorte by censures or compulcions nor it is not to be let pass that Pope
Adryane in his synod celebrate at rome gave unto charles authorite and power
to choose and elect the bysshope of Rome and to order the apostolical se but
here I sesse rehersing the acts and sainges of good bishops for it is long of
scarsy of good bisshoppes that we use no more examples Distin, lxiii. cap
adrianus,
Pope Adrianus gave clerks aucthorit^ to choose ye bishop of rome and to order
the Apostolicalse,
in this matters, for after that the apostles which (yt they might better
entende preachinge the word of god and prayer) did leave seruinge ye tables
although it were a very good work and, Acth, vi
did clean alienate them self from that sainge it is not mete for us to leave
the word of god and serve tables Very sureli singnifieng that it pertayned
chefely to other office that they should give all other labor and the dylygens
in preaching the word of god after these I say and a few other in the
primative church the foloweres of them all the bisshoppes of rome almost so
fare went backewarde from christ that was there chief example In there living
and institucions as they were behind him in time. Bysshopes of rome went so
far backewarde from christ in virtue as they did in time.
But if these things which we have rehearsed before shude be laid against the
bishop of rome at this day and if that power should be esteemed after the
sentencis of the good bisshopes should not they be compelled to undo many
things that he made and done lest it should chance that Gregorye writes upon
the words of our lord That every Realm divided amongst them selfs shall fall
and be distroyed.

But now we will in hand with that thing which we promised to speak of in the
fourth place. That is to say what auctorite is given to kings other by the
law of god or else by ye permissio^ of man in spiritual or holy things. What
aucthoryte is given to kings by god, or else by the permissio^ of man,
In which matter first we will entrete of al kings generally and after yt
peculiarli of ye kings of England first it shall be showed ye god not only with
most evident signs in ye whole order of nature did express his will of ye
authorite and power of kings but that he did declare it also with manifest
words in the holy scriptures both of the old testamente and the new, and
that god did give with his own mouth Kings to be rulers of his people and the
power of them largely expounded he did confirm. God by his own mouth made
kings rulers of his people,
In the example of nature amongst ye chif philosophers plato aristotle and
appolonius did perseaue and considre that as in the whole world one is the hie
creature and ruler of al things as among the stertes ye some precelles al
other, The gouerna^ce of kings apperethe be natural things and by scripture
also,
amongst the beese one king there is, on belwether the flock does follow And
one leader the herd and the cranes follow all one, likewise in a co^munalte
should be one king as head to whom ye members should agree and this
consideracion of the communalte showed by the inclinacion of nature. And by ye
work of nature drawn out and prynted with more obscure tokens god has
aparteli manifest to us in holy scriptures oftentimes making mention of kings
and playnelye approuinge the power of them by his own mouth appointing them
which should raygne and feed his people. Genesis, xvii,
But let us begin at ye book of Genesis or of the creacion of the world in
which book it is thus writton. The laud is ye kings and princes.
The laud of the preistes which ye king gave them by which words it
manifestly appears that the laud was the kings and was given by them to the
preistes and that the dominion of earth perteyneth to kings in that, that they
were kings of whose hands the prestes receyuid all that laud they had and in
the.xvii. Deutoronomi xvii,
chapter of ye book of deuteronomi. When thou shall enter into ye land which
the lord shall give to the and when thou shalt say I will constitute a king
over me as al nations nere about have, yt shall constitute him which the lord
god shall chose amongst the brethern and after that he shall sit upon the seat
of his kingdom he shall write him out in a book this second law taking
example of the prestes of the tribe of the levites of which text it manifystly
apereth that all nations at that time had kings. Kings should be chosen of ye
same nation and have a book of the law and se the law kept,
And yt they were constytude at the fy^st amongst the people of god by the
eleccion of god to whom hit was commanded that they should write ye book of
the law of god that is to write not only for yt intent they should have it
and keep it with them without any other use of it. But yt they should command
that law to be kept and observed insomoche that it longs to them to
correct and to punyshe and it longethe to the preistes only to preach and to
give other example of the law if it were required and further to show the
preemynence of a King it is wrytton in the thryde book of Esdras in the.iiii.
What lo^geth to a king or prince and what to a priest and of the preemynence
of a king,
chapter the king is superior of al and bears rull of them and all that he
commanded them they do. iii, Esdre, iiii,


And he send them to warfare they go and break down hills, walls, and
towers, they are kylde and kill other men, and over pass not the kings word
and if they get the victory, they bring to ye king all the spoil likewise al
other that meddle not with wars nor fyghtinge but till the ground when they
reap they bring tribute to the king. And if the king alone do but command
to kyl they kyl. If he command to forgive they forgive. If he bid strike they
stryk, if he say drive away, they drive away, if he say build, they build
if he command to break down they break down if he say plant they plant,
and all the comens and rulers are obedient to him, and the king in the mean
time sits down eats, drynketh, and takes his rest and they keep watch
rownd about him and none of them dare get him out of the way to do his own
business but must be obedient unto the kings at a word and in the first book
of ye kings our lord said to Samuel show to them the duty of a ki^ge that
shall raygne over them he shall take away your sins your fildes your
vyneyardes your olyuetres and he will take the tenthe of your corn and of your
flocks and you shall be his servants i, Regu^, ix
What is the duty and authorite of a ki^ge,
and in the second book of Paralapomeno^ or Cronicles: iii, Paralopemeno, xix,
rauadias a ruler in the house of Judah shall be over al causes that appertain
to the king also they psalmist says now ye kings be ye wise be warned ye
that are Judges of the earth betokens that it belongs to kings to Judge the
earth. Psalmus, iii,
It belongs to kings t^ minister Justice and Judgment,


Also in the.xxxviii. chapter of duteronomium it is writton thou shall
constitute a king over the. Deutoronomium, xxxviii
And in the first book of the kings ix. i, Regu^, q
chapi when Samuel had looked upon saul our lord said to Samuel this is he has
I told ye of, ii, Regu^, ii, ii, regu^. v
he shall be ruler of my people and in ye.iii chapter of ye second book of
kings our lord says the man of Judah have noynted me to be their ki^ge, and it
folowith in the second book of the kings.v. chapter the seniors of Israel
came and ennoynted David to be their king and our lord said thou shall feed
my people and thou shall be captain upon Israel. Salomen writes in his
proverbs by me kings do raygne throw me princes make Just laws through me
lords be are rule and all Judges of the earth execute Judgment and in the,
Properbioro^, viii,
vi chapter of the book of Sapience or wisdom. Sapientia, vi
O ye kings here and understand give ear ye that rule multitudes for power
is given to you of our lord and strength of the hiest which shall try your
works and search out your Imaginacions and a wise King is the vpholdinge of
his people and in the book of Exodi the.xxxii. Exodi, xxxii,
chapter it is read. Aaron ye high priest said to Moses where he was in the
room of the prince and king, The hye prestes called the kings their lords
and the^ selfs their servants which proves kings to be superiors as to
ye hye prestes,
let not my lord be angry with me. etc. And Achimelich ye hye pressed called
himself ye servant of king Saull in the first book of the kings in.xxiii.
chapter the king sent to call Achimelech the pressed the son of Achetobe and
all his fathers house that is to say ye prestes that were in Nobe, and they
came al to the king and Saul said to achimelech here the son of Achitobe and
he said here I am my lord. Saull said to him why have ye conspyred against
me thou and ye son of Isaye. etc. and achimelech answered god forbedde this
from me, let not the king suspecte any such thing against his servant in all
ye house of my father for they servant knew nothing in thy^ matter another
less nor more.

Then there as the hie bisshoppes did call the kings there lords and the^
selfs ye kings seruannts it may well be gathered that kings be superiors to
the bisshoppes, and that the bishops ought to be subject to kings. Saint
Peter uses ye same manner of argume^tacio^ in his first epistle.iii. i, Petri,
iii,
chapter proving that Sara was subject to Abraham because she called him
lord after the example of whom other women should be subject to their
husbands and Christ by no other manner of argument does show in the.xxii.
Math, xxii
capiter of Matthew yt David was inferior than our savior but because he
called him his lord sainge our lord said to my lord. But there is to be
noted also in this place that ye king did give sentence of death upon the
hiest bishop. King saul gave sentence of death upon a chimelych the hye
bysshope,
Saing thou shalt dye, achimeliche and the house of thy father nor he is not
blamed by cause he gave sentence of death upon a pressed but because he gave
vncharytable and unjust sentence against him that was gilteles solomon likewise
which belike authorite did condemn to death the hie priest Abiathar was
hitherto blamed of no man because he gave a wortye sentence against him yt
deserved it. iii Regst, ii
Salamon condemynid yt hy bishop Abiath to death by like authorite
Saull of treuth is to be noted therefore because he gave sentence against him
that did not deserve it and in ye.xvii. Indicu^. xviii, et vltio
chapter of Indicu^ and the last chapter it is showed at those days there
was no king in Israel but eueri man did that thing yt he thought best by
these words it seems that the power of punishing did only pertayne to kings
and princes and not to the priests, Power of punissheme^t longs to kings
for no dowbte there were many preistes without doubt at that time. But
because they had no king not leader eueri man lived aftex his own pleaser and
desire, because there was no superior regal power by whose sword they might be
refrayned from vice besides that in the.iiii. iiii, regu^, xviii
book of kings xviii. capiter this is contained. Ezechias king put away the
abuses of ecclesiastical things and pulled down ye brazen serpent Set up by
Moses and commanded by god when he so it abused
Ezechias put away ye hilaulters and brake the Images and cut down the
groves and brake the brazen sarpent which Moses made, for till that time the
children of Israel did offer to it Ensence. And why may not now the abuse
of ecclesiastiall things and of al things that be with in the church
pertayne to examinacion and correction of the kings majesty if it be
manifestly perseaued that it be against the honor of god as ye good king
Ezechias did to whom there was none like amongst al ye kings of Judah in
kepinge all the commandments of god he did extend his power within the
bands of the church. And by his new commandments took away the broken
sarpente set ther^ by the commandment of god when he saw it honored
contrary to ye honor of god. If a king could change that thing which god
commanded to be done if it come to ill end and that with in ye church how
much rather might he change these things which commanded by ye commandment
of man be ill abused it makes for this purpos that is wrytton in the.ii. book
of Cronicles.viii. ii, Parali, viii
chapter and ye king Solomon did ordeyne ye offices of prestes in their
mynisteries after ye ordinances of David his father and the leuytes in there
order that they should give thanks and ministre before the prestes after the
ryte or cussome of every day and the porters in there order by gate and gate.
Solomon did order the offices of prei^^es and ministers in the church


for so commaundyd Dauyd the servant of god and another the prestes nor
levites did break any thing of ye commandment which the king commanded
them it agrees with this that is writto^ in the book of the Cronicles.xix.
ii, Paralipou^, xix
chapter Iosaphat did constitute Judges of the earth in all Cites of Judah.
Kings did co^stitute Iudgs as levites and prestes rulers of famylies to here
and Judge the causis of their brethene,
Of Judah walled by every place and comaundid them sainge take ye head what ye do
for ye have not in hand the Judgments of men but the Iudgme^tes of god and
what soever ye Judge it shall redownde to you let the fear of our lord be with
you and do you althynges with Judgment for there is no iniquite with god nor
acceptacions of persons nor desire of rewards also in Jerusalem Iosaphath did
constitute leuytes and pristes and rulers of the saumlies of Israel that they
Judgment and cause of our lord to all the in habitauntes therein and he
commanded them sainge ye shall do so in ye fear of our lord faithfully and
with a pure and parfecte heart al causes of your brethren which shall come to
you which dwell i^ there Citis betwe^ ki^red and kired whersoeuer any question is
made of ye law of commandment of Ceremones of Iustificacions show it unto
the^ yt the offend not against the lord and that the displeasure of god come
not upon you and your breterne for so doing ye shall not offend. Amarias
your Bishop and pressed shall be ruler our those things yt partayne to god.
Further zabadias the son of Ismael which is captain in ye house of Judah
shall ouerse those things that appertain to ye office of a king and ye have
masters leuytes before you take ye conforte and work diligently and our lord
shall be with you in your goods now let us lay this to gether breeflye the
Judgments of the people of Israel were the Judgments of god and al things
were determined after the prescripcion of the word of god of the which law
of god the prestes and ye prophets were expounders and the Judges thereof were
such as were elect and masters in eueri tribe in all ye cities onles there were
any doubtful matter for than that matter was referred to Jerusalem to the
prestes and Judge which shall be rulers, The prestes and prophets were
expou^ders of the law of god and the rulers of ye tribes elect were judges
thereof,
In doubtefull matters ye hye priest and the hye Judge at Jerusalem gave
^ente^ces together,
and they shall give sentence to gether, nor it shall not be lawful for any man
to despise or forsake their sentence. For whosoever did so, it was death to him
of this fasshion Judges ordered them selfs in other Cities saw in Jerusalem
when Iosaphath the king did commit al Judgment to the prestes levites and
rulers of families ioyn tell wherefore if kings and rulers were Judges of the
law of god and of those things which are prescribed by the word of god of
which they were nether makers nor teachers how much more may they be Judges
of al things which are co^stituted by man's law. If kings and rulers were
Judges o^ the law of god much more of ye law of man
To this purpose makes that is in the second book of Cronicles in the.xxxix
capiter even the same year and first month of his raygne did Ezechias open
the gates of the house of our lord and prepared them and he brought in the
prestes and leuytes and gathered the^ together into ye este street and said to
them here me you levites and purifye your selves and halowe you the house of
our lord god of your fathers and being al ye filthenes out of ye holy place
and afterward they gathered, ii, Paralip^, xxxix,
Ezechias commanded the pressed and levites to purifye them selves and ye house
of god and to make sacrifice and offering for sin,
there brethere^ and they did puryfye them selue^ and they went in after ye
commandment of the king, that by the, and that by the word of our lord they
might cleanse the house of our lord and ye prestes went into ye templ^ of our
lord for to cleanse it and the brought forth. etc. And after: for ye king
comaundid yt the burnte offeringe should be made for the sin of all Israel
And he did set leuytes in the house of our lord with cimba^les and saiterys
and harpes according to the comaundementes of David the king and of god The
kings fear of visious and of Natha^ the prophet. For it was the
commandment of our lord by the hand of his prophets. And the levites stood
holding the organs of David and ye preistes triumphs and Ezechias commanded
them to offer burnte, offeringe upon the altar. etc, and after, Ezechias and
the princes comaundid the levites they should praise our lord with the words
of David and Asaph the leer of visions. Ezechias commanded the people to offer.
Which did laud god with great gladness and honor him with kneling Ezechias
more over addid this. Ye have filled your hands to our lord come nere and
offer the sacrifices and thanks offering in ye house of our lord And then all the multitude offered. etc. When prestes in ye church and in the holy place
did all things after the commandment of the kings and princes and did obey
them in offering sacrifices in the purifyinge or halowinge of the house of god
and the sanctuari and in the prayers that were made in the church it seems
that it longs to kings and princes to command the preistes in such
things and that it longs to the prestes to be obedyent to them. ii, Parali,
xxx


Ezechias wrote epistles to al Israel and Judah to effraim and manassen that
they should come to ye house of our lord in Jerusalem to offer passover to the
lord god of Israel. The king sent to bydde the people to offer and held a
perliame^t in Jerusalem where ye decred that (...) feast of pasouer should be
kept ye, ii, month
And the king held a council with his lords and all the congregation in
Jerusalem and they decreed to keep the feast of passover in the second month
and after and the mensengers went with letters by the commandment of the
king and all his lords to all Israel and Judah showing to them according to
the kings commandment. Ye children of Israel turn again. etc. And after
that, and there unto the hand of our lord was in Judah to make them of one
accord to do the commandment of ye king and the captains according to the
word of our lord and much people where gathered in Jerusalem to make the
solemnite of sweet bread in ye second month and they arose and distroied ye
aulters in Jerusalem and they cast down althing where any sacrifice was to
any Idol and threw it into the water Cedron, at the commandment of the king
they kept the feastees of passover and of sweet bread after yt in the.ii. ii,
Paralipom xxxii,
book of Cronicles, xxxi. chapter be those words that follow. Ezechias set
the preistes and ye levites in their order to wait by course every man
according to his office as well ye preistes as levites for the burnte offeri^ges
and pease offri^ges and to minister and to thank and to sing in ye gates of ye
lodge of our lord. Ezechias commaundyd the people to geneperte of there goods
to the preistes and levites yt they might attend the seruis of god the tenth
and first frute^ wi^h thut they had vowed,
And after also Ezechias commaundid to the people yt dwelled in Jerusalem yt
they should give part to the preistes and levites yt they might attend ye law
of god and after yt Ezechias commanded yt they should prepare storehouses in
the house of our lord which thing when they had done they brought in the
first fruits and tenthes and whatsoever they had vowed faithfully And the
ouersear of them was Chonenias the leuite and semey his brother was the second
after whom were Iohiel and Azarias, Naathin, and Asael, Hierimoth Iozabad.
Eliel. Iesmachias. Maath, and Bauay as rulers under ye hands of Cho^enias and
Semey his brother by ye commandment of Ezechias the king and Azarias the
bishop of ye house of our lord to whom al things parteyned and after. Al
things were done in the house of god at ye commandment of the king.
And Ezechias did althi^g which we have spoken in all judah and did that which
was Just and godly before the lord his god in all manner obseruaunces in the
ministeres in the house of our lord according to the law and ceremonies
intending to serve his god in all his heart and he did prospere, mark how
this good king did assygne and divide to the prestes and the leuytes there
offices and how he wrote of the tenthes and the first fruits and those things
that pertayned to the offices or to ye right of the priests asmoche as in the
excersise of the ministeris in ye house of our lord were done at his biddinge
and commandment further it is wrytton in the first book of the Machabeis x,
i, Machabeorum, x,
chapter Alexander the king writes to Ionathas sainge now we have
constitute yt this day to be the hye pressed of the country and that thou shuldes
be called the kings friend. Kings did put in and elect the hye priest and
put them out,
etc. i, Machabeo, xiiii,
Likewise Demetrius did give to Simon the hie preisthode also he did constitute
Alchimus ye pressed and Anthiochus first gave the hic presthode to Jason and
after he put him out and gave it to Menclaus i. Machabeorum, vii,
and after put him out to and made Lilimachus hie pressed so always the assinent
and translacion of the hye priest did partayne to ye kings Whether he will when
preistes were not create but borne priests as in Salomons time or else when yt
were desired by the voices of they people as in the time of these princes. In
Salomo^s time preistes were borne preistes in the tyms of some princes after ye
chosen and cle^^e,
But now contraryewyse the hye preistes say yt they may give realms and
Empires to whom the list which was never hard nor read ye the did before
another in the old Testament nor in the new^. And this power of the kings we
have read confyrmed in ye new Testament for Math says this They came to Peter
that were wo^te to gether poll money. Matthew xvii Christ paid tribute to the
king or Emperor thereby showed that Kings sh^lde be honored
And chri^te said to Peter of whom do kings of the earth take tribute and so
furthe but lest we should offend them goo to the Sea and cast in a book and
take that fisshe that comes up first and open his mouth and thou shalt fine a
grote take that and give it fore me and the: did not christ by this example
shows that the aucthorite of kings should be honerred unto whom having the
rule of the comen weal me^ ought to give poll money and tribute yt he that
has ye oversight or charge of al men should have a reward or recompense of
his diligence and labor likewise it is wrytton. Give yt is Cesars to Ceser and
Jesus answered to Pilate. Mathw, xxii,
Thou could have no power against me oules it were given the from above
furthermore the kings of ye gentilles bear rule over them and they that be the
states do exercise power upon the^, Johan, xix,
Mathw iii,
Rom, xiii
saint Paul w^i^teh agreing to ye same se^te^ce let every man be obedient and
subject to the superior powers for the kings be not to be feared of them that
do well but of them that do ill, for he bears a sword not in vain. And there
ye comen gloss does interpretate the sword to mean power in Judgments. And
in the same place he that withstandeth the power, withstandeth the ordinance of
god and therefore he that by violence or disseate resysteth ye power that is,
the man put in authorite as the gloss says resists the ordinince of god.
Here is no man exempte from the obedience of kings with out dominatio^
Here I think best to tarry awhyle and diligentli to ponder and discus this
place which does meruelously confyrme the regal and riuell power to whom he
byddeth all men to be obedient he excepteth no man at all nether Peter nor
Paul no priest no bishop no Cardinal, no patriarch no Pope onles any man be
willi^g to get his damnacion. But if there be any man that thinks ye this was
not meant or spoken of the Ciuel or lay officer. Let him first remember that
christ taught ye preistes to flee and refuse superior aucthorite furthermore
that he calls them of whom he speaks here, lords or princes and says ye
they be to be feared of them that do ill and this name or word prince is not
wont in ye new Testament to be meant or taken for prestes onles there be
somewhat addid there to as the prince or highest of preistes prince or chief of
the Sinagoge or prince or hedde of the world or some other thing like,
Matthew, i,
and christ did teach that god should be feared which after the death of the
bodi has power to cast the soul into ye fire of hell And the king is to be
feared of them that do ill whom he does punish and correct with his Sword.
And prestes and preachers of the word of god in ye writing of the
Euaungelystes do rebuke sinners and counforte them that amend again. Holy
sciptures of ye new Testament give preistes no Judicial power,
But another the Scriptures of the Euaungelestes nor of the Apostles do give
them Judicial power nor court to make examynation or determinacion of
ponishement. Now that follows he bears not a Sword without cause, who will
expound or mean of the successors of the Apostles, did the Sergeantes or
Cachepolles goo about them beryng Swords or Maces. But a Croche and a Myter.
And further he monished them to give trybute to those officers of whom Paul
speaks of here. But they paid trybute to Christ not to the bishop And by
many other reasons hit may be proved that this place is to be understood of
the civil or lay officer to whom he wollde al men to be subject as much as
the hye bysshopes. And this i^terpretacion with a great consent and agreens
confirm both the lerning and the lyffe of christ and his apostles which did
always know and obey the Civil and lay power if it commanded nothing
contrari to god and with this interpretacion hold the most impiant and best
alowede Authors. Christ and ye apostles did ^uermore obey the ciuyll powers if
it co^maundyd nothing contrary to god
Amongst whom is origin expounding ye same text of saint Paull where he
says. The Judges of the world do fulfill the most part of the law of god for all those offencis which god would have punished he would them to be punyshyde
not by the bisshopes and the rulers of churches but by ye Judges of ye world
And Paul knowing this did Iustlye name him the mynyster of god and Judge
upon him him that, does that, that is ill and saint Augustyne against the
epistel permenianus to the first book Therefore for what entente does he bear a
sword ye is called the officer or minister of god to take vengeance on them yt
do ill onles perchance as many take this place yt be unlearned contentuosli
sainge that it was meant of ecclesiastical dingnityes so ye the word should
betoke spiritual ponishement which does cause excommunicacion where as ye wise
and cyrcumspecte apostle in the next clause of the text folowinge does
plainly she we what he meant for he did add for because of that ye pay
tributes and after that he writes this pay to every one his debt to who^ ye
ought to pay tribute pay custom to whom custom is dew honor to whom
honor belongs fear to whom fear partayneth Some by the sword understand
power ecclesiastical, contrary to ye trewthe.
and Theophilactus expounding this place to the romans every soul be obedient
to ye hier powers says thus he instructes eueri man whether he be pressed or
religius man or apostle that they should be subject to the princes and there is
scante any man that otherwise does expound this place onles it be such as be
hye bisshopes therselfe or such as long to them for favor of whom they corrupt
and deprauete althing and wrest scripture violently being contrary to them.
None expoundes this text of ecclesiastical power but such as be papist is in
favor of the bysshoppes of Rome
But now let us rehearse other textes of scripture that make for this matter.
i, Timoth, iii,
Paul writing to Timothe beddeth us entreat and pray for kings and al other
that have preemine^ce or dignite that they may live under the^ peaceabli and
quietli. Barnab, i,
So hieremias bed them pray for the health of Nabugonosor and his children,
further it is read in the first epistle of Peter the ii. chapter submit your
self to al thordinaunces of god where the gloss says set in authority and it
follows in the same text other to the king as highest or supreme head or to ye
lords or officers set by them for punishment of the ill for so is the will of
god, Al men ought to pray for kings and princes and be the good be the ill to
obey them,
the comen gloss does add yt we should be obedience to them be the good be the
ill, and if the regal power of this manner be so often aproued in the old
testament. Let it be so receuid and confirmed in the law of grace. Let it
bealowed ye kings have in there person dominion, authorite, pre-eminence
dignite ponishmentes and correcctions. And in ye clargy let it be disalowed
Does it not apere by the very same law yt was taken from ye apostles and
Bysshoppes was given to the kings it was spoken to the aposteles go you and
preach the gospel to al manner creatures, Marc vlti^^ Iohu^ vitimo.
feed my sheep. And whose si^nes you remit shall be remetted the^, John^, ii.
and so let the^ preach and minister ye word of god but in ye mean time let
the^ not forsake ye subieccio^ of prices. Mathw. xi^.
But let the^ give ye, that is cesars to caesar and that, that is gods to god.
Some perchance will say here that although ye places rehersid do witness that
power was given to kings yet do the not show al manner power given to kings.
Some say there was no power given to kings in spiritual things
And therefore there is nothing prouid by these Scriptures why we should
grant any power in spiritual things to be given to kings or princes. But
first let us se what ye sincere sense of scripture will give the^. And after yt
how ye use and exercise in ye anpia^t and laudabel sipliciti of man has
confirmed it, and surely in the scriptures we do confyrme and stablishe the
aucthorite of kings as we showed before for they feat them yt do ill because
they bear a sword in these scriptures spoken Indeterminatlie their can be no
other sense. But that whosoever when soever and howsoever he do ill he should
fear the kings sword, or it is not convenient for us to say that if one
offend in a small thing he should be punished and if he offend in a gretter
thin he he should have no punishment and that the kings should be diligent in
ye obseruacion and keeping of worldly things and should not in things longinge
to god. Nor it is not mete to aplye that by distinccion to a few which was
spoken indifferently, al scipture speakethe to al men it understands and
means it of al men and in these words of ill doing he puts no certain
crime nor cause, but how soever ill be committed it will that the Regal power
should be redye which should Judge correct which should punish which should
ever be Ruler for the edificacion for ye belt that that thing might be amended
that was done amiss and that yt which by there business offend ye good. How
soever ill be commyttid the correction longs to the Regal power.
Gala, vi.
After ye saing of saint Paul might be cut of because ye trouble other men.
Gregorius ad mauritiu^ Augustum.
And so Gregory in his.iii. book named Registrum in his Epistle to Maurici the
Emperor says thou wast my lord before thou were lord of all. Lo by me his
hindmost servant and youers, christ will answer saying I made the of A
notarye Earl of the watchmen, of an Earl I made the caesar, of caesar an Emperor
and not that only but also I made the father of Eperours, I have committed my
prystes to thy hands and take thou away thy warryers from my service.
Gregory was obedien^ ^o ye Emperor and fullfylled his commandment which did
not agree with the law of god,
I was obedient to your byddyng, and caused your law to be sent to diverse
parts of the world. And because that law does agree with the almyghtye God I
have certifyed my honorable Lords by my Suggestion writing in my letters:
therefore in eythere place I have done my duty, which did obey the emperor,
and did not hold my peace. But showed that I thought in gods cause,
Gregorius ad theodoru^ epistol, xxiiii,
And in anothere pistle following writto^ to Theodorus a phisicio^ has this
sentence. Me thinks ye very hard that the Emperor should wtdrawe his warryers
or saruauntes from the service of him which gave hi^ all, and gave him
aucthorite not only over ye Sowldiers but over all priests, it appertaynethe
also to this that saint Auguste wrote, whose epistle treats of this manner,
Augustinus ad bonifaciu^,
whosoever will not obey the laws of the^perours which were made for truth
of god gets hi^ grette punishment, for in the time of ye Prophets, Al
kings which amongst ye people of god did not forbed nor break that was
Instituted against the commandment of god were blamed and yt they did
forbide, Daniell, iii
or preased above the merytes of other, And the king Nabugodonosor when he was
ye saruau^t of Idolles made an ungracious law. the commandment of the king
Nabugodonosor compelli^ge me^ to honor Images and Idolles.
That an Image or an Idol should be honored. But they that would not obey his
wicked and ungodly constitucion dyed godly and faithfully. But ye same king
correct by the miracle of god made again a godly and laudable law for the
trewthe that whosoever Nabugodonosor correct by miracle made again and
laudable law that no mane should blasphe^ god,
did speak any Blasphemy against ye true god of sidrac, Misac, and Obdenago
should utterly be distroed with al his house And after the^ how can kings serve
our lord in fear onles the prohibeth and punish with a godli seueryte that
that is done contrary to the commandment of god For he serves otherwise
because he is a man. And otherwise in somoch as he is a King. He serves god
otherwise because he is a man and because he is a King,
For because he is a man he serves him living faythfullye. But because he is
a king he serves god making and eratifieng laws with convenient strenght
which command ye thing that is lawful and that forbide those things that be
contrary to Justice As Ezechias did serve god distroyinge ye Groves and ye
Temples of Idolles and the Illaters which were made contrary to ye precepts
of god As Josias did serve doing very iiii, regu^, xviii
How kings serve god as kings,
iiii, Regu^, xxii
like things, as the king of Neniue did serve compelling the whole City to
pacify and please our lord as Darius did serve giving the Idoil in the power
of Daniell Daniell.
to be broken, Ione, iii,
and putting his Enemies to Lions to be devoured.

As Nabugonosor did serve of whom we spacke beforr. Daniell.
Forbydding with a fearful ordreadfull law all that were in his Realm from
the blaspheming of god. In such things kings serve god in somoche they be
kings. When yt do that thing to serve god which none can do but kings. Act,
xxi,
And after Paul ye apostle did not consider or regard his transitorye life but
the church of god. When he did bring it to pass against them yt had
conspyred to kill him that the council of them should be uttered to the Sherefe,
or Officer wherbi it came to pass yt he was brouhgt with harnessed men to ye
place whether he should be brought leest he should have suffered by their
deceites and he did not doubt to apeale to the laws of Rome shewinge that he
was a Citise^ of rome whom it was not lawful to be beaton or scorged. Actor,
xxv
And called or desired ye help of Caesar lest he should be taken to the Iwes
that desired to kill him which Caesar was ruler of Rome and not a Christian
prince, Paul apealed to Caesar emperor of Rome and a Hethen man.
where he shows well what or after the mine ysters or bayliffes of Christ
should do when they had Christen princes or Emperors. If ye church were in
Ieoperdye. And after. If we possese privately so much as is sufficient for us
the residewe be not ours but the gods of the pore ye procurement and
bestowi^g of the which we have and chaleng nothing by damnable usurpation And
to this purpose makes that Augustyne wrote in another place against
Crestonius the.iii. book. Augustinus co^tra crestoni^ libro, iii, chap, li,
In this point kings, (as it is commanded to them by god) do serve god in
somoch as they be kings If in there realm they comaunde yt is good and forbide
yt that is ill not only that pertayneth to the felawshyp or societe of man. But
yt pertayneth to the faith of god and al in vain thou seiste. Let me follow fre
liberty wherefore in Muder, in oppressing, or Rauishi^g of women, and in all
manner Mischeuos and ungraciousness do thou not cry to be suffered to follow
the free liberty and yet it is very profitable and for ye commonwealth yt
such things should be prohibet and let by Just and good laws / And ye same
Augustyne in another place does testifi yt it is ye proper office of a king to
minister just is and to deliver and save out of ye hands of extortioners the^
yt What is the proper office of ^ king
be vyolentlye oppressed. And further saint Thomas does confyrme ye same in
his book of the Rule or ordringe of princes. Thomas de regimine principium.
In the first book.xii. chapter. Let the king know that he has taken
upon him this office that he should be in his Realm as the soul in the body
or as god in the world. Which if he diligently consider by the one he shall be
enflamed with love of Justice when he considerethe yt he was set in dignite for
ye entente that instead of god he should minister Justice in his Realm by ye
other he should learn to be mercyful and gentyl were as he does repute and
count all men that be under his dominion as his own proper members it agrees
to the same that we read in the book of ye church called quadruuium.
Quadruuium eccle.
The church of god was committed by Christ to the princes or lords that ye
should save and defend it. And whether the peace and faith of ye church be
encreasead or diminished. God shall require is of kings whether the peace and
faith of ye church be inire^sed or diminished.
He shall ask accounte of yt in the powers of whom he did commyte his church
Therefore let the princes of the world know that are bound to make Acounte
to god for ye church which they took of Christ to govern and defend And
Isidore Isidore,
writes one this manner of ye cure charge and authorite of kings. The that be
within ye church and do against the faith and ordinance of the church must
be feared by ye Rigore of princes And the supreme power most ley or put upon
the necks of them ye be prowed or stubborn ye same discipline which the
humility of the church is notable to exercise, and yt they may deserve
honor let them put forth the virtue of their aucthorite and in another place he
says Seculer princes do know ye they are bound to make accounte to god for
the church which they have taken upon the^ to defend. And this is the proper
and chief cure of princes which ye Tripartite stori does show that
constantinus took upon him. tripertita historia libro, iii, cap, iii,
Where these words be that follow. The devout and victorius Constantine to
the bisshoppes assembled to gether in the City of Tiro. The epistle, of
co^stantin to ye bisshops of in the council of tiro,
I am Ignorante what was decreed in your troublos and hasty council. But it
appears that the trweth is oppressed and trodden down by some sedtcious and
vndisrete reasoninge. For you do not consider yt is pleasinge to god but for
the contencion and alteracion which ye have against your neighbors ye
contend to have your desires and minds invincible and mutable. But we have
need of ye goodness and providence of god ye this contencion manifestly espied
may be euacuat and remouid yt it may plain apere to us if your assembling
there have done anithinge without grace because of your sedicion and varience,
wherefore I will that al you with all speed come before my majesty that ye may
certyfye and show me your selves ye verite of those things that ye have done.
But for what entente I wrote this to you and have called you to com before me
by mi letters ye shall know by those words yt follows. As I was going to the
City bearing my name in my fortunate country. Athanasius c^^playeth to
constantine upon his wrong t^ sustained
As I was taking my horse suddenly Athanasius bysshope with certain preistes
with him in the mids of the street came to me so at unawares yt I was almost
suddenly affrayde I take god to wytnes that seth althing yt at the first sight
I would not dyserue who he was, onles one of mi servants had showed me whoo
he was and what wrong he had sustained, and at that time I did not comen with
him nor speak to thyem and when he desired that he might be hard and I denied.

And commanded him to be put away. He with grette confidence and boldenes
desired nothing of us. But that you might come before us, and that he might
before you with lamentacion show, what Injuries he had suffered and therefore
because me thought it reasonable, and convenient for the time. I the more
gladlye did command this writing to be sent to you, that al you yt were at
the counsel at Tyro should in all have and without any let come before our
gracious presens, that ye may show by your works the Reclitude and sinceryte
of your Judgment before me. Whom you will not deny to be ye very officers of
god. And therefore the name of God is peaceablelye honered in every place,
Constantine, Eperour caused hethen me^ to h^^our god and know god,
and wholly Blessed by my service and diligence to god asmoche as amongst
Hethen men which till this time did not know the treuth. For this is manifest,
yt he which knows not ye truth, can not know god. But further as I showed
before. The Hethen by me the faithful minister of god have known god, and
learned to fear god. And it is plain by mi works that god is mi defendour and
helper. And thereby ye chefely know god, and they for ye fear that we have to
god do fear and honor god, And you which seem to minister to his merciful
goodness wholye mysteries I will not say keep them you, I say do nothing else
but that is manifest pertayninge to contencion, And to speak plainly that that
is like to be the destruction of mankind. But as I said haston you quickelye
to come to us and know you that I will labor with all my power that those
things that be in ye law of god may be chefely observed without any
stumbelinge or error And also al such things that may be without any offense
or suspicion of ill. And that al Enemies of the law of god may vtterli be
dyspised distroyed and banished which under pretense of that holy name do
norishe and maintain diverse blasphemies and Heresies and of a treweth
Iustinianus emperor of Rome did let nothing vnconfyrmed and enacted by his
law that longs to the observance and preferment of god and so he did make
laws and ordinauces of faith Justinian emperor made laws to confyrme the law
of god,
of Heritikes, of holy churches of bysshoppes and clerks of religiouse men,
of Marriages and of al such causes specially which at this day be exempte
from the power of kings and make a great authorite of ecclesiastical power
which thing surely Justinian would not have done onles he had had example of
his predecessors and onles he had verelye thought yt they had partained to his
office and authoryte. Quomodo regibus anglie comeeuit authoritas in rebus
diuinis,
In England there be many things that testifi that kings went about to keep
there own right and authoryte and there unto made mani provisions and laws
First of a statute of apelles we find in this manner. An act made by kings
that no man should apele out of ye realm with out license of the king
If appelacions chauce to be had they shall appeal from the Archdeacons to the
bysshoppes and from the bisshoppes to the archbisshops and if ye Archbisshoppe
be slow or necligent in mynistring Justice then ye shall Apele to the king,
That by his commandment in the court of the Archbishop the matter made be
ended so that it shall not proced nor be Apealed forth without lycens of the
King. And in an other place, it shall not be lawful for Archebyshops, Bishops,
nor othere persons of the realm, to goo out of the Realm without license of
the King. And if he will goo forth, and have license of the King, He shall
find surtie that neither in going, nor in tarying they shall procure any ill
or harm another to the Realm, nor to the King Besides that Turstane elect
Archebysshoppe of York got license of the King to goo to the councelle
called by Calyxt, Tursta^ archebysshoppe of york going to the council made an
oeth he should take no benedictio^ of the pope,
But making an oath before yt he should not receive of the pope no epistopall
benediction wherefore if he made promise yt he would receive no benediction of
the pope, Is it not manifest that he supposed the pre-eminence of the regal
power in co^cerni^g ye Libertys of ye realm to be superior than ye pope which
could bynd the bysshope by virtue of the oath yt he should not admytte the
Jurisdiction of the Pop, ein taking his Benediction, which thing the inferior
can not execute against the superior. And if it be your pleasure to be doing
with examples it shall manifestly aper ye kings of England ordered ye Realm by
the Imperial power, did take upon them the cure and business yt they did make
ordinance to the people of the ordering and reserving of Sacraments and
spiritual things. Camitu^ re^ angli^
Among whom one king Camytus most diligently and valyantli did execute his
office and duetye in ye behalf, and made such laws and ordinances as
hereafter do follow

Laws made by king Canutus concerning spiritual things,
It is just and lawful that the money of buryalles be paid whereas the ground
openede, If my course be brought from his own paryshe church into another, of
Buryalis,
the money of his buryall by the law should pertayne or long to the same church
al goodly institucions and al holy cerymonyes of god shall be observed as it
shall be thought necessary and need of them requereth When forbydde that upon the
sondayes ye shall use no merchandise no plees, Upon ye Son^ay shall be used no
Marc^e^dis plees in Cowrtes, no Hunting nor other such exercise,
of Cowrtes, no Huntyng, nor any other such seculare act or exercise, Every
chryste^ man so shall prepare himself to receue the Sacrament of theaulter at
the lest thryse in ye year, Men shall receive the Sacrament thrice in the year.
so that he may receive it to his soul health, and not to his damnacion, if a
minister of the altar kill a man or else very much do misuse him self in ill
and vicious living let him be depreued of his order and of his promocions. A
Preyst for Murder and vicious lyue^g shall be depreued of his order and promocion,
If a wife her husband being alive comytte adultry, and of it be puplished let
her bide shame of the world and lose here Ears and her Nose. Of a wife
committing Adultery,

Wydowes shall not mary within.xii. months.


Eueri widow shall be without husband.xii. months and she mary in that time,
she shall lose her doure. Also we have read certain laws made by king
Etheldrede which hereafter follow.

That is to show you, Etheldrede^ ^e^ made certain laws concerning spiritual
things which here follows,
you shall honor and love on god above al things And al me^ shall obey there
king as the forfathers did aforetyme and with him the shall defend the realm.
Also he ordained that men should call for ye mercy and help of god with fasting
alms doing with lauds and praise to god absti^ence and that every priest should
go with his people. iii days a precession barefored and that he should say.xxx.
Edgarus rex made spiritual laws of kepinge the sunday of teythes and festes,
masses. Further king Edgar did institute these laws. That ye tenthes should
be paid to the mother church. And that the sunday should be keep holyday,
from.ix. a clock of the saterdaye till it were day light upon ye Monday. And
that all other festes should be kept as the were commanded by the preistes.
Also king Edmunde did call a great conuocacion of men of the church secular
and regular at London at the feast of Easter. Edmo^dis rex made spiritual laws
also in a conuocacion called a^ ^o^don,
At which congregation were Edo and vlstam archbishop and many bisshoppes mo,
which king diligentli enquering for ye soul health of the^ that were subject
to him, did make acts and constitucions on this manner. First of all that the
which be in holy orders and should teach the people of god should keep them
chaste, Of them that were within orders
And give good ensample of living according to there degree and order, or else
they be worthy of yt thing that is spoken of in ye cano^. We command that he
that will not pay his thenthes shall be excomminicate, Of te^thes painge, of him
yt commits fornicacion with a Nun
He that commytteth fornication with a Nun or any Religious woman shall be
punished as a Murderer. who so ever shall co^myete Pariurye shall be for ever
desseuered from the compayne of god. of Perjury
Adelsta^us rex
Also king Adelstan did proclaim and make certain constitucions consernynge
Ecclesiastical things ye every man should give his tenthes to god as Jacob
said I will offer to the tenthes of all things that thou sendest me. Of
thenthes.
Gen, xxviii
And our faith in the gospel, to every man that has shall be given and he shall
have abundance and of Sertilege witches and such as tell men's Of Sorcerye and
witchcraft
fortunes if they kyl a man yt shall be Judged to death, also thereby laws made by
Iro the king of west Saxons which apere to concern spiritual things. Iro,
rex.
And they be constitute in this wise. I Iro by ye grace of god king of west
Saxons having co^sideracion upon the health of the soul and of the state of my
Realm do constitute lawfuly matrimony and right Judgment to be kept, and
that ye ministers of god observe and keep the rule and teaching of holy
scripture If a servant work upon the Sunday by the commandment of his
master let him be blameles, Of a seruante working upon the sunday
Of baptism of childri,
let the child be baptized within iii. days after his birth in pain of.xxx.
s. If any man feght in the church he shall be marsed in vi. Of suspendi^g of
churches Of false witness,
pound. If any man before the bysshope do bear false witness or record he
shall be mercid in.iii. s. And the same king has granted to the Abbot and
coue^t of glastenburi ye al causes of murder of sacrilege of wichecrafte, The
grant of the king to the monastery of Glasto^bur^
of theft, of rape, or extorcion, In the dysposicion of the churches, In ye
ordinacion of clerks, in all examinacio^s longing to ye court shuldbe endid
after ye se^te^ces or ordinances of them, and he forbade by thaucthorite of
peter and paul and al saints yt no bysshope should set his cathedral seat
wtin ye Iurisdiccion of ye monasterye. Also the constitucions of King alureddo
manifestly declare That in old time kings of England had great authorite i^
spiritual things. Almebus rex,
Of fornicacio^ with a man's wife,
And this king made these laws, yt if any man comyt fornicacion with another
man's wife he shall pay to ye husband.xxx. s. for amends.

If any man in le^t season do lie the holy oil in any open or comenplace or in
his house he shall be merced in.xxx s. yt criste^ me^ may love god and forsake
there infidelite. If any man do forsake his chrystyndome and follow infidelite
he shall louse his life. Of him that forsakes he i^ christendom,
If any man being in holy orders do steal or comytte perjury let him be
punished, Of him that co^mytteth theft being i^ orders
if a pressed at conuenyent time do not send for cream, or if he deny baptyme
when need requires let him dye for yt If.ii. A pressed that denies baptym shall
dye,
brether or kynsmen do comite fornicacion with one woman let them be mersed a
certain epistle of eleutherius writon to lucius king of britton on this wise
does testify that diverse bishops of Rome in times paste did not only not
deny to kings of England this ecclesiastical power, Some Bysshoppes of rome,
did not deny but gave kings power ecclesiastical,
but also that yt did give it to them and that yt did confess that it was ye
proper office of kings in their Realms so to do. Eleutherius, Lucius king of
Brittons benediction in christ ye desired us to send to you ye laws
Eleuthery pape ep^a lucio ^egi britannia
of Rom and of the emperor which ye might use in the land of Brito^ The laws
of Rome and the Emperors laws when may oftetymes reprove, ye law of god we
can not. You have receyuid by the promission of god in the realm of Bryton the
law and faith of christ. Ye have with you both the Testame^tes in your
Realm, take of the^ by the grace of god and council of your realm a law and
thereby by the sufferance of god Rule and govern your Realm of Bryton for ye
are the vicar of god in that realm as Psalmist says The land or the earth is
the our lords. etc. The pope called the king ye vicar of god
Vicarius dei rege^ appellat,
Further it plainly appears by a book of the acts of the bysshopes of Durham
that kings of Engeland had great authorite in the ordinacion of bysshoppes.
For it is hade in ye book that Chadde was made Bishop of york by the Kingeg
made and ordained bysshoppes.
commandment of king Oswen and King Egfryde caused the reverent Cutberte to
be consecreate bishop of Durham. And that Edmonde priest nominate by the
marvelous voice of Cutbert was brought with great honor to king Knute of whose
ellection he was very glade and commaundid him to be consecrated solemlye,
besides that it is manifest by Matthew parison what authoryte kings had in
consecracion of bisshoppes For he does show that king Henrye did give ye
Archebysshop of Canturbury to Raffe bishop of London and did consecrate him by
aryng and a crowche, And the same king as the same Mathe says gave ye bishop
rich of Wynchester to Wyllyam Gyfforde and by and by put him in possession of
al things pertaining to ye bysshopriche and did consecrate him as were What
authoryte ki^gs had in consecracio^ of bysshoppes in times past,
following ye brothers as following the fathers steps Notwithstanding that
Vrba^ bishop of Rome had made a statute and forbiddon with ecclesiastical
censure that no clarke should take any dignite of the gift of princes or
othere lay men, Urban made an act yt no^ clarke should take any ^mocion
spiritual of any king (...) layman
Innumerable examples of such things are brought to remembrance of men by
such as wrote the acts of Englishmen. And if any man will make cauelacion yt
those laws which we have rehearsed concerning spiritual things made the
anxiant Kings of England to pretend a temporal, and not spiritual
authorytie. Let him know that Linwod Lynwod.
upon the constitutyon prouyncyall does agree to us with those words These
things says Lynnewode be more spyrituall that be not myxte with any temporal
things. What things be more spiritual.
As fornycacion, adultery, baptyem, baudry, heresy, and such othere, After the
sentence of ye epistle that Eleutherius wrete to king Lucius also wylliam king
of England that was duke of Normundye which by conquest obtained the dominion
and realm that he might make ye place where he had victory to be in
remembrance to his afterco^ers did build a monastery in ye same place for the
perpetual and deuote remembrance of his soul and did make the letters of ye
foundation on that tenure yt he might plainly show. That the supreme
aucthorite of Spirtual and Temporal things did remain in princes. Whose
letters be of this tenor. In ye name of ye blessed and indivisible Trynite I
wyllyam by the grace of god king of England will it be known to al me^ as well
them that shall come after as those that be now, Letera Whilhelmi regis Anglie
defundatione mo^tis debell^.
Archbysshops bisshopes. Abbots Earls, Barons, and al faithful people both of
England and France that when I was come into England against my enemies
which wronfully were a bout to keep from me the kingdom being in harnes at
the entering of battayl before mi Barons, and Kynghtes, with the favor of them
all, to coumforte ye hurtes made a vow to build a certain Church in the
honor of god for the soul health of all men If by the grace of god we might
obtain Victory. The vow of Wyllya^ Conqueror,
which when we had gotton we did perform our voue and build a chucrh in ye
honor of the blessed Trinite and saint Marten Confessore for my soul health,
and the soul health of king Edward my predecessor, and of my wife quen
Matildus, and for ye souls of misuccessors in mi realm, and for the soul
health of all them by whose labor and help I did obtain the realm and most
special for the souls of them which dyed at that batayl. And because in this
place where it is builded god gave me the victory I wylled that place to be
called battle in remembrance of the victory. Quicquid concedit regali
authoritati concedit vt ostendat regalem authoritate^ et ad spiritualem
pertinere
And therefore to this church of saint Marten in battle I give and grant
these libertes by my regal authoryte that they may have a court of there own
in all causes, and yt they may have fre and regal liberti and custom to keep
court of there own matters and business and to mynyster Justice themselves.
^ota quod ab ^piscoporum sub iectio^e ex imetur rex.
It shall be for ever fre from the subieccion of al bysshopes and from the
dominion of al persons as cristes church in Canturbury and if any felon or
murderer or guilty in any offense flee for fear of death and com to this
church he shall be hurt in nothnge but shall be let go at liberte, it shall be lauful
for ye abbot of that church in every place to save a theffe from hanginge If he
chance to come by at that time Also I give and grant to the same church a
leyg compass about it fre and quiet from al gylde and scotte and Hidage,
Denegeld, The abbet of battle may s^ue a thef where so ever he comes,
Brige work, Castle work, Park palyng, Clawsutes. From fyndinge men of
war, al aids and plees al Playntes, Shires, hundredes, with sare soce, tol
heam, and Infangthes. Warpene. Lestage. Ha^socun Forstal. bludwytte and
chilwytte, Felony and liberty from al custom of wordlye bondage and from al
exaccion or tapis of bysshopes. Therefore to this church of saint Martin of
battle I give mi regal manyer called Wie with al thappertenaunces longinge to my
regal crown, with all liberties priuelegies and regal customs as fre and
quiet as I had hit first and and queetest as freely as I being king might
give it That is to say from all Gelde, Scott, Hidage Denegild, Brigeworke,
Castelworke, Proke work, inclosinge and finally from al custom of worldli
bondage, And from all Felonye or Theft if it chance, likewise I give.ii. d.
of all forfettes and plays of all ye Hundredes that partayne to the Sommoning
or Lordshipe of Wye, And indingnariis which is on menbre of wye. Also I give to
ye said church of saint Marte^ the church of Radinges, ye church of Culcunton,
the church of saint Olauide in Oxforde with lands and Tenthes and al other
things partaynyng to the same churches. And if any of my Baranes or me^ will
give any of their own to ye said church as in alms, I grant the same
liberty to the^ as I gave to this things which I gave my self to the same
church. And I confyrme it with my present writing, and with my regal
authorytie aforesaid: Guylliam king Lauftance Archebysshop of Cantuatbury,
Thomas Archbishop of York, Maurice bishop of London, The bishop of
Wynchester, Exceter, and Rochester. The Earls of Chester montegue and of ware,
but oftymes is there great change and varyabylytie of times and wits, The
bisshop^ of rome be always subtue,
and as bishops of rome did always excel in wit and subtilty and could get
any occasion to amplisye and enlarge ye circutes of there power, so the did
always with grette diligence labor that the might usurp and bring to there
hands all power, and abuse to there own profet the gentylnes, patience and
simplicite of other men, otherwhyles puttinge them in hope of more profette and
commodite. But because that the are gone from god and go about still to amplisy
that exceeding and confuse power set up with ill and vnsubstancial fondacion
like the tower of Babylon, The power of the bishop of rome never stood a
man's lyffe without resistance and contradiccyon
it could not stand long without resistance nor never yet stod a man's life
clear and quiet without any business, princes have suffered much And the
stories do testify that some have bine more bold then some, and as every one
felt him grieved, so they were more quick and bolder sharply to speak to the
hye bishops for there right, and warn them of there offices. And the did them
dissimule with many things which were not convenient to medell with all that
season. But the same king Wyllaym write to the Pope, of this manner, because he
did abuse his promissyons, in the realm of England, the king to the pope. etc

The lord of al lords Ihesus christ which does govern and rule both
celestial and terrestrial, Alia carta eiu^dem withelmi regis,

The epistle of king wylliam conqueror to ye hye bishop of rome,


things for ever has of his divine goodness exalted you to the appostolical
dygnite for to remove and put away all offensions, to put away al Iuperdies,
and to set forward the profyt of his people.

Therefore we desiring (as we are bound) to provide that, that is necessary,
and withstand and put away al manner Iuperdis from ye People of god of whom by
ye sufferaunce of god I am ruler, would also gladly defend and increase in our
time the honor and liberties of ye noble church of England and that that is
our right, by inheritance which our predecessors worth of eternal memory did
nobly defend, wherefore certain things specyallye before all other which troble
our mind in puryte of sprite, we have opened and certified to your holiness. He
calls the church of england our mother
The church of England our mother which amongst al other churches of ye world
does excel and abound in Temporal possessions, and in the seruis and honor
of god, and in ye diligence of devout ministers in ye works of mercy and
hospitalite and ever has florishede with prerogatives of noblenes and honur
wyle the abundance thereof was at ye dispensacion of her own children, to the
seruis and ministers thereof which were called to those dygnities, The
promissions of the bishops of rome intolerable here in England,
not by ambicion, but by god. Now by Importable Tapis and exceeding provisions,
made by the apostolical see, indifferently as well to strangers as to
Englishemen we being had in suspecion and hatred for ye most part our
peticions made for ever learned and discrete and well be loved utterly contemned
it is so wasted kept under, diminished, and fortroubled because the profettes
of mani dignites and fate benefices be given to Aliens and foren persons which
be not resident upon ye promocions, The dignites of the church were given to
Aliens whereby came much decay of virtue and great hurt to ye realm,
and know not them self, and understand not the tongue but oneli seek for there
Temporal lucre, and I will not speak of other shameful vices. Thereby comethe
and rises much sclaunder, and ye profeccion of the ecclesiastical discipline
is little regarded the charg of souls is neglecte, the honor and service of
Christ is diminyshed The habitacions of the clargy go to decay, which the
predecessors did sumptuously build hospitalite is lest, and the alms that
were wont to be given, be kept away by which the deuocio^ of many is fallen
away. Was this ye first intent and will and the liberal mind of the founders
and prences that the alms and patrimonies of kings and other which were
assined and given to the ministers of ye church for ye exercise of ye honor
of god and for works of charity should come and remain to the profette of
Aliens or strangers. Was lands given to ye church of England to feed Aliens
and let there own childer in hunger and penurye,
Is this pleasyng to god that the church so endued with possession which
brings forth so many dyscrete and wise chylde^r profetable and necessary to
take cure and ministracion of here should let her own childer be in honger and
penury and give her pappes to Aliens and strangers not only to take suck of
the^ but rather to tear and pulle them in pieces for the chylder suck the
Milk, strangers wringe out the blod letting nothing remain that they may
smatche and pluck amongst whom we do not mean nor speak of the right
reuerente fathers Cardinals of the church of Rome which being assistent
about your holiness, The children suck the milk strangers wring out the blod,
may ease and heal the mothers dyseases and help her continualye, for when the
treasure of the Realm is spente and wasted, and the church thereof dystroiwed
the Realm should be much weaker in aduersityes, By such promisions the
realm is made much weaker and porer
which thing perchance over enemies do craftelye conjecture and cast.

Wherefore we seeing before these grefes and other such incommodites which if
we should dis^anul any longer, might be occasion of gretter. Wherefore by the advice and council of our faithful people and learned council gethered
together we beseech your holiness with meker and humblye prayers that ye will
ponder the primissis in ye balaunce of right Judgment with abunda^s of paciens
and devotion and were as we and our realm over clargi and our people hitherto
have been before al other obedient to your se Therefore your holiness of your
nobilite and weldisposed kyndnes ought to favor and releue and not to opresse
them that ye of your customable benignite which does suppress Auerice and
abhors Simony would vochesafe so to moderate your reseruacions and
provisions, Popes required and did ex^ort tapis inportable and the goods of
the^ that dyed intestate and money bequethed to the holy land with other
things ^^o
chefely for Alyons and strangers and such tapis by your holiness required and
oftymes extorte by inportune calling up on of them that be ambitius, and other
commyssions for the goods of them that be ded under color that the dyed
intestate and of such money that is bequethed for the socour of the holy land,
and al such goods as be bequethed vncertaynlye by which our people by the
subtlety of your officers I will not say malice contrary to your mind, as we
trust has ofttymes wrongfuly be wexed that ye Cathedral churches and other
churches of our realm may have fre elections and efficacite after the grauntes
and confessions given by our aunceters kings of England and confyrmed by the
apostolical se. Bishops were elect by ye cathedral ses.
And that clerks that be patrones lose not liberty of there patronage, and
that this burden which werethe they shulders of the children may be taken
away, leeste that necessyte cause them at the last to cast of those burdens
which can not be borne long without ouermoche detriment

But that the devotion of us and ours may increase to ye apostolycal se, we
instantly desire you that the grefes and burdens may cease for we can not
always be sluggardes but as we are bound for our power, we must avoid and
expel al such gref^es and dangers And therefore king Edgarus that he might
show the rule and governance of his people in such causes to partaine to
him, Oration regis edgari ad clerum Anglie,
made to his clargye an oracion which here follows consequentli. Because our
lord god has abundantli showed his mercy amongst us it is mete reverent
fathers that we should be correspondent to his innumerable benifittes in worthy
works. For we do not possess the earth by our Swerd or power, Psalmus, xliii
our strenght has not showed us, but his right hand, his holy arm, it pleased
him so to do for us. Therefore it is righ that we should make our selfs and our
souls obedient and subject to him that did put subject althing under his
fete, and we shall dyligently labor that the that he has made subject to us
shall be subject to him and so his laws. And it pertayneth to me to ordere the
lay People with equite and Justice and to give right Judgment betwixt
neighbor and neighbor to punish tra^gressors to keep down rebels to save
ye weak from ye oppression of the^ yt be bygger to defend the pooer and nedye
from the spoylets of them. What partayneth to a king of a realm


But also it longs to my charge to provide necessatyes for ye ministers of
the church for the couenth of religiouse men for the congregation of Nuns.
The examinacions of the manners and l^uing of the clargye partayneth to ye ki^ge
And to provide yt they may have peace and qietnes the examinacion of whose
manners and leuyng partayneth to us.

If he live chastely, If the behave them honestlye to them that be without.
Forth If the be diligent in the service of god. If the be busye in teaching of
the people. If yt be sober in living, If the be moderate in there behauour, If
the be dyscrete in there Judgments. I speak by your licens reverent fathers,
if ye had looked upon and inquered those things diligentli we should not have
hard so much vice and abominacions by Clerks. I let that pass that the have
another open crown, nor conueniente consure, and that wantones in lyuinge,
pride in behauour, lightness in communicacion, do manifest ye infame of your
souls and hearts Besides that how great negligence is there in the service of
god, Negligence in the service of god and misbehauour in ye clargye.
when ye scante vouchsaue to come to church onhalowe euens. When at the Mass
time ye seem rather to come to gether to laughe and play then to singe, yet
will I tell you that good men be sorry, for ill men do laughe at hit. Yet will I
tell it being sorry for yt, if it may be told how the abound and run at
large in Banketing, and Dronkenes in sloth and uncleanliness that now the
houses of clerks be counted the hospitalites of Harlottes the couentes of
gesters and players, there be dyce and cards, there is singing / and daunsing,
there is watthing with showting and cryinge till mydnight, so the patrimonies of
Kings the Alines of princes ye and that yt is more The price of his Preciuos
blood is spente and wasted, did our fathers wast and spend their treasours for
that intent? did the kings treasure house decrease by withdrawing of much
Rentes for that end did the liberalite of kings give lands and possessions to
the curches of christ for that, that harlottes should be trimode by the
abundance and wa^tones of ye clargy, for to make sumptuos feasts to keep
hounds and hawks and other pleasures, this ye men of war cry out upon, ye
people murmuris at it. Minstreles si^ge and Ieste of it, and you care not for
it, you fauer them, you take up on you ye know it not. Where is ye sword of
leuye? genesis xxxiiii
Where is the zele of Simeon which did dystroy ye sychymytes although they
were circumsised because the did misuse ye daughter of Jacob as a harlot, which
sichimites bare ye figure of them that pollute the church of christ with
vicious living. Exodus, x^xii
Where is the spirit of Moises which did not fouour his own kynsme^ that
honered the head of the clase, where is ye Sword of phemees the priest yt did
stycke him that committed fornicacion with the modianite, Nu^eroru^ xxv
and by that holy zele pacified god when he was angri. Act, v,
Where is the spirit of Peter, which by his virtue dystroyed Auaryce, and did
condemn symoniacall herysye, Act, viii
follow you priests follow you the ways of our Lord and the right wysenes of
our god.

It is time to do against them that dystroye and dyssipate the law of god our
Lord. Clerus anglie gladium petri habet vt non sit necesse a roma petere,
I have the swerd of Constantyne, and you ye Sword of Peter in your hands, let
us Join hands togethere and Swerdes that the lepers may b driven out of the
Tents that th house of God may be purged and that the CHILD of leuy of Leuy
may minister in ye Temple which said to his father and Mother I know you not
and to his brother I wott who you be. I pray you take heed dyligentli lest we
repent us of that we have don and that we have given if we se it spente not in
the service of god but spente in riot and misliuinge of onthriftes by suferance
without punishment. Let the relics of Saints move you whom ye leap before,
let ye holy authors move you before whom they play the mad men. Let the
meruelus devotion of our predecessors moan you, whose alms the vnthristines of
the clargye does misuse, my grette grauntfather as ye know did give the tenthe
of all his lands to the church and monisteris Alfredus of holy remembrance
my great graunfathers father did not entende to spare nothere his The king ga^e
the tenthe of his land to the church,
treasure nor patrimony no manner charges or rentes for to enryche ye church, it
is not unknown to you fathers how much old king Edward my granfather gave
to the church, and ye ought to remember how great gifts my father and his
brother gave to ye churches. O father of fathers dunston behold I pray you ye
eyes of my father shinynge upon you from heaven here his complayntes with much
pety sowning in your ears O fathere dunston dydist you give me council of
building of monasteris of redifieng of churches thou wast a helper and a
laborer with me in every thing I chose the as a bishop and sheperd of my soul
and enformer of my manners, Saint dunsto^ gave council to the king to bilde
mani monasteris to whom the ki^ge was obedyent in all thing
when did not I do after the, what treasure did I set more by then thy
council, what possessions did not I neclat at thy co^aundement if thou willest
any thing to be given to the poor I was redye If ye thought any thing to be
given to the church I did not de far it. If ye did say that religius men or
clerks lacked any thing I did socour their necessite. Thou did say it
was a perpetual alms and that there was no more profitable than that given to
monasteris and churches for with that the clargye is sustained and the residew
given to ye power. O good lie alms. O worthy prece of our soul. O wholesome
remedi for our sins which from the bosom of Sibilla stinkes in the skyn of
astra^ge mouse, that trymmes her ears yt becomes her fingers, that binds her
delicate body in sylke and purple. O father is the profette of my alms is this
the fecte of my desire and of your promise, what answer will ye make to the
complaynte of my father. I know this well, if thou saw a thef run thou
did not run with him, nor thou dydest not take thy part with adulters /
thou have rebuked, thou have desired for gods sake, thou have blamed, thy
words be not regarded. We must come to punishment, ye have here with you ye
reverent father Edward bishop of winchester. The correction of the clargye
committed to the bishops to put out ye vice^ous and to put in them that be good,
Ye have ye honerable bishop of Worceter. Oswalde. I commytte this business to
you, that by the authoryte of the bisshops and power of the king the that live
viciousli be put out of the church, and they yt live well be put in there sted.
Besides that also the temporal lords and the perliament of England (when the
bishop of Rome was about to take upon him that he would know of the title
for ye ki^gdome of Scotland which ye king of England did challenge) The le^^er^
wrytton from the perliame^^ of England to the bishop of rome,
wrote letters to ye bishop of rome on this wise yt follows The holimother
church of Rome by whose mynistery the Christon world is governed in his acts.
As we fyrmelye believe and hold, does always proceed with mature deliberacyon,
so that it wylles too be preiudycyall to no man. But like a loving mother
would that all right and Justice of every man, as well in other men, as in
herself should be conseruyd incorrupte and without breeche In a parlyament
lately sygned at Lyncolne by our most gracyous and noble lord Edward by the
grace of god King of England. Our gracyous lord did cause certain letters
Apostolycall which he receuid from you concerning certain busynes about the
condition and stare of the Realm of Scotland, to be deliueryd to us and
ernestly to be expounded and pondred. Which letters hard and dilige^tli
understand, we hard such things co^tei^ed in the^ as we merueled at and such
things as was never fo hard of before. Scotland, has alwais partayned to the
kings of England,
We know holy father and it is manifest in the parties of England / and
openly known to many other, that from the first institucion of ye kingdom of
England yt as well in the time of the brittons as you the time of the
Englishmen ye very certain and true dominion of Scotland by succession of time
has pertained to ye ki^gs of England and to ye same realm in temporalites and
by no title or right pertayneth to ye church before named But also ye same
Realm of Scotland of old time has bine tributer to ye ancestors and
progenitoures of our forsayde lords yt were kings of England and to him also.
Also ye kings of Scotland and the realm were never under aniother then ye
kings of England or were wont to be subject to any other Nor the kings of
England upon there right in ye foresaid realm or any other Reges anglie de statu
regu^ cora^ nullo li^^gare cogu^tur,
themperaltyes of there is have answered or wear bound to answer before any
ecclesiastical Judge or seculer Judge by the reason of his fre peminence of his
state and regal dignite and custom observed without any contradiccion, wherefore
with diligent council and mature deliberacion upon ye contents in your letters
spoken of before this is ye holy come^ and one consent of al and singular of
us and shall be for ever with the grace of god without variacion. That our forsaid
lord and king shall not with in any Judicial corte answer before you, Negani
respo^dere cord episcopo romano,
upon ye right and title of his Realm of Scotland or any other temporalties of
his nor be obedient to Judgment in any wise or bring his forsaid right in any
doubt nor shall send any proctors or messengers to your presens specially
because yt the premises should manifestli be to ye disheriting of ye right of
ye Crown of England and the kings The whole perliament denies to answer in
any such cause before ye bishop of rome for it should be prejudicial to the
realm,
dignity and the manifest subversion of the state of ye same realm and also
prejudicial to the libertis customs and to ye laws of our fathers, unto ye
obseruacion and defense of the which we are bound by our oaths given which also
we will hold with al our power and defend with all our strenght by ye help of god
nor also we will not suffer nor we cane not, nor we ought not to suffer our
foresaid lord and king although he were wyllinge to do or any ways to atemte
such premises not used, and we ought not to do prejudicial and never hard of
before wherefore humbli desire your holiness yt where as our forsayde lord and
king of England has ever more behaved him self faithful and catholic
amongst all other christen princes of ye world and ever obedient to ye church
of rome yt ye will lovingly suffer him quietli and peaceably to possess and to
remai^e i^corrupt al his riches liberties custo^es and laws without any
dimunicio^ and dysquietnes inwitnes whereof our seals as well for us as for ye
holeco^munalte of ye foresaid realm we have set to this present writing given
at Lincoln the year of our lord.M.CCCCCx. Epistola. Cassiodori
there is also a Epistle of one Cassidore to the church of England of the
abusis of ye bishops of rome after these words To the noble church of England
doing service in lime and stonne Peter the son of cassiodore a christen
knight a devout chaunpion of christ wysseth health and the abaccion of
seruitu^de and bondage and the receyuinge of ye reward of liberty to whom
shall I compare ye or else to whom shall I lyken yt my daughter Jerusalem to
whom shall I match ye virgin daughter of Syon for thy contricion is grette as
the se. Ihero^, i,
Thou art left alone with out solace, Ihero^, ii,
all day wasted with sorrow, thou art put in his hands whence thou canste not
rise without help of a lyfter up. The bisshops of rome be called scribes and
phariseys.
For the scribes and pharyseis fytting upon the seat of Moses the lords of
rome be enemies to the and set abroad there philacteris and go about to enriche
them self with the mari of the bones, the lay burdens over heuye and
importable on the necks of they ministers and further then is comely or
convenient they set the under tribute which in old time wast fre. The bysshope
of rome has maryd ye church of the gentyls and so is mad father to the
church of England but he is unkind like a step father
Put away al manner of maruelinge for they mothere the lady of the gentilnes
after the fasshion of wydowes is spoused to her subject and has ordained him
to be thy father that is to say the grett byshope of the ceti of rome. which
yet in nothing shows the kindness like a father. upon the he enlarges the
borders of his garments by experince does show yt he is the mothers husband
he oftymes remembers the prophetical words which is surely pri^ted and roted
in his heart rote take yt a great book and write in him quickly with the hand of
man, Ezay. viii, What text of Scripture is printed in the heart of ye bisshops
of rome
have yt to spoil and sped ye to rob does ye Apostle say that he was
ordained for that intent where he writes every bishop assumpte from among
me^ is ordained for men in these things ye long to god. Hebreos, v
Not to spoil not to leye on them Annual tapys not for murdering of men but to
offer gifts and sacrifice for sin which also can have co^passio^ upon ye
ygnora^t and be out of ye way, What is the office of a bisshope.
and it is read of Peter a fyssherman whose successer he says that he is that
after the resurrection of christ he returned again to his exercise of fishing
with other apostles which when he could take nothing one ye left side of his
bote at ye biddinge of christ he turned to ye right side of the botte and
drawinge his net to ye ground full of great fyshes therefore John, xxv,
The ministers of the church is profitable if it be excercised on the right
side.
the ministry of the church is profitably to be excercised in the right side
by which the devil is over come and many souls are taken to christ, surely
the labor on the lift side is not so. for on that side faith Wauers / Sadness
raynethe when yt is sought for is not found When can think that he can serve
god and Mamon at ons at one time and follow his own pleasure And follow the
desires of ye flesh and blod / and offer to christ condign or worthy
rewards. And without doubt ye sheperd, that will not watch a upon the edifinge
of his flock does prepare another way the ramping lion sekinge whom he may
devour. The bishop of rome is called ye father of ye church of england but he
is not in deed
Se daughter ye acts / and doing of him yt is named thy father, such as thou
have not hard before which puts away good sheperdes from ye sheep cots and
puts in the stead of them to be rulers of them and not for to good or profet
to them his own nepheues his kinsmen and his parents and some that have no
lerninge, Bysshopes of rome use to exalte there kinsmen with the good of ye
church although they be vnlarned,
and some that be as domme and deaffe that can not understand the tongue of his
flock and such as care not for the bytyng of wolves, but like hired servants
beringe away the fleses, and that reap yt other men have sown whose hands
be ever in taking the coffynne and there backs turned a way from any burden
of which it is manifest that ye preesthod is prouerted now a days The
service of god is withdrawn and the alms given is misused by which things
the holy devotion of kings, Psalmo, viii,
princes, and of al christen men, is decayed Ought not every man to meruel that
where as Christ commanded tribute to be paid to kings for him self and for
peter he does labor to make subject to his power Realms and kings and
rulers of Realms contray to the mind of him whose vicar he says that he is
which did refuse and put fro him realms and the Judgments of the world, The
bishops of rome challenge as much to their own as the list to write to be
there own,
and the by ye dominion of his style or pe^ for the calengeth al yt he will
write to be his, what does he more daughter to ye. The bisshops of rome were
not content with the tenth but the would have also the first fruits
Lo he takes away fromme the what he list and yet he holds not himself
content if he take from thee the tenth part of the goods onles he also have
the first fruits of the promocions of ministers as thoo there were new
patrimonye given to the same for him and his blood, Bysshopes of rome made
lately execrable ordinances, for stepend of Messengers and Posts,
the wyllis of the founders being little regarded, and now lately he has made
cursed and exerrable ordinances for stipend of messengers and posts whom he
sends to England which cari away not ye living of ye and thine and there
consecracions but ye tear there flesh and felles like dogs. Is not he to be
likened to Nabugodo^osor ye king which distroweth the temple of god and robeth
them of all there silver and gold vessels, that he did does now this fellow,
iiii, regum, xxxiiii,
he robs ye ministers of ye house of god and lafte ye house with out
necessaryes. The bysshope of rome may be likend to ki^ge Nabugodonose^
The same does this tira^t, yet in better case be they yt dye with sword,
than ye that dye for honger, for the dye shortly. and those be consumed by ye
batannes of the ground let al those that go by the way have compassion one ye
daughter for there is no sorrow like to them, for now by exceeding Sorrow and
continual effusio^ of tears thy face is blacker than any coals. And therefore
because ye are no more known in ye streets, Thy foresaid superior has set
the in darkness, and hat fed the with Wormewode and gal.

Here good lord the affliction and syghinges of the people Se good lord and
come down for ye heart of that foresaid man, The bysshope of rome has set the
church in darkness and fed it with gall.
is much more indurate and hardened than the heart of Pharo. For he will not let
thy people go away fte, The bysshope of rome punishes me^ after the be bed
and is a new enemy to england
but with the power and strenght of thy hand. For he does not punish them
miserably upon Earth. but also after there death, for he stendeth to have all the
goods of them that dye vntestate. Therefore let ye commens of England consider
how in times past Frenchement casting there covetous eyes upon the Realm of
England whent about to Subdue it to there power but that that ye could not
bring to pass, it is to be feared lest the forcast and subtilty of that
forsaide man our new enemy fulfill. For when the treasure of the realm is
wasted and spente and the church dystrowede the realm most be much impotent
and weaker against our enemies, therefore daughter lest thou and thy ministers
be brought to longer misery it is expedient that for thy safeguard and health of
thine, also thy most noble cristoned king and the nobles of the Realm which
have endewed the with great benefits which in this case should defend you and
there benefits, It is expedient for the king and the nobles of the realm to
defend ye churh from the tyrany of the bysshope of rome
should resist ye polices, consperesis, arrogancye, presumpcion and pride of
that foresaid person, which having no respect of god ernestly laboreth with a
new manner of dominion to scrape away all the treasure of England for to enriche
his parents and like an Egle to set up on heyghte his neste or stock by such
tapis and burdens laid upon the by the same person leest that the simplicite of
the realm dissimmuling in this matters should cause subversion thereof and lest
it be to late or ye provide for remedy.

Lord of all power put away the covering from the heart of that man, Here he
prays god to bring the bishop of Rome out of Ignorance and to make him to
be louli and to know his office.
and give him a lowli and a contryte heart and make him know the steppis of god,
by which he may be rydde from his ygnora^ce and compelled to give, up all
such sinistre and noughty labors and ententes aforesaid / and that the
Vineiarde which was planted by the right hand of god may always busely be
replete and excercised with faithful people let ye words of our lord and ye
prophecies of Hiereme harte^ us to put away and withstand the ententes of this
man, which words be these. Hiere^. xxiii.
The sheperde that has dyspersed the people of god shall be greuesly punished,
Thou sheperde yt have dyspersed my people and driven him out of his
habitacions Lo I punish upon the malice of thy studyes and ente^s, and there
shall be none of thy stock that shall sit upon the seat of David, nor that shall
have any longer powere or authorytie in Judah. The nest shall be deserte and
forsaken and clean subverted and dystrowed like Sodom and gomor. And if by
these words he be not feared and scase from his purposes, and make no
restitucion of yt he has extorte and received. Psalm, C, viii
Let them singe for him yt is indurate the.Cviii Psalm to god to who^ all this
is open eueri day with a loud voice and good devotion in christ, deus laudem.
etc. And verily as favor Ientylnes, benevolence, does many things remytte,
Gentylnes ouermoche oppressed and greuid seeks for the truth desiringe to be
reed from bondage and put of the yocke and come to liberti
and little regard so gentilnes over much oppressed and greuyd while it
desires to be read and seeks easement laboreth to com to the very cognicion
of the treuth and where as it is grieved it puts of the yoke and pain all
manner ways yt it can. And so these of whom we have spoken before. Where as
the meddled but with few things, yet every on perceauinge them selves some ways
and in some part grieved as the time required and convenient oportunite was
given very sorye to se such importable burdens laid upon them by the church
of rome, Mani resisted the bysshopes of rome
and were about to resist. But ye treuth was so shadowed and kept under with
the darkness of Ignorance and by error of the people, that of treuth some
shranke and gave over, that is to say they gave over that the began well. And
submytted them selfs to ye bishops of Rome being of more power, not enduced
or brought thereto by virtue of the treuth but by power of man. And so put ye
heddes again in the yocke of that in tolerable servitude and so ye treuth was
oppressed as the time required and where it was hyde of long continuance it
comes to light again. Which treuth has not his virtue and stablishement
because me^ wrote so but they wrote so because it is treuth and because time
was corrupt and people could not abide the austeryte of the treuthe, it was
thought more agreeable to reason to defend and save wordly things lettyng the
treuth for a while under silence tha^ to take upon them the defense thereof and
put them selfs in Ieoperdye and danger of body and goods in which doing
they did show them selfs men as they were in deed, which do not all times
follow and prosecute that is well be gone, nor would not for the setting furthe
of the treuth put themself in danger of lif, goods, honor and other humayne
things In which cause this world is very fortunat and happy where as men
leave ye old doting and have there ears opened to here ye truth and be
diligent to reseue ye persuasio^ of ye same sith it The time is happy when me^
may say ye treweth with out any danger
is lawful for the^ to show the treuth without any Iuperdi or offension Now
sithe yt is so that the true limits of both the powers be with so plain and
manifest reasons showed and proved onles men list to wynke from the light at
none days. Exortation to the readerg to layne to ye truth.
Good and welbelouid reders awake let doublenes and Ignorance give place to the
trewthe let the light of truth expel and put away darkness yt ye be not ladde
about willingly with diverse and strange doctrynes. But after the council of
Peter now ye be warned. Keep your selves yt ye be not plucked away and
seduced by the arror of the wicked and fall away from your own stedfastnes.
But grow in grace and in the knowledge of our lord and savior Jesus Christ
to whom be glory both now and ever. Amen.

FINIS.
Imprynted at London in the Fletestret at ye sign of the Rose Garland by
Wyllyam Copla^d.

Cum gratia et priuilegio ad ^mprimendum solu^,


