AN ABRIDGEMENT OF THE BOOK OF ACTS AND MONVMENTES OF THE CHVRCH: Written by
that Reverend Father, Master John Fox: and now abridged by Timothe Bright,
Doctor of Physic, for such as either through want of leisure, or ability
have not the use of so necessary an history.

All day long are we counted as Sheep for the slaughter. Psalm. 44. depiction
of a group of monstrous roman catholic figures cutting the throat of a sheep or
lamb, with more sheep in the foreground and a female figure knelt in prayer in
the background

How long Lord, holy and true? Apocal. Cap. 6. verse 10. Imprinted at London by
I. Windet, at the assignment of Master Tim Bright, and are to be sold at Paul's
wharf, at the sign of the Crosse-keyes. 1589.

Cum gratia, and Privilegio Regia Maiestatis.



To the Christian Reader.
COnsidering the great use and profit of that worthy work of Acts and
Monumentes, written by Master John Fox, of blessed memory: and by reason of
the largenes of the volume, and great price, how the most were bereaved of the
benefit of so necessary an History: J often wished, some man would take the
pains to draw the same into an Abridgement: that, both those that are busied
in affairs, or not able to reach to the price of so great a book, might also
have use of the history with them that neither want leisure, nor hability
sufficient. But, seeing hitherto nothing done that way, nor hearing of any that
had it in purpose, J ve^tured upon the labor my self, and thus have performed
it for thy use: wherein, J have omitted nothing to my remembrance, and as my
judgment served me, that is material to the history, so far as the nature
of an Abridgement would permit. As for Treatises, Disputations, Epistles, and
such like, J leave them to be read all together in the large Book: which I do
exhort thee (gentle Reader) the rather for my Abridgements sake, to buy, and
use. For, as the copiousnes of that notable work, has hid the rich treasures
of the same, through charge of price, and men's affairs: So this my labor may
give thee an assay, and appetite, to know further, whereof thou may here take
(as it were) the taste. J assure thee, in mine opinion, there is not a book,
under the Scriptures, more necessary for a Christian to be conversant in.
There is no Burgess of a City, that has care of his corporation, but would
be glad to know, how in times past, the world went with his Corporatio^, that
thereby he may understand the better how to be have himself therein, as
occasion shall serve: and, not only would desire to know the laws of the
same, but also, what examples have any way been given, touching the same. Even
so, it becomes much more Christians, that are Citizens of the church of
Christ, and have a community in that body, to know, not only the laws of
this City, (which is the word of God) but also, what has befallen, either
good, or bad, and every accident: whereupon, experience may arise by example,
and wisdom thereof, to be put in use accordingly. We may read what has
befallen the worthiest Commonwealths in this world, and what storms they have
endured, and all sunk, under them. This Commonwealth of the Church stands
for ever, though the storms that have blown upon it, have been more
boisterous than any other state has endured. And by reason of co^tinua^ce,
gives great variety of examples: of Gods providence, of his mercy, of his
fatherly chastizements, and correction, and of that holy faith, which has
ministered invincible strength of constancy, and patience to this heavenly
state of Christ's Church, in the midst of all storms of trial. And here
may thou read, not only what has been suffered of the old Fathers of the
church, who have with their blood purchased unto us this freedom of the
Gospel: but of late times, what thy father, thy mother, thy broher, and thy
friend have suffered for like testimony, whereby the sincerity of the Gospel
stands at this day. When (I say) in this Abridgement, thou may read these
things, J mean much more in the large volume, where all such matters lie open
at the full: and whereto (I pray thee) let this my labor be (as it were) an
introduction. And if thy hability serve thee, or any other disposition thereto,
J pray thee let not this book withdraw thee. For, Abridgements, in all kind
of learning, have been used, for such respects as J have before mentioned:
besides, the memory embraces them more readily: and not to hinder great
volumes. Neither do they of their own nature, work such effect. If sloth of
some persons neglect them, so are they punished therefore in wanting that
belongs unto them to know: and yet through Abridgementes, have some furniture
of that profitable instruction, whereof otherwise they would be utterly
ignorant. It is said, Iustines Abridgement lost Trogus Pompeius: Trogus
peradventure is lost, but whether through Iustines Abridgement, that hardly can
be proved: and had it not been for Iustine, we had lost with Trogus, the
history too. The case is far otherwise since printing was known: for, who
would lose a leaf of Liuie, for any Abridgement. Before, it may be, charge of
written Copies might be some cause, why the large volumes were not so
universal. And I pray thee, if the Author him self (the fittest of all men,
being an History so meet, even for the meanest Christian, especially in these
times, and containing records of such things, as are else no where to be had)
had taken it in hand: had it not been thanks-woorthy? Yet so had been greater
danger in decaying the book at large in regard of the more sufficient
performance of the work, than by this of mine. I trust the matter needs no

(...) An Abridgement of the first volume of the Ecclesiastical history of
Acts, and Monuments of Martyrs.
The History is divided into five parts.
1 The first is of the suffering time of the Church 300. year after Christ. 2
The growyng and flourishing time of the same, other 300. years. 3 The declining
time, other 300. until the losing of Satan: about the thousand year after
Christ. 4 The time of Antichrist: which continued in full swinge 400. years. 5
The time of reformation these later 288. years.
IN the 17. of the reign of Tiberius Nero, Tiberius Nero. Christ.
Christ suffered the 34. year of his age. Tiberius raised no further
persecution, yet lived he seven years after the death of Christ, and reigned
in all 23. years.

Him succeeded C. Caligula: C. Caligula.
he commanded his Image to be set up in the temple at Jerusalem, and to be
worshipped. And after him succeeded C. Nero, C. Nero.
and D. Nero. D. Nero.
Claudius reigned 13. years. Domitius 14. In the latter end of whose reign,
Peter and Paul Peter and Paul.
were put to death, for the faith of Christ. Anno 69.

About this time, an. 73. 40. years after the passion of Christ, and the 3.
year after the suffering of Peter and Paul, the Jews were destroyed, Titus.
Vespasian. Jews destroyed.
by Titus, and Vespasian his father: (who succeeded Nero) to the number of
eleven hundred thousand, besides a great number Vespasian slew in subduing
Galile, and seventeen thousands mo that were sold for slaves.

Stephen.
Stephen the Deacon was the first martyr, put to death at Jerusalem, and stoned
by the Jews.

After Stephen, suffered James James.
the brother of John, whom Herod Herod.
slew with the sword: and with him the party that was cause of his
persecution: who being moved in conscience, as James went to execution,
confessed himself to be a Christian also, and were both beheaded together.

The same day that Stephen suffered, Nicanor Nicanor.
one of ye 7. deacons, with 2000. 2000.
other christians, suffered for the faith.

Simon Simon.
one of the deacons, and afterward bishop of Bosrum in Arabia, was there
burned: and Parmenas Parmenas.
also an other of the Deacons, suffered for the faith.

Thomas, Thomas.
who preached to the Parthians, Medes, Persians, Germans, Heraconies, Bactries,
and Magies, suffered in Calamina, a city in Judea, being slain with a dart.

Simon Zelotes
Simon Zelotes (who preached in Mauritania, and in the country of Aphrike, and
in Britain) was crucified.

Judas.
Judas brother of James, called Thaddeus and Lebeus, who preached to the
Edissens, and to al Mesopotamia, was slain under Augarus Augarus.
king of the Edissens in Berito.

Simon.
Simon, brother to Jude, and James the yoonger, (which were sons of Mary
Cleopha, and of Alpheus) called Cananeus, bishop of Jerusalem after James, (as
Dorotheus records) was crucified in a city of Egypt, in the time of Traianus
Traianus.
Emperor: but as Abdias writes, he was slain with his brother Jude, by a
tumult of the people of Suanir, a city of Persidis.

Mark the Evangelist, and first B. of Alexandria, preached the Gospel in
Egypt: and there being drawn with ropes to the fire, was burned: and afterward
buried in a place called there, Bucolus: under the reign of Traianus the
Emperor.

Bartholomeus Bartholomeus
is said to have preached to the Indians, and to have converted the Gospel of
S. Matthew into their tongue, where he continued a great space: doing many
miracles. At last in Albania a city of great Armenia, after diverse
persecutions, he was beaten down with staves, then crucified, and after being
excoriate, he was at length beheaded. Johan. de monte regali.

Andrew Andrew,
the Apostle, and brother of Peter, was crucified at Patris, a city in Achaia,
(by the Governor Egeas Egeas.
) embracing the cross, and ioying therein, the day before the Kalends of
December.

Matthew, Matthew.
otherwise called Leui, first a publicane, then an Apostle, after that he had
converted to the faith Ethiopia, and all Egypt, Hircanus Hircanus.
their king sent one to run him through with a spear. Johan. de monte regali.

Matthias Matthias.
also, after that he had preached to the Jews, was stoned, and beheaded by
them.

Philip the Apostle, Philip and his daughters.
after he had much labored among the barbarous nations, was crucified, and
stoned to death in Hierapolis, a city of Phrygia, where he was buried, and his
daughters with him. Isodor.

James James.
being required of the Jews to dissuade the people from the faith of Christ,
Other.
and that he should stand and speak from the battlements of the temple, that he
might more conveniently be heard; The Jews.
he (contrary to their expectation) preaching Christ, was thrown down from
the battlementes headlong, and stoned: and one being present, took a Fullers
instrument, wherewith they beat cloth, and smote him on the head, whereof he
died, and was buried in that place. At which time also, other were put to death
among the Jews for the testimony of Christ.

The first Persecution.
THe first was stirred up by Nero Domitius, Nero Domit.
the 6. Emperor: about the year 67.

In that persecution, Peter Peter.
was crucified, his head downward: himself requiring it should be so, as
unworthy to be in all manner executed like Christ Jesus. The cause was thought
to be the revenge of the death of Simon Magus: Simon Magus.
who pretending to the people of Rome, to flee from ye mount Capitolinus up
into heaven, by the prayer of Peter, was brought headlong down: wherewith his
legs and joints being broken, he died. At that time also, Peter's wife Peter's
wife.
suffered, being much encouraged by the words of her husband Peter, whiles he
hanged upon the cross. Under the same Nero, Paul Paul.
was beheaded in the 14. year of Nero, the same day that Peter was crucified,
and was buried in the way of Ostia. But others (as Prudentius in his
Peristephano) writes that they were put to death in one day: but Paul a year
after Peter.

The second Persecution.
THe Church having had some rest under Vespasian, Domitian Domitian.
(brother to Titus) moved, (not long after) the 2. persecution. He put to death
al ye nephews of Judah, Nephews of Judah.
called the Lords brother, and caused to be sought out and slain, all that could
be found of the stock of David: as Vespasian also did before him: least yet he
were to come of the stock of David, that should enjoy the kingdom. In the
time of this tirant, Simeon, Simeon.
Bishop of Jerusalem, after other torments, was crucified to death: whom Iustus
Iustus.
afterward succeeded in that bishopric.

This Tyrant exiled John John.
the Apostle and Evangelist, into Pathmos, an. 97. Pertinax he was released,
and came to Ephesus, anno 100. Traianus, and there governed the Church in Asia:
where also he wrote his gospel. And so lived til the year 68. which was the
year of his age 99. Eusebius.

Flauia, Flauia.
daughter to Flauius Clemens, one of the Roman Consuls, suffered for the name
of the Lord Jesus: and was (with many other banished out of Rome, into the I Will
Pontia. Eusebius. lib. 3

A remnant of the flock of David as yet remained: who being brought to Domitian
to be slain, and he percyuing them to be poor, and understanding from them,
that the kingdom of Christ should not be a worldly, but an heauenuenlie
kingdom, let them go, and stayed the persecution. They (being dismissed) had
afterward the government of Churches: and so continued in peace till the time
of Traianus. Egesip. and Eusebius. lib. 3. cap. 20.

In these persecutions no kind of torment was omitted, that could be devised
against the Christians: The 2. persecution.
and no kind of slander kept back, that might empaire their credit, their
bodies (after death) not being suffered to be buried: and yet the Church did
daily more, and more, increase.

Euaristus Euaristus.
Bishop of Rome next to Clement, succeeded in the third year of Traianus, and
suffered the xij. year of his Reign.

Alexander, Alexander.
who succeeded Euaristus, converted a great part of the Senators of Rome to the
faith. Among whom, one Hermes, Hermes.
a great man in Rome, whose son being dead, he raised to life, and restored
sight to his maid being blind. Which Adrianus, the Emperor hearing of, sent
word to Aurelianus Governor of Rome, to apprehend Alexander, with Euentus,
Euentus.
and Theodulus, Theodulus.
otherwise called Theodorus, his two Deacons, and Hermes, Hermes.
to commit them to Ward, with Quirinus the Tribune, whose daughter named
Albina, Albina.
he cured: which moved Quirinus, Quirinus.
with all his house to be baptized, and suffered also for the faith of Christ.

In the second year of Hadrian, Aurelianus took Alexander, with Hermes, his
wife, children, and whole household, 1250. and threw them into prison, and not
long after, burnt them all in a Furnace. Whose cruelty being rebuked by
Theodulus, another Deacon of Alexander, caused also unto himself the same
martyrdom. Quirinus the same time (as says Antoninus) having first his tongue
cut out, then his hands and feet, afterward was beheaded, and cast to the
dogs.

The third Persecution.
The third persecution.
BEtwixt the second persecution and the third, was but one year, under the
Emperor Nerua. Nerua.
After whom succeeded Traianus, Traianus.
who raised the third persecution: which was so grievous, that Plinius
Secundus Plinius Secundus.
(moved with compassion) being himself an Infidel, wrote to the Emperor, and
certified him that so many thousands were put to death without cause: saving
that they used to gather themselves together before day, to sing hymns to a
certain God, whom they worshipped, called Christ. Whereupon the persecutions
were greatly alaied.

The sum of Plinies letters to the Emperor.
Plinies letter for mitigation of the persecution.
THe sum of the Epistle was, that the Emperor would resolve how long to
inflicte the punishment with respect of Age, Sex, or Degree. Whether any
Pardon might be granted unto such as would deny the faith; or whether that
offense alone should so grievously be punished; or if other offenses did
aggrauate the fault: who (their Religion and excepted, their worshipping of
Christ) else committed they nothing against the laws: as eue^ such that had
renou^ced their faith confessed, and as he had made proof by laying 2.
christian maids on ye rack, to prove if they could have extorted confession of
further crime. And that for as much as some (although many of them increased)
gave their names to do sacrifice with ince^se unto the image of the Emperor,
and sacrifices were more then before brought to be sold: if space were granted,
they might be amended, which else by great multitudes might run into danger of
condemnation. To whom the Emperor made answer: The Emperors answer.
yt he would not have the christians sought for, but if any were brought and
co^uicted, such should suffer execution: and such as unfeignedly denied the
faith, and would do sacrifice in open place, should be received to mercy.

Certain Sectaries there were of the Jews that accused Simeon Simeon.
then B. of Jerusalem, and son of Cleophas, to come of the stock of David,
and that he was a Christian. Whereupon he was scourged by Attalus Attalus.
commandment then Proconsull, during the space of many days together, being
of the age of 120. and with great admiration given of his constancy, he ended
his course upon the cross.

Under this Traiane which next followed Nerua, among others, Phocas Phocas.
B. of Po^tus suffered, who^ Traianus, because he refused to do sacrifice to
Neptune, cast into a hot furnace, and after into a scalding bath. Anton. Eginl.
fascic. temporum.

In the same persecution suffered also Sulpitius Sulpitius.
and Seruilianus Seruilianus.
two Romans, whose wives are said to be Emphrosina Emphrosina.
and Theodora: Theodora.
whom Salma Salma.
did convert to the faith, and afterward were also martyred. This Salma was
beheaded of C. Lepidus, the governor, in the mount Auentine, in the days of
Hadrian: under whom also suffered Seraphia Seraphia.
a virgin of Antioch. Moreover in this time of Traiane suffered Nereus Nereus.
and Achilleus Achilleus.
at Rome: about which time also one Sagaris Sagaris.
suffered martyrdom in Asia, Seruius Paulus being then Proconsull in that
province.

In this time suffered Ignatius. Ignatius.
Some say that he being sent from Syria to Rome, was given to wild beasts to be
devoured: passing through Asia he confirmed the churches, and coming to Smirna
where Polycarpus Polycarpus.
was, he wrote diverse epistles, one to Ephesus, an other to Magnesia Magnesia.
being at Meander, another to Trallis. He now being judged to ye beasts, and
hearing the Lions roar: I am the wheat or grain (said he) of Christ, I shall
be ground with the teeth of wild beasts, that I may be found pure bread. He
suffered the 11. year of the reign of Traianus. Eusebius. and Hieronimus.

About this time many thousands died for the faith: among them one Publius
Publius.
bishop of Athens.

Next to Traianus succeeded Hadrian, Hadrian.
under whom suffered Alexander bishop of Rome, with his two Deacons Euentius
Euentius.
and Theodorus, Theodorus.
also Hermes Hermes.
and Quirinus Quirinus.
with their families.

In this time of Hadrian, Zenon, Zenon.
a noble man of Rome with 10023 were slain for Christ. Henricus de Erfodia and
Bergomensis lib. 8. make mention of 10000. in the days of this Hadrian, to be
crucified in the mount Ararat, crowned with crowns of thorn, and thrust into
the sides with sharp darts, after the example of the Lords passion: whose
captains were Achaicus, Achaicus. etc.
Heliades, Theodorus, and Carcerius, etc.

Under Hadrian suffered also Eustachius, Eustachius.
a captain who^ Traianus had sent in times past against the Barbarians, and
having now subdued them, was honorably met in his journey of Hadrian the Emperor
himself: who first by ye way would do sacrifice to Apollo for the victory,
willing Eustachius to do also. Which he refusing (not withstanding all means
to draw him to it) was brought to Rome: where with his wife and children he
suffered martyrdom under the same Hadrian.

Faustinus.
Faustinus and Iobita Iobita.
citizens of the city of Brixia, suffered martyrdom with grievous torments.
At the sight whereof one Caelocerius Caelocerius.
seeing their so great patience in such torments, cried out with these words,
Vere magnus Deus christianorum. Verily, great is the God of the Christians.
Whereupon he was presently apprehended, and suffered with them. Ex Ant. Equi.

One Anthia a godly woman (who committed her son Eleutherius to Anicetus
Bishop of Rome, to be brought up in the faith,) who was afterward B. of Apulia,
was there beheaded with her son Eleutherius Nicephorus.

Under this Hadrian suffered also Iustus, Iustus.
and Pastor, Pastor,
two brethren in a City of Spain called Complutum.

Likewise Symphronissa the wife of Getulus the martyr, with her seven children,
Symphronissa and her seven children.
is said about the same time to suffer: who first was much and often beaten and
scourged, and afterward hanged up by the hair of the head. At last, having an
huge stone fastened about her neck, was cast into the river. And after that her
seven children, with sundry and diverse kinds of punishments, were martyred by
the Tyrants.

Getulus or Getulius was a minister or teacher in the City of Tibur, who with
Cerdelis, Amantius, and Primitiuus, by the commandment of Adrian, were
condemned to the fire. The names of the seven sons of Symphronissa were,
Crescens, Iulianus Nemesius, Primitiuus, Justinius, Stateus, and Eugenius: who
by the commandment of Adrian, were tied to seven stakes, and so racked with a
pulley: and last of all, thrust through, Crescens in the neck, Iulianus in the
breast, Nemesius in the heart, Primitiuus about the navel, Justinius cut in
every joint of his body, Stateus run through with spears, Eugenius cut
asunder from the breast to the lower parts, and then cast into a deep pit,
having the name by their idolatrous Priests, entitled Ad septem Biothanatos.
After the death of whom Symphronissa the mother did likewise suffer.

Getulus The children of Symphorosa. Crescens. Iulianus. Nemesius. Primitiuus.
Justinius. Stateas. Eugenius.
Cerdelis Amantius Primitiuus
Sophia and her two children.
Sophia with her two children Serapia and Salma did suffer under some tyrant
about the the year 130.

While Hadrian the Emperor was at Athens, he purposed to visit the city of
Elewsina: which he did, where he sacrificing to the Gentiles gods, gave free
liberty to kill the Christians whosoever would. Whereupon Quadratus Quadratus.
Bishop of Athens, and Aristides Aristides.
a philosopher of Athens, and another Serenus Gramus, Serenus.
a man of great nobility, wrote Apologies for the Christians unto the
Emperor, with such eloquence and learning, laying out their innocence, that
he directed his letters to Minutius Fundanus Proconsul of Asia, Persecution
assuaged in Asia.
willing him from henceforth to exercise no more cruelty upon the Christians,
nor to condemn them for that cause. Thus the Christians had some quiet for a
time.

After Hadrian, succeeded Antoninus Pius, Anton. Pius.
who although he moved no persecution against the Christians, yet the
tumultuous rage of the heathen did not cease to disquiet the people of God.
The Emperors affection might appear by a letter or edict of his to the
Commons of Asia, to stay their rage against Christians, except they had
committed any thing against the laws of the Empire, willing them to consider
the Christians patience in their torments, and boldness in times of
Earthquakes, Persecution ceasseth.
and tempests, when as other tremble and quake for fear. This edict was
proclaimed at Ephesus in the public assembly of all Asia. So by this means
the tempest of persecution in those days began to be appeased.

After Antoninus Pius, M. Antoninus Verus M. Antoninus verus.
succeeded with his brother Lucius, Lucius.
about the year 162. Nero, moved the fourth persecution.

The fourth Persecution.
IN Antoninus Verus time, suffered many Christians with diverse kinds of
torments: namely at Smyrna, some of the^ were whipped, that the inward arteries
and veins appeared, even their very intrailes and bowels were seen, and after
that were set upon sharp shells, taken out of the sea, edged and sharp, and
certain nails and thorns laid for the martirs to go upon sharpened and pointed,
called obelisci. And lastly were they thrown to beasts to be devoured. Among
who^ one Germanicus Germanicus.
very constantly suffered, to the admiration of ye enemies. But most famous
above ye rest, was the martirdom of Polycarpus, Polycarpus,
disciple to the Apostles and 86. years of age, and who had served in the
ministry about the space of 70. years, and was placed of S. John in Smirna,
whose disciple he was. He suffered about the year of our Lord 170. Antoninus
Verus. The manner of his death and martyrdom was thus. These persecutions
being begun in Smyrna, Polycarpus was persuaded by certain yt were about him,
to convey himself away, and to hide him in a Village not far from the City,
which he did, and there abiding with a few more of his company, was night
and day in supplication, for the peace of the Congregation.

Three days before his apprehension, he saw in a vision by night, the bed
set on fire under him, and suddenly to be consumed, And when he waked, he
interpreted it, that he should suffer martyrdom by fire. At the last (being
found by the pursuers, and understanding yt they were armed) he came from the
chamber where he was, and entertained the^ with cheerful countenance, and made
them dine, and required that he might have one hours respite to make his
prayers: which being granted him, he did it in such sort, as they which heard
him were astonished. His prayers being ended, they brought him to the city upon
an Ass on a solemn feast day, there met him Irenarchus, Irenarchus.
Herodes, Herodes.
and his father Nicetes: Nicetes.
which causing him to come up into the chariot where they sat, persuaded him to
do sacrifice. Which when he refused, with rough words they molested him, and
thrust him, going down the chariot, that he might hurt or break his legs: but
he went merrily on to the place appointed. To whom there came a voice from
heaven that comforted him, and bad him be of good cheer, as he was going to
the place of judgment. Whither when he came, the Proconsul dissuaded him from
the faith, and willed him to say with him and the rest, Destroy these naughty
men. Then Polycarpus beholding with constant countenance the whole multitude,
and giving a great sigh, looked up to heaven and said: Thou thou it is that
wilt destroy these wicked men, meaning the Lord. Then the proconsul thus being
earnest with him said unto him, take thine oath, and I will discharge thee:
Deste Christ Polycarpus answered, 86. years have I been his servant, yet in
all this time has he not so much as once hurt me, how then may I speak evil
of my soueraign Lord and king, which has thus preserved me. Then the Proconsul
used al manner of threatenings against him: which when they could not prevail,
Policarpus still denying with great constancy, Philip the Governor of Asia,
was commanded to let lose the Lion to Policarpus: who made answer, that he
might not so do, because he had his pray already. Then the people required with
one voice, that he would burn Policarpus alive. Which was performed. And
having made himself ready to the stake, they would have nailed him thereto
with Iron hoopes, but he said: let me alone as I am, for he that has given
me strength to suffer and abide the fire, shall also give power, that without
this provision I shall abide, and not stir in this fire. Which when they heard,
they only bound him: who having given thanks unto God, and testified his
faith, the tormentors put fire unto him, which seemed to those that were
beholders, to compass the body like a veil, which in ye midst thereof
seemed like gold and silver, tried in the fire, and yielded a pleasant smell
Thus the fire not consuming his body, one of the Tormentors thrust him in with
a Sword. Whereafter, so great a quantity of blood issued out of his body,
that the fire was quenched therewith. The body afterward was taken and
burned, as their manner was to do. And this was the end of that worthy man.

At that same time suffered also at Smirna twelve other, that came from
Philadelphia, with diverse other: as, Metrodorus, Metrodorus.
a minister, and another worthy man named Pionius, Pionius.
who (after grievous torments) were burned.

After these, suffered Carpus, Carpus.
Papylus, Papylus.
and Agathonica, Agathonica.
a woman, who were put to death at Pergamopolis in Asia, Eusebius. l. 4. c. 7.

In Rome suffered Felicitas with her seven children: Felicitas with her 7.
children.
whose names were, Ianuarius, Felix, Philip, Siluanus, Alexander, Vitalis and
Martialis. Of which company, Ianuarius (after he was whipped with rods) was
pressed to death with leaden waightes. Felix and Philip had their brains beaten
out with maules. Siluanus was cast down headlong, and had his neck broken.
Alexander, Vitalis, and Martialis, were beheaded. Last of all, the mother was
slain with the sword. Ex Suppl.

Under this M. Antoninus suffered also the worthy man, and learned Philosopher
Justinius, Justinius.
born at Neapolis in Palestina. His father was Priscus Baicus. He wrote
Apologies: First to the Senate of Rome, after to Antonius Pius, the Emperor. He
wrote also to Vrbinus, Lieftenant of the City. He prevailed so with Antonius
Pius, that he stayed the persecution in Asia. This man was accused by Crescens
a Cynike philosopher, whom he had vanquished in disputation: in revenge whereof
he procured his death, in the year 154. Antoninus the Emperor.

Under the same Antoninus, suffered also Ptolomeus, and Lucius, Lucius.
for confessing Christ, in a City of Egypt, called Alexandria. Ptolomeus was
accused by a Centurion, subornne thereunto by a vicious Infidel, whose wife had
been also lewd, but converted by Ptolomeus, and thereupon departing from her
vicious husband, he reuengeth himself upon her Instructor: who being brought
before Vrbinus the Judge, and condemned to suffer death, Lucius a Christian,
blaming the Judge, and justifying the innocence of Ptolomeus, was with him
also (without further examination) martired.

In the reign of this Tirant, suffered also one Concordus, Concordus.
a Minister in the City of Spoletum, because he would not do sacrifice to
Jupiter, but spit in his face: wherefore (after many and sundry torments) he
was beheaded.

It is reported that diverse other Martirs suffered under this Antoninus Verus:
as, Symmetrius, Symmetrius, etc.
Florellus, Pontianus, Alexander, Caius, Epipodus, Victor. Corona, Marcellus,
and Valerianus. Who (because they would not do sacrifice to Idols) ended their
lives by the sword.

Under this Tyrant suffered diverse Martirs at Vienna, and Lions, two Cities in
France. Among whom, Vetius, Vetius.
Zacharias, Sanctus, Maturus, Attalus, Blandina, Alexander, and Alcibiades, are
chiefly renoumed.

Vetius Epagathus, for reproouing the cruel sentence of the Judge, given
against the Christians, and making an Apology for them, was martyred. He was
called by the faithful (being but a young man) the Advocate of the Christians.

Sanctus.
Sanctus was Deacon of the Congregation at Vienna: Maturus Maturus.
was but a little before baptized: Attalus Attalus.
was borne at Pergama, who was the foundation and pillar of that congregation.
Blandina Blandina.
weried the tormentors with her patient suffering. Likewise did Sanctus, who in
his tormenting being asked his name, his city, his kindred, he answered to all
questions, I am a Christian. With these suffered one Bibledes Bibledes.
a woman, who had denied Christ, and being tormented to the end she might utter
some wickedness of the Christians, she confessed Christ again, continued
constant, and was martyred with the rest.

At that time Photinus Photinus.
deacon to the B. of Lions, about 90. years old, being first sore beaten, was
cast into prison, and there died within two days after.

Maturus and Sanctus were brought again to torment, and with them Blandina and
Attalus, yet, notwithstanding exquisite and strange devised torments, they
continued constant in the faith. Blandina was fastened upon a stake, and cast
to beasts to be devoured, but no beast would touch her: whereupon they took
her down, and put her in prison till another time.

Attalus was brought forth again, with one Alexander Alexander.
a Phrygian, and a Physician: who because he encouraged the Christians standing
before the Judge, was apprehended, and suffered most grievous torments most
patiently, without change of countenance, and died, broyled in an Iron chair.

After this (being the last day of the spectacle) Blandina again, and one
Ponticus, Ponticus.
a child of fifteen years old, was brought forth. The child died constant,
with extremity of torment. Blandina (after diverse most exquisite torments, as
whips, gridiron, and wild beasts) was at the last, cast into a net, and
thrown to a wild Bull, and so was gored to death. Neither did their rage
cease against the dead bodies: which they would not suffer to be buried, but
caused them to be watched, least they should be put in grave. The causes why
these persecutions were the more sharp, was because some of the Ethnicks being
servants to the christians, were compelled by threatenings to feign against
them, that they kept the feasts of Thiestes and incest of Oedipus, with other
most heinous crimes.

To these Emperors did Melito Melito.
bishop of Sardis exhibit Apologies for the Christians, learned and eloquent.
So did Claudius Apollinaris Cl. Apollinaris
bishop of Hierapolis, like as Quadratus Quadratus.
and Aristides Aristides.
did before to the Emperor Hadrian. So that whether it were by that means, or
through the writing of Athenagoras Athenagoras.
a philosopher, and a Legate of ye Christians, it is certain yt the
persecution the same time was stayed. Persecuton stayed.
Others think it came by a miracle wrought in the Emperors camp. For what
time the two brethren Emperors joined together, and warred against the Quades,
Vandals, Sarmates, and Germans, when their soldiers wanting water five days
together, Miracle.
and by means thereof were like to perish: in this distress, a legion of the
Christian souldidiers withdrew themselves, and prayed, whereby they obtained
showers and sweet rain, and the enemies were terrified with lightnings and
hail, and so discomfited and put to flight. Whereupon the Emperor wrote to
diverse of his Governors, that they should give thanks to the Christians, and
give them peace: of whom came the victory and preservation to him and all his
people.

In the year 175. Lucius, Antoninus Commodus, Commodus.
son to Verus, who reigned xiij. years. In whose time (as some think) by
the favor of Martia, Martia.
the Emperors Concubine, who favored the Christians, persecution slaked. By
which means, many noble personages of Rome, embraced the Gospel. Among who^
was one Apollonius, Apollonius.
who being maliciously accused by Seuerus his servant, (notwithstanding the
false accusation of his Accuser) being detected, and he for that crime having
his legs broken, was nevertheless, driven to make confession of his faith, and
for the same also beheaded by an ancient Law, that no Christian ought to be
released without recantation.

This Emperor on his birth day, with the people of Rome assembled together,
made sacrifice to Hercules and Jupiter, causing it to be cried through out ye
city, that Hercules was the patron of the city. At which time there were in
the city Vincentius, Vincentius.
Eusebius, Eusebius, etc.
Peregrinus, Potentianus, learned men, and instructors of the people: who
converting the Gentiles in diverse places, and hearing hereof, preached and
persuaded against the same, and converted one Julius Julius.
a Senator, with others to the faith. Whereof Commodus hearing caused them all
to be first tormented, and then to be pressed to death with leaden waights,
saving that Julius was beaten to death with cuggels, at the commandment of
Vitellus the Master of the Soldiers.

Peregrinus Peregrinus.
had been sent before of Xistus B. of Rome into the parts of France, to
supply the room of a teacher, where the horrible persecutions had made wast.
Who having there established the Churches, returned home again to Rome, and
finished his days with martyrdom.

Xistus Xistus.
or Sixtus was the sixth bishop of Rome after Peter, and governed that ministry
ten years.

To Sixtus succeeded Telesphorus, Telesphorus.
and was bishop there eleven years, and died in the first year of Antoninus
Pius, being martyred the year 138. Hyginus, Hyginus.
and died a martyr anno 142. Pius. Pius, etc.
After him succeeded Anicetus, Soter, Eleutherius, about the year 180.

About this time of Commodus, among others were martyred Serapion Serapion.
B. of Antioch, Egesippus Egesippus.
a writer of the ecclesiastical History from Christ's passion to his time.
Also Miltiades, Miltiades.
who wrote his Apology for Christian religion, as did Melito, Aristides and
Quadratus before.

About the same time wrote Heraclitus, Heraclitus.
who first began to write Annotations and Enarrations upon the New Testament,
and Epistles of the Apostles. Also Theophilus Theophilus.
bishop of Cesarea, Dionisius Dionisius.
bishop of Corinth, a man famously learned, who wrote diverse Epistles to
diverse churches: and among other exhorts Penitus Penitus.
a bishop that he would lay no yoke of chastity on any necessity upon his
brethren, but that he would consider the infirmity of other, and bear with it.

About the days of Co^modus, wrote also Clemens Alexandrinus Clemens
Alexandrinus.
a man of singular learning. In that time lived also Pantenus, who was the
first in Alexandria that professed to read in open school, of whom is thought
first to rise the order of Universities in christendom. He was sent to preach
to the Indians by Demetrius bishop of Alexandria.

Now in this tranquillity of the Church grew contention among themselves for
Easter day, Contention among the christians for Easter day.
which had bin stirred before of Polycarpus and Anicetus. For they of the West
church pretending the tradition of Paul and Peter, but in deed being of
Hermes and Pius, kept the Sunday after the 14. day of the first month. The
Church of Asia following the ordinance of John the Apostle, observed an other.

The fifth Persecution.
AFter the death of Commodus reigned Pertinax Pertinax.
but few months: after who^ succeeded Seuerus, Seuerus.
under whom was raised the fifth persecution. He reigned 18. years, and in the
first ten was very favorable, afterward through false accusations and
suggestions, he caused to be proclaimed, that no Christian should be suffered:
whereupon an infinite number were slain, this was about the year 205. to pray
toward the East. But the special matter against them was, that they would not
woorshippe Idols. The Presidents and chief under the Emperor of this
persecution were, Hilarious, Hilarious etc.
Vigellius, Claudius, Hermianus, ruler of Cappadocia. Celicius, Capella,
Vespronius, Demetrius mentioned of Cyprian, and Aquila Judge of Alexandria. The
places where these persecutions raged were Africa, Alexandria, Cappadocia, and
Carthage. The number infinite: of which the first was Leonides, Leonides.
the father of Origin, who although he were but of the age of seuenteen years,
greatly desired to have suffered with his father, had not his mother privily in
the night stolen away his garments and his shirt, and so for shame he was
constrained to tarry at home: yet he wrote to his father, Take heed to your
self that you turn not your thought and purpose for our sakes

Origin Origin.
was so toward in knowledge of the scriptures, and all kind of virtue, that
his father would diverse times uncover his breast being asleep, and kiss it,
giving thanks to God that had made him so happy a Father of so happy a son.

After the death of his father, all the goods being confiscate to the
Emperor, he sustained himself, his mother, and six brethren, by keeping a
school, till at length he applied himself altogether to the scripture, and
profited in the tongues, Hebrew and Greek, which he conferred with other
translations, as that of the 70. and found out also other translations which we
call the common translations of Aquila, of Symmachus and Theodocian, with which
he joined also four other. He wrote to the number of vij. thousand books, O
rgens book
the copies whereof he used to sell for three pence a piece and a little more
to sustain his living. He had diverse Scholars, as Plutarchus, Plutarchus.
Serenus Serenus, etc.
his Brother which dyed both martyrs: Serenus was burned, Heraclitus and Heron
were beheadded. Also another Serenus which was beheaded, Rhais; and Potamiena,
who was tormented with pitch powered upon her, and martyred with her mother
Marcella, and died in the fire. She was put to death by one Basilides,
Basilides.
a Captain of the army, who showed her some kindness in repressing the rage
of the multitude: wherefore she thanked him and said, she would pray for him.
Now this Basilides being required a while after to give an oath in a matter by
the Idols, and the Emperor (as the manner of the oath was) refused so to do,
confessing himself to be a Christian, and was beheaded for the faith.

At that time, there was one Alexander, Alexand.
who after great torments, escaped alive, and was afterward Bishop of
Jerusalem, together with Narcissus, Narcissus.
who being threescore and three years old, was unwieldy to govern alone. He
continued Bishop in Jerusalem 40. years, till the persecution of Decius, and
there erected a famous library, where Eusebius had his chiefest help in
writing his ecclesiastical history. He wrote also diverse Epistles, and licensed
Origin to teach openly in his Church. At length being very aged was brought to
Cesarea under Decius, where after his constant confession the second time, he
died in prison.

Under Seuerus, suffered also Andoclus, Andoclus.
whom Polycarpus had sent before into France: who was apprehended of Seuerus,
and first being beaten with bats, was afterward beheaded.

In that time Asclepiades Asclepiad.
confessed also, and suffered much, and was after ordained Bishop of Antioch,
and continued there 7. years.

About the fourth or fifth year Ireneus Ireneus.
with a great multitude beside, were martired. He was the scholar of
Polycarpus. He was appointed Bishop of Lions: and there continued 23. years.
In his time, the question of keeping of Easter was renewed between Victor
Victor.
Bishop of Rome, and the churches of Asia: and when Victor would have
excommunicated them as Schismatikes, Ireneus, with other brethren of the French
Church, wrote unto Victor, to stay his purpose therein, and not to proceed
thereto, for such a matter.

Not long after Ireneus followed Tertullian, Tertullian.
about the time of this Seuerus and Antoninus Caracalla, who writ very
learned Apologies for the Christians, and confuted all the slanders objected
against them. He writ also diverse books: whereof part remain at this day.

Victor succeeded Eleutherius in the bishopric of Rome, and died a Martyr (as
some say) after he had sitten ten or xij. years. This Victor was earnest in the
matter of Easter, the year of our Lord 260. Ireneus dissuaded him. With Victor
stood Theophilus, Theophil. etc
Bishop of Cesarea: Narcissus, of Jerusalem: Ireneus, of Lions: Palmas, of
Pontus: Panthillus, of Corinth: the Bishop of Ostrena, and other more: who
agreed to have Easter upon the sunday, because they would differ from the Jews
in all things: and partly, because the resurrection of the Lord fell on that
day. On the other side were diverse Bishops of Asia. Among whom, the chief was
Policrates, Policrat. etc.
Bishop of Ephesus, alleging the example of Philippe the Apostle, with his
iij. daughters at Hierapolis: of John the Apostle and Evangelist, at Ephesus:
Polycarpus, at Smirna: Thraseas, at Eumenia, Bishop and Martyr. Likewise the
example of Sagaris at Laodicea, Bishop and Martyr: holy Papirius, and Melito,
at Sardis: beside diverse others. Notwithstanding, Victor proceeded to
excommunication, yet by the wise handling of Ireneus and other, the matter was
stayed: who showed, that varia^ce and difference of Ceremonies, was no strange
thing in the Church of God, not only in the day of Easter, but also of fasting,
and diverse other vsages among the Christians, and yet kept the unity of faith
and concord among themselves: and brought forth examples of Telesphorus, Pius,
Anicetus, Soter, Eleutherius, and such other.

After Victor, succeeded in the Sea of Rome zephyrinus, Zephyrinus.
in the days of Seuerus, about the year 203. Eusebius says, he died in the
reign of Caracalla, and sat xvij. years. Platina says that he died under
Seuerus, and sat viij. years. And so, Nauclerus. Damasus says, that he sat
xvi. years, and ij. Months.

Under this Seuerus suffered also Perpetua, Perp. etc.
Felicitas, and Rouocatus her brother. Also, Saturninus and Satyrus, brethren,
and Secundulus, which were thrown to wild beasts, and of them devoured, in
Carthage, and in Africa: saving that Saturninus (being brought again from the
beasts) was beheaded, and Secundulus died in prison, about the year 202 Seuerus
reigned xviij. years, and was slain at York by the Northern men and Scots,
the year 214. Bassianus, and Geta.

Which Bassianus, Bassianus.
surnamed Carocalla, after he had slain his brother here in Britain, governed
the Empire alone the space of six years. After whose death he also (being
slain of his servants) succeeded Marianus, with his son Diadumenus, who
after they had reigned one year, were both slain by their own people.

After them succeeded Varius Heliogab Varius Heliogabalus.
who (after he had reigned very vitiously ij. years, viij. months) was slain
by ye soldiers, drawn through the city, and thrown into Tyber. He (having
no issue) adopted his heir Aurelius Alexander Seuerus, the son of Mammea. He
entered his reign the year 224.

Mammea, Mammea.
the mother of this Emperor, who^ Ierom calls a devout, and religious woman,
hearing of ye fame of Orige^, sent for him to Antioch: to who^ Orige^ resorted,
and (staying a while with the Emperor and his mother) returned again to
Alexandria. Thus (having reigned xiij. years) at a co^motion in Germany, with
his mother Mammea he was slain.

After him succeeded Maximinus, Maximinus.
and although the church in the time of Alexander had no open persecution, yet
under Judges there were many martyred, because there was no edict to the
contrary. As under Almachus, Calixtus Calixtus.
B. of Rome, who succeeded Zephyrus above mentioned: and after him Vrbanus, who
suffered under Alexander Seuerus. Vincentius says Calixtus was tied to a great
stone, and so out of a window was thrown into a ditch. Eusebius says he sat
5. years, Platina 6. Sabellicus 7. and so Damasus.

After Calixtus followed Vrbanus, Vrbanus.
about the year 227. Marianus, Scotus, Sabellicus, Nauclerus do hold) in the
days of Seuerus after he had governed there, as Damasus and Platina say, four
years: as Marianus, eight years. Damasus and Platina witness of him, that
he converted diverse Ethnicks, among whom were Tiburtius Tiburtius.
and Valerianus Valerianus.
the husband of Cecilia, which being both noble men of Rome, remained constant
unto martyrdom.

Under the same Alexander suffered also one Agapitus Agapitus.
of the age of fifteen years, who being condemned at Preneste in Italy,
because he would not do sacrifice, after other torments, was beheaded. The
executor of these punishments was one Antiochus, who while the torments were
executing, fell suddenly from his Judicial seat: crying out that all his
inward bowels burned within him, and died. Under him also suffered Calepodius
Calepodius.
a minister of Rome, who was drawn through the city, and cast into Tiber:
after him suffered Pammachus Pammachus.
a Senator of Rome, with his wife and children, and other men and women, to the
number of 42. and with them also another noble Senator named Simplicius:
Simplicius.
all which together in one day had their heads smitten of, and their hands
hanged up in diverse gates of the city.

Under him also suffered Quiritius Quiritius.
a noble man of Rome with his mother Iulia, Iulia.
with a great number besides: also Tiberius Tiberius.
and Valerianus Valerianus.
citizens of Rome and brethren, suffered the same time, being first beaten with
bats, and after beheaded. Also one Martina Martina.
a virgin suffered at the same time: but these martyrs are rather to be thought
to suffer under Maximinus or Decius.

The sixth Persecution.
Maximinus.
MAximinus succeeded Alexander, as is aforesaid the year of our Lord 237.
Alexander, raised the sixth persecution, especially against the teachers of the
Church: he reigned but three years. In the time of this persecution Origin
wrote his book De Martyrio.

After him succeeded Gordian, Gordian.
who was mild toward the Christians, reigned six years, and was slain of
Phillip Phillip.
who succeeded him.

In the days of these Emperors above recited, was Pontianus Pontianus.
bishop of Rome, who succeeded next after Vrbanus about the year 236.
Alexander, according to Eusebius declaring him to sit six years. Damasus and
Platius write that he was Bishop nine years and a half, and with Phillip his
priest was banished into Sardinia, and there died. But it seems he was rather
banished under Maximinus, and died in the beginning of the reign of Gordianus.

In these times notable men were raised up to the church, as Philetus Philetus.
Bishop of Antioch, who succeeded Asclepiades above mentioned anno 220. Zebenus
Zebenus.
bishop of the same place anno 231. Ammonius Ammonius.
the Scholemaster of Origin and kinsman of Porphiry the enemy of Christ. In the
same times was also Julius Aphricanus Julius Aphricanus.
the scholar of Origin.

To these may be joined Natalius, Natalius.
who had suffered for the truth, and was seduced by Asclepiodotus and Theodotus
(who were ye disciples of Theodorus) to take upon him to be the Bishop of their
sect, promising him every month 150. pieces of silver, whereto he yielded. But
the Lord in a vision admonished him, whereto he taking no heed, was in a night
scourged with Angels, and so confessed his fault, and declared that which had
happened unto him, to Zephirinus the Bishop, who with the rest of the
congregation admitted him again.

After Pontianus succeeded Anterius. Anterius.
Concerning his time writers do greatly vary. Eusebius and Marianus Scotus
affirm, that he was Bishop but a month, Damasus twelve years and one month,
Volateranus Bergomensis and Henricus Erford three years and one month,
Nauclerus one year and one month.

Next to this Bishop, was Fabianus.

Hippolitus Hippolitus.
was a martyr: and as Gelasius says, was bishop of an head City in Arabia,
Nicephorus, that he was Bishop of Ostia, a port town near to Rome. He was a
great writer, and was about the year 230. Prudentius in his Peristephanon,
makes mention of great heaps of martyrs buried by threescore together: and
says, that Hippolitus was drawn with wild horses through fields, dales, and
bushes.

After Gordianus, succeeded Philippus, who with Philip his son, governed
about the space of six years ann. 246. These Emperors with their families
were christened and converted by Fabianus and Origin. He with his son was
slain of Decius, one of the Captains, by hatred, as it is thought, because
the Emperors had committed their treasures unto Fabianus then Bishop of Rome.

The seventh Persecution.
DEcius having slain the former Emperors invaded the crown the year 250. the
Christians.

Fabian.
Fabian above mentioned, was made Bishop of Rome after Anterius, by the
flying and lighting of a Dove upon his head in the congregation, which was
minded to elect some noble personage of Rome. He sat 13. years, or as other
say 14. and was put to death by Decius, who also caused to be proclaimed in all
quarters the destruction of Christians.

To this Decius Origin wrote of the rightnesse of his faith: he continued two
and fifty years in great labors of teaching, and writing, and sustained
diverse gieuous persecutions, but especially under Decius: under whom having
suffered bands, torments, rackings, with bars of iron, dungeons, besides
terrible threats of death, and burning, at length was brought to an altar,
where a foul filthy Ethiope was appointed to be, and there this choice was
offered him, whether he would sacrifice to the Idol, or have his body polluted
with that foul and ougly Ethyope. Origin made choice rather to do sacrifice:
Origin sacrifices.
for the which impiety, he was after excommunicated by the Church. Epiphanius
writes, that he being urged to sacrifice to Idols, and taking the bones in his
hand, wherewith the heathen were wont to honor their gods, called upon the
Christians to carry them in honor of Christ: which fact the Church of
Alexandria misliking, removed him from their communion. Origin excommunicated.
Whereupon Origin driven away with shame, went into Jury, where being in
Jerusalem among the congregation, and there requested of the ministers to make
some exhortation in the Church, refused a great while so to do: but at length
through importunity, he turned the book as though he would have expounded
some place of Scripture, and read the verse of the 49. Psalm. But God said to
the sinner, why do thou preach my iustifications? and why do thou take my
testament in thy mouth? etc. Which verse having read, he shut the book, and
sat down, weeping and wayling, the whole congregation also weeping and
lamenting with him. Origin repents.


Suidas says, Origin was buried at Tirus. Eusebius says he died under ye
Emperor Gallus, about the year two hundred fifty and five, Antoninus
Carocalla, Origin had a notable man Heracleas Heracleas.
his usher in the school of Alexandria, who after in the tenth year of
Alexander, Origin departing unto Cesaria, succeeded him in the government of
the school of Alexandria. This Heracleas also succeeded after the death of
Demetrius to be Bishop of Alexandria, in the time of the Emperor Gordianus: in
which function he continued sixteen years.

After Heracleas, succeeded Dyonisius Alexandrinus. Heracleas was no martyr,
but died three years before Decius, anno 250. Dionysius Alexandrinus
Dionysius. Alexandrinus.
suffered much.

The persecutions under Decius were so cruel, yt Niceph. faith, it were as
possible to number the sand of the sea, as to recite their names yt suffered.
Cruel persecution.
Of the which persecution under the Emperor, the chief doers were, Optimus the
vnderconsul, Secundianus, Verianus, Marcellinus, etc.

In the time of Decius, Alexander Alexander.
was B. of Jerusalem, where he continued a very aged man about the term of
xl. years, till the 1. year of Decius. At what time (being brought from
Jerusalem to Cesarea) he died in prison. After whom succeeded Mezananes,
Mezananes.
the xxxvj. Bishop of that city, after James the Apostle.

Under this Decius, Babylas, B. of Antioch, who succeeded zebinus, died in
prison, which followed after Philetus, an. 232. and sat xij. years. Which
Philetus succeeded Asclepiades, after Serapion, an. 214 and sat vij. years.

Babilas, because he resisted a certain Emperor, who had most cruelly slain
(against his promis) a kings son, whom he received in Hostage, and would
not suffer him to enter the temple of the christians, was by him put to death.

In the reign of Constantinus, afterward Gallus then made ouerseer of the East
parts, caused the body of Babylas to be translated into the suburbs of Antioch
called Daphnes: where was an oracle of Apollo, which after the bringing in of
the body of Babylas, ceased to give answer, alleging his body to be the
cause: and so it continued til the time of Iulianus, who therefore caused it to
be removed away by the Christians: which was no sooner departed the temple, but
the temple was consumed with fire. This Babylas is mentioned of Chrysostom who
is like to be another, diverse from him that died. In Decius time Nicephorus in
his fifth book, makes mention of an other Babylas besides this that was
Bishop of Nicomedia, and suffered under Decius.

In these times in the City of Antioch suffered forty Virgins xl. Virgins.
in the days of Decius. In Phrigia suffered one Peter Peter.
in the Town of Lampsur, under Optimus the Proconsul. In Troada also other
martyrs suffered, whose names were, Andrew, Andrew,
Paul, Paul.
Nichomachus, Nichomach.
and Dionisia Dionysia.
a Virgin. Also in Babylonia, diverse Christian Confessors were found by
Decius, and were led away into Spain, there to be executed.

In the Country of Cappadocia at the city of Cesarea, Germanus, Germanus.
Theophilus, Theophilus.
Cesarius, Cesarius.
and Vitalis, Vitalis.
suffered martyrdom, Likewise Polichronius Polychronius.
Bishop of Babylon, and Nestor, Nestor.
in Pa^philia, Bishop of the same place. At Persida, in ye Town of Cardala
suffered Olimpiades Olympiades.
and Maximus. Maximus.
In Tyrus, Anatolia, Anatolia.
a Virgin, and Audax, Audax,
gave their lives for the faith.

In these times, diverse suffered diversely in Alexandria, a whole year before
any Proclamation, by reason of a Soothsayer, Soothsayers.
which stirred up the people. Who first flying upon a Priest, called Metra,
Metra.
apprehended him, and laid upon him with staves and clubbes, and with sharp
reeds pricked his face, and eyes, and afterward in the Suburbs stoned him to
death. Then took they Quinta, a faithful woman, and bound her feet, and drew
her through the streets, upon the hard stones. And so (dashing her against
the milstones) and scourging her with whips, slew her in the Suburbs of the
City. This done, they spoiled all the Christians, who avoided the City, and
took the loss patiently. Among other that were taken there was one Apollonia,
Apollonia.
an ancient Virgin, whom they brought forth, and dashing al her teeth out of
her jaws, made a great fire before the City, threatening to cast her into the
same, except she would deny Christ. Whereat she staying a while, as one that
would take a pause, suddenly leapt into the midst of the fire, and so was
burned.

They also took one Serapion, Serapion.
in his own house, who^ having broken almost all the joints of his body,
they cast him down from an upper lofte, and so he died. Thus (raging against
the Christians) at last they fell at debate among themselves, and so for a time
the fury stayed: which was so great, that no place could hide the Christians
from the rage of the heathen. Shortly after this, came the Edict of the
Emperor against the Christians, whereupon the persecution grew in all places
more grievous tha^ before. In so much, that some revolted voluntarily, Revolt.
and some by imprisonment and torment: Other continued constant to the death:
of whom one was Iulianus, Iulianus.
a man diseased with the gout, and not able to go, but was carried by two men:
of whom, the one quickly denied the other.

Cronion, Cronion.
surnamed Eunus, Eunus.
with Iulianus the old man, were laid upon Camels, and there scourged, at
length cast into the fire for the testimony of Jesus. When ye aforesaid were
going to martirdom, there was a soldier A soldier.
took part with them, and so was presently apprehended, and beheaded.

Likewise was one Macer, Macer.
a Lybian, burned alive, for his confessing of Christ. After these, suffered
Epymachus, Epimachus.
and Alexander, Alexander.
which having suffered bonds and torments, with rasors and scourges, were
burned with iiij. other women.

Likewise Ammonarion, Ammonarion.
a holy virgin, and an aged matrone, named Mercuria, Mercuria.
with another called Dyonisia Dionysia.
(being a mother of many fair children) after many torments, were slain by
the sword. Ammonarion suffered before the rest, after, Heron, Heron.
and Isidorus, Isodorus.
Egyptians, and with them Dioscorus, Dioscorus.
of the age of xv. years, With whom the Judge first began, and could not
prevail, either by persuasions, or torments. The rest (after grievous
torments) he caused to be burned, and respited Dioscorus for his tender age,
being astonished at his grave answers, and constancy.

Nemesian Nemesian.
also, an Egyptian, was first accused to be a co^panio^ of thieves: but being
purged thereof before the Ce^turion, was the^ accused of christianity. Wherefore
(being more grievously scourged tha^ ye other thieves) he was burned with them.

There were standing before the Tribunal seat, certain warriors, or knights,
whose names were, Ammon, Ammon.
Zenon, Zenon.
Ptolomeus, Ptolomeus.
Ingenius, Ingenius.
and with them a certain aged man called Theophilus: Theophilus.
who seeing a certain Christian fainting, and fearful to confess his faith,
emboldned him by signs, and gave him courage. Which being noted, and the
sta^ders by ready to lay hands on them, they preased up of their own accord,
professing themselves to be Christians. Whereat the Judge and his assistants
were greatly amazed, and the Christians emboldened to suffer. So they departed,
glad for the testimony they had given of their faith.

Also one Ischrion, Ischrion.
being oftentimes moved by his master to do sacrifice, and he refusing, was of
him run through with a pike, and slain. In these times, infinite numbers
wa^dred in wildernesses, suffering hunger, cold, danger of wild beasts: in
the number of whom was Cheremon, Cheremon.
Bishop of a town called Nilus, an aged man: who with his wife, flying to the
mountain of Arabia, could never (although they were sought for) be heard of.
And many other taken of the barbarous Arabia^s, could scarcely be ransomed for
money.

At the same time Dionisius Alexandrinus Dionisius. Alexandrinus.
(out of whose Epistle to Fabius Bishop of Antioch, Eusebius records these
persecutions) suffered much afflicton, and had strange deliverance. Once the
messenger was stricken blind, and could not find his house, being a Farmer of
Sabinus: at length after three days he was commanded of God to fly, and so
did: but afterward coming to Jerusalem, he was taken and brought by soldiers
to Taposixis, where Timotheus Timotheus.
being from home and returning, and finding Dionisius and others taken, and all
the rest fled, he fled away also, and meeting a neighbor of his, and asked
whether he went, declared all the matter simply. Which done, the man went on
as he was purposed to a marriage, and told the company what was done, which
they hearing, burst out of the house in the night season (as the manner of
marriages was in that time) making toward the prisoners with great showting:
whereat they that apprehended the prisoners being afraid, left them, and ran
away. Then the company willed them to depart, which they did, and took
Dionysius by the hands and feet, and carried him out, and led him away. There
followed him Gaius, Gaius.
Faustus, Faustus.
Petrus, Petrus.
Paulus, Paulus.
who brought him out of the city, and setting him upon a bare Ass, conveyed
him away.

Under Decius suffered one Christophorus, Christophorus.
a Chanaanite, being 12. cubits hie. Under him, also suffered Meniatus Meniatus.
a Florentine, and Agatha, Agatha.
an holy virgin in Sicily, who suffered imprisonment, with beatings, racking,
famine, railing upon, sharp shelles, and hot coals. Having (moreover) her
breasts cut from her body, by the cruelty of Quintinianus the Proconsul.
About the same time suffered also among others, xl. virgins by diverse kinds of
death. Under this tyrant also suffered by the sword (after diverse torments)
Tryphon, Tryphon.
a man of great holiness and constancy in the City of Nice, by Aquilius. At
what time Decius had erected a temple in ye midst of Ephesus, co^pelling al in
the city to do sacrifice, there were found vij. soldiers yt refused: their
names were, Maximianus, Malchus, Martialis, Dionisius, Johannes, Serapion and
Constantinus. Who when respite was given them to consider of the matter, till
the Emperors return from the war, hid themselves in mount Celius in caves:
which the Emperor at his return caused to be rammed up with stones, and so
they were martyred.

There was, as Hieronymus writes in the life of Paulus the Heremite, a godly
soldier, who could by no means be brought from his faith by the Praetor, and
was brought into a pleasant garden, and laid on a soft bed, and an harlot
sent to allure him: who when she offered to kiss, he bit of her tongue, and
spit it in the harlots face. The like is reported of Ambrose de virginibus, of
Theodora, Theodora.
who was commanded to the stews: which a young man a Christian understanding,
pressed in, as though he had been one of the lewd wantons, and told Theodora
what he was, and councelled her to change garments, and to convey her self
away. Which she did, he offering himself to their violence: and being found a
man, confessed himself a Christian, and was presently condemned to suffer.
Which Theodora understanding of, offered her self to the Judge, as the party
guilty, and required the other might be discharged. But the cruel judge
commanded them to be both beheaded, and after cast into the fire. At what time
this befell, it does not appear.

Agathon.
Agathon, a man of Terms, in the city of Alexandria, for rebuking those that
derided the dead bodies of the Christians, was condemned to lose his head.

The Proconsull of Troada, gave Paulus Paulus.
and Andreas Andreas.
(being first scourged, and after drawn through the City) to be trodden to
death under the feet of the people. In this time also of Decius, suffered one
Justinius, Justinius.
a priest of Rome, and Nicostratus, a Deacon, also Portius, Portius.
a priest of Rome, who is reported to have converted the Emperor Philip above
mentioned.

In that time there was also one Secundianus, Secundianus.
who was accused to Valerian a captain of Decius to be a Christian: who as he
was led by the soldiers to the gaile, Verianus Verianus.
and Marcellinus Marcellinus.
cried to the soldiers, and asked whether they led the innocent. Whereupon
they were also brought to a place named Contumcellas, and there after torments
and beatings with wasters, they were hanged on a gibbet with fire put to their
sides: but the tormentors some fell suddenly dead, other were taken with evil
spirits, and the martyrs at length were beheaded with the sword.

Besides an infinite number that suffered under Decius, Sore persecution.
these are registered, Hippolitus and Concordia, Hiereneus and Abundus, Victoria
a virgin, being noble personages of Antioch: Bellias bishop of the city of
Apollonia, Leacus, Tyrsus and Galmetus Nazanzo, Triphon in the city of Egypt,
called Tanais. Phildas bishop of Philocomus, with many other in Perside,
Philochronius bishop of Babylon, Thesiphon bishop of Pamphilia, Nestor bishop
in Corduba: Parmenius a priest with diverse other. In the province called
Colonia, Circensis Marianus and Iacobus. In Africa Nemesianus, Felix,
Rogatianus priest, Felicissimus: at Rome Iouinius, Basilius, Ruffina, Secunda
virgins, Tertullianus, Valerianus, Nemesius, Sempromanus, and Olympius in
Spain: Teragone at Verone, Zeno bishop at Cesarea: Marinus and Archenius in
the town of Milaine: Priuatus bishop, Theodorus surnamed Gregorius bishop of
Pontus. Haec Beda.

Also in the same persecution suffered certain children, Children persecuteth.
in a city of Tuscia called Aretum: their names are thought to be Pergentius
Pergentius.
and Laurentius. Laurentius.


The heat of this persecution was so sore, that some revolted, Revolt.
as Serapion an aged man, Nichomachus in the midst of his torments, in the
city of Troada: Euaristus bishop in Africa, Nicostratus a Deacon, whereof
diverse were punished by the hand of God, some with evil spirits, some with
strange diseases.

In this time rose up the quarrel and Heresy of Nouatus, Nouatus.
who disturbed Cyprian Cyprian.
bishop of Carthage, afterward disturbed Cornelius Cornelius.
Bishop of Rome, and being assisted with Maximus, Vrbanus, Sydonius, and
Celerinus, allured unto him three simple Bishops in the coasts of Italy, by
whose laying on of hands (making them drunk before (he made himself Bishop of
Rome with Cornelius, whom he went about by all means to defeat, and caused the
people that came to receive the Eucharist at his hands, to swear they would
stand with him. But Maximus, Vrbanus, Sydonius, and Celerinus, perceiving
themselves abused, forsook him afterward.

Cornelius remained B. of Rome after the death of Decius to the time of Gallus,
but other affirm (as Damasus) that he was exiled under Decius, and by him
martyred in the way of Appius, first being beaten with plumbats. Eusebius says
he sat two years: in another place he says three years. Damasus gives him
only two years.

Under this tyrant suffered, as Cyprian reports, two young men, the one
Aurelius Aurelius.
who was twice tormented, the other Mappalicus, Mappalicus.
who in the midst of his torments, said to the Proconsull; to morrow you
shall see the running for a wager: meaning his martyrdom, which he constantly
did suffer.

Decius death.
This Decius reigned but two years, and with his son was slain of the
Barbarians. Pomponius affirming that he warring against the Gothians, to avoid
their hands, ran into an whyrlepit where he was drowned, and his body never
found.

Immediately after the death of Decius, God sent a plague ten years together,
A plague of ten years.
which made diverse places of the world desolate; especially where the
persecution most raged. Where might appear great difference between the
Christians and Gentiles, one comforting and ministering to the necessities of
their brethren, the other forsaking their neighbors, and friends, left them
destitute, Cyprian de mortalitate.
and void of succor. Upon this plague, Cypr. wrote his book de mortalitate.

After ye death of Decius, succeeded Vibias Vibias.
Gallus Gallus.
and Volusian. Volusianus.
his son, both by treason, about ye year 255. and continued 2. years.

Gallus at the first was quiet, The teachers of Christianity banished.
but anon after published edicts against ye Christians, which was chiefly of
banishment of the guides of the church. In whose time Cyprian B. of Carthage
was banished. Other were condemned to ye mines, as Nemesianus, Nemesianus.
Felix, Felix.
Lucius, Lucius.
with their bish, priests, and deacons: to whom Cyprian wrote co^solatory
epistles. He wrote also consolatory Epistles to Seagrius Seagrius.
and Rogatianus, Rogatianus.
being then in bonds for the truth. In the time of this Gallus, was Lucius B.
of Rome sent into banishment, (who next succeeded Cornelius in ye year 256.)
wherein he continued but a while, and returned to his Church. Lucius sat but 8.
months, as says Eusebius, Damasus, Marianus, Scotus, and Nauclerus say he
sat 3. years, and was beheaded the second year of Valerian, and Galienus.

After Lucius, came Stephanus, Stephanus.
and sat 7. years 5. months, and died a martyr, as says Damasus. Platina,
Sabellicus, Eusebius, and Volateranus, give him (which is more likely) but 2.
years.

Betwixt this Stephanus, and Cyprian, fell a contention Contention.
about rebaptising of heretics.

Next to the former Emperors succeeded Emilianus, Emilianus.
who slew the former, and succeeded himself. After that he had reigned but
three months, he also was slain.

Next, Valerianus, and Galienus, Valerianus and Galienus.
his son, were advanced to the Empire, and succeeded Emilianus.

Valerianus three or four years was so courteous, and gentle to the
Christians, as no Emperor before him, no not such as professed Christ: so that
his Court was full of Christians. But being seduced by an Egyptian magician,
Valerianus seduced.
who was hindered by the Christians, from practicing his charms, he fell to
idols, and sacrificed young infantes, and raised the eight persecution.

The eight Persecution.
THe chief ministers of this persecution were, Emilianus, President of Egypt,
Paternus and Galerius maximus Proconsuls in Africa, Paternus Vicegerent in
Rome, Perennius, Nicetus and Claudius Presidents.

Disordered life of Christians.
The cause of this persecution, besides the Egyptian above mentioned, was the
dissension and disordered life of Christians, even of those that had been
confessors, as Cyprian in his fourth book, and fourth Epistle does declare:
to whom it was showed in a vision of the Lord before it came. There was a
certain aged man sitting, A Vision.
at whose right hand sat a young man very sad and pensive, as one with an
indignation sorrowful, holding his hand upon his breast, his countenance
heavy, and vncheerefull. On the left hand sat another person, having in his
hand a net which he threatened to lay to catch the people that stood about,
and said unto him: the young man whom thou see sad and sorrowful, is for that
his precepts be not observed: but he on the left hand daunceth and is merry,
for that occasion is given him to have power of the aged father, to afflict men.

Cyprians Apology for Christians.
Cyprian does defend the Christians, and confute the false accusations laid
against them (as among the rest to be ye causes of all calamities that happened
of war or plague whatsoever) writing contra Demetrium, as Tertullian had
before, writing contra Capulam.

Cyprian was an African, borne in Carthage, and first was an idolater, Cyprian
once a Magician.
altogether given to the practice of magical arts, and a worthy Rhetorician.
He was converted to the says by Cecil. a priest (whose name after he bare)
through occasion of hearing the history of ye Prophet Jonas. Cecilius
conuerteth Cypr.
And immediately upon his conversion, he distributed all his substance to the
poor, and being ordained a Priest, was not long after made Bishop of Carthage.
But whether he succeeded Agrippinus, Agrippinus.
which was the first author of rebaptization, it is uncertain. Such were his
gifts and virtues, that he had the government of the whole East Church, and
Church of Spain: and was called the Bishop of Christian men. He was much given
to read Tertullian, and called him his master.

In the time of Decius and Gallus, he was first banished, Cyprian banished.
and after (returning again out of exile, in the time of Valerianus) he was
also the second time banished by Paternus, the Proconsull of Afric, into the
City of Thurbin, or into a City called Furabilitana, or Curabilitana. But
when Paternus the Proconsul was dead, Galienus Maximus succeeded him: who
finding Cyprian in a Garden, caused him to be apprehended, and (after many
raging words) his head to be stricken of, Xistus being then Bishop of Rome,
Cyprian beheaded.
in the year 259.

It is to be noted, that there were more Cyprians: Diverse Cyprians.
one of whom, Nazianzen writes to be a Citizen of Antioch, and afterward
Bishop of that City, and martired under Dioclesian. There was also a third
Cyprian, in the time of Iulianus Apostata, long after both the former.

About this time, under the same Valerianus, suffered Xistus, or Sixtus, the
second of that name, Bishop of Rome: who with vi. of his Deacons, Sixtus with
six of his deacons.
( Nemesius being one) was beheaded. At which time also, one Laurence a Deacon,
seeing the Bishop led to execution, cried out unto him, saying, O dear father,
whither go thou without the company of thy dear son? meaning himself.
To whom he answered with a fatherly discourse: that within three days, he
should suffer after a more painful manner: which in deed followed according
as he had said: for Laurence having distributed of the goods of the poor, by
the charge of the Bishop, it came to the Emperors ear: who (greedy of pray)
commanded him to render the treasure unto him. But he insteade thereof,
presented unto him after three days respite, a sort of poor Christians, as
the treasure of the Church. Wherewith, taking himself deluded, he commanded
Laurence to be broyled on an Iron Gridiron. L. broyled on a gridiron.
Whereon, after he had suffered a great space, he pronounced these words unto
the Tyrant: This side is now roasted enough, turn up O Tyrant: assay whether
roasted, or raw, thou think to be better meat.

By the constant confession of this Laurence, a certain Soldier of Rome being
pricked, and therewith converted to ye faith, desired forthwith to be baptized
of him: for which, (being called for by the Judge) he was scourged, and after
beheaded.

Under the same suffered also Dionisius (B. of Alexandria) Dionisius B. of
Alexandria.
much affliction and banishment: who with Faustus, Maximus, and Cheremon, were
banished into a town of Libia, called Cephrobie. Emilianus the President, at
the Emperors commandment, not giving Dionisius (then sick) one days respit:
in ye place he was once scourged, and afterward removed from thence to another
place called Mariota, a more straight and sharp place of Libia. Who after he
came thither, was assigned thence to go to Colluthion. There were also
afflicted with him at yt time, Caius, Petrus, and Paulus. But (notwithstanding
all their cruelty) certain visited the brethren: The brethren visited.
as Maximus, Dioscorus, Demetrius, and Lucius. At yt time also Eusebius
Eusebius.
suffered affliction for the truth, who was afterward made B. of Laodicea, in
Siria. Maximus had the ministry of the church of Alexandria after Dionisius.

Faustus.
Faustus long after, being a very old man, was in the later persecution
beheaded. Dionisius himself suruiued all these troubles, and continued unto
the xij. year of the reign of Galienus, about the year 268. and so in great
age departed in peace, after he had governed the church of Alexandria xvij.
years, and taught School in the same xvi. years. After whom succeeded Maximus.

In Cesaria Palestine suffered ye same time Priscus, Priscus.
Marcus Marcus.
and Alexander: Alexander.
who stepping to the judge, and declaring themselves to be Christians, were
given to wild beasts, with a woman that had been before of the sect of Marcion.

Also in Carthage were 300. martyred 300. martyred.
in a lime kill, for refusing to do sacrifice to Jupiter.

Also in the city of Tuburba, Maxima, Donatilla, and Secunda, three virgins
Three virgins
were after diverse cruel torments given to beasts, which refusing to touch
the^ they were beheaded with the sword. In Symela a city under the Alps one
Pontius Pontius.
being apprehended by Claudius the president, after diverse torments, was given
to beasts, who refusing to touch him, was committed to the fire, of which also
being not touched, he was beheaded by a rivers side, and his body cast into the
same. Gods judgments.
At which instant Claudius with Anabius his assistant were taken with wicked
spirits, and bit of their own tongues, and so died.

In the same time also Zeno Zeno.
Bishop of Verona was martyred. The later Histories write of one Philippus, who
being promoted to the Presidentship of Alexandria, came down with his wife
Claudia, and his two sons Auitus and Sergius, and his daughter named Eugenia.
Among whom this Eugenia Eugenia.
was brought to Christianity, with two other her companions Eunuchs Prothus,
and Hyacinthus: with whom she councelling, took the apparel of a man,
partly to avoid trouble, and to hear more boldly the readings of Helenus
Helenus.
an aged Bishop, and called her name Eugenius. Now a matrone named Melancia, of
Alexandria, fell in love with this Eugenius: which she refusing, and Mela^cia
seeing by no means she could obtain her suit, she made an outcry against
Eugenius, declaring yt he went about to defloure her, and presented her
accusation to Philippus: Whereupon Eugenius was constrained to manifest her
self unto Philippus her father, who had now long time missed her, and whom
with other of her parents she did afterward win to the faith, for the same was
after martyred. Eugenia after the martyrdom of her Father, is said to have
returned to Rome with Prothus, and Hyacinthus, and converted Basilla to the
faith, who should have been married to a Pagan husband, and was then beheaded
after sundry, and diverse torments.

In the sixth year of Valerianus, Victor Victor.
and Victorinus, Victorinus.
with Claudianus Claudianus.
and Bossa Bossa.
his wife, after three years imprisonment, and diverse torments, were put to
death.

Under these tyraunts, suffered Fructuosus Fructuosus.
Bishop of Taraconia in Spain, with his two Deacons Augurius and Eulogius,
conde^nsd by Emilianus. There hands bound behind them, presently were unloosed,
and the fire flew from them, till they had prayed, that it might accomplish the
work, and so they died constantly. At which time a certain soldier of the
house of Emilianus, A vision.
did see the heaven open and the martyrs enter in: which sight he did show unto
the daughter of Emilianus the president.

This Valerian after he had reigned with his son Galienus six or seven
years, and about two years had afflicted the Christians, fell into the hands
of Sapores Sapores.
king of Persians, being of three score and ten years of age: who made him
always his footestoole to get upon his horse, to which purpose he served till
his death: albeit Eusebius says he was slain at the commandment of
Sapores, and powdered with salt. Claudius his president was possessed of a
Devil, Gods judgments.
and biting of his own tongue, by many small pieces, ended his life.

At the same time in the Roman Monarchy there happened thirty earthquakes
together: Earthquakes.
by the means whereof Galienus could not succor his Father, whom it is
thought they did so terrify, that he caused thereupon the persecution to be
moderated, Persecution moderated.
notwithstanding there were some that suffered: among whom was one Marinus,
Marinus.
who being a noble man, and a warrior of Cesarea, and standing for a dignity
that belonged unto him, was accused of him yt should succeed him, to be a
Christian, whereupon being called before Achaius, then judge, had given him
four hours to deliberat: who standing in deliberation, Theotechnus otherwise
called Theodistus Theodistus.
Bishop of Cesarea brought him into the Church of Christians, laid before him
a book of the new testament, and a sword, willing him to choose: who forthwith
chose the book, and so encouraged by the Bishop, presented himself to the
judge, by whose sentence he was beheaded.

After the martirdom of Xistus, the government of ye church of Rome was
committed to one Dionysius, Dionysius.
about the year 266. 9. years, according to Eusebius, but as Damasus says,
6. years and 2. months.

After him succeeded Felix, Felix,
in the first year of Probus the Emperor, about the year 280. 5. years and
died (as Platina says) a martyr. After him followed Entuchianus, Entuchianus.
and then Gaius, Gaius.
both martyrs, as the histories of some do record.

About the time of these Bishops, Theodorus Bishop of Neocesarea lived,
otherwise called Gregorius magnus, Gregor. magn.
whom Nicephorus calls the worker of miracles.

After the captivity of Valerian with whom he reigned 7. years, he ruled the
monarchy alone about 9. years with some peace to the Church.

After Galienus succeeded Claudius, Claudius.
a quiet Emperor: although Vincentius says, he moved persecution: under who^
he makes mention of 262, martirs, 262. martyrs.
that should suffer. This Claudius reigned but 2. years, after whom came
Quintilianus Quintilianus.
his brother, a quiet Prince: who continued but seue^teen days, and had his
successor Aurelianus: Aurelianus.
under whom was moved the ninth Persecution.

The ninth Persecution.
The tyrant terrified.
THis Aurelianus rather intended, then moved persecution, for as the edict was
a subscribing with his hand, he was terrified with lightening, and not long
after about the fifth or sixth year of his reign he was slain, betwixt
Bizans and Heraclea, Anno 278. Vincentius and Orosius notwithstanding reckon up
a great Catalogue of martirs, which should suffer under him in France, and
Italy.

Amnis.
Next unto Aurelianus succeeded Publius Annius Tacitus, Tacitus.
who reigned but six months: after him succeeded his brother Florianus,
Florianus.
who reigned but threescore days. And after him succeeded M. Aurelius, Aurel.
Probus.
surnamed Probus, under whom was moved no persecution: and after he had reigned
six years, and four month, (by reason he kept his soldiers occupied, where
no occasion of war was offered) he was slain. Anno 284.

Next him succeeded Carus Carus.
with his two sons, Carinus, Carinus.
and Numerianus, Numerianus.
who continued but 3. years. Of these, Numerianus killed Cerillus, Cerillus
martyred.
because he would not suffer him to enter into the congregation of the
Christians he being their bishop. This Numerianus was slain of his father in
law Aper.

After these, succeeded Dioclesian, Dioclesian.
in whose time till the 19. 19. years quiet in the church
year of his reign, ye Church was quiet, and the whole time of the quietness of
the Church might seem to continue about 44. 44. years quiet. The Church
grows.
years. In which time, the Church grew mightily, and the chief of them were
in favor with the Emperor, as Dorotheus, and Gorgoneus, and diverse mo.

Church dissolute.
The Church having now obtained peace outwardly, began to be divided with
controversies, and to wax wanto^ with their peace, Large temples builded.
which was so great, and multituds so increased, that then they began to build
large churches for their congregatio^s: The x. persetion.
but their dissolutenes brought on them the 10 persecution, which although it
passed through the hands of diverse tyrants, yet it bears the name of
Dioclesian.

The tenth Persecution.
THis Dioclesian flue Aper, who flue Numerianus, and in the first beginning of
his reign, chose for his Colleague Maximianus Maximianus.
surnamed Herculeus, father to Maxentius, which two also chose two other to
them, Galerius, and Constantius, whom they called Cesars. Cesars.


Dioclesian all the while he abstained from persecuting, obtained diverse
victories, wherewith being puffed up, he would needs after a solemn triumph be
woorshipped as a God: saying he was brother to the sun, and moon, Dioclesian
would be worshipped as a God.

Churches burned.

Scriptures destroyed.


and would needs inioyn yt people to kiss his feet: and in the 19. year of
his reign he moved persecution. In the month of March, when the feast of
Easter was nigh at hand, he commanded all the Churches of the Christians to
be destroyed, and the scriptures to be burned, and put of from magistracy all
such as were Christians, and constrained all with torments, to offer to Idols.

At the first coming of the cruel edicts into Nicomedia, after the
Proclamation made was set up, there ran a Christian, a noble man borne, and
openly rent, and tare it in pieces, notwithstanding, two of the Emperors were
then in the city: for which act he was put to most bitter death.

These Tyrants parted the execution of their cruelty among them. Dioclesian in
the East, Maximianus in ye west. Dioclesian began first in his own Camp with
the Christian Soldiers: willing such as would not agree to him, to lay away
their weapons, and give over their charges: which they did willingly.

At Tire in Phenicia, Miracle.
there were certain Christians (given to the bears, and most cruel wild
beasts) preserved miraculously from hurt: although they were kept hungry for
the purpose, and raged against those that brought the christians, and those
they could catch they devoured: but the Christians were beheaded with the
sword, and after thrown into the sea.

At that time was martyred the B. of Sidon. But Siluanus Siluanus.
the bishop of Gazensis, with 39. other were slain in the metal mines of
Phenicia.

Then also was Pamphilius Pamphilus.
an elder of Casarea, the glory of that congregation martyred, of whom Eusebius
has written in a several book.

In Syria all the teachers, bishops, Elders, and Deacons were committed to
prison, Tirannion Tyrannion,
was made meat for the fishes of the sea, and Arnobius Arnobius.
a very good physician, was slain with brickbats.

Some to avoid sacrificing to idols drowned, themselves, as two maids in
Antioch, Two maids of Antioch.
of a worshipful parentage.

Siluanus Siluanus.
the Bishop of Emissa, together with certain others, was thrown to wild
beasts.

In Mesopotamia the Christians were hanged by the feet, and choked with a
smoke of small fire, with diverse other torments. In Cappadocia the martyrs had
their legs broken.

There were also martyrs in Tarsus of Cilicia, Tharatus, Tharatus.
Probus, Probus.
and Andronicus. Andronicus.
But the martyrs of Pontus suffered most grievous torments: and so outrageous
was the beginning of the persecution in Nichodemia, and Bithinia, that he
refrayned not from the slaughter of Emperors children, nor the cheifest Princes
of his Court, whom not long before he had esteemed as his own children, Among
whom was Peter, of the household, Peter of the Household.
who (after diverse cruel torments, as, whipping to the bones, and powdering
with salt and vinager) was roasted with a soft fire: which Dorotheus Dorotheus.
and Gorgonius Gorgonius.
seeing, reproved the Emperor, and confessed themselves to be Christians.
Wherefore (notwtstanding they were in great authority under him) they were
almost tormented as Peter was and after strangled.

Afterward, Anthonius Anthonius.
Bishop of Nicomedia, and a great company of Martirs with him, were
beheaded. And so was Lucianus Lucianus.
(the Elder of the Congregation at Antioch) after he had made his Apology
before the Emperor.

Hermannus caused Serena the wife of Dioclesian, Serena, the wife of the
emperor martired
to be martired. There were also other Martirs in Nicomedia, as, Eulampia,
Agapen, Irenea, Chronia, and Anastachia: who under Illyricus chief Officer,
were burned.

Maximinus burned 2000. Two thousand together in a Temple, burned.
Christians together in one Temple, men, women, and children.

In Arabia many Martirs were slain with axes. In Phrygia there was a whole
City of Christians compassed, set on fire, and burned. A whole city of
Christians burned.


In Melitina, a Region of Armenia, the Bishops and Elders were cast into prison.

In Arabrate, a Region nigh Armenia, Eustachius, that Countreyman borne, and
Sheriff under the Emperor at Lycia, in the East, having there done execution
on the christians, was converted, and confessed himself a Christian: and after
diverse strange torments, was carried to Sebastia, with the rest of his
companions, and there burned,

At that time also suffered Eugenius, Auxentius, Eustachius.
Marderius. And in no less manner raged this persecution in Egypt, where
Peleus, and Nilus, Peleus and Nilus.
Bishops, were martyred. But especially in Alexandria the rage was great, where
Peter the Bishop of Alexandria suffered, with the Elders of the same church,
Faustus, Didius, Ammonius, Phildas, The B. with the Elders, martired. A legion
of Christians martired.
Hesichius, Pachiminus, and Theodorus, beside many other.

The whole legion of Christian Soldiers, which (to the number of 6660. lay at
Thebes in Egypt, under the Christian Captain Mauritius) refusing to worship
Images, were tithed to death once, and then again: and last, through ye
exhortation of Mauritius, Mauritius.
died al together constant in faith Likewise at Anteno diverse Christian Martirs
suffered death together. Among whom were, Ascla, Philemon, and Apollonius. And
in other parts of Africa, and Mauritania, was great persecution. Also in
Samnium, and Scilia, where 79. 79. martired.
were put to death.

Now in Europe, at Nicopolis in Thracia, the Martirs were miserably handled by
Lysia. In Chalcedon suffered Euphenia, under Priscus the Proconsul

Great persecution in Italy.
At Rome, Johannes, and Crispus, being Priests had the execution of Martirs. At
Bohemia, Agricola, and Vitalis: and at Aquileia, the Emperor commanded every
man to kill the Christians. Among those, Felices, and Fortunatus are recorded.
In other places also of Italy, the persecution was great: as, at Florentia,
Pergamus, Naples, Ca^pania, Beneuentus, at Venusa in Apulia, in Thussia, and at
Verona.

In France. Rectorianus was a cruel persecutor. At Mediolanum suffered
Victor. Victor.


At Massilia, Maximianus sets out his decree, that all ye refused to do
sacrifice, should with diverse torments be slain. In Beluacus suffered Lucian.
Lucian.


In Spain likewise was great persecution, as at Emerita, where suffered
Eulalia, and Adula: where also suffered Vincentia, Sabina, and Christiana.

18. martired.
At Toletum suffered Leucadia the virgin. At Cesarea, Augusta: Where were put to
death xviij. beside a great number of Martirs which suffered under Decianus the
Governor, who afflicted with persecution, all ye coasts of Spain. And the
foresaid Rectorianus made such Persecution at Treuers, Persecution in Spain.
near the river of Mosella, that the blood of christian men that were slain,
Rivers died with blood of Christians.
ran like a little brook, and colored many rivers. And round about all
quarters he commanded horsemen to ride, and charge the people to kill the
Christians, as they found them.

Moreover, at Colonia was great persecution, where Agrippina and Augusta were
martyred: as also in the province of Rhetia. In Britanny great persetion.
And in Brytannie all the Christians were destroyed. The deaths that this
tyrant used were diverse, and the torments so grievous as no tongue can utter:
as the hanging up of them by one hand, Strange torments.
that they might feel the weight of the rest of their bodies, the scorching
and broylyng them with coals not unto death, but every day new: with which
kind of death the martyrs of Antioch were afflicted, as more at large it
appears by a letter of Phildas, to the congregation of Thunitans, where he
was Bishop before he received the sentence of death, being yet in hands.

In Thebaid, Eusebius says, that he himself beheld the persecution, which was
so great, The persecutors wearied with slaughter.
that the very swords of the hangmen and persecutors, being blunt with the
great and often slaughter, they themselves for weariness sat down to rest
them, and other were feign to take their places. But the martyrs nothing
dismayed, bare all with patience, for his sake.

In this persecution one Miletus gave back, and the Bishop of Lycus a city
in little Egypt, Revolt.
whom Peter the Bishop of Alexandria did therefore excommunicate. So did
Marcellinus Bishop of Rome, being persuaded thereto by Dioclesian, wherefore he
was excommunicated, but afterward repented, and was also martired.

So cruel was the persecution, that there were slain of Martirs in xxx. days,
xvij. thousand, 17000. slain in 30. days. 300. at Alexandria. 300. at Colen.
besides another great multitude that were condemned to the metal mines, and
Quarries. At Alexandria, with Peter their B. were slain 300. with axes. Gerio^
was beheaded at Colonia, and Agrippina, with 300 of his fellows. Victor in the
city of Troy, now called Xanthus, with his fellows, 360. Reginus recites
many other martirs, to the number of 120.

Mauritius came out of Syria into France, and Italy, being Captain of the band
of the Theban soldiers, in number 6660. Theban soldiers 6660.
sent for of Maximinianus to go against the rebellious Bangandes. These Thebans
were at Rome confirmed by Marcellus the bishop in the faith. Now at Ottodon
Maximinianus offered sacrifice to the Devils, and commanded all his army so to
do, which Mauritius and his company refused, wherefore they were all tythed to
death once: and persisting constantly, were tythed again, and at the last by
the commandment of Maximinianus his whole army set upon them, and slew them
all, making no resistance. Victor at that time was not of that band, but being
dismissed for his age, came suddenly to see what had been done, and finding
them making merry and banketting, having known the cause, detested their fact.
Whereupon, confessing also him self to be a Christian, he was slain.

This persecution endured till the seventh year of Constantinus, as Beda
says, but as Eusebius, till the tenth year: which at the length ceased from
slaughter, the tyrants being out of hope to extinguish them: yet slew they
many, and put out the eyes of diverse, and condemned other to the metal mines.

When Dioclesianus and Maximinianus had reigned together one and twenty, or
two and twenty years, they gave over their empire, and lived a private life,
Dioclesian at Salona, the other at Mediolanum, Ann. 309. Constantius and
Galerius Maximinus. Maximinus governing the east, and Constantius the West
parts. But Constantius (contented only with the title) satisfied himself with
France, Spain, and Britanie. Wherefore, Galerius chose to him his two sons,
Maximinus and Seuerus. Likewise, Constantius took Constantinus under him.

Constantinus.
In the mean time, while Maximinus with his two Cesars were in Asia, the Roman
soldiers set up for their Emperor Maxentius, the son of Maximinian, who had
deposed himself: against whom Seuerus being sent by his father, was slain of
Maxentius: in whose place Maximinus took Licinius, and these Emperors
prosecuted the persecution seven or eight years, which was till the year 318.
Constantius and his son Constantinus rather favored the Christians:
Constantius tries his court, who were Christians.
and minding to try at a certain time what good Christians he had in his
court, feigned as though he would do sacrifice to Devils, and commanded all
his household so to do, to the end he might discern the one from the other:
which having done, and finding a number to remain constant, cherished them
and refused the backsliders, admitting the other to the chief places about him.

Maximinus in the East churches used great cruelty, and had executioners of
the same, Pentius, Quintianus and Theotechnus, besides other: but his rage was
stayed by the hand of God, who sent him such a botch, Gods judgment upon
Maximinus.
that it putrified and eat his entrails, from whence swarmed an innumerable
multitude of lyce: whereupon he caused persecution to cease, and required the
Christians to pray for him, and published edicts of peace unto them throughout
all his Empire. Whereat one Maxentius was not pleased to have such edicts
published, where he had to do, in Asia, and other provinces. But Sabinus, who
had among them the chief office, wrote the Emperors pleasure to the
substitutes of every country, whereupon grew a marvelous sudden alteration in
the Church. But scarce suffered Maximinus the tyrant the same six months
unviolated, but set out contrary edicts, and caused them to be engraued in
brass, and hanged in every city. So that persecution rose again as great as
before. At Emysa in Phenicia they condemned three christians, with whom
Syluanus Syluanus.
the bishop, a very old man, being 40. years in ecclesiastical function, was
condemned to death. In Nicomedia Lucianus the Elder of Antioch, after he had
given his Apology to the Emperor, was put to death. In Amasia a city of
Cappadocia, Bringes the lieftenant of Maximinus, had the executing of that
persecution.

At Alexandria, Petrus Petrus.
a most worthy bishop, was beheaded with many other Egyptian bishops. Quirinus
Quirinus.
the Bishop of Scescanius was thrown into the flood, having an handmill hanged
about his neck, and drowned.

At Rome died Marcellus, Marcellus.
and Timotheus Timotheus.
the elder, with many other Bishops and priests: and in many other places
diverse were martyred, as Victorianus, Symphorianus, Castorius with his wife,
Castulus, Cesarius, Mennas, Nobilis, Dorotheus, Gorgamus, Petrus, and other
innumerable martyrs more, Iuliana, Cosmus, Damanus, Basilenus, with 7. other.
Dorothea, Theophilus, Theodosia, Vitalis, Agricola, Acha, Philemon, Hireneus,
Ianuarius, Festus, Desiderius, Gregorius, Spolitanus, Agapes, Chronia, Hirenea,
Theodora, 270. martyred.
and 270. other: Florianus, Primus, and Felicianus, Vitus, and Modestus,
Crescentia, Albinus, Rogatianus, Donatianus, Pancratius, Catharina, Margareta,
Lucia, the virgin, and Antheus the king with 37000. martyrs, Antheus a king,
with 37000. martyrs.
Simplicius, Faustinus, Beatrix, Panthaleon, Gregorius, Iustus, Leocandia,
Anthonia, with an infinite number more. Also Felix Victor with his parents,
Lucia the widow: 79. martyrs.
Germinianus with 79. others: Sabinus, Anastacia, Chrisogonus, Felix, and
Audactus, Adrianus, Nathalia, Eugenia, Agnes of thirteen years old. The kind
of cruelties were strange, and the persecution more grievous under Maximinus
the tyrant, then under Maximinianus the Prince.

Now the Emperor in his edict, had declared what plenty they enjoyed, what
times their Idols were adored: but immediately upon this renewing of
persecution, fell out most miserable famine and pestilence, Famine and
pestilence.
in the which the christians showed their kindness unto the Gentiles, releeuing
to their power such as they thought to stand in need. Hereupon grew again some
peace.

Maximinian understanding that the Pretorian soldiers had chosen his son
Emperor at Rome, intended to take unto him again his empire, and persuaded
Dioclesian so to do, but was repulsed, and provided to fly to Constantinus in
France for aid; but indeed purposed to kill him: which was detected by Fausta
the daughter of Maximinian, who^ Constantinus had married. So that taking no
place, he retired, and in the way was apprehended, and put to death.

Certain companions of Maxentius, soliciting a Christian Gentlewoman of Rome,
whose husband first they had killed, to satisfy the filthy desire of the
Emperor, rather then she would so do, killed her self.

In the beginning of his reign, he fained himself a Christian, to the end he
might serve his wicked purpose, but afterward showed himself both toward them,
and in all other behavior most abominable, giving himself to magic, and
pollution of his body, with all kind of cruelty against his own citizens, and
nobles.

He banished a certain noblewoman of Rome, because she gave her goods to the
Church.

The people of Rome being wearied with ye villainy of Maxentius, The villainy of
Maxentius.
required aid of Constantin. who first admonished him by letters, which nothing
prevailing, he gathered an army in France, and Britanny, to repress the rage
of the of the tyrant. To who^ he approached: and fearing his charms wherewith
he had vanquished Seuerus, sent by Galerius, stood in doubt: and whilst he
was in doubting, and casting up his eyes many times to heaven, on the South
part, about the going down of the sun, he saw a brightness in heaven,
appearing in the similitude of a cross, A vision of the cross.
with certain stars of equal bigness, giving this inscription like latin
letters, In hoc vince, that is, in this overcome. Eusebius Pamphilus made
report that he heard Constantinus himself often report the same. Now he being
astonished hereat, and consulting upon the meaning thereof, in the night in his
sleep, Christ appeared unto him with the sign of the same cross, which he
had seen before, bidding him to make the figuratio^ thereof, and to carry it
in his wars before him, and so should he have victory. Whereupon he marched
toward Maxentius, (having done as the vision commanded) who being constrained
to issue out of the city to meet him, commanded Pons Milonius to be beaten
down, and a false bridge to be made, thinking thereby to take Constantinus. But
he himself being not able to sustain Constantinus force, Maxentius drowned.
The last persecution ended.
and retiring, in hope to get the City, was overthrown of his horse into the
flood, and drowned, and so ended the last Persecution.

The first attempt of Constantinus against Maxentius, was Ann. 318.
Constantinus for this victory had his image set up, holding in his right hand
the sign of the cross, with this inscription: with this wholesome sign, the
true token of fortitude, I have rescued and delivered our city from the yoke
of the tyrant. After this, Constantinus with Lycinius, Liberty to the
Christians.
gave liberty by proclamation to Christians, to profess their religion.

Diocle. dies.
Dioclesian being at Salona, and hearing of the proceedings of Constantine, and
this his edict, either for sorrow died, or as some say, poisoned himself. Now
remained only Maximinus in the West, who although he raged against the
Christians, yet was he appaled at the edict before mentioned, and caused
Sabinus to publish a certain releasement to Christians, and yet wrote another
countermaund: howbeit shortly after, he making wars, and fighting with
Lycinius, lost the victory. Whereupon, he caused his charmers to be killed,
Maxim. glorifieth the God of the Christians.
that persuaded him to the wars: and shortly after, being oppressed with a
certain kind of disease, glorified the God of the Christians, and made a most
absolute law for their safety. This was Ann. 319.

Now yet remained Licinius, who was also a persecutor: notwithstanding, at ye
first he dissembled the matter, and joined with Constantine. He was a man
every way vitions: he named Learning the poison of the common Wealth, Learning
named by Licinius the poison of the common weal.

Licinius a great persecutor.


and counted learning in a prince to be a great vice. The knowledge of the
laws he did most abhor: For he himself was unlearned.

He became a Persecutor, pretending against the Christians, that they prayed
for Constantinus only, and not for him. First, he began to persecute in his
court: then he stretched unto his provinces, with as great cruelty as any that
went before him: and hated Constantine, who gave him his sister Constantia to
wife, Churches raced to ye ground.
and had bestowed many benefits upon him. About Amasia, and other Cities of
Pontus, he rased the churches even to the ground.

Among those that suffered, Nicephorus first speaks of Theodorus: Theodorus.
who (being hanged upon a cross,) had nails thrust into his armepits, and
after that, his head stricken of. Also, of one Theodorus B. of Tire, and a man
of Pergamus. Likewise, Basilius Basilius.
B. of Amasenus, Nicholaus, Nicholaus.
B. of Mirocus, Gregorius, of Armenia the great. After that, Paul Paul.
of Neocesarea, who by Licinius him self, had both his hands cut off with a
searing Iron.

Besides these aforesaid, were in the city of Sebastia, xl. Christian
Soldiers, Forty christian soldiers.
in the vehement cold time of winter, drowned in a horseponde: when Lycias as
yet, and Agricolaus executing the sherifes office under Licinius, were in the
east part, of great reputation, Inuenters of torments.
for inuenting of new and strange torments against the Christians. The wives of
those 40. were carried to Heraclea, a city in Thracia, and there with a
certain deacon, whose name was Ammones, were (after innumerable torments)
slain with the sword.

Diverse battles were fought between Licinius and Consta^tinus. First in
Hungary, Licinius vanquished.
where Licinius was overthrown. Then again in Macedonia, whither he fled, and
repaired his army. And finally, being vanquished both by sea and land, at
Nicomedia he yielded himself to Constantine, and was commanded to live a
private life in Thessalia, where he was slain by the soldiers. He was killed
an. 324. Licinius slain
Constantius, the father of Constantine, being a good and godly Emperor, died,
the iij. year of the persecution, an. 310. and was buried at York.

Constantius dies and is buried at York Alban the first martyr in England.
Now, among an infinite number of special men of name that suffered, were these
that follow in this 10, persecution, At what time Dioclesian and Maximinian,
had directed out their Letters for the persecuting of Christians, Alban (the
first that suffered martyrdom in England for Christ) received into his house a
persecuted Clarke, named Amphibalus, Amphibalus.
by whose continual praying day and night, and godly life, he became a
Christian. It was infourmed the Prince, that he lodged the Clarke. Whereupon,
(search being made by the Princes commandment) Alban, by and by putting on the
apparel of the Clark, his master offered himself in stead of the other, to the
soldiers, who brought him to the Judge, that was even then sacrificing unto
devils at the Altar. Which Alban refusing to do, at the commandment of the
Judge, after he had been grievously scourged, was beheaded. The Clarke flying
into Wales, was fet also again to the same Town of Verlancaster, where he was
martired, having his belly opened, and made to run about a stake, while all
his bowels were drawn out, then thrust in with swords and daggers, and at last
stoned to death.

With Alban suffered Aaron, and Julius, Aaron, and Julius.
ij. citizens of Verla^caster, beside a great number mo. Albans martyrdom
might seem to be about the ij. or iij. year of the x. persecution, under ye
tira^ny of Dioclesia^ and Maximinianus, Herculeus the^ bearing rule in England,
about an. 301. Constantinus came to his government. England only touched with
ye tenth persecution.
It is to be noted yt England was not touched with any of the ix. persecutions,
but only with this tenth, in which almost al christianity was in ye Ila^d
extinguished.

Pitiles Galerius, with his grand captain Asclepiades, invaded Antioch,
threatening ye christians: whom one Romanus, a noble man, confirmed, and
encouraged to be constant. Wherefore he suffered many strange torments with great
constancy: and reasoning with the tirant of the truth, required a child to be
presented unto him: which was done, of who^ he asked, whether it were more
reasonable to worship one God, rather the^ innumerable, considering God could
be but one. To whom the child answered before the tyrant, according as his
Christian parents had instructed him, yt one god was to be worshipped. A child
tormented.


Wherefore the child was grievously scourged, and the skin of his head pulled
of hair and all, the mother standing by, and exhorting the child to patience
and constancy; he was put to death with Romanus, the child was beheaded, A
miracle.
and Romanus cast into ye fire. Which when it would not burn him, he was
brought from the same, and strangled in prison.

Gordius Gordius.
was a citizen of Cesaria, a Centurion, who gave over his charge, and lived in
the desert a long time: but upon a certain day when a solemn feast of Mars
was celebrated with games, in the Theator of Cesaria, he came thither, and gat
up to the highest place of the Theator: and uttered himself a Christian in the
hearing of all the people: whereupon after he had endured many and grievous
torments, the shiriffe assayed by flattery: which when it would not prevail,
he caused him to be had out of the City to be burned, which was accomplished,
and suffered of him with patience. Likewise suffered Menas an Egyptian soldier
after that in like sort with Gordius, he had declared himself to be a
Christian in the city of Cotis, where after diverse torments, by the
commandment of Pirrhus the President, he suffered the loss of his head.

Basilius mentions of 40. martyrs 40 martyrs.
in a Sermon, which were gentlemen, and young all, that professed themselves
christians, and went boldly unto the Marshall, and declared unto him their
names: whereat he was first astonished, and not prevailing with flattering words
and fair promises: devised a new torment, and caused them to stand all night
(in the winter) in a great pond which was in the midst of the city, and lay
full upon the cold Northwind. In the morning they were found stark and stiff,
yet having breath, were brought to the fire to be burned. Now one of them more
lively then the rest was pitied of the tormentors, who said to his mother
standing by, that they would save him alive: but she with her own hands
brought him to the pile of wood where the rest lay, A notable mother.
admonishing him to accomplish the blessed journey he had taken in hand?

The like story reports Nicephorus of forty martyrs Forty martyrs.
that were married men, which were killed in a ponde at Sebestia a town of
Armenia.

In this persecution suffered also Cyrus Cyrus.
a Physician, borne in Alexandria, who flying into Egypt in the persecution of
Dioclesianus and Maximinianus, led a solitary life in Arabia: unto him resorted
one Ioannes Ioannes.
borne in the city of Edessa beyond Euphrates, leaving his soldiers life
which before time he had exercised. Now these twain hearing of the
inprisonment of Athanasia with her three daughters, Theoctiste, Theodota and
Eudoxa, at the persecution of Canope a city in Egypt, came to confirm them:
at which time Sirianus was the chief Captain and Lieftenant of Egypt (who was
very cruel especially against women and maidens) whereof they being accused
and in no sort yielding to do sacrifice, were put to death by the sword, with
Athanasia and her three daughters. Athanasia and her three daughters.


Sebastian Sebastian.
being borne in that part of France which is called Gallia Narbonensis, was
Lieftenant general of the vauward of Dioclesian the Emperor, and encouraged
many martyrs of Christ by his exhortations: whereof being accused to the
Emperor, was commanded to be brought into ye open field, where of his own
soldiers he was shot through with innumerable arrows, and after his body was
thrown into a Iakes. With him suffered others, as Nicostratus with Zoe his
wife, Tranquillinus with Martia his wife, Traglianus, Claudius, Castor,
Tiburtius, Castullus, Marcus and Marcellinus, with other more.

Barlan Barlan.
a noble man, mentioned in a sermon of Basilius, having abode all torments, was
laid upon the altar, where they used to offer up sacrifice, and fire and
frankincense put into his right hand, (wherein he had yet some strength,)
thinking he would have scattered the incense upon the altar, and have
sacrificed, but the flame eat round about his hand, and the the same endured
as though it had bin covered with hot embers, he saying the Psalm: Blessed is
the Lord my God who teaches my hands to fight, etc.

Under Dioclesian, and Maximinian, suffered Agricola, Agricola.
and Vitalis his servant. Vitalis Vitalis.
died in extremity of torments, Agricola was fastened to the cross, and so died.

But most lamentable was the martyrdom of Vincentius a Spaniard, Vincentius
lamentable martyrdom.
who suffered martirdom at Valence under Darianus the President: of whom he was
so racked, that all the joints of his body cracked: then was his body indented
with many deadly wounds: and thirdly, his flesh was torn with iron combs
sharply fyled, and that the tormentors should be the more egar, they were also
scourged. Tormentors scourged.
This done they laid his body upon a grate of iron, and having opened it with
hooks, they seared it with fiery plates, sprinckling the same with hot salt.
And last of all, they drew him into a dungeon sprinkled with sharpshelles, and
locked his feet in the stocks.

At Alexandria, Philoromus, having great possessions, forsook all for Christ,
and was beaded, and could not be moved with respect of friends, wife or
children. Also Procopius Procopius.
in Palestine, after his conversion, brake his silver images and gave them to
the poor, and after most grievous torments, had his head smitten off, having
first his body dismembered, both of hands and feet.

In like manner suffered Gregorius, a young man of Cappadocia, besides a number
of others, as Sergius and Bacchius, etc.

Panthaleon Panthaleon.
a Physician in Nicomedia, Theodorus in the city of Amasia, in Hellespontus,
Gerion with 318. fellow martirs, 318. martyrs.
which suffered about Colon. Hermogenes President of Athens, being converted by
the constancy and patience of one Menas, and Eugraphus. Item Samonas, Gurias
and Abilus, Hieron also with certain his confessors under Maximinus, Indes and
Dominas at Nicomedia, with 2000. martyrs: 2000. martirs.
Enelasius and Maximinius, whom Fausta the virgin converted in her torments.
Also Thirsus, Lucius, Callinicus, Apollonius, Philemon, Asilas, Leonides, with
Arrianus president of Thebaide.

Cyprian Bishop of Antioch (before his profession being a filthy magician,)
suffered with Iustina a virgin. Item Glicerius at Nicomedia, Felix a minister,
Fortunatus, Achilleus deacons in the city of Valent, Arthemius of Rome,
Ciriacus deacon to Marcellus the Bishop, Caryophorus Priest at Thuscia, with
Abundus his deacon. Item Claudius, Cyrinus, Antonius, which suffered with the
Bishop Marcellinus, Cucusatus in the city Barcimona, Felix Bishop of Apulia,
with Audactus and Ianuarius his priests, Fortunatus and Septimus his readers,
who suffered in the city Venusia under Dioclesian: Cassianus Cassianus.
was stabbed in of his scholars with bodkins, or iron pens, wherewith they
did use to write.

Now the constancy of the women Constancy of women.
was also marvelous, and especially of a virgin, named Eulalia, Eulalia.
of the town of Emerita in Portugal, who (being shut up of her Christian
Parents, that for desire of martyrdom, feared least she should be cause of
her own death) brake out in the night, and came before the Governor of the town
of Emerita, being distant from the village where she was kept, and confessed
her self to be a Christian, and reproved the cruelty of the judge, and the
vanity of Maximinius, ye worshipped Idols, throwed the idols down, which she
was brought to worship, and scattered the incense. Wherefore, after many vain
perswasio^s. she had one joint of her body pulled from an other, and her flesh
and sides scratched with talents of wild beasts to the bones (she in the
mean time rejoicing and praising God) They seared her breasts with torches,
which when they had caught her hair which hanged down to her feet and
covered her shame, she swallowed the flame, opening her mouth, and so died.

Like was the constancy of Agnes of Rome, of honorable parentage, and not
mariageable, when she professed Christ, wherefore being brought before the
judge, she was threatened torments which she contemned, then was she threatened
to be committed to the common stews, and yoonkers appointed to assail her,
whom when she refused, commandment was given that she should be tied at a
corner of a street, naked where common strumpets used to resort. At this ye
multitude being greatly ashamed, went away saving one, who beholding ye virgin
with unchaste eyes, was stricken with lightning, A miracle.
and his eyes dashed out of his head: whom Agnes prayed for, and restored. In
the end she was beheaded, and greatly rejoiced to see the executioner,
preferring him before all the amorous company. There are many miracles
reported of her.

Catharine Katherine.
openly resisted the Emperor Maxentius to his face, rebuking him for his
cruelty, wherefore after she had felt the rack, and the four sharp cutting
wheels, she was beheaded, about the year of the Lord 310.

There was also one Iulitta, Iulitta.
who was dispossessed wro^gfullie of her goods by the Emperors Deputy: for
which she complained to the Emperor: but the covetous, and false deputy,
accused her of Christianity, wherefore she could have no redress. Whereupon
being command to do sacrifice with Incense, she refused it, and confirmed,
and encouraged others. She was burnt in the fire, and so slept in the Lord.

Also Barbara, a noble woman in Thuscia, after she had suffered most cruel
torments as, cords, and burning of her sides, was at the last beheaded.

Also Fausta Fausta.
the virgin, who suffered under Maximinus: by whom Euelasius a ruler in the
Emperors palace, and Maximinius the president, were both converted, and
suffered martyrdom. Also Iuliana of Nicomedia, under Maximinus. Item Anisia a
maid of Thessalonica, under the same Maximinus. Iustina, which suffered with
Cyprianus bishop of Antioch. Also Lucia, Agatha and Tecla, who rather suffered
under Nero as most do agree: which all holy virgins, suffered in the tenth
persecution of Dioclesian.

Succession of Bishops of Rome.
Now during the time of this persecution, these Bishops succeeded one the other:
Caius, who succeeded next after Xistus, Marcellinus, Marcellus, Eusebius, and
then Miltiades: all which died martyrs in the time of this persecution.
Marcellinus having given place to Dioclesian, and sacrificed, was
excommunicated, but repented, and was martyred, with Claudius, Cyrinnus, and
Antonius. Marcellus also refusing to do sacrifice, was beaten with wasters,
and expelled the city, and entered into the house of Lucina Lucina.
a widow: and assembled the congregation. Which the tyrant hearing of, turned
the house of Lucina into a stable, and made Marcellus a keeper of beasts: and
so with stinch thereof, and miserable handling, he died. Eusebius sat Bishop
of Rome two months: some say eight, some six months. Miltiades (by the
testimony of Platina) sat three years and seven months, and suffered under
Maximinus. Which seems not to be true, because he died before Miltiades. He
was the last of the bishops of Rome, that were in danger to suffer.

Yet persecution in Asia.
Now in the East parts, in all Asia as yet for the space of iiij. yerers
persecution did not cease, by the means of wicked Licinius: under whom
suffered diverse: as, Hermylus, a Deacon, and Stratonicides, a keeper of the
prison. Which both, (after punishments sustained) were strangled in the flood
Ister.

Now also under Sapores, Under Sapores.
king of Persia, suffered Acyndinus, Pegasius, Anempodistus. and Epidephorus:
also, Simeon, Archbishop of Selentia, with Ctesiphon, another Bishop in
Persia, with other ministers, and religious men, 128. martirs.
to the number of 128.

The Magicians of Persia accused Simeon, and Ctesipho^ to Sapores, that they
favored the Roman Empire, and revealed to the Emperor such things, The
magicia^s raise persecution.
as were done in Persia. Whereupon he called for Simeon, the chief Bishop, and
endeavored to persuade him to do sacrifice: which he refusing, was committed
to prison: and in the way going to the Jail, there was sitting at the kings
gate a certain Eunuche, an old Schoolmaster and Tutor of the kings, named
Vsthazares, Vsthazares.
who had fallen from Christianity to Idolatry, who seeing the. B. passing by,
led to prison, rose up, and did reverence unto him. Simeon Simeon.
again with sharp words rebuked him, and cried out against him. Whereat the
Eunuche burst out into tears, and (laying away his Courtly attire) put upon
him a mourning weed, and sat before the Court gates weeping, and saying
within himself, woe is me, with what hope shall I hereafter look for my God,
when Simeon my familiar acquaintance so much disdayneth me? Which being made
known unto the king, A notable history.
and he confessing himself a christian, after many perswasible words in vain,
he was by the kings commandment led away to be beheaded. Going unto execution,
he desired that the king would grant him, for the old and faithful service
he had done him, that it might be proclaimed by a Crier, that Vsthazares was
not beheaded for any offense against the king, or Realm; but only because he
was a christian. Which he required, because his shrinking from the faith, gave
great offense to many Christians that heard thereof. And so it was granted unto
him. Simeon being in prison, and hearing thereof, was very glad: and the next
day suffered also, with an hundred more. An hundred suffer.
All which were put to death before Simeon, who confirmed them: and at last,
with two other ministers of his Church, Abedecalaus, and Ananias, he was also
put to death.

At which time, one Pusices, seeing Ananias, an old father, to shrink at the
sight of those that suffered: said unto him, O father, a little moment shut
thine eyes, and be strong, and shortly thou shall see the sight of God. Which
being reported to the king, he caused an hole to be made in his neck, and
there: out pulled his tongue, and so was he put to death, who was the kings
servant, and ouerseer of his Artificers. At which time also, the daughter of
Pusices, a godly virgin, was put to death for the testimony of Jesus.

The next year following, on the day of the Lords passion, A cruel edict.
the king set forth an Edict, for the utter extinguishing of all the
Christians that were in his Dominions. So that an infinite number were slain
in Town and City, (by the procurement of the Magicians, Magicians.
) and diverse in the kings Court suffered martyrdom: among whom was Azades,
Azades.
whom he did most entirely love. Of whose death when he heard, The teachers
only put to death.
he took it so heauelie, that he commanded after that time, no Christians
should be put to death, but only those that were teachers.

In the same time the Queen fell into a certain disease: upon occasion
whereof, the cruel Jews, and Magicians falsely accused Trabula, Trabula.
the sister of Simon the Martyr, a godly virgin, with another Sister of hers,
that they had wrought the Queen hurt by Charms: for which, they were both cut
in sunder with Sawes, and their quarters hanged upon stakes, the Queen going
between them, thinking thereby to be healed. This Trabula (being beautiful)
was promised deliverance by one of the Magicians, if she would yield to his
pleasure Which she constantly refused, and suffered patiently.

Now upon the Proclamation against the teachers, great persecution rose against
them by the malice of the Magicians: especially in the Country of Diabener,
which was most Christened: where Acepsimas (there B.) with a great number
dismissed, and only deprived of living, was taken and whipped of the
Magicians. To whom one Iacolus Iacolus.
a minister of the Church, joined himself to serve the necessity of the aged
Bishop. At the same time also Athalas a minister: Aradanes, and Abdiesus
Decius, were imprisoned, and miserably scouraged for the testimony of Christ:
and afterward were more tormented of the Archmagician, The Archmagician.
to whom the King had given liberty to use his pleasure on them, unless they
would worship the Sun: which when they refused to do, they were put to most
bitter torments, in which Acepsimas died: the other yet remaining maruelously
alive, were turned again into prison. Of whom Athalas Athalas.
in time of his whipping, was so racked with pullings, that both his arms were
pulled out of joint, and hung down, that he had no use of them.

Innumerable were the slaughters of bishops, ministers, Innumerable slain.
and deacons, in this persecution under Sapores. The names of certain thus
recited of Zozomen, and Nicephorus: Barbasines, Paulus, Gaddiabus, Sabinus,
Mareas, Marcus, Johannes, Hormisdas, Papa, Iacobus, Romas, Maares, Agas,
Bothres, Aldas, Abiesus, Ioannes Abrianus, Agdelas, Sapores, Isaac, Dausus,
Bitor, 250. martyrs. xv. thousand martyred among the Persians.
also with Mameanda his fellow Bishop, and the rest of his Churches under him,
to the number of 250. persons. In sum, the number of those that the Persians
themselves were able to recite, comes to fifteen thousand men and women. Now
these troubles coming to Constantines ears, moved him to consider how to
redress the Persecution, and there being at Rome Ambassadors of Sapores, with
requests to the Emperor, he granted them all: thinking thereby, Constantine
to Sapores, for mitigation of the persecution
to move him to be favorable to the Christians: And wrote also unto him a
letter, requiring him to take compassion upon those Innocents, and showed how
the hand of God had been against tirants of the Church, as Valerianus, etc.

What success his letter had, it is uncertain: But likely it is, that it did
somewhat mitigate the heat thereof. Of other troubles, it is recorded to have
been in Persia, under Isdigerdes the king in the time of the Emperor
Theodosius, at which time suffered Andas Andas.
the bishop, and Homisda Homisda.
a great noble man's son of great reputation among the Persians: whom the king
condemned to keep his Elephants naked, and seeing him a distance of time after,
tanned with the Sun, promised him if he would deny Christ a shirt to cover
himself withal: which when he refused, he was banished the country. There was
also one Suenes Suenes.
that had under him an hundred men: and because he would not deny Christ, the
vilest of his servant was appointed over him and the rest, and coupled with
his Masters wife.

Benjamin Benjamin.
also, the deacon after two years imprisonment, was let loose at the request
of the Roman Ambassador: but afterward preaching contrary to the kings
commandment, was thrust under the nails with xx sharp pricks. Whereat when
the martyr laughed, a sharp reed was put up into his yard, and a long thornie
stalk thrust up into his body, and so he died. These persecutions were about
the year 425.

Likewise under Iulianus Iulianus,
the Apostata, certain suffered martyrdom by Idolaters, as Emilianus,
Emilianus.
who was burned in Thracia, and Domitius, who was slain in his cave. Theodorus
also for singing a Psalm at the removing of the body of Babylas, was
tormented from morning till night, and hardly escaped with life: The martirs
comforted.
and being asked how he could abide the torments, said, at the first he felt
some pain, but afterward, there stood by him a young man, who (as he was
sweating) refreshed him in such sort, that being let down from the Engine it
grieved him more than before. Artemias also the Captain of the Egyptian
Soldiers, lost his head for Christ. Also, Eusebius, and Nestabus, two
Brethren, with Nestor also, were murdered by the people of Gaza.

Euspicius, a noble man in the Country, died among the^ of Cesarea, whereof,
some were banished, some slain, for pulling down the temple of Fortune. But
special was the cruelty of the Arethusians Arethusians.
a people of Syria, against a company of Christian virgins, whom they first
set out naked to be scorned of the multitude, then shaued them: then covered
them with swill and draffe, and caused them to be devoured of Swine. It is
thought their cruelty was the greater, because Constantine restrained them of
the exposing their virgins to filthy lust, and destroyed the temple of Venus in
Heliopolis.

Among the rest, The temple of Venus destroyed.
Marcus Arethusus Marcus Arethusus.
their Bishop was most cruelly handled, because at the commandment of
Constantine, he pulled down a temple of Idols, and builded a Church for
Christians in the place. Now they considering how he was not favored of
Iulianus, accused him of treason: who first fled, then hearing there were taken
other for him, he returned again, and offered himself: whom when they had
gotten, they first stripped naked, and beat him grievously, then they put him
into a filthy sink, from whence again they took him, and caused boys to
trust him in with sharp sticks. Lastly, they put him into a basket and
anointed him with honey and broth, and hong him before the sun, as meat for
waspes and flies to feed on. All this they did unto him, that he might be
brought either to build again the temple, or give money to the building: which
he refused. But at the last (taking him to be a poor man) they required but a
small sum, which he also would not yield unto: answering yt it were as great
impiety to confer one halfepeny to a matter of impiety, as a great sum:
thus they being not able to prevail against him, let him down. And thus much
of the persecution in ye primitive church, The persecution of the primative
Church ends.

A month for a saboth of years.


which agrees with the time of the Apocalips, taking every month for a saboth
of years: 42. Monethas, that make up just the time from Christ's death, to the
last year of persecution by Maxentius, which were 294. and six years under
Licinius in Asia: in all 300. years, reckoning from the death of John Baptist,
to the end of Maxentius and Licinius: all which time Satan from the time of
Licinius till John Wickliffe was bound up. Satan bound up, til Wicliffe.


Constantine deferred baptism till his old age, because he determined a
journey into Persia, and thought in Jordan to have been baptized. He entered
into the Empire, Anno 311. and reigned 30. years, as Letus says 32. lacking
two months. Constantine borne in England.

Helena daughter of king Coilus, Constantines mother.


He was borne in Brytaine. His mothers name was Helena daughter of king Coilus.
He greatly traveled for the peace of Christians, and before he had conquered
Licinius, wrote to his subjects inhabiting the East, in their favor. He set
also peace among the Bishops in the Church, who were at dissension, and made
provision for ministers and teachers of the people, and caused all to be
restored unto the Christians that had been taken from them in the
persecutions: Constantine, a father of the Church.
writing to Syluius his chief Captain, to that end, and commanded him that
in Africa where he had to do, and where Cecilianus was bishop, that Clerks
and ministers should be freed from all manner public duties and burdens. He
was greatly studious in taking up causes among the bishops, and wrote to that
end to diverse: as to Miltiades bishop of Rome, to Cresce^s bishop of Siracusa,
to Cecilianus bishop of Carthage: also to Eusebius for the edifying of new
Churches. And after he had gathered the Nicene Council Nicene council.
for the unity of the Church, he writes to Alexander, and Arrius to the same
intent.

He prescribed a certain prayer for every one of his soldiers in stead of a
brief Catechism, and caused them to learn the same, Constantine teaches his
soldiers a prayer.
which is this: We acknowledge thee only to be our God, we confess thee
only to be our king, we call upon thee our only helper: by thee we obtain
our victories, by thee we vanquish our enemies, to thee we attribute whatsoever
commodities we presently enjoy, and by thee we hope for good things to come:
unto thee we direct all our suits, and peticions, most humbly beseeching thee
to keep Constantine our Emperor and his noble children, to continue in long
life, and to give them victory over all their enemies through Christ our Lord.
Amen.

He granted great immunities to the ministers, that they might appeal from
the civil judge to their bishop, Appeal granted by Constantine.
whose sentence was of as great value in such cases, as if the Emperor
himself had pronounced it.

He provided also maintenance for liberal arts and sciences, for the
professors, Provision for learning.
their wives and children and gave the^ great immunities. He wrote also to
Eusebius the B. of Nicomedia, to procure 50. volumes of parchment, well bound,
and cause to be written out of the scripture therein in a legeable hand, The
scriptures written for the use of ye church.
such things as were profitable for the instruction of the Church: and allowed
him two ministers for the business. Finally, he was a father to the Church,
and enforced himself every way to set forth the Gospel, and every good thing,
and endeavored to suppress the contrary. Constantine baptized a little before
his death.


He was baptized at Nicomedia, of Eusebius Bishop of Nicomedia, in the 31.
year of his reign, a little before his death.

The end of the ten persecutions.
The rest of this history concerns chiefly the affairs of the Church of
England and Scotland.
The rest of this history concerns chiefly England and Scotland. England
received the Gospel in Tyberius time.
GIldas affirms, that Britain received the Gospel in the time of Tiberius the
Emperor, under whom Christ suffered, and that Joseph of Arimathea, after ye
dispersio^ of the Jews, was sent of Philip ye apostle out of France into
Britain ann. 63. Easter kept in England after the manner of ye East church. The
Gospel came into Enland from the Cast and not from Rome.
In the time of Bid almost a thousand years after Christ, as he testifies,
Easter was kept after the manner of the East Church, in the full moon, what
day of the week soever it fell, and not on the sunday as we do now, Whereby it
may appear that the preaching of the Gospel came into this land from the East
and not from Rome.

About the year 180. Lucius, son of Coilus, king of Britains, which now are
called English men, hearing of the miracles done by Christians in diverse
places, K. Lucius the first Christian K. of England, Fugatius and Damianus.
at that time wrote to Eleutherius B. of Rome, to receive of him the Christian
faith: who sent him thereupon certain preachers, Fugatius, or by some Faganus,
and Damianus, or Dimianus, which converted first the king and the people of
Britain, and baptized them, and subverted the temples, and monuments of
idolatry. And the 28, Flamines they turned to bishops, and three Achflamines
to three Archbishops, having their seats in three head cities, London, York,
and Glamorgantia, by Wales.

This king also sent to him for the Roman laws, to frame his people
thereafter: who answered, that the laws of God was to be his direction for
laws, and not the Romans, that might be reproved, the other being without
exception,

Thus was the Christian faith confirmed in this land, by the means of
Eleutherius, Eleutherius.
and therein it continued two hundred and sixteen years,

King Lucius reigned 77. years, and died without issue, the year of our Lord,
201. the xiiij. year after his baptism, (some say the iiij. and some the
tenth,) and was buried at Gloucester.

By reason that the king died without issue, the Land was spoiled, and the
Romans invaded, and became sometimes masters. When they reigned, Gentilisme
was advanced: and when the Britains, the Gospel. Albeit no persecution
touched the Britains, that is read of, Almost all Christianity destroyed in
England.
before the last persecution of Dioclesian and Maximinianus Herculeus. At which
time, all Christianity was almost in ye whole land destroyed.

Now the Britanes being greatly distressed, and brought to misery, the
Archbishop of London, called Gnetelinus, procured help out of less Britanie,
and brought over Constantinus the kings brother, by whose means, the state of
Religion, and Commonwealth was in some quiet, all the time of Constantine, and
the Archbishop, till Vortiger cruelly caused his Prince to be slain, and
invaded the Crown. Gnetelinus Archb. of London.
And fearing the other two brethren of Constantine his Prince Aurelius, and
Vter in little Britain he caused aid to be sent for to the Saxons (being then
Infidels) and married him self also with Rowen, an Infidel, the daughter of
Hengist. Which Hengist deprived him and his people, and drove the Britains out
of their Country: after that the Saxons had slain of their Nobles two
hundred, three score, and eleven: some say four hundred and threescore, 271.
of the Nobility of England slain by the Saxons.
Which misery fell upon them, for covetousness, and oppression in their
Princes: wickedness in the Judges: slouthfulnes of the Bishops, in neglecting
their duties of preaching: and riot and wantonness of the people, as says
Gildas in his chronicle. This fell out in anno 469.

The Captains of the Saxons were, Hengistus, and Horsus. Now, the first
persecution in this Land began under Dioclesian, an, 210.

The first persecution in England by Dioclesian. The second by Gnauius and
Melga.
The second was by the inuading of Gnauius, and Melga, whereof, the first was
Captain of the Hunnes: and the other of the Pictes. Which two Tyrants (after
the slaughter of Vrsula, Vrsula,
and 11000. noble Virgins 11000. Virgins.
) made their rode into Britain. At what time, they made a miserable murder of
Christians, spoiling and rasing Churches, without regard either of women or
children.

The third by Hengist, The third by Hengest.
and the Saxons, who destroyed (like raging wolves) the silie sheep: till
Aurelius Ambrosius came, Aurelius Ambrosius restores the churches.
and restored again the Churches destroyed.

The fourth was by Gurmundus, Gurmundus,
a paga^, king of the Affricans, who joining with the Saxons, wrought much
mischief against the Christians. In so much, that Theonus B. of London,
Thaodiceus, of York, with the rest of the people, did pack away, some into
Cornwall, some into the mountains of Wales, an. 550. and remained till the
time of Ethelbert Ethelbert.
king of Kent, an. 589. In whose reign, ye faith was first received of the
Englishmen, Gospel received of the Englishmen. Austen sent into England by
Gregory, B. of Rome.
by means of Gregory, bishop of Rome, who in the year 598. sent Austen into
England, and with him about xl. Preachers, to instruct and convert the people.
The occasion was offered by seeing certain children of the land to be sold at
Rome: where considering their beauty, he had compassion on them: and
thereupon, when the Bishorick of Rome fell unto him, next after Pelagius, he
sent Austen, with the other Preachers. Who passing on their journey, were
greatly afraid, and discouraged, considering the barbarousnes of the people.
But being comforted by Gregory, and persuaded, they went on their journey, and
came to the I Will of Tenet, I Will of Tenet.
on the Eastside of Kent. Near unto which la^ding place was the Palace of the
K. not far from Sandwich, which the Inhabitants of the I Will the^ called
Richburgh: whereof some part of the ruinous walls is yet to see. The king that
reigned at that time was Ethelbert the fifth king of that province, who at that
time had married a Frenchwoman Christened, whose name was Berda, Berda.
whom he had of that condition, that she should with her bishop Lebardus
Lebardus.
enjoy the faith. By means whereof he was the more flexible to embrace the
preaching of the faith of Christ.

Now the king hearing of Austines arrival, within few days after, and having
received message from Austine, of the cause of his coming, comes to the
place where he was, to speak with him. To whom Austine preached the word of
God. The king at the first was not persuaded: yet for so much as he came for
his benefit, he both ministered unto him necessaries, and gave him liberty to
preach, and convert his people (which he did in Canterbury where the king gave
him a mansion place) and baptized people on the Eastside of the city in the
old Church of Saint Martine, where the Queen was wont to resort, till time
that the king himself was converted to the faith, which he was at length by
the godly conversation of Christians, and miracles Godly conversation, and
miracles.
that were wrought. He was converted an. 586. 36. year of his reign: who
being converted, the number grew innumerable, whom he specially embraced, None
compelled to believe. The Abbey of S. Peter and S. Paul in Canterbury.
but compelled none. Then he gave to Austin a place for his bishops sea at
Christ church in Canterbury, and builded the Abbey of S. Peter and Paul in the
Eastside of the city, where after Austin and all the kings of Kent were
buried, and that place is now called S. Austin.

In this while Austin sailed into France to the bishop of Arelatensis called
Ethereus, by him to be consecrated archbishop, by the commandment of Gregory,
and so was. He sent moreover to Rome one of his company Laurentius, to show
Gregory how they had sped, and also to be resolved concerning nine or ten
questions.

The first how the B. should use himself toward his clarke, Questions
resolved from Rome.
and of oblations, what diuidens were to be made. For the first Gregory
refers him to the Epistle of Paul to Timothy: touching the second he
tells him, the order of the church of Rome is to make four parts: Bishops
livings how to be bestowed.
the one for the B. hospitality in receiving comers in: the other to the
Clergy: the third to the poor: the fourth to repairing of churches. And
because (he says) Austine could not live from his clerks, he would have in
their society all common.

The second, whether Clerks that can not contain may marry, and then
marrying, whether they are to return to their secular estate again or no?
Clerks may marry.
to whom he answers, they might marry and also obtain their stipends.

The third, seeing the faith is but one, how comes it to pass, Diverse
ceremonies.
that the ceremonies and customs be so diverse, as one manner of Mass at
Rome, and an other in France? To which he answered, that without respect of
place he should chose out of many churches, the best orders.

The fourth, what punishment should be laid on him that pilfereth out of the
church? This he refers to his discretion, consideration being had of the
necessity of the stealer, and the ability to make recompense, without any
gain.

Whether two brethren may marry two sisters, being far of from any part of
kindred? To this he answers affirmatively, to what degree of kindred
matrimony may extend: and whether it is lawful to marry with the stepmother,
Degrees for marriage.
and her kinsfolks. The answer he refers to the law of God, and denies
the lawfulness of such marriages, or with the kinsfolk, but in the third
degree.

Whether such as be coupled in such unlawful marriage, ought to be separated,
and denied the Communion? to which he answers: that such as have been so
married in time of their ignorance, should not therefore be separated from the
Communion, but admonished to do so no more: and such as profess the faith, and
so couple themselves, he wills they should be denied the Lords body.

After what manner he should deal with the Bishops of France, and Britain? To
these he answers, that the Bish. in France are not to submit to him, but
only his jurisdiction should extend over them of Britain.

The ninth contains diverse points: whether a woman with child ought to be
baptized? and after she has had a child, whether she ought to enter the
Church, etc? To which all, Gregory makes answer with resolution.

Now Gregory, after he had sent these resolutions, sends mo coadiutors, and
helpers, as Mellitus, Iustus, Paulinus, and Ruffianus, with books and such
other things, as he thought necessary for the Church. He sends also to Austen
a Pall with letters, A Pall from Rome.
containing an order between ye two Metropolitan seats of London, and York.
Notwithstanding, he grants to Austen during his life, to be the only chief
Archbishop in all the land, and after his time that to return again to
London and York. He sends also another letter to Mellitus, willing him to
let the Idolatrous temple stand, and alter the use. He admonishes Austen also
not to be puffed up with pride, for his working of miracles. Moreover, he wrote
to king Ethelbert, willing him to continue constant, and sends him presents.
Now Austen of a monk, being made an Archbishop, after he had baptized a great
part of Kent, made two Archbishops by the commandment of Gregory,

Mellitus Mellitus,
was specially sent to the East Saxons, in ye province of Essex, where
afterward he was made B. of London under Sigebert K. of Essex: which Sigebert,
together with his uncle Ethelbert, first built the Church of S. Paul in London,
and appointed it to Mellitus for his Bishops seat.

Austen associate with this Mellitus and Iustus, through ye help of Ethelbert,
assembled the Doct. of Britain in a place, which taking the name of Austen, is
called Austens oak. Austens oak,
In which assembly, he charged the Bishops to preach with him to the English
men, the word of God, and to baptize after ye manner of Rome, Britains and
Scots refuse the Easter of Rome.
and keep Easter after the same manner, which the Britains and Scots refused to
do. Then he gathered another synod, to ye which came 7. bish. of Britons,
with the wisest men of that famous abbey of Bangor: Abbey of Bangor.
who first taking counsel of an holy wise man, were advised yt if he were
humble, the^ to agree unto him, Austens pride offends the Britains.
as ye servant of God. The B. thus counseled, entered into ye counsel, and
Austen after ye Roman manner keeps his chair of pride: whereat (after some
heat of words) ye Britains disdaining, departed. To who^ the^ Austen spoke,
and said, that if they would not take peace with their brethren, they should
receive wars of their enemy, etc.

1100. monks of Bangor slain.
Which not long after fell out according as he had said, for Ethelfride being
yet a pagane, slew 1100. monks of the Abbey of Bangor (which consisted of 2100.
monks that lived with the sweat of their brows) that came to Chester, and
prayed and fasted three days, for the good success of Brockmayl against the
Saxons. Whereat Ethelfride being offended, slew 1100, only 50. fled away. They
came to their chief Governor, one named Dinoe. Dinoe.
This Ethelfride was afterward slain of the christian king Edwin, (who
succeeded him) as he had slain the Christians before, which was 610.

Austen, after that he had baptized a thousand Christians of Saxons, in one
day, in the West river, that is called Swold beside York: on Christmas day,
he perceiving his end to draw near, Gregory dies
ordained Laurentius Laurentius.
to rule after him, the Archb. Sea of Canterbury. In the mean season, about
this time died Gregory: of whom it is said, yt of all the Bish. that were
before him, he was ye basest, and of all that came after him ye best. About which
time, died also in Wales, David, Archb. of Kaerleion, who then translated the
sea from thence to Meuenia, and therefore is called David of Wales. Not long
after this, also died Austen, Austen dies.
after he had set 15. or 16. years.

This Gregory denied any B. to be lawfully called universal bish. declaring,
that he that should take that upon him, is ye forerunner of Antichrist. For this
matter he had much adoo with the Emperor, and Patriarch of Constantinople,
who was extolled by Mauricius to the Patriarchie of Alexandria, and would be
called universal Patriarch of Alexandria would be universal.
Patriarch, Strife about Primacy.
requiring the Emperor that he would obtain Gregory's consent herein: but
Gregory refused so to do, whereupon grew great troubles to Gregory, that
purchased thereby the displeasure of the Emperor.

This Gregory brought in the title among the Roman bishops, to be called
Seruus seruorum Dei. The title, Seruus seruorum Dei. Sabinianus first
universal Bishop.


After Gregory succeeded Sabinianus, a malicious detractor of Gregory and his
works. He continued scarce two years: after whom succeeded Bonifacius the
third, who reigned but one year, yet did much hurt: he obtained of Phocas the
wicked Emperor, that he and his succcessos, Phocas gives first title of
universal bishop
should be called universal Bishops, and head of the rest. This Phocas, to
obtain the empire, killed his master Mauritius, and his children: but he was
rewarded thereafter. For, having his hands and feet cut of by Heraclius, that
succeeded him, he was cast into the sea.

King Ethelbert did many Christian acts, Ethelb. dies.
and died when he had reigned 56. years, ann. 616. Ethelfride the king of the
North Saxons, who also after he had reigned four and twenty years, was
slain in the field of Edwin, that sucded in Northumberland after him.

This Edwin the son of Alba, was converted by Paulinus, and was the first
christian K. of Northumberland, although his wife were a Christian woman, and
K. Ethelbertes daughter. Who, although he was much labored with by his wife,
yet was he hard to be won to the faith, till a certain trouble fell upon him,
which was the cause of his calling: for his death being conspired by the K. of
Westsaxons, Quincelinus, with Kinegilsus his brother, he was wounded by one yt
was suborned to kill him. About whitsontide after, the K. assembled his host,
and intended to make war against them, and vowed to Christ if he would give him
victory that he would be christened, and in token thereof caused his daughter
borne of Edelburgh, the same Easterday when he was wounded, named Eufled to be
baptized, with twelve other of his family, by Paulinus. So he obtained the
victory, and yet with much adoo, forsook his Mahometrie at the preaching of
Paulinus, and denied to be christened till a time after. This Edwin before he
married the daughter of Ethelbert fell into some displeasure with him, and fled
to Redwald king of the East Angles, which Redwald being corrupted intended to
betray him, wherefore being pensive and not having whether to fly, there
appeared suddenly to him a stranger, who said unto him with other speeches:
will thou do after his counsel that shall deliver thee, and follow him if he
show thee a better way of life? to whom he promised faithfully so he would.
Then he laying his hand upon his head: when (says he) this token happens
unto thee, A vision.
then remember this time of thy tribulation, and the promise which thou have
made, and suddenly he vanished out of sight. Now Paulinus seeing the king to
hard to believe, prayed for him, and God revealed unto him the vision above
mentioned. Whereupon Paulinus coming unto the king upon a time, and laying
his hand upon the Kings head, asked him if he knew that token: the king
hearing this, and remembering the token, was ready to fall down at his feet.
But Paulinus would not suffer that, and declared unto him, the victories he
obtained by Christ, and put him in mind of his former promise.

Whereupon, the king (conferring with his Nobles) was by him baptized in York,
with many of his Subjects. In so much, that Coysi, the chief of the Idolatrous
prelates, with others of that kind, Edwine baptized.
destroyed the Idols, with their Temples, which was at Godmunham, not far
from York. And this was the eleventh year of his Reign.

This Edwine, after he had first brought in the Faith into the North parts,
continued after his baptism, vi. years. At length he was slain in battle by
Ced walla, king of the Britains, and by wicked Penda, king of the Mercians,
with his son, and Offricus, in the field called Hatfield.

This Paulinus, was the first Archbishop of York, and ordained by Iustus
Archbishop of Canterbury. After whose decease, he ordained Honorius
Archbishop of Canterbury.

Paulinus, after the death of Edwin, fled from the unmerciful Cedwalla, and
the wicked, and Idolatrous Penda, (who had neither regard of Sex, nor age) by
water, into Kent, with Edelberge the Queen, and Eufled her daughter. Where he
remained Bishop of Rochester, the space of xix. years. And so the Church of
Northumberland lacked a Bishop the space of xxx. years. Notwithstanding, he
left one James, a Deacon, in those quarters, Paulinus, the first archbishop of
York.
who continued there preaching, til peace was recovered, and the Church brought
again to a stay. By the means of this Edwine, Erpwaldus king of the
East Angles, son to Redwaldus above mentined, was brought to the faith.

After Edwin and his son, reigned Osricus, and Eaufridus (the one in Deira)
who were first christened in Scotland, but after they were kings, revolted to
Idolatry, and in the years following, were slain one after another, by
Cedwalla, and wicked Penda. After whom succeeded in Northumberland, the second
son of Ethelfrede, named Oswaldus, having rule over both the provinces, as
well Deira, as Bernicia. He (by prayer made unto God) overcame Cedwalla, or
Cadwallo, the Britain king, which sent Penda with an army against him, that
was overthrown, after he had reigned over the Britains 22. years, leaving
after him a son, wohm Gaufridus called Cadwalladius, Oswald a notable king.
the last K. of Britans. This Oswald was very religiously disposed, and sent
for a certain bishop out of Scotland, named Aidanus, to preach to his people.
And as he preached in Scottish, so ye K. did interpret it, having learned the
Scottish tongue in his banishment there. By the means of Oswald, Kinigilsus,
K. of the Westsaxons, was converted to Christ's faith, especially through the
godly labor of Berinus, who was sent by P. Honorius, to preach in England, and
then made Bishop of Dorcester. Kinigilsus converted.
To whom Quincelinus, brother to the foresaid Kinigilsus, (after he had
received baptism of Berinus Bernius.
) gave to him the said city, therein to make his Sea: and gave after to the B.
of Winchester, The Sea of Winchester.
7. miles compass of land, to buyld there the bishops Sea, which was
accomplished, and finished by Kenwalcus his son.

This Bernius was driven by the weather to the Coast of the West Saxons, where
Kinigilsus, and his brother Quincelinus did reign, and were baptized with
their people. It so fell out, that Oswaldus, King of Northumberlande, was there
present: and ye same day married Kinigilsus his daughter, and was also
Godfather to the king.

Oswald (after he had reigned ix. years) was at the length slain in the field,
called Maxfield, by wicked Penda, king of Mercians. Which Penda likewise, was
overcome, and slain by Oswy, brother to Oswald, the next king of
Northumberland after Oswald, not withstanding he had himself as many people
as Oswy had.

Penda had iij. sons, Wolferus, Weda, and Egfridus. The second son Weda,
Oswy had before time married his daughter, Weda converted.
by consent of Penda his father. Who also by the help of Oswy, was made king
of Southmercia, and promised when he married his daughter, he would become a
christian: which thing he performed after the death of Penda. And within three
years following, by reason of his wife, he was slain. Wolferus converted.
After him, the kingdom fell to Wolferus, the other brother, who being wedded
to Armenilda, daughter to Ercombert, K. of Kent, was afterward christened: so
that he is accounted the first christian king of Mercia.

This Wolferus conquered Kenwalcus K. of Kent, and gat the I Will of Wight, which
after he gave to Sigbert king of the East-angels, upon condition he would be
christened, Sigbert baptized.
And thus the East Angles which before had expulsed Mellitus their B, recovered
again the christian faith under Sigbert their king, who was baptized by
Finanus Finanus.
the bishop.

Now to Oswy was joined Oswinus his cousin, over the province of Deira, and
there reigned with Oswy seven year, a Prince gentill, liberal, and devout,
but not long after Oswy the king of Bernicia disdaining at him, caused him
traitorously to be slain: and so Oswy with his son Egfride reigned in
Northumberland alone.

In that time and also in the house of Oswy and his son Egfride, was
Butolphus the abbot, who builded in the East part of Lincoln an abbey. Also
Aidanus, Finianus, and Colmannus, with 3. scottish Bishops of Northumberland,
holy men, that held with the Britains against the Romish order for keeping of
Easter. Moreover, Cuthbertus, Iarmuannus, Cedda and Wilfridus lived at the same
time.

About this time, or not much before, Oswy and Oswine, the question of Easter,
The questions of Easter.
and having of other ceremonies, was debated in the Abbey called Sternehalt: Of
which, Hilda Hilda.
a devout woman, was abbess: to the which place came both the kings, the
father and the son, Bishop Colman, with his Clergy of Scotland, Aigelbert
with Agathon, and Wilfride, Priests. James, and Roman were on their sides:
Hilda the Abbess, was on the Scottish part, with her company. And the
reverend Bishop, Cedda Cedda.
was appointed Prolocutor for both parts in that parliament. Now, there was
much debating of ye matter on both parts: one standing to the custom of John
the Euangeliste, to be kept according to the Law: the other, the tradition of
Peter and Paul, of Rome, with other reasons. Wilfride, spoke for Aigelbert,
because he could utter his mind more plainly in the English tongue. Now, when
Wilfride had showed, that Peter was the chief of the Apostles, and that the
Lord had said to him I will give thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven etc.
The King said to Colman, is it true that the Lord spoke these things to S.
Peter? and Colman answered yea. Then said the King can you declare any thing
that the Lord said to Columba? (who was a reverend Father, whom Colman alleged
to follow) Colman answered, No. Then quoth the King do you both agree on this
matter? They both answered, yea. Then concluded the king: for as much as S.
Peter is door keeper of heaven, I will not gainesay him, but in that I am able
I will obey his order in every point, least when I come to the gates of heaven,
he shut them against me. Upon this simple and rude reason of the king, A rude
reason of the king.
the multitude consented, and with them, Cedda was contented to give over,
only Colmannus the Scot, being then Archb of York, departed into Scotland,
carrying with him the bones of Aidanus. The bones of Aidanus.


After the decease of Oswin, Egfride his son was king after him in
Northumberland, fifteen years. By this Egfride, Cuthbert was promoted to the
Bishopric of the isle of Farne, and Wilfride, which before had been
Archbishop of York was displaced, through the means of Theodore, Archbishop
of Canterbury and Cedda, possessed that Sea. Wilfride, when he was put out,
went to Agathon Bishop of Rome, and complained to him, and was well allowed in
some things. But the king, and Theodorus, had there such Proctors, and
friends, that he returned without speeding of his cause. Wherefore he
returned unto the Southsaxons, and builded an Abbey in Silisey, and preached
unto the Southsaxons xv. years.

The king of the Southsaxons was then Ethelwolde: to whom Wolferus, king of the
Mercians, gave the I Will of Wight, Southsex converted.
upon condition, yt he should be a Christian. Wherefore, Wilfride being now
licenced by Ethelwolde the king, preached unto his Nobles, and people of
Southsex, and converted them to Christ.

In the time of whose baptizing the rain that lacked before, three years, was
given them plentifully, whereby their country was made fruitful, and their
famine stayed, Great famine.
which was such, that ye people (penured with famine) would go 40. together and
throw themselves into the Sea. Moreover the same Wilfride taught them first the
art of fishing, The art of fishing taught.
whereof they were ignorant before.

After Egfrid, who was slain in the straights of Scotland, succeeded Alfride
his brother, and bastard son to Oswin, and reigned 18. or 19. years in
Northumberland. Wilfride restored.
This Alfride restored again the foresaid Wilfride to the sea of York, whom
his brother had before expelled, and put in Cedda. Not withstanding the same
king within 5. Wilfride expulsed again.
years after expulsed Wilfride again, and so he went to Rome. But at length by
Oswrick his successor, he was restored again; and Cedda was ordained by
Theodorus archbishop of Canterbury, who by the authority of ye Sinod holde^ at
Hatfield, did after divide Mercia into five bishoprikes, one to Chester, the 2.
to Worcester, the third to Lichfield, the fourth to Caderna in Lindsey, the
fifth to Dorcester, which was after translated to Lincoln.

Near unto this time in the year 666. began the detestable set of Mahomet,
which well agrees with the number of the beast signified in the Apocalips chx
that is 666. Mahomet begins.
patched of many sects and religions together. He taught them to pray ever to
the South, and to keep the Friday as we do the Sunday. He permitted the^ to
have as many wives as they were able to maintain, and to have as many
concubines as they listed: to abstain from the use of wine, except upon
certain solemn days in ye year: to worship only one God omnipotent: saying
that Moses, and the Prophets were great men; but Christ was greater, and
greatest of all the Prophets, as being borne of the virgin Mary by the power of
God without man's seed, and at last was taken up into heaven; but was not
slain, Turks conquered the Saracenes.
but another in his likeness, etc. At length this kingdom of the Saracens was
conquered by the Turks.

In this mean season Theodorus Theodorus.
was sent from Italy into England by Vitellianus the Pope, to be Archbishop of
Canterbury, and with him diverse other monks of Italy, to set up here in
England Latin service, Latin service, and mass first brought into England.
The archbishop plaieth Rex.
Masses, Ceremonies, Letanies, with such other Romish ware: and being archbishop
he began to play Rex, placing and displacing bishops at his pleasure: he thrust
out Cedda, and Wilfride archbishop of York, pretending they were not lawfully
consecrated. Wilfride went up to Rome, but could have no redress.

An. 680.
In the time of this Theodorus, and by the means of him a provincial Synod was
holden at Thetford: A provincial Synod at Thetford.
the principal points were these: 1. That Easter should be uniformly kept on
the full moon in the month of March. 2. That no B. should intermeddle with
the dioces of an other. 3. That monasteries should be exempt from the
authority of Bishops. 4. That monks should not stray from one monastery to an
other without license of his Abbot. 5. That no clergy man should forsake his B.
and be received in another place without letters commendatorie of his own B.
6. That foreign bishops and clergy men should be contented only with such
hospitality, as should be offered the^, without any further intermedling without
license. 7. That provincial synodes should be kept within the realm, at least
once a year. 8. That no B. should prefer himself before an other, but observe
ye time and order of his consecration. 9. That the number of bishops should be
augmented as the people increased. 10. That no marriage should be admitted but
such as was lawful, and no man put away his wife, The sixth general council
at Constance. Marriage forbidden. The first Latin mass at Constantinople.
but for fornication.

The next year following was the sixth general council kept at Constance,
where Theodore was also present under Pope Agathe: where marriage was permitted
to the Greek Priests, and forbidden to the Latin. In this council the
Latin mass was first openly said by John Porte^sis the Popes Legate, before
the patriarch, and princes of Constantinople, in the temple of S. Sopry,

After the decease of Alfride, king of Northumberland, succeeded his son
Oscadus, and reigned 11. years, after who^ reigned Kenredus, 2. years, and
next after him, Osricus, 11. years. In the time and reign of these 4. king of
Northumberland, king Iua reigned in West saxe, who succeeding Cadwallader, the
last king of the Britains, began his reign ann. 689. 37. years. About ye 16.
year of the reign of this Iua, or Iue, Etheldred king of Mercia, after he had
reigned there 30. years, was made a monk, and after an abbot of Bardney.
About the 18. year of the reign of Iua, King Iua made a monk, and after an
abbot.
died the learned and worthy bish. Aldelmus, Aldelmus.
first abbot of Malmesburie, afterward B of Schirburne. He was next unto Bid,
in learning and virtue: he wrote diverse Epistles, and Poems. The sea of
Schirburn was afterward united to the sea of Winton.

Moreover, about the 25. year of Iua, John of Beuerley, then Bishop of York,
John of Beuerley.
and was buried at the porche of the minster of Beuerley,

In the time of this foresaid Iua, The right observing of Easter, now first
received of Picts and Britains.
began the right observing of Easter day, to be kept of the Picts and
Britains: in the observing of which day, three things are chiefly necessary.
1. The full moon of the month of March. 2. The Dominicall letter. 3. The
equinoctial days. It took place, through ye busy travel of Theodorus,
Cuthlacus, but namely of Egbert, whom they termed the holy monk, and of
Colefride abbot of Serwin in Northumberland, who wrote to Narranus, or Naivnus,
the king of the Pictes, about the same: who also wrote among other things, of
ye shaue^ crowns Shaven crowns.
of priests, saying, it was as necessary for their vow, for restraint of
their lusts, as it is for any Christian man to bless him against spirits,
when they come upon him. The letter is very ridiculous, notwithstanding being
read before king Naiton, he rose from among his noble men, and gave thanks to
God for the advice of shauing, kneeling on the ground, The K. thanketh God for
the priests shaven crowns.
and caused it to be observed among his people, defacing the errors that had
bin used the space of 404. years.

Now when king Iua had ruled the West Saxons 37. years, he was persuaded by
Ethelburga his wife, to go to Rome, and there to be made a mo^k. Which having
long time before persuaded, and not prevailing, she caused ye fair palace of
the king, where they had bin the day before, The devise of Ethelburga the
Queen.
to be filled full of dung, and hogs, and vile beasts to be laid in the
chief chambers, and in their own chamber, a sow to be laid with her young
pigges, and bringing the king thither again, within a while, thereupon
declared unto him the vanity of this life, and persuaded him to be a monk.
Whereupon, shortly after, he resigned his kingdom to Ethelardus his nephewe,
and in great devotion went to Rome, after he had reigned seven and thirty
years: after whose departing, Ethelburga his wife went unto Barking, The Q
becomes an Abbess.
seven miles from London, where, in the Nunry of Barking, before founded of
Erkenwald, she continued, and ended the rest of her life, when she had
continued Abbas of the place a certain time.

This Iua, was the first king that granted a penny for every fire house
through his dominion, to be paid unto the Court of Rome, which after was called
Rome scotte, or Peter pence, and long after was paid in many places of England.

Peter Pence.
Iua was the first of Saxon kings, that set forth laws to his country, to
the number of 80. and odd.

Next unto Osoricus king of Northumberland, followed Celulfus, Celulfus a
learned king. Diverse learned men flourish. Bedaes Anglorum historia.
who^ he had adopted brother to Kenred. This Celulfus, as he was learned, so
in his time diverse learned men flourished in England: among whom was Beda, who
unto the same king Celulfus, offered his history, entitled, Anglorum
historia, not only to be ratified, but also to be amended by his learning and
knowledge.

Beda Beda.
was an Englishman, a Priest, and of the Monastery of Peter and Paul, at Wire,
and was borne in the same Territory. About the xix. year of his age he was
made a Deacon, and the xxx. a Priest. From which time, til the age of lix. he
occupied himself in writing Treatises, and interpreting of Scriptures, which
rose to the number of xxxvij. Volumes, which he digested into xxviij. Books.

This Beda, for the same of his learning, was sent for by Pope Sergius, who
wrote unto Chelfride, the Abbot of Wire, to send him unto him. He lived in
travel of study till the age of lxij. years. At length (drawing to his end)
being sick vij. weeks together, besides other occupyinges of his mind, and
studies, which he did not intermitte, Beda translated the gospel of John into
English.
he translated the Gospel of Saint John into English. So he died, (pronouncing
very many comfortable words to those that stood round about him,) upon
Ascension day, in the same year that Nothelinus was restored to the
Archbishopric of Canterbury.

This Celulfus, king of Northumberlande, before mentioned, after he had reigned
viij. years, was made a Monk in the Abbey of Farne, otherwise called Lincoln,
or holy Island. Where, by his means, license was given unto the monks of that
house only to drink wine or ale, which before, The K. made a Monk.
by ye institution of Aidanus, before mentioned, drank nothing but milk, and
water. After whom succeeded Egbert his cousin, brother to Egbert, the same time
Bishop of York, which brought again thither, the Pall, that his Predecessors
had forgone, since the time of Paulinus, who left that Sea, and fled to
Rochester.

The said Egbert also erected a noble Library in York: whose example I would
other Bishops now would follow, A noble Library in York by a Bishop.


About the beginning of Egberts reign, was Cutbert, Archb. of Canterbury, who
conuented a great Synod of Bishops and Prelates, in the year of our Lord 747.
in the month of September near to the place called Clonesho: in the which
Synod assembled, these articles were enacted.

First, that Bishops should be more diligent in looking to their office, and
admonishing the people of their faults. 2. That they should live in a peaceable
mind one with another. 3. That every Bishop once in a year, should go about all
the Parishes of his Dioces. 4. That the Bishops should admonish their Abbots
and Monks, to live regularly: and that Prelates should not oppress their
inferiors, but love them. 5. That they should teach the Monasteries which the
Secular men had invaded, and could not be taken from them, to live regularlie.
6. That none should be admitted to orders, before his life were examined. 7.
That in Monasteries, the reading of holy Scriptures should be more frequented.
8. That Priests should be no disposers of secular business. 9. That they should
take no money for baptizing of infants 10. The L prayer and Creed, in the
English tongue.
That they should both learn, and teach, the Lords prayer, and the Creed, in
the English tongue. 11. That al should join together after one uniform order,
in their Ministry. 12. That with a modest voice, they should sing in the
Church. 13. That all Holidayes should be celebrated at one time. 14. That the
Sabbath day be reverently observed. 15. That the seven hours Canonical, be
every day observed. 16. That the Rogation days, both greater and lesser,
should not be omitted. 17. That the feast of Saint Gregory, and Saint
Augustine our Patron, should be observed. 18. That the Feast of the four times
should be kept. 19. That Monks and Nuns, should go regularlie apparrelled.
20. That Bishops should see these Decrees not to be neglected. 21. That the
Churchmen should not give themselves to drunkenness. 22. That the communion
should not be neglected of the Churchmen. 23. That the same also should be
observed of the Lay men, as time required. 24. That Lay men should first be
well tried, before they enter into Monkerie. 25. That alms be not neglected. 26
That Bishops should see these decrees notified to the people. 27 They disputed
also of the profit of alms. 28 Of the profit of singing Psalms. 29 That
the congregation should be constitute after the ability of their goods. 30
That Monks should not dwell among lay men. 31 That the public prayer should
be made for Kings and Princes. These decrees among them concluded, Cutbert
Cutbert.
the Archbishop sends the copy thereof to Boniface, Boniface the Pope, an
Englishman.
otherwise called Winfride an English man, that was then Archbishop of Mentz.

This Boniface wrote a letter to Ethelbald, who was present at ye former Synod,
Boniface a great maintainer of nuns.
admonishing him of his vicious life, and of his Nobles wantonness even with the
Nuns, of which order this Boniface was a great setter up and maintainer
afterward. This Ethelbald, after the departing of K. Celulph to his monkery,
spoiled the country of Northumberland, and exercised mortal war a great
while against Cudred of some called Cutbert K. of West Saxons, who encountering
with Ethelbald that had the greater power, by means of a certain warrior, a
Consul called Edellim overthrew him. Notwithstanding the next year he renewed
battle, and was slain of one Beornered after he had reigned 41. years in
Mercia, where Beornered reigned after in that dition but a small time. For Offa
nephew to the said Ethelbald expulsed Beornered, and succeeded king in that
province of Mercia, after he had reigned 39. years.

Boniface before mentioned, Religious fathers permitted to carry Nuns about
with them a preaching.
permitted religious fathers to carry about nuns with them a preaching, and
founded many monasteries, and canonized many Saints. Among other he founded the
great monastery of Fulde in Germany of English monks, into the which no women
might enter, but Libda and Tecla Libda and Tecla.
two English nuns. He deposed Childericus king of France by authority from
Pope Zachary, Childerike deposed by the Pope.
and Pipinus the betrayer of his Master was confirmed. From this Boniface
proceeded that detestable doctrine that although the Pope led with him
innumerable souls into Hell, A detestable doctrine of Boniface.
yet ought no man to rebuke him.

In the time of this Archbishop, Pope Gregory the second, Great maisteries
wrought against the Greek Emp. by Popes. Philippicus the Emp. lost both his
eyes and Empire.
also Gregory the third, and pope Zachary: and before these, Pope Constantine
the first, wrought great maisteries against the Greek Emperors, Philippicus,
and Leo, and others, for the maintayning of Images to be set up in the
Churches, of whom Philippicus lost both his eyes and his Empire. Leo for the
same cause was excommunicated of Gregory the third. This Gregory the third, is
like to be he which wrote the 4. books of Dialogs in Greek, falsely bearing
the name of Gregory the first: which books afterward Zachary his successor
translated into Latin. Also this Gregory the third brought into the Mass
Canon, The clause for relics, the memorial, and offerings for the dead.
the clause for Relics, beginning Quorum solemnitates hodie in conspectu etc.
Item he brought into the same the memorial, the offering and sacrifice for the
dead: Like as Zachary brought in the Priests vesture and ornaments. And
Constantinus the first, The Priests vesture.
was he that gave his feet to be kissed of the Emperor.

Constantinus the first, gave his feet to be kissed of the Emperor.
In the time of Egbert king of Northumberland, Sigibert or Sigbert, reigned in
the West Saxony, and was for his cruelty deposed, and wandering in a wood
alone without comfort, was slain by the Swineherd of the earl Combranus;
whom he before had slain, for giving him counsel to govern his people, and
himself after a better sort.

This Sigebert being slain, in his place succeeded Kenulphus Anno 748.
Sigebert his master. Kenulphus reigned 31. years, till he resorted to a
paramour of his, who^ he kept at Merton, where he was beset, and slain by a
kinsman of Sigebert, named Clito or Cliton. Moreover in the reign of the
foresaid Egbert king of Northumberland, and the eight year of Kenulphus king
of West Saxons, Offa, after he had slain the tyrant Beornredus. (who before
had slain Ethelwald king of Mercia, and uncle to this foresaid Offa) reigned
king of that province.

Offa had such displeasure against the citizens of Canterbury, that he removed
the Arthbishops sea, and the lands of Lambrith Archbish. of Canterbury (by the
agreement of Pope Adrian) unto Lichfield. Lambrith to Lichfield.


About the later time of the reign of Offa king of Mercia, Ethelbert king of
Eastangels, came to sue to marrye with Offas daughter, but the Queen
suspecting worse matter (without cause) caused him to be beheaded, having
trained him into a convenient place, by one Gnimbertus, the year 793. but the
Queen lived not three months after: and at her death, was so tormented, that
she bit, and rent her tongue asunder, with her teeth. The K. gives the tenth
of his goods to the Church.
And Offa understanding of the innocence of this king, gave the tenth part of
his own good to holy Church, and to the Church of Hereford (in remembrance
of this Ethelbert) he bestowed great lands. Moreover, he builded the abbey of
Saint Albones, etc: and went after to Rome to do penance, where he gave to the
Church of Saint Peter, a penny through every house in his dominion, which was
commonly called Romescot or Peter Pence, Romescot or Peter Pence.
and there at length was transformed from a King to a Monk, Anno 794. Kenredus
king of Northumberland, although some deny that he was a Monk.

After Offa, when he had reigned 39. years, succeeded Egfretus his son, who
reigned but four months: next Egfret, succeeded Kenulphus in the kingdom of
Mercia, who made war against the Cantuarites, and took Egbert their king
called Wren: whom he bound, and led prisoner to Mercia: but upon the dedication
of a Church, which he builded, he released him out of prison.

Next to Pope Zachary, followed Pope Stephen the second: to whom Pipinus the
French king, to gratify the Pope gave to the sea of Rome, the princedome of
Rauenna, the kingdom of the Lombards, and many other great possessions of
Italy, The donation of Pipine the traitor and murderer. Invention of Organs.
with all the cities thereto, adjoining unto the borders of Venice: and this is
like to the donation which (they say) was given of Constantine.

To this Pipinus, was sent into France the invention of Organs out of Greece,
by Costantine Emperor of Constantinople. Anno 757.

Next to Stephen the second, succeeded Paul the first, in the Papacy, who
thundered against Constantine the emperor of Constantinople, for abrogating of
images, but he continued constant in his purpose, notwithstanding, to the end
of his life.

These came to be Popes, Constantinus the second, a Lay man, Pope deposed,
and his eyes out.
and brother to Desiderius the king of Lombardie, for the which cause, he was
shortly deposed and thrust into a Monastery, having his eyes put out. In whose
stead, succeeded Stephen the third, who condemned the seventh Council of
Constantinople for heretical, because in that Council, the woorshipping of
Images was condemned, Pope strives for images.
and contrarily caused them to be worshipped and incensed.

At this time, Charles the great began to reign, by whom the Pope caused
Desiderius, the Lombard king, to be deprived. Next unto Stephen succeeded
Hadrianus the first, who gave more veneration to images, then any before him
writing a book in commendation, and utility of their adoration, Images, lay
men's calendar.
commanding them to be taken for lay men's kalenders, holding a synod at Rome
against Felix, and al other that spoke against images: and as Paul the first
before him, had made much of the body of Petronella, S. Peter's daughter. So
this Hadrian, clothed the body of S. Peter all in silver, Cost upon Images.
and covered the altar of S. Paul with a pall of gold.

This Hadrian did confirm the order of Saint Gregory's Mass, before the order
of S. Ambrose: for unto the time 800. Strife for Gregory's mass.
the Liturge of S. Ambrose was more used in the Italian Churches, but this
Bishop burnt the books of Ambrose service into ashes, and threw into prison
many priests that would not consent unto him. Now Eugenius coming 3. days
after the council ended, persuaded the pope to call the council again, and
agreed that both the books of Gregory and Ambrose should be laid upon the
altar of Peter and Paul, and the Church doors shut and sealed, they should all
the night give themselves to prayer, that God might give a token whether were
more to be allowed. Now, on the morning, A miracle falsely interpreted.
they found Gregory's mass book plucked one piece from another, and scattered
over all the Church, and only Ambroses book open upon the altar, where they
had laid it. This miracle, Pope Adrian did interpret on his own side side,
that as the leaves were scattered over the Church, so should Gregory's book
be used through the world, and Ambrose his book should only be kept at his
own Church, at Mediolanum, where he sometime was Bishop.

Carolus magnus did confirm his fathers gift and devotion to the Pope, adding
moreover, thereunto the City and dominion of Venice, Histria, the Dukedom of
Foroiuliense, the Dukedom Spoletanu^, and Beneuentanum, and other possessions
mo, to the patrimony of saint Peter: and the Pope, to requite him, made him
Patricium Romanum, and ordained him only to be taken for Emperor of Rome.

Carolus being proclaimed Emperor, the Empire was translated from the Grecians
to the Frenchmen, an. 801. The Empire translated to the French. A B C
Monasteries.
and continued so 102. years, or thereabout, till the coming of Conradus, and
his Neuew Otho, which were Germa^s.

This Charles builded so many Monasteries as there be letters in the A.B.C. He
held a Council at Franckforde, wherein was condemned, the Council of Nice,
and Irene, for setting up, and worshipping of Images.

Anno 784. Irene Empress of the Greeks, through the means of Pope Hadrian,
took up the body of Constantine Emperor of Constantinople, Irene the Greek
Empress a maintainer of Images.
her own husbands father, and when she had burned the same, she caused the
ashes to be cast into the Sea, because he disanulled Images. Afterward she
reigned with her son Constantine the sixth, son to Leo the fourth: The
cruel Irene.
who was also excommunicated for taking away Images, and being at dissension
with him, she caused him to be taken, and laid in prison: and afterward
(through power of friends being restored) was at the last again cast into
prison, The Emp. eyes pulled out by his mother.
and had his eyes pulled out so cruelly, that within short space he died. After
this, the Empress by the counsel of Therasius, Bishop of Constantinople, held
a Counsel at Nicea, wherein it was decreed, that Images again should be
restored to the Church: which Charles afterward repealed at Frankford. At
length she was deposed by Nicephorus, who succeeded her, and ended her life in
much penury.

Monasteries erected and founded in England.
In the space of 200, years, these monasteries following, began to be founded
in the land.

Paul's Church at London was founded by Ethelbert King of Kent, and Sigebert
king of Essex, about the year 604.

The first Cross, and Altar, was set up in the North parts, in Heuenfield,
upon occasion of Oswalde, King of Northu^berlandes fighting against Cadwall:
where he in the same place set up the sign of the Cross, kneeling and praying
there for victory, an. 635.

The Church of Winchester was first begun, and founded by Kinigilsus, king of
Mercia, having nine miles about it. And afterward finished by his Son
Kewalcus, where Owen, of Englishmen, was the first Bishop. Anno 636.

The Church of Lincoln, was first founded by Paulinus Bishop, an. 629.

The Church of Westminster began first by a certain citizen of London, through
the instigation of Ethelbert, king of Kent, which before was an I Will full of
Thorns, anno 614.

The common Schools were first erected at Cambridge, Common schools at
Cambridge.
by Sigebert, king of East Angles, an. 636.

The Abbey of Knonisburie builded by Furceus the Eremite, an. 637

The Monastery of Malmsburie, by one Meldulsus, a Scot, an. 640. And after
enlarged by Agilbert, Bishop of Winchester.

The Abbey of Gloucester first builded by Offricus, king of Mercia, as
Cestrensis says. But as William Malmsburie writes, by Vlferus, and Etheldred,
brethren to Kineburga, Abbess of the same house, in the year of our Lord 679

The Monastery of Maylerose, by the river of Twide, by Aydanus, a Scottish
Bishop.

The Nunnerie of Theorduton, by Heavy, who was ye first Nun in Northumberland.

The Monastery of Hetesey, The first Nun in Northumberland.
by Oswy king of Northumberland, who also, with his daughter Elfred, gave
possessions for xij. Monasteries, from the parts of Northumberlande, anno 650

The Monastery of Saint Martin in Dover, by Whitered, king of Kent

The Abbey of Lestingeye, by Ceadda, whom they call Saint Cedde, through the
grant of Oswald, son to saint Oswald, king of Northumberland, an. 651

The Monastery of Whitbie, otherwise called Strenhalt, by Hilda, daughter to
the Nephue of Edwin, king of Northumberland, an. 657. Also, another Monastery
called Hacanus, not far from the same place, builded by the same Hilda, the
same year.

The Abbey of Abingto^ builded by Cissa, king of Southsex, an. 666

Also, an Abbey in the East side of Lincoln, called Ioanno, by S. Botolph, an.
654

The Monastery of Ely, builded by Etheldred, or Edeldrida, daughter of Anna,
king of East Angles, and the wife of Elfride, king of Northumberland, in the
year six hundred seventy four.

The Monastery of Chertsey, in Southerie, by Erke^wald B. of London, an. 674.
thrown down by the Danes, and reedified by king Edgar.

The Nunnerie of Barking, edified by the same Erkenwaldus, B. of London, about
the same time.

The Abbey of Peterborough, otherwise called Madehamsted, founded by king
Ethelwald, king of Mercia, anno 675

Badney Abbey, by Etheldredus, king of Mercia, an. 700 Glastenburie, by Iua, K.
of the West Saxons, and after repaired, and enriched by king Edgar, an. 701

Ramsey, in the time of king Edgar, by one Alwinus, a noble man, an. 673

K. Edg. builded 40. Abbeies.
K. Edgar builded in his time xl. Monasteries. He reigned an. 601

The Nunnerie of Winburne, by Cuthburga, sister to Insus, K. Iuaes brother, an.
717

The Monastery of Sealesey, near to the I Will of Wight, by Wilfridus, B. of
York, an. 678

The Monastery of Wincombe, by Kenulphus, king of Mercia, an. 737

S. Albons, builded by Offa, K. of Mercia, an. 755

The Abbey of Euesam, by Egwinus, an. 691

Ripon in the North, by Wilfridus, B. an. 709

The Abbey of Echelinghey, by K. Aluredus, an. 691

The Nunnerie of Shaftesburie, by the same Aluredus, the same year.

King Ethelbald freed the churches monasteries, The Church freed from tributes.
etc. from all manner tributes, and granted them great liberties. Diverse of
the Saxon kings became monks: as Knigilsus king of West Saxons: Iue king of
West-sex. Diverse Saxo^ kings become monks.
Celulfus king of Northumberland, Eadbertus king of Northumb. Ethelredus of
Mercia, Kemedus of Mercia, Offa of East Saxons, Selly of East Saxons,
Sigebertus king of East Angles.

There became also Queens and kings daughters, Queens became nuns.
with other noble women Nuns: as Hilda daughter to the nephew of Edwin king of
Northumberland, Abbess of the house of Ely. Erchengoda with her sister
Ermenilda, daughter of Erkembertus K. of Kent, which Erchengoda was professed
in Brigets order in France. Also Edelberga, wife and Queen to king Edwin of
Northumberland, and daughter of king Anna, who was also in the same house made
a Nun. Etheldreda, whom they term Saint Eldred, wife to king Egfred of
Northumberland, was professed Nun at Helinges, Werburga, daughter of Vlferus,
king of Mercians, was made Nun at Ely, Kinreda, Sister of king Vlferus, and
Kinswida her sister, were both professed Nuns. Sexburga daughter of king Anna
King of Mercia, and wife of Ercombert, king of Kent, was Abbess at Ely,,
Elfrida daughter of Oswe, King of Northumberlande, was Abbess at Whitney.
Mildreda, Wilburga, and Milginda, all three daughters of Merwaldus, K. of
West-mercians, became Nuns: Bridburga, the wife of of Alfride, K. of
Northumberland, and sister to Ofricus, K. of Mercia, and daughter of king
Penda, was professed Abbess in the Monastery of Gloucester: Elfleda, daughter
of K. Oswy, and wife of king Penda his son, became also a Nun: Likewise
Alfritha, wife to king Edgar, and Editha, daughter to the same king Edgar, with
Wolfrith her mother, and so forth.

As in the Britans time, Under the Britons, the Metropolitan sea at London,
and by the Saxons after the coming of Austin translated to Canterbury.
the Metropolitan Sea was at London, so in the time of the Saxons, after the
coming of Austin, it was removed to Canterbury: ye names and years of which
Metropolitanes till Egbert from Austin are these: Augustinus 16. Laurentius 5.
Mellitus 5. Iustus 3. Honorius 25. Deus dedit 10. Theodorus 22. all these were
Italians. Bertnaldus English 37. in whose time the monastery of S. Martin was
builded in Doroberne by Witredus and his brother kings of Kent. Tacunius 3.
Nothelinus 5. Cutbert forbids funerals to be made for him.
Cuthbertus 17. He after his death forbad all funerals, exequies, or funeral
lamentations to be made. Lambrithus or Lambertus 27. In whose time king Offa
translated the Metropolitan sea from Canterbury to Lichfield, by the grant
of Pope Adrian, being overcome with apostolical arguments, as says Flores
historiarum, that is, with money. In the time of 17. Archb. 34 Popes.
Ethelardus 13. who by his Epistles to Pope Leo, obtained the Metrapolitan sea
again to Canterbury. Vlfredus 28, Fegeldus 3, Celnocus 41. During the time of
these seventeen Archbishops, there were 34. Popes of Rome.

Anno 826. Egbert, notwithstanding he had six, or eight against one of his
men, overthrew Bernulphus K. of Mercia, The land brought into one monarchy,
and called Anglia.
with other kings, and subdued the rest of the land into one monarchy, and
having called a counsel of his Lords at Winchester, was by their aduises
crowned king over all the land, and caused the inhabitants to be called Angles,
and the Land Anglia.

This king (when he had ruled the West Saxons, and over the more part of
England, xxxvij. years) died, and was buried at Winchester: leaving his
kingdom to Ethelwolfe, which first was Bishop of Winchester, Gregory the
fourth. A B made king of England.


He gave to the Church, and Religious orders, the tithes of al his goods and
lands in West Saxons, Lands given to ye Church.
with liberty, and freedom from all seruage, Ethelbaldus, king of Mercia. The
ground of al their good works and donations was remission of sins, which
they thought thereby to procure) This done, taking his journey to Rome with
Alured his yoongest son, committed him to the bringing up of pope Leo ye
fourth. Where he also reedified the English school at Rome: which being
founded by king Offa or rather Iue King of Mercia, was in the time of King
Egbert his Father consumed with fire.

Besides, Peterpence throughout all England.
he granted to Rome of every fire house a penny to be paid throughout the
land, as king Iue in his dominion had done before. Also he gave and granted
to be paid to Rome yearly three hundred marks: that is, to the maintayning of
the light of Saint Peter one hundredth marks: to the light of Saint Paul an
other hundredth; to the use of the Pope an other hundredth. This done he
returned by France into England, and married with the daughter of Carolus
Caluus, whose name was Judith. He had to his chief counselors two Bishops,
Adelstanus B. of Schireborne, more skillful in civil matters then in
divinity: and the other Swithinus bishop of Winchester, being of a contrary
disposition.

Gregory the fourth above mentioned, was the third Pope that succeeded after
Pope Paschalis the first: being but four years betwixt them: who succeeded
after Stephen the fourth which followed Leo the third, next Pope unto Hadrian,
in the time of Charles the great. From the time of that Hadrian the first, unto
Pope Hadrian the third, the Emperors had some stroke in the election (at least
in the confirmation of the Roman Pope) notwithstanding there were diverse
practices to the contrary. Wherefore by the commandment of Ludouicus the
Emperor in the time of Gregory the fourth, General counsels called by the
Emperor.
a general Synod was comenced at Aquisgraue, where it was decreed by Gregory
and his assistants, that every Church should have sufficient of his proper
lands and revenues to find the Priests thereof. That none of the Clergy, of
what degree soever he were, should use any vesture or any precious, or any
Scarlet color, Against the excess of apparel in the Clergy.
neither should wear ringes on their fingers, except it be when Prelates be at
Mass, or give their consecrations.

Item, that prelates should not keep too great ports or families, nor keep
great horses, use dice, or keep harlots: and the Monks should not exceed
measure in gluttony or riot. Against the dicing and whoring of the Popes
Clergy.
Item, that none of the Clergy being either anointed or shaven, should use
either gold or silver, either in their shoes, slippers, or girdles, like to
Heliogabalus. They should were no silver in their shoes, nor gold.
Moreover, by him (at the commandment of Ludouicus the Emperor) the feast of
Alsaints was first brought into the Church.

Feast of Alsaints first erected.
After this pope came Sergius the second, who first brought in the altering of
the Popes names, because he was named before Os porci, that is, Swines snout:
which also ordained the Agnus thrice to be song at the Mass, Alteration of
Popes names. Swines snout.
and the host to be divided into three parts. After him was Pope Leo the
fourth: to whom this king Ethelwolfus did commit the tuition of his son
Alured.

By this Pope Leo, it was first enacted by a Council of his, that no Bishop
should be condemned, under three score and twelve witnesses, also (contrary to
the law of Gregory the fourth his predecessor) he commanded and ordained the
cross, all to beset with gold and precious stones, and to be carried before
him.

After this Leo succeeded a woman Pope, named Gilberta, Gilberta a woman Pope.
and was called Joan the eight. She was a dutchwoman of Magunce, who went with
an English monk out of the Abbey of Fulda to Athens, in man's apparel: where
she proved excellently learned: and obtained the Popedom, and sat two years
and six months: The Pope trauaileth with child.
and at last openly in the face of a general procession, fell in labor and
travel of child, and so died. By reason whereof the Cardinals at this day do
avoid to come near that street where that shame was taken.

By Benedictus the 3. that succeeded next in the whorish sea, was first enacted
(as most writers record) the Dirge to be said for the dead: The dirge for the
dead.
albeit Gregory the third, had done in that matter worthily for his part
already.

After him sat Pope Nicholas the first, who enlarged the Popes decrees with
many constitutions, equalling the authority of them with the wrytings of the
Apostles. Popes decrees equal with the Apostles writing.
He ordained that no secular Prince, nor the Emperor himself, should be
present at their Councels, unless in matters concerning the faith. Also that
no Lay man should sit in Judgment upon the Clergy men, or reason upon the
Popes power.

Item, that no Christian magistrate should have any power over any prelate:
alleging that a prelate is called God. A prelat called God.
Also that all Church service should be in Latin, except the Polonians and
Sclauonians; Polonians and Sclauonians exempt from Latin service.
to whom he permitted the use of their own tongue.

Sequences in the Mass, were by him first allowed. By this Pope priests began
first to be debarred marriage: Against priests marriages. Huldrich of Auspourgh.
whereof Huldrich Bishop of Auspourgh sends a letter to the Pope, reclaiming
and confuting his proceedings in the matter, gravely and learnedly: showing the
decree to be an impious tyranny, contrary to the laws of God, and Nature. The
epistle seems rather to belong to the time of Nicholas the second, or third.

After this pope Nicholas, succeeded Hadrianus the second, Ioannes 9. Martinus
2. After these came Hadrian the third, and Stephen the fifth: By this Hadrian
it was decreed, that no Emperor after that time should intermeddle in the
election of the Pope: and thus began the Emperor first to decay, and the Pope
to swell. The Emp. begins to decay, and Pope to swell.


Ethelwolfe after he had done valiantly against the Danes (that greatly
invaded and molested the land) died, and left behind him four sons, which
reigned every one in his order (after the decease of their father:) whose names
were, Ethelbaldus, Ethelbrightus, Ethelredus, and Aluredus.

About the latter time of the reign of Ethelred, Anno 870. Inguar and Hubbar,
landed in Norfolk, and forced Edm. the under king of that Province, to flee to
Franingham castle, and commanded him to submit himself unto them, and to
reign under Inguar, Prince of the Danes. Whereupon, by persuasion of one of his
Bishops, being his secretary, he paused; and made answer, that Edmund, a
Christian king, for love of temporal life, will not submit himself to a Pagan
Duke, K. Edm. slain of the Danes.
unless he would before be a Christian. Wherefore, having apprehended him at
S. Edmondesbury, he bound him unto a tree, and caused him to be shot to death,
for that he would not deny Christ, and his laws. Lastly, they caused his
head to be smitten off, and cast it into the thick bushes, which was by his
friends at the same time taken up, and solemnly buried at S. Edmondesbury:
whose brother named Edwoldus, (notwithstanding of right the kingdom fell to
him) setting apart the world, became an Hermit, at the abbey of Cerum, in the
county of Dorset.

King Ethebald having had great conflicts with ye Danes, and perplexed with the
miserable state of his country, after he had reigned five or eight years,
deceassed. During which time, of his reign (notwithstanding many troubles) he
builded the college of Canons at Exeter, and was buried at the Abbey of
Winburne, or Woburne. After whose decease, for lack of issue, the land fell to
his brother Alured or Alfred, ann. 872. who first of the English kings, Alfred
of the English K. takes his vnctio^ from the Pope,
took his, crown, and unction of Pope Leo at Rome. He after great
alteration, and diverse troubles forced the Danes to seek for peace: which was
concluded upon certain covenants: whereof one, and the principal was that
Gutrum their K. should be christened. The other, that such as would not be
christened, should depart the Realm. Upon these covenants, Gutrum coming to
Winchester, The king of the Danes christened.
was there christened, with xx. of his great Nobles. To the which Gutru^ K.
Alured being his Godfather at the baptism, named him Athelstane, and gave him
diverse Countries: as, of East-anglia: containing Norfolk and Suffolk, and
part of Cambridgeshire: and granted to the Danes that were christened, the
Country of Northumberland: the rest voyding the land. Athelstane reigned xi.
or xij. years.

Alfred builded diverse houses of Religion: as, the house of Nuns at
Shaftesburie, and the religious houses at Etheling. Also, another at
Winchester, named the new Monastery, and endued richly the Church of Saint
Cutbert, at Durham. He sent also into India, to pay, and perform his vows to
saint Thomas of India, which he promised in the time of his distress, against
the Danes. After he had reigned nine and twenty years, and six months: he
changed this mortal life, and divided his goods into two equal parts, the
one to uses secular, the other to uses Ecclesiastical: Of the which, the first
he divided into three portions: the first, for behoof of his family: the
second, upon his buildings: the third upon strangers. The other second into
four parts: the one to the relief of the poor, Alfred a notable king.
an other to monasteries, the third to the Schools of Oxford, for the
maintening of good letters, the fourth he sent to foreign Churches without the
Realm.

He divided the day and the night into three parts. Eight hours (if he were
not let by wars, A notable spe^ding of ye time by the king.
and other affairs) he spent in study and learning. Other eight in prayer
and alms deeds. And the other eight in natural rest, sustenance of his body,
and needs of the Realm.

He especially provided against robbing, and thieves, by severe execution. In
such sort, that he caused to be set up through his Dominion, gilded brooches,
and none so hardy, neither by day nor night, to take them down. His virtues
were many: he was learned; wise; religious; and valeaunt: especially about the
West part of the land he erected Schools, and mainteyned Students, although
among the Britains, in the town of Chester, in Southwales, long before that,
in the time of King Arthure, as Galfridus writes) both Gra^mer, and
Philosophy, with the tongues, were taught.

In the time of Egbert, king of Kent, some writers affirm, yt this land began
to flourish with Philosophy. About which time, also, some think that the
University of Grantchester, near to that which is now called Cambridge, began
to be founded by Beda, Grantchester founded by Beda.
following this conjecture therein, for that Alcuinus, who went to Rome, and
from thence into France, in the time of Charles the great (where he first
began the University of Paris) was first traded up in ye same School of
Grantchester. Paris began from Grantchester.


Bed. lib. 3. cap. 18. writing also of Sigebert, king of the East Angles,
declared how Sigebert returning out of France into England, (according to the
examples which he did there see) ordered, and disposed Schools of learning,
through the means of Felix, then Bishop: and placed in them Teachers, after
the manner of the Cantuarites. And yet before these times, it is thought there
were two Schools, or Universities within the Realm: the one for Greek, at the
town of Greglade, which was after called Kirklade: the other for Latin, which
was then called Latinlade, afterward Lethelade, near to Oxford.

Alfrede very learned.
This King Alfrede was eleven years of age before he began to learn Letters,
having to his Master Pleimundus, (afterward made Bishop of Canterbury,) and
grew so in knowledge, that he translated diverse latin works: as, Orosius,
Pastorale Gregorij, the histories of Bid, Boethius de Consolat. philosophiae:
also, an Enchiridion of his own making.

He compiled also an History in the Saxon tongue called the history of
Alfred. He suffered no man to aspire to any dignity in his Court, except he
were learned, and caused all his Nobles to set their children to learning: if
they had no sons, then their servant. He began also to translate the
Psalter into English, The Psalter translated by king Alfred.
and had almost finished the same, had not death prevented him. These endeavors
he took in hand, that the English nation might be furnished with knowledge,
which was decayed before, by the innumerable volumes burned by the Danes. The
king careful to furnish the land with knowledge.
He used chiefly the wise counsel of Neotus, Neotus.
who was counted then an holy man, and was Abbot of a certain monastery of
Cornwall: by whose advise he sent for Grimbaldus a learned monk out of
France, and for Asserion an other learned man out of Wales, whom he made
Bishop of Schireborne: also out of Mercia he sent for Werefrithus Bishop of
Worcester, to whom he put the Dialogues of Gregory to be translated. By the
aduisement of Neotus he ordained certain schools of diverse arts, first at
Oxford: and fraunchised the same with many great Libraries.

Moreover, besides other learned men which were about Alfred, histories make
mention of Johannes Scotus, Johannes Scotus.
a godly divine, and a learned Philosopher, but not that Scotus who^ we call
Duns, (who came after this many years.) This Johannes Scotus at the request of
Carolus Caluus, the French king, translated the book of Dyonisius, entitled
De Hierarchia, out of Greek into Latin, word by word. He wrote also a book,
De corpore and sanguine Domni: which was after condemned by the Pope, Scotus
book De Corpore condemned.
In concilio Vercellensi.

He wrote also a book De naturae diuisione, wherein he accorded not with the
Romish religion: whereupon the Pope writing to Charles of this Scotus,
complained of him: so he was constrained to remove out of France, and came into
Engl. to Alured (as some say) by ye letters of Alfred, of who^ he had great
intertainment till he went to Malmesburie, where he was slain of his own
scholars (who^ he taught) with their penkniues. Scotus slain of his scholars.


King Alfred had by his wife two sons, Edward, and Ethelward, and three
daughters Elflena, Ethelgora, and Ethelginda, which all he caused to be
instructed in learning. Edward succeeded in the kingdom; Ethelward died before
his father; Ethelgora was made a Nun; the other two were married the one in
Merceland, the other to ye Earl of Flaunders. He reigned 29. years, and six
months: he departed this life, v. Kal. Nouemb. and lies buried at Winchester,
an. 901. David, David's psalms always with the king.
and certain other prayers of his own collecting, whereupon he was
continually either reading, or praying, whenever he had leisure thereunto.

Pleymundus schoolemaister to Alfred, succeeded Etheredus in the Bishopric of
Canterbury, and governed that sea 34. years. After him succeeded Athelmus and
sat 12. years: after him came Vlfelmus, and sat 13. years: him followed Odo a
Dane borne, and governed 20. years.

After the death of Pope Stephen the fifth, was much broyle in the election of
the Bishops of Rome, one contending against another: in so much that in the
space of nine years, there were nine Popes: of the which, first was Formosus,
who succeeded Stephen, being made pope against the mind of certain in Rome,
that would rather Sergius, then Deacon of the Church of Rome, should be Pope:
not withstanding Mars and money prevailed on Formosus part, by the aid of king
Arnulphus, who came to Rome and beheaded Formosus adversaries, whom the Pope in
recompense blessed and crowned Emp. This Formosus had once sworn never to
reiterate or take to him again ecclesiastical order, but was absolved again
of Pope Martin, who sat four or five years: after whom in 9. years, there
were nine Popes. In nine years nine Popes.
After him succeeded Boniface the 6, who continued 25. days, then came Stephen
the 6. who abrogated all the decrees of Formosus. and taking up his body after
it was buried, Pope Stephen rages against the dead body of Formosus.
cut two fingers of his right hand, and commanded them to be cast into Tiber,
and then buried the body in a Lay man's sepulcher. He reigned one year, and
him succeeded Rhemanus, and sat 3. months, repealing the decrees of his
predecessor against Formosus, next whom came Theodorus the 2. who like wise
taking part with Formosus, reigned but 20. days, then sat Pope John, who
fought against ye Romans, and (to confirm the cause of Formosus more surely)
did hold a synod at Rauenna of 72. Bishops, with the French king Endo, and his
Archbishops, present at the same: where all the decrees of Formosus, were
confirmed, and those of Stephen the 6. burned.

This Pope lived not Pope full two years: after whom succeeded Benedictus the
fourth, who kept the chair three years: after whom Leo the fifth was Pope, who
within 40. days of his papacy, was with strong hand taken and cast in prison
by one Christopher, his own household Chaplain, whom he had long time
nourished in his house: which Christopher, being Pope about the space of seven
months, was also horsed from his seat by Sergius, as he had done to the
other before, who after he had thrown down Christopher, shore him monk into
a monastery, and occupied the sea seven years. This Sergius, a rude man,
Sergius baebarous cruelty against Formosus, now dead and buried.
and unlearned, very proud and cruel, had before time been put back from
the Popedom by Formosus above mentioned: by reason whereof to revenge himself
of Formosus again, (being now in his papacy) caused his body to be taken
up, and afterward setting it in the Papal sea (as in his Pontificalibus) first
disgraded him, then commanded his head to be smitten off, with the other
three fingers which were left: which done he caused his body to be thrown into
Tiber, deposing also all such as had been invested by Formosus.

By this Pope Sergius, first came up the bearing of candles on Candlemas day,
Candles on Candlemas day.
for the purifying of the blessed virgin.

After Sergius entered Pope Anastasius: who after he had sat 2. years, followed
pope Lando, the father (as some think) of pope John: which John is said to have
been Paramour of Theodora, a famous harlot of Rome, A pope set up of Theodora,
a famous harlot.
and set up by the same harlot, either against Lando, or after Lando his
father, to succeed in his room.

There is a story writer called Liuthprandus, who writing de imperatoribus,
lib. 2. cap. 13. makes mention of this Theodora, and John the eleventh: and
says, that this Theodora had a daughter named Marozia, which had by Pope
Sergius above mentioned, a son who afterward was pope John the 12. The same
Marozia, afterward married with the marquis Guido of Tuscia, through whose
means and his friends at Rome, she brought to pass that this pope John the
eleventh was smothered with a pillow laid to his mouth, Pope smothered.
after he had reigned 13. years, and so John the 12. her son reigned in his
steed: but because the clergy, and people of Rome did not agree to the
election, therefore was Pope Leo the 6. set up in his room.

Thus pope John the son of Sergius, and Marozia, being rejected, reigned pope
Leo, 7. months: after him pope Stephen 2. years: who being poisoned, Pope
poisoned
then was pope John the 12. above rehearsed, set up again, where he reigned
near the space of 5. years.

After John the twelfth, followed pope Stephen, three years. Leo three years
and four months: Stephen the eight, three years, four months: Martine 3.
years, 6. months: After him, Agapetus, eight years and six months: about
whose time, or a little before, began the order of monks called, Ordo
Cluniacensis. The Monks Cluniacenses.


It may appear, in those times, that the authority of bestowing bishoprikes
in England, and also in prescribing laws to Churchmen was in the hands of the
kings of the land, and not only in the hands of the Pope: as it is manifest
by King Alfredus laws: If any one lie with an other man's wife, etc. If any
that has taken orders, steal, etc.

After Alfred succeeded his son Edward called the elder, giving also
testimony of the same. Who with Pleymundus archbishop of Canterbury, and with
other Bishops in a Synod assembled, elected seven Bishops, in seven
Metropolitan churches, whose names were 1. Freidstane, 2. Adelstane, 3.
Werstane, 4. Addlelin, 5. Edulphus, 6. Dernegus, 7. Kenulphus. In which
election, the kings authority alone seemed then sufficient. The kings authority
in electing of bishops sufficient.


This Edward reigned 24. years: The K. daughters set to spinning.
and to the needle: his sons he set to the study of learning: to the end
that they being Philosophers first, might be made more expert to govern the
common wealth. The king makes his sons first Philosophers, and then
Governors.


Ethelstane succeeded his father in the kingdom, and being base born of Egwin,
before the king was married to her, and fearing his next brother Edwine, being
rightly borne, caused him to be put in an old rotten boat in the broad sea,
only with one Esquier with him: who being perplexed with the rage of the Sea,
and weary of his life, threw him self into the Sea. This act Ethelstane
lamented vij. years, and builded the two Monasteries, of Middleton, and of
Michelendes, for his brothers sake, or (as the Stories say) for his soul.

About this time, the Empire began to be translated from France (where it had
continued about an hundred years,) into Germany, The Empire translated out of
France into Germany.
where it has ever since remained.

This king gave his third Sister to Henricus Duke of main, for his son Otho,
the first Emperor of the Ger-Almanes.

This king set forth diverse laws for the government of the clergy: he
prescribed also constitutions touching tithes giving. And among his laws, to
the number of 35. diverse things are comprehended, pertaining as well to the
spirituality, as to the temporaltie. Out of the laws of this king first sprung
up ye attachment of thieves, yt such as stole above 12. d. Attaching of
thieves. Stealing above twelve pence.
and were above twelve years old, should not be spared. He reigned about the
space of 16. years, and died without issue. Anno 940.

After him succeeded his brother Edmund son of Edward the elder, by his third
wife, being of the age of twenty years. About this time Mo^kery came into
England. Monkery comes into England.
There was at that time, and before a monastery in France, called Floriake,
after the order of Benedict: from the which monastery did spring the greatest
part of our English monks, who being there professed, and after returning into
England, did gather men daily to their profession: and so at length grew in
favor with kings and princes, who founded them houses, maintained their rules,
and enlarged them with possessions. Among the Monks that came from Floriake,
especially was one Oswaldus, first a monk of Floriake, then Bishop of
Worcester, and York: a great patron, and setter up of monkery. Oswaldus a
monk, a great Patron of monkery.


This king builded and furnished the abbey of Glastenburie, and made Dunstan
abbot thereof.

He was slain of a felon with a knife. He ordained laws also for the
Spirituality, touching tithes, against deflouring of Nuns, touching
reparation of Churches, etc. In the time of this Edmund, was Odo, Archbishop
of Caunterburie, who was the first from the coming of the Saxons, till this
time, that was Archb. being no Monk, for all before him were Monks: of whom,
a great part had been Italians, unto Berctualdus. Notwtstanding, after he
sailed into France, and received that order at Flo-riake. Vlstan bishop of
York, at the same time is noted to differ in habit from other Bishops.

Odo continued Bishop the space of twenty years: after whom, Elsinus was
elected, and ordained by the king, to succeed through favor and money: but
going to Rome for the Popes pall, in his journey through the Alps, he died for
cold: after whom succeeded Dunstan.

This Edmund gave to saint Edmund the Martyr, above mentioned, the town of
Bredrichcepworth, now called S. Edmondsburie, Saint Edmondsburie.
with great revenues, and lands belonging to the same. He was buried at
Glassenburie by Dunstane. He left two sons behind him; Edwine, and Edgar, by
his wife Elgina: But the children being under age, Edred brother to the king,
was made Protector in the mean time, who faithfully behaved him self toward
the young children.

In his time Dunstane was promoted by the means of Odo, from Abbot of
Glassenbure, to be Bishop of Worcester, and after of London. By this Dunstan,
Edred was much ruled. So that he is reported in stories, too much to submit
himself to fond penance laid upon him by Dunstane.

After his Uncle Edred, Edwin the eldest son of King Edmund began his
reign, anno 955. Odo, Archbishop of Canterbury. He is reported the first day
of his Coronation, to have departed from ye company of his Lords, into a secret
chamber, to the disorderly company of a woman, whose husband he had slain.
Now, Dunstan (being yet but Abbot of Glassenburie) followed the king into the
chamber, and brought him out by the hand, and accused him to Odo the Archb. and
caused him to be separated from the said woman, and to be suspe^ded out of ye
church by the same Odo. Whereupon, the king being offended with Dunstane, D.
causes the king to be suspended for adultery.
banished him, and forced him for a season to fly into Flaunders, where he was
in the Monastery of Saint Amandus.

About the same season, the Monastical order of S. Benedict, or (as they call
them) black monks, began to increase in England: in so much, that other
Priests and Chanons were displaced, and they set in their rooms. But king
Edwine (for displeasure he bare to Dunstan) did vex all that order of Monks,
so that in Malmsburie, Glassenburie, and other places, he thrust out the
Monks, and set Secular priests in their rooms.

In the end, being hated for his evil demeanor, he was deposed from the
Crown, The K deposed.
and his brother Edgar received in his room, so that the river of Thames
divided both their kingdoms. Edwine (when he had reigned four years)
departed, leaving no issue of his body. Wherefore; the rule of the land fell
unto Edgar his younger brother, in the year of the Lord, nine hundred fifty
and nine;

In the beginning of his reign he called home Dunstane whom Edwine before had
exiled. Then was Dunstane, (before Abbot of Glassenbury) made B. of Worcester,
and after of London.

Not long after this, Odo, the Archbishop of Canterbury deceased, after he had
governed the Church xxxiiij. years. After whom, Brithelinus Bishop of
Winchester, was first elected: but because he was thought insufficient, Dunstan
was chosen, and the other sent home again to his own Church. So Dunstan being
made Archbishop by the K. went to Rome for his Pall, to Pope John the
thirteenth: which was about the beginning of the Kings reign. Du^stan having
obtained his Pall, returned and obtained of the king, that Oswaldus, who was
made a Monk at Floriake, was created B. of Worcester: and not long after,
through the means of Dunstan Ethelwoldus, first Monk of Glassenburie, then
Abbot of Abbindon, was made Bishop of Winchester.

These three bishops were great vpholders of Monks: by whose council king
Edgar is recorded in histories to have builded either new out of the ground, or
caused to be reedified monasteries decayed by the Danes, more then forty.
Moreover thorough the instigation of them, the king in diverse Cathedral
Churches, where Prebendaries and Priests were before, displaced them, and
set in Monks and Nuns. Priests displaced, and monks placed.


After that the kings mind was thus persuaded to advance Monkery, Oswaldus
bishop of Worcester, also made Archbishop of York, after the death of
Oskitellus, having his sea in the Cathedral Church there of S. Peter; after he
had first assaied the Canons and priests by fair means to become monks, and
not prevailing, near to the same Church of S. Peter in the Churchyard, he
builded another Church of our Lady, which when he had replenished with monks,
there he continually frequented: and so the people left the other Church naked.
Whereupon the priests did either become monks, or depart from the place. So did
Ethelwold drive out the Canons and priests from the new monastery in
Winchester, afterward called Hida, and placed his monks. The cause was
pretended for that they were thought slack, and negligent in their Church
service, and set in Vicars in their steed. Then the K. gave to the same Vicars,
the land which belonged before to the Prebendaries: who also, not long after
showed them selves as negligent as the other. Wherefore, king Edgar (by the
consent of Pope John) voyded cleerelie the Priests: and ordained there Monks.
Which Monks, did greatly differ, and do at this day disagree with the
ancient Monks of old time, that were Lay men only, The new mo^ks differ
from the old, who were lay men.
and were forbidden by the Council of Chalcedon, in any sort to deal with
matters of the Church: and were such, as by the Tyranny of Persecution, were
either constrained to hide themselves in solitary places, or else of their own
voluntary devotion, withdrewe themselves from company, having nothing proper
of their own, or all things common with other.

Afterward Bonifacius the fourth made a decree, Anno 606.

King Edgar a mainteiner of learning.
King Edgar was a great mainteiner of religion, and learning. To avoid excessive
drinking by the example, of the Danes, which dwelt in diverse places of the
realm, he ordained certain cups with pinnes or nails, set in them, adding
thereto a law, yt what person did drink past that mark, at one draught, should
forfeite a certain penny: the half part whereof should fall to the accuser,
the other to the ruler of the town, where the offense was done. He was a noble
Prince, wise, and victorious, but favored the monkish superstition overmuch,
and is reported by some to have builded so many monasteries for them, as there
are Sundaies in the year, or as Edmer reports 48. 48. monasteries builded by
K. Edgar.
Notwithstanding he was much given to adultery, and fornication, and used
among others, Egelfleda or Elfleda, called the white daughter of Duke Odorere:
of whom he begat Edward in bastardie: for the which he was enjoined by
Dunstan, seven years penance, and kept back from his Coronation so long, till
the one and thirty year of his age, anno 974 although he began his Reign at
sixteen.

His penance appointed by Dunstane, The K. enjoined penance by Dunstan.
was, that he should wear on his head no crown, and places, couents of
Monks, etc. He reigned sixteen years, and was crowned only three years. He
adopted to succeed him, Edward that was borne of the harlot.

Among other laws of this king, he ordained that the Sunday should be
solemnized from Saturday at nine of the clock, till Monday morning. The Saboth
to be solemnised from Saturday nine of the clock, till Monday morning.


By reason of the displacing of the Priests before, there arose a great
contention after Edgars death, one part standing with them, so that they called
also the crown in question: another part favoring Edward, Great strife
betwixt priests and monks.
the other Egfride the lawful son: in which stir Dunstan Archbishop of
Canterbury, and Oswald of York, with diverse other Bishops, Dukes, and Lords
assembled a Council: where Dunstan coming with his cross in his hand, and
bringing Edward with him, so persuaded the Lords, that Edward was received
king, whom Dunstan hoped would become a patron of Monkery, and advance that
estate; but it fell out contrary to his expectation. For shortly after the
coronation, Duke Alferus of Mercia drove out the Monks from the Cathedral
Churches, and restored the Priests with their wives. In the end, upon this
controversy was holden a Council of Bishops, and other of the Clergy: first
at Winchester, where the greater part of nobles and commons judged the Priests
to have great wrong, and sought by all means to redress it, anno 977.
Dunstan; but he prevailed notwithstanding.

Not long after, about the fourth year he was slain with a dagger, drinking
on horseback, by the procurement of the mother of Egelred, (whom he came to
visit,) and his brother her son Egelred. He was buried not being known who
he was, at the town of Warham: and three years after was taken up by Duke
Alfere, and with honor was removed to the Minster of Shaftsbury, and there
bestowed in the place called Edwardstow. This Edward they hold for a martyr,
and say that the Queen in repentance of her fact builded after two nunneries,
one at Amesbury by Salisbury: the other at Werewell, where she kept her self
in continual repentance, all the days of her life.

Him succeeded Egelredus his brother.

Pope John the thirtinth (of whom Dunstan Archbishop of Canterbury received his
pall) is noted to be monstrously vicious: A monsterous vicious pope.
he was an whoremaster, adulterous, incestuous, libidinous: a gamester, an
extorcioner, perjured, a fighter, a murderer, cruel, and tyrannous: of his
Cardinals some he put out their eyes, from some he cut out their tounges, some
their fingers, some their noses, etc. In a general council before Otho the
first Emperor of the Germans, these objections were articulate against him:
first, that he never said his service: that in saying his Mass he did not
communicate: that he ordained Deacons in a stable: that he committed incest
with two of his sisters: that playing at dice, he called for the Devil to
help: that for money he made boys bishops: that he defloured virgins and
strangers: that of the palace of Laterane he made a stews: and that he lay
with Stephana his fathers concubine: likewise with Ramera, and with Anna, and
her niece: that he put out the eyes of bishop Benedict: that he caused houses
to be set on fire: that he broke open houses: that he drank to the Devil:
that he never crossed himself, etc. For the which causes he was deposed by
the consent of the Emperor, and the Prelates: and Pope Leo placed in his
room. But after, thorough the harlots of Rome, Pope restored by harlots.
and their great promises, he was restored again, and Leo put out. At length,
about the tenth year of this Pope, he being found without the city with
another man's wife, was so wounded of her husband, that within eight days after
he died. Pope killed in adultery.


After him, the Romans elected Pope Benedictus the fifth, without the consent of
the emperor: whervppon Otho besieged Rome, and set up Pope Leo again, the
eight of that name. Which Leo, to gratify him again, crowned Otho for Emperor,
and entitled him Augustus: also the power which Carolus magnus gave to the
Clergy and people of Rome touching the election of the B. of Rome, this Leo by
a synodall decree gave to the Emperor and his successors. The election of the
Pope given to the Emperor by the Pope.
The Emperor again restored to the Sea of Rome al such possessions, which
Carolus magnus took from the Lombards, and gave to them.

After Pope Leo had reigned a year, and three months, succeeded Pope John the
14. Against whom, for holding with the Emperor, Petrus the head captain of the
city, with two Consuls, and twelve Aldermen, and diverse other nobles,
gathering their power together, laid hands upon him in the Church of
Laterane, and clapped the pope in prison eleven months. The Pope put in prison.
Whereof the Emperor hearing, sped him to Rome, and did execution upon the
offenders, and committed Petrus to the Popes arbitrament: The cruel revenge of
the Pope.
whom he caused first to be stripped naked, then his beard being shaven, to be
hanged by the hair a whole day together, after that, to be set upon an Ass,
his face turned backward, and his hands bound under the Asses tail, to be
led through the City: that done, to be scourged with rods, and so banished
the city. And thus the holy father loved his enemy according to the rule of
the Gospel.

From this Pope, proceeded first the christening of bells, The christning of
belles.
971. Benedictus the 6, who was in like manner apprehended by Cinthius, a
captain of Rome, and cast in prison, where he was strangled, The Pope strangled.
or as some say, famished for lack of meat. Then came Pope Donus the 2, after
whom, Bonifacius the 7. was pope, who was constrained to hide himself, for
fear of the Citizens conspiracy, and seeing no place for his safety, took
the treasure of Saint Peter's Church, and so privily stole to Constantinople: in
whose steed the people set up Pope John the fifteenth. Not long after, Boniface
returning again from Constantinople, by his money procured a garrison to take
his part, by whose means Pope John was taken, his eyes put out, and so thrown
in prison, The popes eyes put out, and he famished in prison.
where he was as (some say) famished, some say he was slain by Feruchus.
Neither did Boniface live many days after, but suddenly died: whose carkas
after his death, was drawn by the feet through the streets of Rome, The dead
body of the Pope drawn through the streets.
the people shriking, and exclaiming against him, An. 276. Next Pope after him
was Benedictus the seventh, by the consent of the Emperor Otho the second: and
reigned 19.

In the time of this Pope, Hugh Cappet, the French king took Charles the right
heir to the crown, by treason of the Bishop of Laon, and when he had
imprisoned him, he also imprisoned Arnoldus, Archbishop of Rames, and placed
in his room Gilbertus, a Necromancer, who was Schoolemaister to D. Robert the
kings son; but Pope Benedictus calling a council at Rhemes, restored Arnoldus
again, and displaced Gilbertus,

After Benedictus, succeeded in ye sea of Rome, Pope John the 16. and died the
8. month of his papacy, next to whom came John the seventeenth, and after him
Gregory the fifth, ann, 995. Gregory called before Bruno, was a German borne,
and therefore more maliced the Clergy, and people of Rome. Whereupon,
Crescentius with the people and clergy, agreeing against the same Gregory, set
up pope John the 18. whereupon Gregory went to Otho the third, who upon his
complaint, came to Rome, and took in the city of Rome both Crescentius the
consul, and John the pope. Which John having his eyes put out, The popes eyes
put out.
was after deprived of his life. Crescentius the Consul was set upon a wild
horse, having his nose and ears cut of, Cruelty
and so was led through the City, his face turned to the horse tail: and
after having his Members cut off, was hanged upon a Gibbet.

Pope Gregory being thus restored to his former state, reigned four years in
his Papacy, although some say, but two years. During which time, he assembled
a Council at Rome, A Council at Rome.
wherein (to establish the Empire in his own country, by the consent, and
council of Otho,) he ordained seven Princes of Germany, to be Electors of the
Emperor: The seven Electors of the Empire.
three Bishops, and three Princes: the Palatine; the Duke of Saxony; and the
Marquis Brandenbourge: unto whom was added the king of Boheme, to give a
casting voice, if need so required. The Bishops were, of Magunce; of
Treuers; and of Colone. This constitution being first begun in the year of our
Lord, nine hundred ninety seven, Otho the Emperor, an. 1002.

Now, concerning king Egelred, or Elred, the son of Alfrith. He reigned 38.
years. Our English Cronicles report his reign to be ungracious in the
beginning; A strange reign of a king.
wretched in the middle; and hateful in the end.

There fell a variance betwixt this king, and the Bishop of Rochester, so that
he made war against him, and besieged the City till the Bishop offered him
an C.l. of gold, which he received, and so departed.

The Danes, in the time of this king, did much molest the Land: in so much,
that the King was glad to grant unto them great sums of money, for peace.
Peace bought for money of the Danes.


For the assurance of which peace, Analeffe, the Captain of the Danes, became
a Christian, and so departed the Country.

About the xi. or as some say, the ix. year of this kings reign, died Dunstan:
after whom succeeded Ethelgarus, or, as Iornalensis says, Stilgarus. After
him Elfricus, as says Guilielmus, lib. 1. de Pontif. But as Polidorus says,
Sirifius. After him, Elfricus came, but after the mind of William, lib. 1.
Siricius. But Polidorus says, Aluritius, then Elphegus, etc.

About the same time, Anno 995. Aldwinus, Bishop, translated the body of
Saint Cutbert from Chester (which first was in a Northern Island, then at
Rochester,) to Durelind, The Sea of Durham began.
or Durelin, whereupon the Bishops Sea of Duresine first began.

This king was greatly vexed with the Danes, and was feign to redeem peace
with great sums of money, yerelie, which was called Dane-gelt, Danegelt.
from x. thousand, to xl. thousand a year. An. 1000. In the xxi. of his reign,
he married with Emma, Richard D. of Normandy, which caused the king to have
great confidence in himself: and by presumption thereof, sent secret, and
straight Commissions, to the Rulers of every town in the land, that upon
Saint Brices day, at a certain hour appointed, the Danes should be suddenly
slain, Danes slain.
which was in like manner performed. But the Danes, and their king, hearing
thereof, entered again, and made great waste. In so much, that the king was
feign to take peace with them: and gave to King Swanus, thirty thousand
pounds: whereupon he returned. But the peace lasted not long, for the next
year, one named Turkillus, Turkillus, a Dane. Great vexation of ye Danes.
a Prince of the Danes, invaded again, and was feign to be pleased with
gifts. So the invasion of the Danes, and the molesting of Englishmen by them,
never ceased: wherewith the Country was brought to great misery.

After this, Swanus, the king of Danes, who had made a covenant of peace before
with the K. brake it: and hearing of the increase of his people in the land,
came, and landed in Northumberlande, and there proclaimed himself king of the
Land.

After much destruction in other places, at length he came to Canterbury,
which he besieged, and was resisted twenty days: but at last, by treason of a
Deacon, Treason of a Deacon.
called Almaricus, (whom the Bishop had preserved from death before) wan it,
and took the goods of the people, and set the town on fire: and tithed the
Monks of Saint Augustines abbey: Monks tithed by the Danes.
killing nine by cruel torment, and keeping the tenth alive, for slaves. So
they slew there of religious men, to the number of nine hundred: of other men,
women, and children, they slew above eight thousand. And finally, when they had
kept the Bishop Elphegus in straight prison, the space of eight months:
(because he would not agree to give them three thousand pounds) after many
villainies done unto him, at Greenewich they stoned him to death. Elphegus
stoned by the Danes.


The K. Egelred in the mean time fearing the end of this persecution, sent his
wife Emma, with his two sons Alphred, and Edward, to the Duke of Normandy,
with whom also he sent the bishop of London, whether also himself went: after
he had spent a great part of the Winter in the I Will of Wight, whether he was
chased of the Danes. The king chased of the Danes.
Whereof Swanus hearing, and inflamed with pride, reared great exactions upon
the people: and among other, he required a great sum of money of Saint
Edmunds lands: which the people there clayming to be free from kings
tributes, denied to pay.

For this, Swanus entered the territory of S. Edmund, and wasted the country,
and despised the holy martyr: menacing also the place of his sepulcher:
wherefore the men of ye country, fell to fasting and prayer. Fasting and prayer.
Shortly after, Swanus died suddenly, crying, and yelling, among his knights.
In fear whereof Canutus his son, that ruled after him, granted them the
freedom of al their liberty: and moreover, ditched their land with a deep
ditch, and granted to the inhabitants thereof great freedom; quitting them
from all tributes; and after builded a Church over the place of his Sepulture:
ordained there an house of monks: and endewed them with rich possessions. And
after that time, it was used, that kings of England when they were crowned,
sent their crowns for an offering to S. Edmunds shrine, The crown of England
offered to S. Edmunds shrine.
and redeemed the same afterward with a condign price.

King Egelred hearing of the death of Swanus, made provision, and returned into
England: for whose sudden coming Canutus being unprovided, fled to Sandwich,
and there cutting of the noses, and the hands of the pledges which his father
left with him, sailed into Denmark: and the next year returned again with a
great navy: and landed in the South country, and entered the country of
West Saxon, forcing the people to be sworn to him, and to give pledges. In
this season king Egelred being at London, was taken with sickness, and there
died: and was buried in the Northside of Paul's Church behind the quire, after
that he had reigned vnprosperously six and thirty years, leaving behind him
his eldest son Edmund Ironside, and Alphred and Edward, which were in
Normandy. This king with his council gave forth wholesome laws and precepts
for judges: and it is recorded, that he deposed or deprived from all
possessions, a certain judge or justice named Walgeatus, A false judge
deposed, whom the king loved. Edmund slain.
the son of one Leonet, for false judgment, and other proud doings: whom
notwithstanding he loved above all other.

After the death of Egelred, variance fell betwixt the Englishmen for the
election of the king: the one part standing for Edwin the eldest son of
Egelred; the other for Canutus, the son of Swanus the Dane. By means whereof
there were diverse battles fought between them, and in the end the Princes
themselves tried the matter hand to hand: and when they had assaied each other
a while; by the motion of Canutus, hastily, they were agreed, and kissed each
other to the comfort of both hosts: and shortly after agreed upon partition of
the land, and loved as brethren.

Soon after, a son of wicked Edericus, by the means of his father, espying
Edmund at the draught, thrust him into the fundament with a spear and slew
him, after that he had reigned two years. He left behind him two sons, Edmund,
and Edward: whom Edrick the wicked Duke, after ye death of their father, took
from their mother, not knowing yet of the death of her husband, and presented
them to King Canutus, and saluted him, hail king alone. Canutus being King
alone, sent the sons of Edmund to his brother Swanus, king of Sweueland, to
be slain: who abhorring that deed, sent them to Solomon, king of Hungary,
where Edmund being married to the K. daughter, died. Edward was married to
Agatha, daughter of his brother Henry the 4. Emperor. Canutus being
established King, A promise well performed.
and having promised the false Duke to make him higher then all the Lords of
the land, caused his head to be stricken of: and to be set upon London bridge,
and his body to be cast into the town ditch: other say, he caused him to be
bound, and thrown into the Thames. The reward of Traitors.
Likewise Canutus did disdain all those whom he knew to have dealt falsely
against Edmund, and his heirs.

In the mean time Swanus king of Denmark, brother to Canutus died, wherefore
that land fell to Canutus; who anon after sailed thither, and took the
possession, and returned into England, and married Emma, late wife of Egelred,
and by her had a son called Herdeknight, or Hardiknoutus: He assembled a
parliament at Oxford, wherein was agreed that English men, and Danes, should hold
the laws made by king Edgar, King Edgars laws.
as most good, and reasonable. Thus, the Danes being in England, began by
little and little to be christened, and Canutus went to Rome, and so returning
again to England, governed the land 20. years, leaving behind him two sons,
Harold, and Hardiknoutus, which Hardiknoutus was made K of Denmark in his
fathers time: Harold for his swiftnes, called Harefoot, (son to Canutus by
Eligna his first wife) began his reign over England, an. 1039 Emma, and took
her goods, and jewels from her. He reigned but 4. years, and the kingdom fell
to Hardeknoutus king of Denmark his brother: who when he had reigned 2.
years, Hardeknoutus dies.
being merry at Lambith, suddenly was stricken dumme, and fell down to the
ground, and within 8. days after died without issue of his body, and was the
last that reigned of the blood of the Danes. The last K. of the Danes.
For the Earls and Barons agreed, that none of that blood should after be
king, for the despite and hurt the Danes had done to ye English nation, and
sent into Normandy for the 2. brethren, Alfred and Edward, sons of king
Egelred, entending to make Alfred king of England: but Earl Godwin a
Westsaxon, who had married the daughter of Hardeknoutus, thought to slay the
two brethren coming into England, and to make Harold his son king: which
son, he had by the daughter of Hardeknoutus, ye Dane King. The messengers
that went for the brethren, found but Alfred the elder: for Edward the younger
was gone into Hungary, to speak with his cousin the outlaw, which was Edward
Ironsides son. So the traitor Godwin met with Alfride, and the Normans
attending upon him, and when they came to Guilde down, he commanded his men to
slay all that were of Alfrides company, and after that, to take Alfred, and to
lead him to the isle of Ely, where they should put out both his eyes: which
they did, Alfred cruelly murdered,
and that done, they opened his body, and took out his bowels, set a stake
into the ground, and fastened an end of his bowels thereto, and with needles of
iron they pricked his tender body, thereby causing him to go about the stake
till al his bowels were drawn out. After this treason the wicbed Duke fled
into Denmark, and lost al his lands in England, and kept him there 4. years,
and more.

The stories record, that this Canutus following much the superstition of
Achelnotus, Archb. of Canterbury, went on Pilgrimage to Rome, and there founded
an Hospital for English Pilgrims: he gave the Pope precious gifts, and
burdened the land with a yearly tribute, called Romeshotte. Romeshot.
He shrined the body of Bernius, and gave great lands to the Cathedral
Church of Winchester: he builded Saints Benets in Northfolke, which was before
an heremitage. Also S. Edmundsburie, S. Edmundsburie turned from priests to
monks.
which king Ethelstane ordained before for a college of priests, he turned to
an abbey of Monks of S. Benets order.

This king Canutus being provoked to go to Winchester by Egelnothus Archbishop
of Canterbury, resigned his regal crown to the rood, A Rood crowned king of
England.
and made the roode king over the land.

He ordained laws of his own, touching matters ecclesiastical (although at
the beginning he used Edgars laws) as touching paying for opening the earth
at funerals: he forbad also all faires and markets upon Sundays: and all
secular actions, but upon urgent necessity. A good law against adultery
He ordained to receive the communion thrice a year. That married woman that
had committed adultery, should have her ears and nose cut off. Also that no
widow should marry within xij. months after the death of her husband, else to
lose her ioynture, etc.

Thus ended the Danish kings: which Danes had vexed and wasted the land, the
time of 255. years. The land vexed by ye Danes 255. years.


Next unto Canutus the second, or Hardiknoute, succeeded Edward, the younger
son of Egelred, and Emma, who was long banished in Normandy. He came over
with a few Normans, and was crowned at Winchester, anno 943. by Edesius, the^
Archbishop of Canterbury: and not long after, he married Goditha, or Editha,
daughter of Earl Godwin: with whom he neither dealt fleshly, nor yet put her
from his bed. He governed the land with great wisdom and peace xxiiij years.

In the time of this K. came William, Duke of Normandy, with a goodly
company, to see K. Edward: to whom (it is said) Edw. promised (if he died
without issue) to leave the Crown. In this K. reign lived Marianus Scotus, M.
Scotus.
the story writer.

About the 13. year of this kings reign, he sent Aldred bishop of Worceter,
to the Emperor Henricus the fourth, praying him that he would send to the king
of Hungary, that his coosin Edward, son of Edmund Ironside, might come into
England, for so much as he intended to make him king after him (who was called
Edward outlaw). This was fulfilled, and he came into England with his wife
Agatha, and with his children Edgar Adeling, Margaret, and Christina: but the
year after his return he died at London, and was buried at Westminster, or as
Iornalensis says, at Paul's church in London. After whose decease the king
received Edgar Adeling his son as his own child, thinking to make him his
heir; but fearing the mutabilitie of the Englishmen, and the pride, and malice
of Harold the son of Godwin, directed Ambassadors to William, Duke of
Normandy, William Duke of Normandy appointed heir of the crown.
his kinseman, assigning him to be lawful heir after him. After the death of
Godwin, his son Harold grew in great favor with the king. He sailed into
Flaunders, and in the course of his sailing, he was driven by force of weather
into the province of Pomilitie, where he was taken prisoner, and sent to
William, Duke of Normandy: to whom he was made to swear, that he in time
following, should marry his daughter, and that after the death of King Edward,
Harold swears to Duke William.
he should keep the land of England to his behoof, according to the mind and
will of Edward: (after some Writers) and so to live in honor next to him, in
the Realm. Thus he returned home, and showed to the king what he had done.
Wherewith he was very well contented.

Leofricuss Earl of Chester, and of Mercia, who was also very faithful to
king Edward, with his wife Godina, builded the Abbey of Couentree, The Abbey of
Couentrie.
and endued the same with great lands and riches.

King Edward (after he had reigned three and twenty years, and seven
months) died; K. Edw. dies.
and was buried in the Monastery of Westminster, which he had greatly
augmented, and repaired.

Diverse laws were before in diverse Countries of this land used: as, the Law
first of Danwallo, Molunicius, with the laws of Mercia, called Mercinelega,
then the laws of West Saxon kings: as, of Iue, Offa, Alfrede, etc. which was
called Westsaxonilega. The third were the laws of Canutus, and of Danes,
called Danelega. Of al these laws, K. Edward compiled one universal, and
common law, K. Edward begins the common law.
for all ye people through his land, which were called King Edwards Laws, so
just, and serving the public weal of all Estates, that the people did long
after rebel against their heads, to have the same laws again, being taken
from them, but could not obtain them. For though Duke William did swear to
the maintenance of them, yet he forsware himself: and abrogating them, brought
in much worse, and more obscure: yet was he compelled (through the clamor of
the people) to take some of Edwards Laws, The law at this day. Duke W.
contrary to his oath, overthrows ye laws.
but omitted ye most part, contrary to his oath at his coronation, placing ye
most of his own laws, in his own Language, to serve his purpose: and so they
remain to this day.

Harold, the second son of Earl Godwin, took on him (through force and
might) to succeed Edward: notwithstanding his oath to Duke William of
Normandy, an. 1066. Harold refused to perform. Whereupon, D. William prepared
to invade: and sent to Rome, to Pope Alexander, touching his title, and voyage
into England. The Pope confirms the same: and sent unto him a Banner; willing
him to bear it in the ship, wherein he him self should sail. So he took
shipping at the haven of saint Valeria, and landed at Hastings in Sussex. From
whence he sent a monk to Harold, and offered him three conditions. Conditions
of peace offered by D. Will. to Harold.
1 Either to render unto him possession of the land, and so to take it again
of him under tribute, reigning under him.

2 Or else to stand to the Popes arbitrament between them.

3 Or else to defend his quarrel in his own person, against the Duke, without
any further bloodshed.

All which conditions he refused, and joining battayll with the Normans, was
shot into the left eye with an arrowe, and died, after he had reigned ix.
months: and so was he the last that reigned of the Saxons. Which (reckoning
from Hengistus first reign in Kent) was the space of 591. years. And if it be
reckoned from the years of the West Saxons, Saxons end after 591. or 560.
years.
then it endured the space of 565. years.

Now, after Elfegus, whom the Danes stoned at Greenwich, Liningus succeeded in
the Sea of Canterbury: Archb of Canterbury.
and after him Egelnothus: then Robertus, a Norman: after who^, Stigandus (as
they say) invaded the Sea by Simonie, being both Archbishop of Canterbury,
bishop of Winchester, and Abbotte of another place. Where he continued a long
space, till Duke William cast him into prison, and there kept him, placing in
his room Lanfrancus, a Lombard borne.

Siluester the second succeeded after Gregory the fifth, in the Sea of Rome.
This Siluester was a Sorcerer, and compacted with the devil to be made Pope.
He sat four years, one month, and eight days.

Siiuester couenanteth with the devil for the popedom.
He upon a certain time demanded of the devil an answer, how long he should
enjoy the Popedom: to who^ he answered again: until thou say mass at
Jerusalem, thou shall live. At length, the fourth year of his Popedom, saying
Mass in the Lent time, at the temple of the holy cross, being then called
Jerusalem, there he knew the time was come that he must die: whereupon (being
stricken with repentance) he confessed his fault before the people: desiring
them to cut his body in pieces (which he before had vowed to the devil:
Siluester is deceived by the devil.
) and so being hewe^ in pieces, they would lay it on a cart, and bury it
there, where the horses would stay of their own accord. So the horses stayed
at the church of Lateran, and there he was buried, whereas commonly by the
rattling of his bones within the tomb, The rattling of Syluesters bones.
is portended the death of Popes, as the common report goes. Johannes Stellas.

After Siluester succeeded Johannes 19. by whom was brought in the feast of
Alsoules, The feast of Alsoules.
as Volaterane says, Anno 1004. Odilo abbot of Cluniake, to be celebrated next
to the feast of Alsaints.

Not long after came Johannes 20. and Sergius the 4. after whom succeeded
Benedictus the eight, then John 21. who (being promoted by art Magic,
through Theophilact his Nephew, Gratianus, Brazutus, and other sorcerors)
brought in first the fast of the eeuen of S. John Baptist, and and S. Laurence:
after him Benedictus the 9. by magic also, who resisting the Emperor,
Henricus the 3. son to Conradus, The Popedom sold.
and placing in his room Petrus the king of Hungary, with this verse: Petra
dedit Romam. Petra dedit, etc
Petro tibi Papa coronam, after for fear of Henricus, prevailing in battle,
he was feign to sell his seat to his successor Gratianus, called Gregorius 6.
for 1500. pounds. At which time, were three Popes together in Rome, one raging
against another. Benedictus 9. Siluester 3. Gregorius 6. Three Popes together.
For the which cause Henricus, surnamed Niger the Emperor, coming to Rome,
displaced these 3. monsters at one time, placing for them Clemens the 2. and
thereupon enacted, that no Pope thencefoorth, should be chosen without
confirmation of the Emperor. No P. without the Emperor.
The Romans also made an oath to the Emperor, that they would not intermeddle
in the election of the Bishops, further then the Emperors assent should agree
withal. But within ix. months after, they forgot their oath, and poisoned the
B. Which fact some impute to Steven his successor, called Damasus the second:
some to Brazutus, who (as histories record) wtin xiij. years, poisoned 6.
popes: One poysoneth six popes.
Cleme^s ye second; Damasus 2; Leo 9; Victor 2; Steph. 9; Nicolaus 2.

Damasus entered, neither by consent of the people, nor election of the Emperor,
but by plain inuasio^: and wtin 23. days being poisoned An. 1049. Bruno an
Almaigne, and Bishop of Collen, afterward named Leo the ninth, who coming from
the Emperor to Rome in his Pontificalibus, was met of the Abbot of Cluniake,
and Hildebrande a monk, that al to rated him, because he would take his
authority of the Emperor rather then of the Clergy; and councelled him to
lay down that apparel, and to enter in with his own habit, till he had his
election by them: which he did, confessing his fault, and was called Leo the
ninth. By him Hildebrand Hildebrand.
was made a Cardinal, and put in great authority.

Under this Pope, were two councels, one kept at Vercellis, A council at
Vercellis. A council at Laterane.
where the doctrine of Berengarius, touching the real presence, was first
condemned, although Berengarius as yet recanted not; but afterward, in ye
council of Laterane, under Nicholas 2. Anno 1060. Priests may not marry.
and that no lay man should give benefice or any spiritual promotion.

This Leo being at Worms with the Emperor on Christmas day, did excommunicate
the subdeacon, because in reading the Epistle he did it not in the Roman tune,
he being there present. The Archbishop moved therewith, departed from the
Altar (being at mass) saying, The pope, and Archb. fall out at mass.
he would not proceed in his service, unless his Subdeacon were restored.
Whereupon, the Pope commanded him to be released, and so they went forward in
their service.

Brazutus the poysoner.
After the death of Leo (whom Brazutus poisoned the first year of his Popedom)
Theophilactus did strive to be pope, But Hildebrande (to defeat him) went to
the Emperor, that assigned another, a German, Victor 2. Who having a Council
at Florence, deprived many bishops for Simony, and fornication: that is for
being married. In the second year of his popedom, he was also poisoned by
Brazutus, thorough the procurement of Hildebrand and his Master.

After him succeeded Stephen the 9. by the election of the Clergy of Rome,
contrary to their oath made to the Emperor. By this Stephen the Church of
Millain was first brought under the subjection of the Romish Church: and shamed
not to accuse the Emperor of heresy, for minishing the authority of the
Roman sea: and at that time it was counted simonie, to enjoy any spiritual
living at a temporal man's hand. Which Stephen hearing to reign in diverse
churches, especially of Burgundy and Italy, sent forth the Cardinal
Hildebrand to reform the matter, he himself also earnest therein. In the
mean while Stephanus tasting of Brazutus cup, fell sick: whereof Hildebrand
hearing, hasted to Rome, and assembling the orders of the Clergy together,
made them swear, that they should admit none bishop, but such as should be by
the consent of all. This done, Hildebrand takes his journey to Florence,
belike to fetch the B. of Florence to enstall him: the clergy having sworn
unto him, that none should be chosen B. before his return: but the people in
his absence, elected one of their own city called Benedictus the 10. Whereof
Hildebrand hearing, was greatly offended, and returning without Gerardus B. of
Florence, caused the clergy to proceed to a new election: whereupon (they being
afraid to do it at Rome) went to Seen, and there elected Gerardus bishop of
Florence, named Nicolaus 2. who holding a council at Sutriu^, through the
help of duke Godfride and Gilbert, and other bishops in Italy, deposed the
other Pope. Benedictus understanding himself to be set against by Hildebra^d,
vnpoped himself, and went and dwelt at Velitras.

Nicholas being thus set up against the mind of the Emperor, or consent of the
people of Rome, after his fellow Pope was driven away, brake up the Synod of
Sutrium, and came to Rome, where he assembled another Council called
Lateranum: in which first was set forth the terrible sentence of
Excommunication, The terrible sentence of excommunication.
mentioned in the decrees, and beginning In nomine Domini nostri, etc. The
effect of the Council was, that a few Cardinals, and certain Catholic
persons might choose the Pope without the Emperor. The Pope to be elected only
by ye cardinal.
Secondly, against these that creep into the seat of Peter by simonie,
without consent of the Cardinals. In the same Council also Berengarius
Andeuangensis, Berengarius recanteth.
an Archdeacon, was driven to recant his doctrine against the real presence.
In the same Council was also hatched the new found term of
transubstantiation. Transubstantiation hatched.


This Pope made Robert Guichard (displacing the right heir) Duke of Apulia,
Calabria, Sycilia, and Captain general of Saint Peter's lands: that through
his force he might subdue those that rebelled against him. At length he met
with Brazutus cup, after he had set three years and an half, Anno 1062.

At the beginning of this Nicholas, or somewhat before, An. 1057. was Henricus
4. made Emperor, after Henricus the third, and reigned fifty years.

In the reign of this Nicholas, An. 1060. Alredus bishop of Worcester, after
the decease of Knisius his predecessor should be made archbishop of York: who
coming to Rome with Toctius Earl of Northumberland, for his pall, was
deprived: till the Pope being threatened by Toctius The Pope threatened by
Toctius.
with the loss of S. Peter's tribute, was content to send home Aldredus with
his pall.

After the death of Nicholas, the Lombards being oppressed before of him,
desired to have a Bishop of their company, and so elected the bishop Parmen
called Cadolus, to be Pope with the Emp. license, to whom they sent concerning
the same. Hildebra^dus hearing this sets up another, Anselmus, afterward
called Alexander the 2. so that the two popes met, and fought together, Two
Popes fight.
Alexander getting the upper hand. The Emp. hearing of this, sent his
Ambassador, Otho Archb. of Collen to Rome: who did chide the pope, for taking
so upon him without the emperors leave. Against who^, Hilbrand on the other
side, very stoutly behaved himself in the maintenance of the clergy: so that
Otho was content to be persuaded: only requiring in the Emperors name, a
counsel to be had to decide the matter, whereat the Emperor should be present
himself, and so he was. In which Council, kept at Mantua, Alexander was
declared Pope, and the other had his pardon granted him. In this Council, it
was concluded, that priests should have no wives, and such as had Concubines,
to say no mass: priests children not to be secluded from holy orders: no
benefices to be sold for money; Alleluia to be suspended out of the Church in
time of Lent, etc. It was also decreed, that no spiritual man should enter into
any Church by a secular man, and that the pope should be elected only by the
Cardinals. Benno Cardinalis writes, that Alexander being at mass, (having
perceived the frauds of Hildebrand as he was preaching) told him he would not
sit in that seat without the license of the Emperor. Whereupon after mass,
Hildebrand by force had him into a chamber, and pummelled the pope with his
fistes: The pope pummeled by Hildebrand.
rating him, for that he would seek favor of the Emperor. Thus he was kept
in custody, and stinted at xx. d. a day: The P. stinted at xx. pence a day.
Hildebrand in the mean time encroching to himself the treasure of the
Church. Hildebrand encrocheth the Church treasure.


The names and order of the Archbishops of Canterbury, from the time of king
Egbert, to William the Conqueror.
18 ETheredus 18. 19. Pleimundus 29.20. Athelmus 12. 21. Vlfelmus 13.22. Odo
20. 23. Elfius or Elfinus. 1. 24. Dunstane. 20. Polydorus makes Dunstane the
23.25, Ethelgarus, 1.26. Elfricus, 11.27. Siricius 5.28. Elphegus, 6. 29.
Liuingus, 7. 30. Egelnodus 17.31. Edsius, 11. 32. Robertus 2.33, Stigandus
17.34. Lanfrancus 19.

The Printer to the Reader.
NOte gentle Read, that whereas (by means our written copy had not observed
the same) we unawares have omitted certain distinctions, that we purposed to
have made between each of the 3. parts, or books of this former volume
abridged, according as in the first volume of acts and monuments, at large is
distinguished: thou shall understand, that the first of those former books
conteyneth the 300. years next after Christ, until Lucius his days. The 2.
book begins page 68. and contains the next 300. years; viz. from Lucius
to king Egbert. The 3. must be reckoned from page 85. containing the next 300.
years, viz. to the time of William the Conqueror: which here follows.

The fourth book.
ANno 1067. William Conqueror was crowned king, W. Conqueror
by the hands of Aldredus, Bishop of York, for so much as Stigandus,
Archbishop of Canterbury was the^ absent) on Christmas day.

William exercised great cruelty Cruelty of the Conqueror.
upon the English Nation, and abrogated Edwards laws, and established his own,
for his profit. He placed his people in all offices, Spiritual and Te^porall.
And such was the reproach of English men, An Englishma^ a name of reproach.
that it was a name of shame. And thus now the fifth time, the land was by
diverse Nations afflicted. First, by the Romans, in ye time of Julius Caesar.
Then, by Scots, and Pictes. After, England. five times ouerrun.
by Saxons, and then by Danes, which continued from ye reign of Ethelwolfe,
230. years, till K. Edward. And fifthly, by the Normans.

In the fourth year of K. William, between Easter and Whitsontide, was held a
Council at Winchester, of the Clergy of England: In which were present, two
Cardinals, sent from pope Alexander the second, Peter and John. In that
Council, (the king being present) were deposed many Prelates of the English
Nation, without any evident cause, that the kings Normans might be placed.
Normans placed. Srigandus Archbishop deposed.
Among whom, Stigandus the Archbishop was put down for three causes. The
first. for that he had wrongfullie holden the bishopric, while Robert the
Archbishop was living. The second, for that he received the Pall of Benedict,
who was deposed. The third, for that he occupied the Pall without lawful
authority of the Court of Rome.

So Stigandus was deposed, and kept in Winchester, as a prisoner during his
life.

At the same time was preferred to the Archbishopric of York, Thomas, a
Norman, and Chanon of Bayon: at which time also, Lanfrancus Abbot of
Cadomonencie, a Lombard, and Italian borne, was sent for, and made Archbishop
of Canterbury. Lanfra^k, archbishop of Canterbury. Contention of primacie.
Betwixt him and the Archb. of York there grew great contention for the oath
of obedience. But in the end, through the king, Thomas was contented to
subscribe obedience to the other. After, the Archb. went to Rome for their
Palles, with Remigius B. of Dorcester: without which no Archb. nor B. could be
confirmed. And to Lanf. Alexander (for ye estimation of his learning) gave ij.
palles: 2. palles given to Lanfrank.
one of honor, the other of love, he obtained also for the other ij. their
confirmation. Now again began the controversy of Primacie to be renewed before
the P. who sent the^ home to end ye matter, and to have it determined. So
returned they to England an. 1070 6. year of this W. the matter was brought
before the K. and clergy at Windsor: where (after much debating on both sides)
Th. gave over: condiscending, that the first of his province should begin at
Humber. Whereupon it was decreed, that York for that time should be subject to
Cant. York subject to Cant.
in matters appertaining to the Church. So that wheresoever within England,
Canterbury would hold his Council, the Bishops of York should resort thither,
with their bishops, and be obedient to his decrees Canonical. Provided
moreover, yt when the Archb. of Canterbury should decease, York should depart
to Dover, there to consecrate (with other) the B. that should be elect: and if
York should decease, his successor should resort to Canterbury, or else where
the Bishop of Cant. should appoint, there to receive his co^secratio^, making
his profession there, with an oath of canonical obedience.

In the days of this Lanfrancus, Archb. of Canterbury, anno 1076. Bishops
seats altered from from towns to great cities.
as, of Sealesey, to Chichester: out of Cornwall, to Exceter: from Wells, to
Bath: from Shireburne to Salisburie, from Dorcester to Lincoln, from Lichfield
to Chester. Which bishoprike of Chester, Robert then B. reduced from Chester to
Couentrie. Likely it is also, that the sea of the archbishop was translated
from Dover to Canterbury, or that Canterbury in old time had the name of
Dorobernia: as does by diverse testimonies appear.

In the 9. year of this kings reign, by ye procurement of Lanfrancus, was a
council holden at London: where among other things it was first enacted,
Ecclesiastical decrees.
yt the Archb. of York should sit on the right hand, and the B. of London on
the left, or in ye absence of York, London on the right hand, and Winchester
on the left hand of the archbishop in council. 2. That bishops should
translate their seas from villages to cities. 3. That monks should have
nothing in proper, and if they had died vnco^fessed, they should not be buried
in churchyard. 4. That no Clarke or Monk of another Dioces should be admitted
to orders, or retained without letters co^mendatorie. 5. That none should
speak in the Council except Bishops, and Abbots, without the leave of the
Archmetropolitane. 6. That none should marie within ye seventh degree with any
of his own kindred, or of his wives departed. 8. That no sorcerie should be
used in the Church. 9. That none of ye clergy should be present at the
judgment of any man's death, or dismembring: neither should be any fautor of
the said iudicants.

In the days of this Lanfrancus, Waltelmus B. of Winto^, had placed about
forty Canons in sted of Monks, so that the part of Priests was taken again
against Monks. Priests yet against Monks.
But it held not: Lanfrancus opposing himself against the same. He wrote a
book against Berengarius called Opus scintillaru^. His own church of
Canterbury he pulled down, and builded a new. He sat nineteen years, and
being not so favored of William Rufus, he died for sorrow. Lanfranke dies for
sorrow.


After Pope Alexander followed Pope Hildebrand, surnamed Gregory the 7. an.
1074. Pope Hildebrand a sorcerer.
and first began to spurn against the Emperors, who before time confirmed the
Popes and called Councels: but this Pope trusting upon the Normans, that then
ruffled in Apulia, Calabria, and Campania, trusting also upon the power of
Machtilda a stout woman there about Rome, and partly bearing himself bold for
the discord that then was among the Germans: Hildebrand contemns the
Emperor. Both the swords. Pope can not err.
first contemned the authority of the Emp. and vanted he had both swords
committed unto him of Christ. Whereupon he challenged the dominion both of the
East and West churches, and boasted he could not err: and that he had received
of Christ and Peter, power to bind and loose: he decreed against married
priests, whose wives in these days were called Presbiteresse: Presbiteresse.
forbidding men to salute them, to talk with them, or to keep company with
them: and to this end among others he wrote letters to Otho B. of Constance
concerning this matter, who resisted ye pope herein. The counsel of Hildebrand
against married priests was holde^ at Rome. Council against marriage of priests
The clergy of France also withstood it, alleging that decree to be against
Gods laws, The decree against marriage resisted.
and the law of nature.

The Germain ministers did also mightily withstand the same, so yt the archb.
of Mentz in a council urging ye matter with the popes legate called Curiensis,
hardly escaped with their lives, and so the council brake up. By this schism,
A schism.
it followed yt the churches after yt, in choosing their priests, would not send
them to the bishops to be confirmed; but did elect the^ within themselves, and
so put them in their office without all knowledge of ye bishops: who were
determined to admit no priests, but such as were to take an oath of perpetual
singlenes, and so first came up the profession of single priesthood.

Hildebrand a villainous pope.
This Hildebrand was a most wicked, and reprobate monster; a sorcerer, a
necromancer, an old companion of Siluester, Theophilactus, and Laurentius
coniurers, Benno cardinal of Rome sets out many of his villainous acts.
As Soon as pope Alexander was dead, who died somewhat before night, the same
day (contrary to the canons) he was chosen pope of the Laymen; but the
Cardinals subscribed not to his election. For by the Canons, under pain of
cursing, none should be chosen under 3. days after ye burial of his
predecess. None chosen Pope under 3. days after his predecessors burial.
He also put the Cardinals from his council, and society; so that none could
bear witness of his life, faith, and doctrine: whereas the Canons command, that
in every place where the Pope is, should be with him 3. Cardinals, being
priests, and 2. deacons, because of his ecclesiastical testimony. He
excommunicated the Emperor, The Pope exco^municateth the Emperor.
being in no synod solemnly accused before: whereto none of the cardinals
would subscribe. As Soon as he had rose out of his papal seat, to excommunicate
the Emperor, it (being made a little before with big timber) suddenly rent
and shiuered in pieces. He appointed one to lay great stones over the Church
roof of S. Mary's in ye mount Auentine, whether the Emperor was wont to go to
prayer: to the end, by throwing the^ down the vault, he might slay ye Emperor
at his prayers. The pope practices to kill the Emperor while he prays.
Which while the hireling was doing, by removing a stone, it broke the plank
whereon it lay, and the hireling standing thereon, both fell down together: and
so he was with the same stone dashed in pieces. Also enquiring of the Sacrament
of the altar an answer, (as an oracle against ye Emperor:) because it would
give no answer, Hildebrand asks counsel of the host, and casts it in the
fire, because it would not answer.
he threw it into the fire, and burned it, contrary to the persuasion of the
Cardinals. His villainies were infinite: in so much that diverse of the colleges
of the Church of Rome refused to communicate with him. He persuaded the
Emperor to depose those Bishops that came in by Simony: which he did without
delay, and after Hildebrand restored the same again, to procure their
friendships unto himself, and to make the Emperor odious unto them: and after
much vexing of him, caused him by force and violence to accuse himself at
Canusium, in his presence, who had excommunicated him. The Emperor coming on
his bare feet, The Emperor barefoot to the Pope.
clothed in thin garments in the sharp Winter, was there three days made a
spectacle to the world, and a jest to Hildebrand. Too long it were to declare
all the detestable acts of this Hildebrand.

About what time Hildebrand was made Pope, Henricus 4. the Emperor, was
encombred with wars in Germany, by Otho duke of Saxons. Now upon ye point
hereof, Hildebr. cursed al those, that being lay me^, gave any spiritual
promotio^s, or received any at their hands: her by thinking to wring al
authority from temporal men, and to take it to the spiritualty: and sent for
the Emperor, now busy in wars to appear at the Council of Laterane in Rome.
Where the emperor could not (being busy in his wars) appear. The Pope
threatens he would excommunicate him, A popish interpretation of symony.
and except he would abjure simonie, as they called it, and do penance, (he
called symonie, giving and taking spiritual livings at lay men's hands) he would
also depose him from his regal dignity. The Emp. being moved with the arrogance
of the Pope, called a council at Worms, in which all the Bish. of the whole
empire of Germany concluded upon the deposing of Hildebra^d: A terrible pope
and sent Roulandus, a priest of Parmen with the sentence, who there denounced
the same. Hildebrand tickled with the sentence, first condemns it in his
Council of Laterane, with excommunication. Secondly, depriueth Sigfridus
archbishop of Mentz, of all his dignities: with all the prelates and priests,
that took the Emperors part. Thirdly, he accuses Henricus the Emperor
himself, depriving him of his kingdom, and regal possession, and releaseth
his subjects of their oath made unto him. The Emp. fain to yield to the Pope.
The Princes of Germany took this occasion to rebel again, and concluded to
elect another Emperor, and to fall from Henry, unless the Pope would come
into Germany, and he there content to submit himself, and so obtain his
pardon. Whereto the Emp. seeing no other way, with an oath agreed: whereupon, the
Bishop of Triers was sent Ambassador to entreat the Pope to come into
Germany, whereto he yielded: and in his way when he came to Vercellos, the
bishop of that city, bearing a grudge to the Emperor, persuaded the pope, that
he was coming against him with a mighty power: willing him to provide for
himself, whereupon the pope being afraid returned to Canusium or Canusus, a
city subject to Matilda a Countess in Italy. Whereof the Emperor
understanding, incontinent coming out of Spires with his wife and his young
son, in the deep and sharp winter, resorted to Canusus without any company,
for they were al afraid of the popes curse: and laying apart his regal
ornaments, came barefooted, with his wife and child to the gate of Canusus: The
Emperor brought under the Popes foot.
where he from morning to night all the day fasting, most humbly desired
absolution, craving to be let in to the speech of the Pope: which could not be
granted of three days. At last it was answered, that the Pope had no leisure
to speak with him: yet notwithstanding, through his importunate suit, and
entreaty of Matilda, the Popes paramour, and of Aleranus Earl of Sebaudia,
and the Abbot of Cluniacke: it was granted, that he should be admitted to the
Popes speech. On the fourth day, being let in, for token of true repentance, he
yielded to the Popes hands, his crown, and all his imperial ornaments, The
Emp. yeldeth his crown to the Pope.
and confessed himself unworthy of the empire, if ever he do so again
against the Pope: and humbly required absolution. The pope answered, he would
not release him, but upon conditions: First, that he shall be content to stand
to his arbitreme^t in the Couecel, and to take such penance as he should
appoint him: and that he should be ready to appear in such place, and time,
as the P. should appoint him.

Moreover, being content to take the P. as Judge, should answer in the said
Council, to all accusations laid against him: and that he should never seek
any revenge hereafter. Also, though he were quit, and cleared therein, should
stand to the P. mind, whether to have his kingdom restored, or to lose it.
Hard conditions.
Finally, that before the trial of his cause, he should use no ornaments of
his crown or empire: nor to govern, or exact any oath of his subjects. These
things being promised of the Emperor by oath. He only released him of
excommunication, and afterward, fearing least the Emperor should hereafter,
Henricus 4. deposed.
when he had obtained peace among his people make revenge, they concluded to
derive the Empire to Rodolphus a great state of Germany: and sent into France
to declare the Emperor to be rightly excommunicated, and to require the
consents of the French men, to elect Rodolphus: to whom the pope sent a crown
with this sentence, The Rock gave this crown to Peter, Petra dedit Petro.
and Peter gives it to Rodolph: and gave in commandment to the archbishop of
Mentz, and Collen, to elect this Rodolphus for Emperor. Which news being
brought to Henricus the Emperor, he mustereth his men to defend his right: and
trusting upon the league between him and the Pope, sends to Rome, requiring
him to proceed with his sentence against Rodolphus, for the rebellious invasion
of his empire. The pope refused to denounce Rodolphus: Rodolph. chose^ emperor.
and after they had tried twice with the sword, and much bloodshed, he sends
down a commission by Otho Archbishop of Treuers, Bernardus deacon, and
Bernardus Abbot of Massilia, to whom he gave charge to call a Council in
Germany, and there to define whether should be Emperor, promising that he
would ratify him whom they should choose: but the Emperor would not permit
the Legates to hold any council in Germany, except they would first deprive
Rodolphus of his kingdom. Whereupon, the Legates returned again without their
purpose: which moved the Pope once again to thunder out his excommunication
against him: thinking thereby, to further Rodolphus.

Also, he enditeth, and deposes Gimbertus, Archb. of Rauenna, for taking the
Emp. part: and sends to Rauenna an other Archb. with full authority. Upon
this, they fought again: where Rodolphus, Rod. wounded to death.
(having his deaths wound,) was carried to Hyperbolis, where he commanded the
Bishops and chief doers of his conspiracy to be brought unto him: who (when
they came) he lifted up his right hand, in which he had taken his deadly wou^d,
and said: this is the hand that gave the oath, and Sacrament to Henricus my
Prince, and which (through your instigation) has so often fought against him in
vain. Now go, and perform your first oath to your K. for I must go to my
fathers: and so died.

After this, the Emperor having subdued his enemy, called a Council of diverse
Bishops: of Italy, Lombardie, and Germany, at Bryxia, an. 1083. Crimes
against the P.
as, to be an usurper; perjured; a Negromancer; a sorcerer; and sower of
discord; etc. When, notwithstanding he swore with others, in the the time of
his father, Henricus the third, that during his time, and his sons, they
would suffer none to aspire, (nor they themselves) to the seat of Papacy,
without the consent of the Emperors. Wherefore, that Council condemned this
Gregory, to be deposed: and sent the tenor to Rome, and elected Gimbertus,
Archbishop of Rauenna, named Clemens the third, whom the Emperor by force of
arms placed in that Sea. Not long after this, Hildebrand died in exile,
Hildebrand deposed, dies in banishment.
and as Antoninus writes, lying on his death bed, he bewailed his faults, and
sent a Cardinal to ye Emp. desiring forgeuenes, absoluing also him and his
part-takers, quick, and dead, from the sentence of excommunication.

About the death of Pope Hildebrand, or not long after, followed the death of
K. William Conqueror, W. Conqueror dies.
anno 1090. Wolstane of Worcester, who being commanded of the K. and Lanfrank,
to resign up his staff, partly for inhabilitie, partly for lack of the French
tongue: refused otherwise to resign it, but only to him that gave it: and so
went to the tomb of K. Edw. where he thought to resign it, but was permitted
to enjoy it still: so likewise, there was almost no Englishma^, that bare office
of honor or rule. In so much, that it was half a shame at that time, to be
called an Englishman. Yet was he somewhat favorable to the City of London, and
granted them the first charter that ever they had, written in the Saxon
tongue, and sealed with green wax. He was much given to maintain peace in his
land: The conqueror given to make peace in his land.
so that a maiden loded with gold, might have traueled safely through the same.
He builded two monasteries, one, at Batel in Sussex, where he wan the field
against Harold: and another at Barmonseie, in the Country of Normandy. There
were slain on ye side of Harold, Great slaughter of Englishmen.
66634. Englismen. Of the co^querors side, 6013. in the battle fought betwixt
the^.

The first B. of Salisburie The first B. of Salisburie.
was Hermannus, a Normand, who first began the new church, and minster there.
After who^ succeeded Osmundus, who finished the work, and replenished the house
with great living, and much good singing. This Osmundus began the ordinary
first, which was called secundu^ vsum Saru^, Secundum vsum Sarum.
an. 1076. Thurstanus the Abbot, and his Covent, in the days of W. Conqueror,
who^ he had brought with him out of Normandy, from the Abbey of Cadonius and
placed him Abbot of Glasse^b. The cause of this contention was, for ye Thurst.
the abbot, and his covent, conte^ning their quire service, then called the use
of S. Gregory, compelled his monks to the use of one W. a monk of Fisca^, in
Normandy: The use of Gregory. The Ab kills his monks.
so it grew from word to blows and from blows to armor: so yt the abbot
slew ij. monks at the steps of the altar, etc. This matter being brought
before the K. the Abbot was sent again to Cadonius, and the monks by
commandment of the K. scattered in far countries. Thus by occasion hereof,
Osmund. B. of Salis. devised ye ordinary, that was called the use of Saru^,
and afterward was received in a manner, throughout England, Ireland, and Wales.

W. left after his death by his wife Mawd, 3. sons, Robert Courtesey, to whom
he gave the duchy of Normandy, William Rufus his 2. son, to whom he gave ye
kingdom of England, and Henry the 3. son, to whom he gave his treasure.

About this time there was a certain B. dwelling betwixt Collen and Me^tz, who
having store in time of famine, and would not relieve the poor, was eaten with
mise, A bishop eaten with mise. Rats tower.
though he builded in ye mids of Rhine a tower to keep himself in against
the^, It is called at this day of the duchmen Rats tower.

An. 1088. W. Rufus the second son began his reign, and reigned 13. years,
being crowned at Westminster. by Lanfra^cus.

Robert Courtsey hearing how Rufus had taken upon him the kingdom, William
Rufus.
made preparation of war against his brother, but was by him appeased without
fight. This variance betwixt the two brethren, caused dissension among the
Norma^ B. and Lords, both in England and Normandy, so that almost al ye Norma^
B. rebelled against their K. except Lanfrancus and Wolstan B. of Worcester an
English man.

In the 3. year of Rufus, died Lancfrancus, Lancfranke dies.
the Archb. after whose decease, the Sea stood empty 4. years.

Remigius bishop of Dorceter, removed his sea from thence to Lincoln, and
builded the minster there. By him also was founded the monastery of Staue.

Herbert Losinga, at this time remoouing his sea from Thetford to Norwich,
there erected ye cathedral church, with the Cloister: where he furnished the
Monks with sufficient rents, and livings of his own charge besides his
Bishops lands. Nothing from the king, but for money.
He bought his bishopric of ye K. for money (as nothing came from him but for
money,) whereupon, repenting him of simonie, he went to Rome, and resigned it
to the Popes hands, of whom he received it presently again. This Herbert was
the son of an Abbot, called Robert.

After Pope Hildebrand succeeded Victor 3. set up by Matilda, and the Duke of
Normandy. Victor 3. pope.
With the faction of Hild. This Victor also showed himself stout against the
emperor: and so all his Successors, according to the example of Hildebrand:
Victor poisoned in his chalice.
he sat but one year and an half; as they say, being poisoned in his chalice.
In the time of Victor began the order of the Monks of the Charterhouse, by
means of one Hugo B. of Grationople, Charterhouse monks.
and of Bruno bishop of Collen

Next to Victor sat Vrbanus 2. Vrbanus pope.
by whom the acts of Hildebrand were confirmed, and new decrees enacted against

In Henricus the Emperor.

this time were two Popes at Rome: Two popes at once.
Vrbanus, and Clemens the third, whom the Emperor set up.

Under Pope Vrbane, came in the white monks of Cistercian order, White mo^ks.
by one Stephen Harding a monk of Schirborne an Englishman: by whom this order
had beginning in the wilderness of Cistery, within the Province of Burgonie,
ann. 1098. Especke, that builded an Abbey of the same order, call- Merinale. In
this order, the Monks did live by the labor of their hands: they paid no
tithes, nor offerings: they ware no furr, nor living: they ware red shoes,
their cowles white, and coat black: all shorn save a little circle: they eat
no flesh, but only in their journey.

This Vrbanus had diverse councels: one at Rome, where he excommunicated al such
lay persons as gave inuesture of any ecclesiastical benefice: and al such of
the clergy, as abiected themselves to be underlings, to Lay persons for
benefices.

Another Council he held at Claremount in France: In which, was agreed the
voyage against the Saracens, for recovery of the holy Land: where thirty
thousand men being persuaded by the Popes Oration, and taking upon them the
sign of the Cross for their cognizance, made preparation for the voyage:
whose Captains were, Godwine Duke of Lorraine, with his two Brethren, Eustace,
and Baldwine, Voyage against the Saracens.
the Bishop of Padue, Bohemund, the D. of Puell: and his neuew Tancredus,
Raymund Earl of Saint Egidius, Robert Earl of Flaunders, and Hugh Le grand
brother to Philip the French king. To whom also was joined Robert Corthoise
duke of Normandy, and diverse mo, with one Peter an Heremite, Peter the
Heremite.
who complaining of the misery that the Christians sustained there, was the
chief cause of that voyage, an. 1096. Jerusalem won from the Saracens.
and besieged Jerusalem, and wan it of the Infidels in the 39. day of the
siege: and Godfry captain of the Christian army, was proclaimed first king of
Jerusalem.

About this time the K. of England favored not much the church of Rome,
Prohibition of going to Rome
because of their insatiable and impudent exactio^s: nether would he suffer any
of his subjects to go to Rome.

By this Vrbanus, the 7. Canonical hours Canonical hours.
were first instituted in the church. Item, that no B. should be made but under
the title of some special place. Item, that Mattins and hours of the day,
should every day be said: also every Saturday to be said the Mass of our Lady:
and all the Jews sabbath to be turned into the service of our Lady. Item, all
such of ye clergy as had wives, should be deprived of orders. Item, Lawful
for subjects to break their oath of allegiance.
that it might be lawful for all subjects to break their oath of allegiance
with such, as ye pope had excommunicated, etc.

The K. after he had detained the archbishoprike of Canterbury in his own
hands three years, gave it to Anselmus abbot of Beck in Normandy: which he was
so unwilling to take, that the King had much adoo to thrust it upon him, The
city of Canterbury given to the Archbishop.
and was so desirous he should have it that he gave unto him wholly the city
of Canterbury, about the year 1093. Anselmus in gentle manner, that such
lands of the Church of Canterbury, as the king had given to his friends,
since the death of Lanfranke might so remain: and whereto Anselme refusing to
agree, Anselme the Archb. against the king.
moved the King with displeasure against him: and thereupon he did a great
while stop his consecration.

By reason of the contention at Rome betwixt the two Popes, Vrbanus, and
Clemens 3. there grew division: some holding with one, and some with the other.
England took part with Clemens 3. but Anselme against the K. and the rest
stuck to Vrbanus, Vrbane, and Clement popes at strife.
and required of the king leave to fetch his pall of Vrbanus: which when he
could not at the first obtain, he appealeth to the pope; contrary (as the K.
said) to his fealty. Betwixt the^ there was much reasoning, and debate about
the matter: but in conclusion none of his fellow Bishops durst take his part,
but were all against him: especially William B. of Duresme. In the mean season
the king had sent two messengers to Vrbane for ye pall, to bestow where he
would: who returned and brought with them Gualtar B. of Albane the Popes
Legate, with the pall to be given to Anselme. Which Legate so persuaded the
king, that Vrbane was received Pope through the whole land: and after the king
had received the pall, there went unto Anselme certain, declaring the pains
and charges the king was at, in procuring the pall, The king feign to relent to
the Archbishop.
and willed him somewhat to relent unto him; which he notwithstanding in no
case would yield unto: so the king was compelled to yield unto him the full
right of the sea. But afterward grew great displeasure betwixt them, so so
that Anselme went to appeal to Rome, where he remained in exile,
notwithstanding Vrbane wrote in his behalf to the King, that set light by the
Popes letters and suite therein. A Council.
Whereupon the pope promised at the next Council at Baron to take order for
the matter, where Anselme being present was called for: and first sitting in an
vtterside of the Bishops, afterward was placed at the right foot of the Pope,
with these words: Includamus hunc in orb nostro, The Archb. of Canterbury
called the pope of England.
tanquam alterius orbis Papam. Whereupon that same seat was appointed afterward
to the sea of Canterbury in every general Council.

In this Council great stur was against the Grecians, about the proceeding of
the holy ghost. Which greek church differed from the Latin in 20. or 29.
articles. First, 29. articles of controversy betwixt ye church of Rome and the
Greek Church The Latins holde^ for exco^municates.
that they are not under the sea of Rome. 2. That the sea of Rome has not
greater power, then the 4. patriarchs, and whatsoever the pope does beside
their knowledge, or without their approbation, is of no value. 3. That
whatsoever has been concluded since in the second general council is of no
authority sufficient: because from that time, they recount the Latins to be
excluded out of the Church. 4. They deny ye real presence, and consecrate in
leuened bread. 5. Also at the words of baptism, they say: Let this creature be
baptized, in ye name of the father, son, and holy Ghost, etc. 6. They deny
purgatory, and account the suffrages of the dead of no value. 7 That the souls
after death, have neither their perfect pain, nor glory, but are reserved in
a certain place, till the day of judgment. 8. They condemn the Church of
Rome, for mixing cold water in their Sacrifice. 9. They condemn the Church of
Rome, saying: they admit as well women, as men in baptism to anoint children,
on both shoulders. 10. Also they call our bread, Panagia. 11. They blame the
Romish church, for celebrating mass on any other days save sundaies, and
certain other feast days. 12. The Greek has neither cream, nor oil, nor
sacrament of confirmation. 13. Neither do they use extreme unction: expounding
ye place of S. James, of spiritual infirmity. 14. They enjoin no satisfaction
for penance. 15. They consecrate for the sick only, on maundy Thurseday,
keeping it for the whole year after: neither do they fast any Saturday
through the year, but only on Easter even. 16. They give only but five
orders: as Clearkes, Subdeacons, Deacons, Priests, and Bishops: the Romans
giving nine. 17. They make no vow of chastity. 18. Every year the Grecians use
upon certain days, to excommunicat the Church of Rome, The Romans every year
solemnly excommunicated of the Greeks.
and all Latins, as heretics. 19 They excommunicat him, that strikes a
Priest: neither do they live unmarried. 20. Their Emperor disposes of
ecclesiastical matters of government according to his own pleasure. 21. They
eat flesh, eggs and cheese on Friday 22. They hold against the Latins, for
celebrating without the consecrated church: for fasting on the Sabbath day: for
permitting menstruous women to enter into the church, before their purifying:
for suffering dogs and other beasts to enter into the church. 23. The
Grecians use not to kneel in all their devotions, not to the Eucharist, saving
one day in the year. 24. They permit not the Latins to celebrate upon their
altars: which if they do, they by and by wash the altar: and when they
celebrate, they say but one Lyturgy, or mass upon one altar that day. 25. They
dissent in the manner of the proceeding of the holy Ghost, etc.

Now in the counsel aforesaid, among other points, ye proceeding of the holy
ghost, and celebrating with leauened bread, was debated: concerning the which,
Anselme did behave himself greatly to the mind of ye pope: and after long
reasoning of matters betwixt the churches, the pope thundereth out
excommunication against the Greeks, The Pope excommunicated the Greeks.
and their adherents: and was ready also to proceed to the sentence of
excommunication against the king of England for Anselmus sake, had not Anselme
himself kneeling down, obtained for him longer time of further trial. Whereupon
the counsel brake up, and the Pope directs his letters to the K. of England,
and comma^deth him to reuest Anselme: The Pope commands the K. of England.
which the K. would not obey, but sent message and letters contrary, to the
great coffeehouse of the pope, threatening him again with excommunication:
but the messenger so handled the matter, that when the council came, which was
then holde^ at S. Peter's church in Rome, the K. took no harm; only the
sentence of excommunication was pronounced against Lay persons that gave
inuesture of Churches, and them that were so invested: and against such as give
themselves in subjection to Lay men for Ecclesiastical things. The Counsel
being finished, Anselme went to Lions, and stayed there till the death, both of
Pope Urban, and also of the king: who in hunting (by chance) was wounded to
death by an arrowe, The K. slain.
shot of a knight named Walter Tyrrell, and was buried at Westminster.

Vrbanus ruled the Church of Rome xij. years, and excommunicated the Emperor
Henricus, who had bin also before excommunicate by Hild. and Victor, and after
by Paschalis.

After the time of this K. William, K. of Wales cease.
the name of kings ceased in the Country of Wales, among the Britains, since
King Rice, who in the reign of this K. an. 1093.

Anno 1100. Henry the first succeeded Rufus, for want of issue, who was the
3. son of the Conqueror. He for his knowledge in liberal arts, was called
Beauclarke. Edwards laws, K. Beauclarke. K. Edwards laws restored.
with correction thereof. He reformed Country measures, and made a measure
after the length of his own arm, etc,

Soon after he was K. he married Mawde, daughter of Malcolin king of Scots,
and of Margaret his wife, daughter of Edward the Outlaw, being a professed
Nun in Winchester. Whom, notwithstanding, without dispensation of the Pope,
he married, by the consent of Anselme. By which Mawd he had two sons,
William, and Richard: and two daughters, Mawd, and Marie. About the third year
of this kings reign, Little S. Bartholmewes founded by means of a minstrell.
Priests sequestered from their wives.
the hospital of S. Bartholmew by Smithfield was founded, by means of a
Minstrell belonging to the K. named Raier, and was after finished by Richard
Whittington, Alderman, and Mayor of London.

In his time, by means of Anselmus, Priests were first in England sequestered
from their wives. Also it was decreed, that Monks, and Priests, should bear
no rule over lay persons, etc.

This king called home again Anselme, Anselme restored.
that was at the Council of the king at Westminster, where the K. in the
presence of the Lords, as well temporal, as spiritual, invested ij. bishops,
Roger B. of Salisburie, and Roger B. of Herford. During which Council, Anselmus
in his Convocation, deposed diverse Abbots, and other Prelates.

At this Council, and the other before set forth by Anselmus, Herbert, B. of
Norwich had much trouble with the Priests of his Dioces: for they would
neither forsake their wives, Priests would not forsake their wives.
nor leave their Benefices. And requiring Anselmus council therein, was willed
by him to account them as rebels, and to persuade the people to drive them
forth of their Country, and to place monks in their rooms. Like business
also had Gerard, Archb. of York: which (notwithstanding his excommunications)
he could hardly bring to pass.

Anno 1103. Anselme and the K. for those Bishops whom the K. had consecrated:
whom Anselmus disdayned, and otherwise behaved himself very insolently against
the king. Anselm insolent against the king.
And Messengers being sent to Paschalis the pope, for allowance of the kings
inuesting, he would in no case yield to the same, but held himself fast in
the steps of Vrbane: in so much, that the Ambassadors of the King, having
said, that he would not lose the authority of inuesting Prelates, for the
crown of his Realm: the P. answered, before God (with an oath) nor I, for the
price of his head, For the price of his head. A proud P.
will lose the giving of spiritual promotions in England.

Yet at that same time it was brought to pass, that certain customs in such
matters were released unto the king: and that the K. only, who had invested
them, being excepted, they that were invested, should be excommunicated: the
absolution, and satisfaction of whom should be left to Anselm.

Thus Anselm was dismissed (whether he went to complain) from Rome: and in his
return, was charged by the Ambassador of the K. either to consent unto him, or
else to beware how he presumed to enter into the land again.

Whereupon he remained at Lions a year and a half, writing diverse letters
unto the king: and seeing no way to prevail with him, he went about to revenge
himself by excommunication: whereof the king hearing, desired Anselmus to come
unto him into Normandy, The king reconciled to Anselme.
where reconcilement was made, and Anselmus restored again, yet deferred he
his coming into England, because he would not communicate with those whom the
king had invested: and made his abode at the abbey of Beck. The king yet sent
again Ambassadors to Rome: where it was agreed, that he should take homage of
the Bishops elect, but should not deal with inuesting them by staff, and
ring, etc. Now in the absence of Anselme, Priests, Priests pay money for their
wives to the king.
and Chanons took them to their wives again, paying a certain money to the
king for the same: whereat Anselmus being very angry, writes to the king and
rebukes him for the same, and afterward meeting with him at the abbey of
Beck, Anselme yielded to in all points.
agreed unto him in all points he desired. First, that all Churches which were
made tributary to the king before, should be made free.

Item, that he should require nothing of the said Churches, the seats being
vacant.

Item, that those married Priests that had given money to the king, should
surcease from ecclesiastical function three years: and that the king should
take no more after that manner: and that all the goods that had been taken
away from the Archbishoprike should be restored at his return into England.

Anno 1106. Anselme by the permission of the King, assembled a great council
at Westminster, of the prelates and Clergy: where (by the Popes authority) he
so wrought with the king, that it was enacted, yt no temporal man after that
day, should make inuesture with cross, or with ring, or with pastoral hook:
besides many other decrees against priests marriages, and sodomitry. But the
decree and curse against that was called back again by the suite of certain,
who persuaded Anselmus that the opening of that vice did give more occasion of
committing the same, and so it was taken away: but the decree against marriage
remained still.

Pope Paschalis Pope Paschalis.
entered his papacy the same year that king Henry began his reign, an. 1100.
The Popes ornaments.
and a girdle put about him, having seven keys, with seven seals hanging
thereupon, in token of his seuenfold power, Popes seuenfold power.
according to the seuenfold grace of the holy Ghost, of binding, loosing,
shutting, opening, sealing, resigning, and judging, etc. This Pope did depose
all those Prelates that the Emperor set up: also banished Albertus,
Theodoricus, and Maginulphus (they striued the same time for the papacy) and
made an army against Guybert whom the Emperor had made Pope: who being put to
flight not long after died.

About the same time Anno 1101. That Antichrist was borne. Married priests
condemned for Nicolaitans.
as Sabellicus testifies: whereupon Paschalis assembling a council, put to
silence the said bishop, and condemned his books. In this Council at Trecas,
married priests were condemned for Nicolaitans.

This Paschalis renewed the excommunication of Hildebrand against the Emperor;
and set up his son, Emperor against him, and caused the archbishop of Mentz,
of Collen, and of Worms, at Hilgeshen, to deprive the Emperor: The Emp.
deposed by the Pope.
and to take from him all the ornaments of his Empire, whereupon the Emperor
being left desolate, he pronounced, Let God see and judge. Let God see and
judge.
Thus they left him, and went, and confirmed his son, and caused him to drive
out his Father, who then being chased of his own son (having but nine
persons about him) did fly by the Dukedom of Lymbrough.

Where the Duke being then a hunting, and hearing of him, followed after him.
The Emperor looking for nothing but present death, (for he had displaced the
same Duke before out of his dukedom) submitted himself, and craved pardon:
the Duke pitying his case, received him to favor, and into his castle. And
gathering together his men of war, brought him to Collen, where he was well
received. His son hearing of this, besieged the city, but the father by
night escaping fled to Leodium where he assembled a power, and pitched a field:
desiring his friends, The pope sets the Emperors son against him.
that if he got the victory, they would spare his son. In fine, the Father
had the victory, and the son was put to flight: but shortly after, they
renewed battle again, and the son got the field, and the father taken: who
being utterly dispossessed of his kingdom, was brought to that state, that
coming to Spire, he was feign to crave of the Bishop there (to whom he had
done much good before) to have a prebend in the Church: The Emperor craves to
be aprehend of a Church, but could not obtain it.
and for that he had some skill of his book, he desired to serve in our Ladies
quire, yet he could not obtain so much at his hands: who swear by our lady, he
should have none there. Thus he came to Leodiu^, and there for sorrow died,
after yt he had reigned 50. years: whose body Paschalis after his funeral,
The Emp dies for sorrow.
where it remained five years, unburied.

After the decease of Henricus the 4, Henricus the 5. reigned 20. years, who
coming to Rome to be crowned of the Pope, could not obtain it, No Emperor to
have to do with the elect. of the Pope. The Emp. had been slain at Rome.
before it were by him fully ratified, that no Emperor should have any thing to
do with the election of ye B of Rome, or with other bishoprics: and such a
stir there was at Rome, that the Emperor, if he had not defended himself
with his own hands, he had been slain: yet got he the victory, and
took the Pope, and leads him out of the City: where he indenteth with him
upon diverse conditions, The pope feign to agree to the Emperor.
both of his coronation, and recovering again his title in election of the
Pope, and other Bishops. Whereunto the Pope assented and agreed to all: so the
Emperor being crowned of Paschalis, returned again to Rome.

The pope breaks covenant.
But so soon as the Emperor was returned into Germany, ye Pope forthwith
calling a synod, revoked all that he had granted to before, and excomunicated
Henricus the Emperor: whereof he hearing, being in France, and there having
married Mathild, daughter to K. Henry, returned with a power, and puts the
pope to flight, and places another in his steed. The Germans rebel.
In the which time, the States of Germany rebelled, in so much that it grew to
a foughten field, ann. 1115.

The Emp. gives over to the Pope.
In the time of this Paschalis, lived Bernardus, called Abbas Clarauallensis,
ann. 1118. Bernardine monks. Bernardine monks.


After the death of Paschalis, succeeded Gelasius, Gelasius
chosen by the Cardinal? without the consent of the Emperor: whereupon grew
great great variance in Rome: and at length another pope was set up by the
Emperor, called Gregory the 8: Gregory 8.
and Gelasius driven away into France, and there died. After whom came
Calixtus Calixtus.
the 2, chosen by a few Cardinals, without the consent of the Emperor: who
coming up to Rome to enjoy his seat, first did excommunicat the Emperor: He
then having diverse conflicts with his fellow, pope Gregorius, at length drove
him out of Rome. At which time, by this occasion, great controversy was
betwixt the emperors, and the popes court, for the preeminence: but in
conclusion, The Emp. fain to yield.
the Emp. was feign to condescend to the unreasonable conditions of the pope:
first to ratify his election, notwithstanding the other pope was alive, whom
the Emperor set up: and that in matters of the popes election, and inuesture
of the Bishops, he should resign his right. Which being granted, A shameful
usage of a pope.
the Pope makes out after his fellow pope, and takes him at Sutrium, and set
him upon a Camel, his face toward the Camels tail, and the tail held in
his hand in steed of a bridle, and so brought him to Rome thorough the
streets, and afterward having shorn him, thrust him into a monastery.

This Pope did first establish the papal decrees against the Emperor: he
brought in the four quarter fastes, calcalled Imber days, Imber days.
and brought in the order of monks, called Premonstratensis, Premonstratensis.
and also was hot against priests wives.

After the death of Anselme, who deceased An. 1109. 16. years; the church of
Canterbury stood void 5. years: Canterbury 5. years void to the kings use.
and the goods of the church was spent to the kings use, the king pretending to
take deliberation to choose one answerable to those that went before.

The same year, after his death, Ely made a bishopric.
the king converted the abbey of Ely, to a bishopric, which was before under
the bishopric of Lincoln: placing there, Henry, B. of Bangor, the first
Bishop of that sea.

Ann. 1115. Rodolphus, B. of Rochester, an English man, was promoted to be
Archb. of Canterbury, and Thurstinus the kings Chaplain, was elected Archb. of
York: who, because he refused to profess obedience to the same Sea, was
deprived by the king: and thereupon went to complain to Pope Paschalis, who
wrote, that he would have the order of Gregory stand therein. But Thurstine
stood stiffely in the matter, and renounced his Archbishopric, promising he
would never, either make claim to it, or molest those that should enjoy it. Now
afterward, when Calixtus had called a Counsel at Rheims, in France, Thurstine
wrought so, that he was in that Council consecrated, and had his pal,
notwithstanding the Pope had promised the king faithfully to the contrary. For
which deed, the K. was sore discontented with Thurstine, and warned him the
entry of his land. In the Council of Rheims, were gathered 434. Prelates, A
Council of 434. Prelates.
The points there concluded, were, for establishing their own authority, in
dispensing of Ecclesiastical Offices, and in prohibiting Priests marriages,
and sequestring the^ from their wives. Which articles were sent to ye Emperor,
to try his mind before the Council should break up: who was contented with
all, saving that he could not away to have the inuesting of ecclesiastical
function taken from him: The Pope exco^municateth the Emperor.
whereupon the pope proceeds against him to excommunication.

It was not long after, but the Pope came to Gisortium, where Henry king of
England resorted to him, desiring that he would send no more Legates into the
land, except he himself desired, because they spoiled the realm of great
treasures: The king of England sueth to the Pope.
and also that he would grant him to use all the customs used before of his
ancestors in England, and in Normandy. To these petitions the Pope granted,
and required again of the king, that he would license Thurstin the Archbishop
above mentioned, to return with favor into the land: but the king utterly
denied that, except he would submit to Canterbury. Submit to Canterbury.


Anno 1120 Calixtus directs his letters to the king for Thurstinus, and to
Rodulph Archbishop of Canterbury, in which he does interdict the Churches of
Canterbury, and York, and threatens the King with excommunication, except
within a month after the the same Thurstine were received into the Sea of
York. The Pope Thurstine.
Whereupon Thurstine (for fear) was immediately sent for, and received: and
was placed in the Sea.

Anno 1122. Rodolfe Archbishop of Canterbury died, whom Gulielmus de Turbin
succeeded.

About which time, in the xxvij. year of the kings reign, the Gray friars, The
Graye friars.
by procurement of the king, came first into England: and had their house
first at Canterbury. Anno 1125. the king called a Council at London, where
the spirituality of England (not knowing whereabout it was required) granted
the king to have the punishment of married Priests. The Priests pay to the K.
for their wives.
Whereupon the Priests (paying to the K. a certain sum) were suffered to
retain their wives still, to the great gain of the king.

This king Henry builded the Abbey of Reading, for joy of Saint James hand,
which his daughter Mawde (who had married with the Emperor Henry the fifth)
brought unto him after the decease of her husband. She was after married to
Geffrey Plantagenet, Earl of Aniou: of whom came Henry the second.

About this time was founded the Priorie of Norton, in the Province of Chester,
by one William, the son of Nichelle. This K. an. 1131. Danegelt released by
the king.


After Calixtus succeeded Honorius 2. Notwithstanding that the Cardinals had
elected another, Honorius B
yet he (by yt means of certain Citizens) obtained it. An. 1125. Henricus v.
after that he had reigned xx years, and died out issue.

Next after Henricus, the Empire fell to Lotharius, D of Saxon, an. 1127.
Honorius 2. there was one Arnulphus Arnulphus.
(some say) Archbishop of Lugdune. ( Trithemius says, he was a Priest) that
for sharp rebuking of the Clergy of Rome, was laid wait for, and privily
drowned. He preached very boldly against their abuses. Sabellicus, and Platina
say, they hanged him. About the time of this Arnulphus (if it were not his own
work) there was written a book, called Opus tripartitum, Opus tripartitum.
that co^playneth of many abuses and enormities of the Church: as first, Abuses
of the church preached against.
of ye number of holy days: also, of curious singing in the Church: of the
multitude of begging Friars, and professed women: with diverse other points of
abuse.

About the year of our Lord 1128. Knights of the Rhodes and Templars.
the order of Knights of the Rhodes (called Ioannites) and the order of
Templars, rose up.

After Honorius Honorius.
succeeded Innocentius the second, but after he was chosen, the Romans
elected Anacletus, Betwixt which Popes great strife and contention rose,
Contention betwixt the popes.
till Lotharius the Emperor began to assist, and take part with Innocentius.

This P. decreed, that whosoever did strike a Priest Strike a Priest
shaven, should be excommunicate, and not be absolved, but only of the pope
himself.

An. 1135. H. dies in Normandy, after that he had reigned in England, thirty
five years and odd months, leaving for his heirs, Matilde the Empress,
his daughter, with her young son Henry, to succeed. But the Prelates and
Nobility (contrary to their oath) made Steven, Earl of Boloign, king:
sisters son to Henry. He entered his reign, an, 1136.

But the empress, about the 6. year of his reign, came into England, and took
him, and sent him to Bristow to be kept prisoner. Whence he escaped out, and
pursued the empress, and her part, and caused her to fly the Realm, the
sixth year of his reign. But after that, Henry, Duke of Normandy, invaded in
the quarrel of his Mother: and so prevailed, that Steeuen was contented to
hold the kingdom but for his life time, and that Henry in the mean time,
should be proclaimed Heir apparent. The same year, about October, Steeuen
ended his life, after he had reigned xix. years, periuredly.

As Theobald succeeded after William, Archb. of Cant. so in York; after
Thurstane, followed William, who was called S. William of York. He was
poisoned in his chalis, Archb. poisoned in his chalice.
by his Chaplains.

In the xvi. year of the reign of this king, Theobaldus Archbishop of
Canterbury, and Legate to the Pope, held a Council at London, wherein was
concluded appellations from Councels to the Pope, found out by Henry, Bishop of
Winchester.

In the time of King Steeuen, died Gracianus, a Monk of Bononia, who compiled
the book called, The Popes decrees, also his brother Petrus Lombardus Petrus
Lombardus.
Bishop of Paris, Master of Sentences, wrote his four books of Sentences.
These two were the greatest doers, in finding out that the similitude only of
bread and wine remained in the sacraments. Some write that Petrus Comestor
Petrus Comestor.
the writer of the Scholasticall history, was the third brother. In this time
also lived Hildegard the Nun and prophetisse Hildegard the nun and
prophetisse.
in Almaigne.

By this K. was builded the abbey of Feuersham, where his son and he were
buried. He builded the monastery of Finerneys and of Fomitance.

Much about the same time, came up the order of the Gilbertines, Gilbertines.
by one Gilbert, son to Iacoline, a knight of Lincolnshire.

Theobald, Priests no rulers in worldly matters.
ye Archb. of Canterb. among other matters decreed, yt priests should not be
rulers of worldly matters: and that they should teach the Lords prayer, and
Creed, in english. Mattheus Parisiensis, writes, how Stephen K. of England,
reserved to himself, the bestowing of spiritual livings, and inuesting of
prelates, ann. 1133. Lotharius the Emperor began to do the like, had not
Bernardus given him contrary council.

Then came into ye Church, the manner of cursing with book, bell, and candle,
Book bell, and candle.
devised in the Council at London, holden by William, B. of Winchester, under
P. Celestinus, who succeeded after Innocentius, an. 1142. Lotharius who
succeeded after Innocentius, an. 1142. Also, Lotharius succeeded in the Empire,
Conradus, the nenew of Henricus 5. an. 1138. Who only (among the Emperors) is
found not to have received the Crown at the popes hand.

In the days of this Emperor, who reigned fifteen years, were diverse Popes:
as, Celestinus, 2. Lucius, 2. Eugenius, 3.

Betwixt P. Lucius Lucius.
and the Romans was great strife: for, the Romans would have recovered their
ancient liberty in choosing their consuls: and Pope Lucius in the fight was
well beaten, and lived not long after.

Pope Eugenius Eugenius.
after, him followed the same course, An. 1145. Anastasius Anastasius.
the 4. And after him Adrianus the 4. an Englishman, Adrianus pope an
Englishma^.
by his name called Break spear, belonging once to S. Albons. He likewise
kept great stur, and prevailed against the Romans for the former causes, and
thundered against Fredericus the Emperor.

Hildegardis a Nun, and as many judged (even the papists themselves) a
Prophetisse, lived, anno 1146. Hildegard prophecieth against ye kingdom of the
Pope.
which neglect to teach, and to do good things. The master likewise, and the
Prelates do sleep, despising justice, and laying it aside, etc. And in
another place: Then shall the crown of Apostolical honor be divided, because
there shall be no religion among the Apostolical order: and for that cause shall
they despise the dignity of that name: and shall set over them other men, and
other Archbishops. In so much, that the Apostolic sea of that time, by the
diminution of his honor, shall have scarce Rome, and a few other Countries
thereabout, under his dominion. And these things shall come to pass, partly by
incursio^ of wars, and partly by a common Council, Justice flourish when the
Pope is overthrown.
and consent of the Spiritual and Secular persons. Then shall Justice
flourish: so that in those days, men shall honestly apply themselves to the
ancient customs, and discipline of ancient men, and shall observe them as men
in times past have done, etc.

She prophesied also of the Friars. In those days shall rise a senseless
people, proud; greedy; without faith; and subtle: which shall eat the sins
of ye people, holding a certain order of foolish devotion, under the fained
cloak of beggary, etc. But this order shall be accursed of all wise men and
faithful Christians: they shall cease from all labor and give themselves over
to idleness, choosing rather to live by flattery and begging, having
familiarity with women, teaching them how to deceive their husbands, by their
flattery and deceitful words, and to rob for them: for they will take all
these stolen evil gotten goods, and say, give it unto us, and we will pray for
you: so that they being curious to hide other men's faults, do utterly forget
their own. And alas they will receive all things of rouers, pickers, spoilers,
thieves, sacrilegious persons, usurers, adulterers, heretics, schismatikes,
apostataes, whores, and bawdes, of noblemen periurers, merchants, false judges,
soldiers, tyrants, princes, of such as live contrary to the law, and of many
perverse and wicked men, following the persuasion of the Devil, the sweetness
of sin, a delicate and transitory life, and fulness, even unto eternal
damnation, etc.

Henry the 2. son of Ieffrey Plantagenet, and of Mawd the Empress, and
daughter of king Henry the first, reigned after Stephen, and continued 35.
years.

Within a year or twain after the entry of his reign, he made Thomas Becket
Thomas Becket.
Lord Chauncellor of England.

About the year of our Lord, 1158. Gerhardus, and Dulcinus Nauarrensis, did
earnestly preach against the Church of Rome; mainteyning, Gerhardus against ye
church of Rome.
that prayer is not more holy in one place then in another: that the Pope is
Antichrist: Pope Antichrist.
that the Clergy, and Prelates of Rome were reject, and the very whore of
Babylon Whore of Babylon.
prefigured in the Apocalips, etc. These two Anno one thousand, one hundred,
and fifty eight, brought with them thirty into England; who by the king and
prelates were burned in the forehead, and so sent out of the realm. And after,
as Illyricus writes, were put to death by the Pope. Put to death by the Pope.


The Emperor Fredericus successor to Conradus, marched up to Italy, to subdue
there certain rebels. The Pope hearing thereof, came to meet him with his
Cardinals, at Sutrium: the Emperor seeing the Bishop, alighted of his horse to
receive him, The Emp. holds the popes stirrup on the wrong side.
holding the stirrup on the left side: whereat the Pope showed himself
somewhat agreeued, but the next day with holding the right stirrup he made him
amends: and when they were come together, Hadrian would not crown him (for the
Popes at that time had brought the Emperors to that pass) except he would of
his own charges, help to the recovery of Apulia, out of the hands of the
Duke William: whereto the Emperor agreed, and so the next day was crowned.

In the mean time the Pope excommunicateth the Duke, and incenseth Immanuell
the Emperor of Constantinople against him: but the Duke puts Immanuell to
flight, and placed his siege against Bonauenture (where the Pope with his
Cardinals were looking for victory) and forced the Pope to entreat for peace:
which he granted on condition, that he should make him King of both Sycils.
The Pope returning to Rome, and there finding that he could not prevail
against the consuls of Rome, removed to Arciminum.

In this mean time, the Emperor requires homage of the Bishops of Germany,
Popes Legates forbidden in Germany.
forbidding the Popes Legates to be received in Germany, except he sent for
them. Besides he prefixed his own name in his letters before the Popes name,
whereupon passed letters of displeasure betwixt them: and Hadrianus not content
with the Emperors answer, directs a bull of excommunication, and stirs
up William duke of Apulia, and the clergy against him. The Emperor purges
himself, by letters sent thorough his Empire, very pithie, and sharp. The
Pope on the other side accuses the Emperor to the bishops of Germany, The
Germans excuse the Emperor.
and incenseth them against him: but they would not so far yield unto the Pope,
but excused the Emperor.

This Pope, only continued four years, The Pope choked with a fly.
and odd months: and walking with his Cardinals to a place called Anagnuia,
or Arignam,

About this time, rose up the order of the Hermites The order of the Hermites.
by one William, once Duke of Aquitania, and afterward a Friar.

After Hadrian, succeeded Alexander 3: Alexander 3. Pope.
and at the same time the emperor, with 9. Cardinals, set up Victor 4. so that
there fell much debate about the matter, til at the last, Alexander, by the
help of Philip the French king, obtained ye sea, against whom, the Emperor made
his power: and coming to Rome, forced the Pope to sail to Venice: whither he
sent Otho his son after. Who attempting rashly against his fathers
commandment, was overcome, and taken. Whereupon the Emperor (to redeem his
son) was feign to seek peace: and coming to Venice at S. Marks Church, The
Emperor feign to seek peace with the Pope.

The Pope sets his feet upon the Emperors neck.


where he should take his absolution, he was bid to kneel at ye popes feet:
and the pope setting his feet upon the Emperors neck, pronounced the verse of
the Psalm: Thou shall walk upon the Adder and the Basilisk: and shall tread
down the Lion, and the Dragon. To whom the Emperor answered: not to thee, but
to Peter. The pope again both to me, and to Peter. In fine, the Emperor was
absolved, on condition, he would receive Alexander for true Pope: and restore
again to the Church all that he had taken away.

This Pope (who reigned 27. years) kept sundry councels, Against marriage of
priestd.
both at Turo, and at Lateran: wherein he concluded against marriage of priests

At this time, lived Thomas Becket: whose first preferment was to the Church of
Branfield, which he had by the gift of Saint Albons. After that he entered into
the service of the Archbishop of Canterbury, and was put of Theobald the
Archbishop to king Henry, to bridle the young king, that he should not be too
fierce against the Clergy: of whom he was made Lord Chancellor, and
afterward in the 44. year of his age, was made priest, and the next day made
bishop: afterward there fell great variance betwixt the king and him for
ouerlightly punishing the Clearkes that offended his laws: Variance betwixt
the King and Becket.
and standing with the king therein. Besides, he resisted diverse ancient laws
of the land, and would not submit himself or his Clergy thereunto: moreover,
there were other laws also made at Claredoune, Executed for a Traitor that
brought curse from Rome.
in Normandy, whereto Becket would give no allowance: as if any person should
be found to bring from the Pope, or from the Archb. of Canterbury, any
writing, containing a curse or indict of the land, Peterpence denied.
he should be executed for a traitor, etc. That Peterpence should no more be
paid. yet at the length he answered, he would agree to the Kings ordinances
saluo ordine suo. Saluo ordine suo.
Which clause, the king greatly misliked: but notwithstanding great entreat by
the Bishop of Norwich, and Salisbury, and the tears of two of the chief of
the Templars, called Richard de Have, and Constans de Henerio, he would not
relent, til the king signified by express message, Becket relenteth to the K.
that he should look what to trust to, if he yielded not at his request: so at
length he relented. And the king called a Council of States, where he
requiring the Archb. to set to his seal to instruments drawn, concerning the
matter, but he refused so to do, til farther deliberation, which also the king
was contented with: and yet after Thomas repented him of that he had done, by
the motion of his crossebearer, who put him in mind how prejudicial it was to
the Church, that he had yielded unto. Whereupon he required absolution of the
Pope for his fact, who granted the same, and gave him courage to be constant
in his quarrel begun, Becket stout to the king.
and therevppon he waxed stout, and would have departed the land, to flee to
the sea of Rome: but he was stayed. The quarrel ceased not, for Becket being
Legatus a latere, greatly stayed the kings purposes. Whereupon the king sent to
the Pope, requiring that the same authority might be bestowed upon some other
after his appointment: which was the Archb. of York, but the P. would not:
notwithstanding, at the request of the Kings Clergy, he was content yt the K.
should be Legate himself: whereat he took great indignation: The K. Toulde
be the Popes Legate.
which moved the Pope (at the length) to yield to the request of the bestowing
of the Legacy upon the Archbishop of York: yet so, that he would Thomas
should take no harm thereby. The king having this, straight began with the
Inferiors of the Church, that had broken his laws: as Felons; Robbers, felons
murderers, among the Clergy.
Robbers; Quarrellers; Breakers of the peace; and Murderers: whereof, more
then an hundred, were proved at that time upon the Clergy.

This, Thomas could not abide, as derogating from the liberty of holy Church.
The king on the contrary part, was greatly incensed, and caused him to be
cited to appear on a certain day, at the Town of Northhampton: where Tho-
appeared not, but sent another. This the king took in great displeasure, and
laid diverse actions against him, of reconings, etc.

The other Bishops endeavored to persuade Thomas, to consider what he did, and
not to stand so stiflie against the king: others encouraged him: and at last
they agreed with common consent, to cite him up to Rome upon perjury, and
appointed him his day of appearance. Which when the Archbishop heard, he also
sent to Rome: to whom the Pope directs again his letters of comfort, that
made Becket still to hold himself stout against the King, who was so incensed
against him, that if he had not fled the Court, he had been laid in prison,
Becket flies, and turns his name to Derman.
for not answering to certain accounts the king had to charge him withal. But
he sped him away, changing his name, and calling himself Derman: and taking
ship at Sandwich, fled into Flanders, and from thence to Ludouicus the French
king: who (notwithstanding Letters, and request to the contrary) gave him
entertainment, and wrote to the Pope in his behalf: and (although the K. had
sent unto him Ambassadors, Robert, Archbishop of York, with other Bishops,
and Nobles, requiring him to deal otherwise,) through the French Kings letters,
did wholly incline to Becket. But, forasmuch as he could not be placed as yet in
England, the Pope sends him in a monks habit to the Abbey of Pontiniake, in
France: where he remained two years. And from thence he removed to Senon, B.
in exile seven years.
where he abode five years. So his exile continued in all, seven years.

Now the king understanding of the Popes favor toward Becket, sailing out of
England into Normandy, directs over certain Injunctions against the Pope,
and the Archbishop of Canterbury. Besides, an. 1166. Beckets kindred, Beckets
kindred banished.
should be banished: without carrying away any penyworth of their goods. He
sent also to Guarrin, the Abbot of Pontiniakes, threatening him, that if he
would not put away Tho. he would drive out of his Realm, all the Monks of
his order. Whereupon, Becket was feign to depart to Jews the French king, who
placed him at Senon, and there found him the space of five years.

In which time of his absence, he wrought all he might against the king, and
those that he knew did not favor him: and diverse letters passed to, and from
Becket, to the Pope, and the king: very seditious, and rebellious. From which
dealing, a very pithie letter, written by the Suffraganes of ye Church of
Canterbury, could nothing persuade him, but provoked him, very sharply to
reply against them. He rejected also, the letters of the Empress, that
endeavored to persuade him.

After these letters sent to and fro, anno 1169. The K. fears Becket.
whereupon, he sent two Cardinals, Guilielmus, and Otho, o take up the matter,
at Grisorsium in France: but it came to no conclusion. Where, William
requiring Becket (for the peace of the Church which he pretended) to resign
his Bishoprike, so that the King would give over his customs: answered that
the proportion was not like, saying: that he (saving the honor of his Church
and person could not so do) but the king, Because the Pope had condemned them.
it stood on his souls health to renounce those ordinances and customs,
because the Pope had condemned them.

After the Cardinals were returned, the French king also thought to have
prevailed with Thomas, and labored to persuade him, but could not. Thomas
always adding his obedience, Saluo honor Dei, very captiously, that he might
thereby make escape if need were, wherewith the King was greatly displeased.

After this there fell other displeasure betwixt them. Anno 1170. Henry to be
crowned King, with consent of Lords Spiritual and Temporal: which Coronation
was done by the hands of Robert Archbishop of York, with assistance of other
Bishopses: whereat Becket took great displeasure, because he was not called
for, and complained thereof to the Pope: at whose instaunce the Pope sent down
sentence of excommunication against the Archbishop, and London, Salisbury,
Duresme, and Rochester, that were doers with him in the Coronation: and sends
also two Legates, the Archb. of Rhothomage, and the Archb. of Nauerne with full
commission, either to drive the King to reconciliation, or to interdict him, by
the Popes censure out of the Church: whereupon the king at last (through the
mediation of the French king, and diverse prelates, and great Princes) was
content to yield to reconciliation, but would not grant him his possessions,
and lands of his church, before he repaired into England, The king yields to
Becket.
and should show how peaceably he would agree with the kings subjects.

This peace being thus concluded. Thomas after 6. years of his banishment
returned, and was commanded of the young king to keep his house. The Bishops
before excommunicated, required absolution of him, but he would not grant
thereunto simply without cauteles: so they complained to the king, who took it
heavenly, and lamented often and sundry times, that none would revenge him of his
enemy: which certain to ye number of 4. hearing, prepared themselves, and came
into England out of Normandy, about Christmasse time, and repaired to Thomas,
and commanded him in the kings name to come to the young K. and to do his duty
to him, and to restore the bishops whom he had excommunicated, for ye kings
coronatio^: which Thomas would not grant unto, touching ye absolutio^,
referring it to the pope who had excommunicated the^. In the end so disorderly
Thomas behaved himself, that they said he had spoken against his own head,
and rushed out of the doors, commanding the monks to keep him forth coming.
What quoth Thomas, think you I will fly away? nay neither for the K. nor for
any man, will I stir one foot from you: and so cried after them, Four armed
men kill Thomas Becket.
here, here shall you find me, laying his hand upon his crown. The 4. whose
names were Reynold Bereson, Hugh Morteuill, Will. Thracy, and Richard Brito,
went to harness themselves, and returned the same day, and slew Becket,
meeting him about eue^song time with his cross in his hand, every one striking
him with his sword into the head: they after fled into the North, and at length
with much adoo, The murderers do penance.
having obtained their pardon of the pope, went to Jerusalem in linen clothes,
barefoote, fasting, and praying, whereof in few years after, they died. Anno
1220. Cesarius the monk, at Paris, whether Becket were saved or damned. Roger
a Normand holding against him: Whether Becket were saved or damned.
and Peter Cantor a Parisian, for him, grounding himself upon miracles, which
he was reported to have done after his death, 270. miracles done by Becket.
and his quarrel for the Churches sake: his miracles are reported to have
been 270. Of this Thomas the papists sing this blasphemous Antheme, or
Collect in English thus: A blasphemous Antheme.
For the blood of Thomas, which he for thee did spend, Grant us Christ to
climb where Thomas did ascend.

But as it appears by the testimony of Robert Crickladensis, the Peers and
nobles of this land, near about the king, gave out in straight charge, upon
pain of death, None should hold Becket a martyr or preach his miracle. The
kings penance.
and confiscation of all their goods, that no man should be so hardy, as to
name Thomas a martyr, or to preach of his miracles The king for this fact, was
upon his oath enjoined this penance: First, that he should send so much to the
holy land, as should find 200. knights, for the defense of the land: also, that
from Christmas day next following, he should in his own person fight for the
holy land (except he were otherwise dispensed with) 3. years. Also, that he
should fight against the Saracens in Spain. Item, that he should not hinder
any appellations made to the Pope of Rome. Also, that neither he nor his son,
should ever depart from the pope and his successors. Ite^, yt the possessions
of the church of Canterbury, should be fully restored, and that the outlawes
for Beckets cause, should be restored, Also, that his decrees stablished
against ye church, should be void: besides other fastings and alms, etc. It is
mentioned also in stories of the said king, that returning out of Normandy into
England, he came first to Canterbury, and so soon as he had seen Beckets
Church, lighting of his horse, and putting off his shoes, he went barefoote to
his tomb: Sharp penance
whose steps were found bloody through the roughnes of the stones: and not
only that, but also received farther penance of every monk in the cloister,
certain discipline of a rod, Ann. 1174. Canterbury burnt.


The year 1175 Contention betwixt York, and Canterb.
or not. About those matters grew such contention betwixt the seas. that
appeal was made to the sea of Rome, on the one party, and a Cardinal was
sent down to make peace betwixt them for 5. years, til they should have full
determination of their cause: and that the Archb. should abstain from the
claim to the church of S. Oswald at Gloucester, and molest the sea of York no
more therein.

In the year 1176. Richard, Archb. of Canterbury, made 3. archdeacons in his
dioces, where there was wont to be but one. About which time also, it was
granted by the king to the popes legate, that a Clearke should not be called
before a temporal judge, except for offense in the forest, or for his lay fee
which he holds. Item, that no Archb. or Bishopric should remain in the
kings hands, No bishopric remain longer then one year in the K. hand.
above one year, without great cause.

The same year, there was one at Canterbury, to be elect abbot in the house of
S. Austen, named Albert: who required the Archbishop to consecrate him in his
own Church: which the Archb. refused, requiring him to come to him rather. The
matter grew hot betwixt the^, so that appellation was made to Alexander the
pope, who through pence took the Abbots part, and enjoined the Archb. to
satisfy Alberts request: who picked out a time, when the Abbot was about his
household affairs, absent from home, and not finding him, departed, prete^ding
the fault of ye abbot, in great disdain. So the abbot disappointed, filled his
purse, and went to Rome, and had his consecration of the Pope himself.
Contention again betwixt the Archbishops.
This year began again the contention betwixt the Archbishops, for
superiority, at a council at Westminster, where York took the right hand of
the Cardinal, the popes legate: where about grew such a contention, that words
begat blows, and the Archb. of Canterburies part pulled York from his seat to
the ground: and al to tear his casule, chimer, and Rochet from his back; and
put the legate in such fear, From words to blows.
that he ran away. The next day after, York appealeth to Rome.

This king, though his dominions were greater then ever before him, yet never
put task on his subjects, nor upon the spirituality any first fruits, or
appropriations of benefices, and yet his treasure after his death amounted to
900000. No task, nor first fruits.
pounds, besides Jewels and furniture.

Anno 1181. 11000. pounds, beside plate.

This king died, after he had lived with estimation of great valor and
wisdom in the government 35. years. The king died.


Pope Alexander sat 21. years, or as Grisburgensis writes 23. years, This
pope among many other his acts, had certain Councels, some in France, and some
at Rome in Laterane: by whom it was decreed that no Archb. should receive his
pall, except he should first swear.

The form of the words whereby the pope is wont to give his pal, are these: To
the honor of almighty God, The form of words in giving the pall.
and of blessed Mary the virgin, and of blessed S. Peter and Paul, and of our
Lord, pope N. and of the holy church of Rome, and also of the Church of N.
committed to our charge, we give to you ye pall taken from from the body of S.
Peter, as a fulness of the office pontificiall, which you may wear within your
own church upon certain days, that be expressed in ye privileges of the
same church granted by the sea Apostolic.

The pope might wear the pall at all times, Order of the pall.
and in all places at his pleasure. It must be asked within 3. months: without
the which, any might be displaced. Also, it must be buried with him to whom it
belonged.

The bishops make this oath to the Pope. I M, B. of N. from this hour
henceforth, will be faithful, The B. oath to the Pope.
and obedient to blessed S. Peter, and to the holy apostolic church of Rome:
and to my Lord N. the Pope. I shall be in no Council, nor help, either with
any consent, or deed, where by either of them, or any of them, may be
empaired: or whereby they may be taken with any evil taking. The Council
which they shall commit to me, either by themselves, messengers, or by letters,
wittingly, or willingly, I shall utter to none: to their hinderance, and
damage. To the mainteining of the papacy of Rome, and the regalities of S.
Peter, I shall be an ayder (so mine order be saved) against all persons. The
Legate of the apostolic sea, both in going, and coming, I shall honorably
entreat, and help him in all necessities. Being called to a Synod, I shall be
ready to come: unless I be let by some Canonical empeachment. The palace of
the Apostles every third year I shall visit: either by my self, or by my
messenger: except otherwise I be licensed by the sea apostolic. All such
possessions as belong to the Dioces of my Bishoprike, I shall neither sell, nor
give, nor lay to morgage, or lease out, or remove away, by any manner of
means (without the consent and knowledge of the Bishop of Rome) so God help
me, and the holy Gospel of God.

Also among other decrees, in a Council at Rome of 300. Bishops, Chastity
was obtruded upon Priests, and Thomas Beckette: and Bernarde were canonized
for Saints. T. Becket, and Bernard, canonized for Saints.


Anno 1184. Becket, the K. of England meeting him by the way.

After the death of Richard, Archbishop of Canterbury, who followed after
Becket, succeeded Baldwinus, Baldwinus.
a Cistercian Monk.

Anno 1178.

In the time of this Alexander the Pope, sproong up the doctrine, and name of
them, which were called then, Pauperes de Lugduno, Pauperes de Lugduno.
which of one Waldus, a chief Senator in Lions, were named Waldenses.
Waldenses.
They were also called Leonisti, and Insabbattati About the year 1119. or,
according to Laziardus, 1170. up Franciscus, Franciscus.
and Dominicus, Dominicus.
mainteners of blind hypocrisy.

The original of Waldenses came upon this occasion: 1160. it fell out as the
chief heads of the city of Lions were walking, and talking according to their
manner, of diverse affairs, one among them fell down dead: whereat Waldus Waldus.
being present was so terrified, that he was stricken with repentance, and
endeavor to refourme his life: insomuch that, first he began to minister large
alms of his goods to such as needed.

Secondly, to instruct himself, and his family, with the true knowledge of
Gods word.

Thirdly, to admonish all them, which resorted unto him upon any occasion, to
repentance, and virtuous amendment of life: whereby he drew much people unto
him: to whom he gave certain rudiments, translated out of the scripture, into
the French tongue. The Prelates threatened him with excommunication, whereat he
was nothing abashed; but persisted constant, until with sword, imprisonment,
and banishment, they drove Waldus, with all his favorers, out of the City:
who therefore, were called Pauperes de Lugduno, because they were driven from
their Country, and dispossessed of their goods. Their articles were these.

1 Only the Scriptures are to be believed in matters concerning faith. The
doctrine of the Waldenses.


2 All things necessary to salvation, to be contained in the Scriptures.

3 That there is one only Mediator, and no Saints, to be inuocated.

4 No Purgatory.

5 Masses to be wicked.

6 Men's traditions to be rejected in matters of salvation: against holy days,
superfluous chaunting, fixed fastes, the degrees, and orders of Priests,
Nuns, etc. Against vows, and peregrinations.

7 Against the supremacy of the Pope.

8 Against receiving in one kind.

9 The Pope is Antichrist, and Rome Babylon.

10 Against indulgences, and pardons.

11 Against vows of chastity.

12 That such as hear the word, and have a right faith, are the Church of
Christ: and the keys to be the preaching of the word, and ministering the
Sacraments.

These Waldenses, at length exiled, were dispersed into sundry, and diverse
places: of whom many remained long time in Bohemia, who writing to their king
Vladislaus, to purge themselves of the slanderous accusations of one D.
Augustine, gave up their confession, with an Apology, which was no other
doctrine than that which is taught at this day: The zeal of ye Waldenses.
as appears by the report of Aeneas Siluius. They were devout in prayer, and
diligent in reading the Scriptures. In so much, that Reinerius, a diligent
Inquisitor against them, reports, that he did hear, and see, a man of the
Country, unlettered, The Testament by heart.
which could rehearse the whole book of Job, word for word without the
book: and diverse other which had the new Testament by heart: and they were so
painful to instruct others, that he says, he did hear (of one that knew the
parties) that one of them did swim over the river Ibis, to convert one from
the Romish religion, and to give him instructions.

In the reign of this K. Henry, was gathered through England and France, ij.
d. of every pound, for the succor of the East christians against the Turks:
for such was the affliction, that Pope Urban 3. died for sorrow, and Gregory 8.
the next Pope after him, lived not two months.

Then in the days of P. Clement 3: king Henry of England, and Philip the
French king, the Duke of Burgundy, the Earl of Flaunders, the Earl of
Ca^pania, with diverse other christian princes, with a general consent, upon S.
Georges day, took the mark of the cross upon the^: promising together to take
their voyage to the holy land: at which time the king of England received first
the Red cross, The marks of the cross to go to fight for the holy land.
the French king the White cross, the Earl of Flanders the Green cross, and
so other Princes other colors. But king Henry after the three years were
expired, in which he promised to perform his voyage, sent to ye pope for
farther delay of his promise, offering for the same to erect 3. monasteries:
which he thus performed. In the Church of Waltham he thrust out the secular
priests, and placed monks in their room, and repaired again, and brought in
the nuns of Amesbury, that were before excluded for their incontinent life.
An. 1173. Incontinent life of nuns.


About the five and twentieth year of the reign of this king Ludouicus the
French king, by the vision of Thomas Beckets appearing to him in his dream,
and promising him the recovery of his son, K Jews of France makes
pilgrimage to Becket.
if he would resort to him to Canterbury, made his journey into England, to
visit S. Thomas at Canterbury, with Philip, Earl of Flanders: where he
offered a rich cup of gold, with other precious jewels, and 100. vessels of
wine yearly, to the covent of the Church of Canterbury.

Anno 1178. Albingenses Albingenses
about Toulouse denied the real presence, and denied also matrimony to be a
sacrament.

The monks of the Charterhouse, Monks of the Charterhouse.
first entered into this Realm, an. 1180.

Anno 1187. Baldwinus, Archbishop of Canterbury, began to buyld his new house,
and church at Lambeth, but by letters of Pope Clement the third, he was
forbidden to proceed any further.

It is written also, that Henry 2. gave to the Church of Rome, for the death
of Becket, 40000. marks of silver, and 5000. marks of gold, an. 1187.

In the five and thirty year of his reign, the king died at the Castle of
Whiuen, in Normandy: at whose death, they that were present, were so greedy
of the spoil, that they left the body of the king naked, and not so much could
be found as a cloth to cover it: till a Page coming in, and seeing the king lie
so ignominiously, threw his cloak upon his neither parts.

Anno 1189. Richard the eldest son of Henry the 2. succeeded his Father: at
which time Pope Clement Pope Clement
sat at Rome, succeeding Gregory, that died a little before for sorrow.

Jews destroyed.
In the time of the Coronation of the king, the Jews were destroyed, almost all
the land over.

The king in part of satisfaction for his trespass against his father, agreed
with Phillip the French king, to take upon them the recovery of the holy land:
and for the same, sold and let out much, and gathered diverse ways, great
treasures for the journey. Besides, by the commandment of Pope Clement the
third, a tenth was exacted of the whole Realm: in such sort, as the Christians
should make to the King 70000. A Bish. Chancellor. A Bish. chief justice of
England.
pound, and the Jews six thousand. For the government of his Realm in his
absence, the King set over principal in his absence, the Bishop of Ely his
Chancellor, and the the Bishop of Durham: whom he ordained to be chief
Justice of England, the one to have the custody of the Tower, with the
oversight of all other parts of the land on this side of Humber. The other,
which was the bishop of Durham, to have charge over all other his dominions
beyond Humber: sending moreover to Pope Clement, in the behalf of William,
Bishop of Ely, to be made the Popes Legate through all England, and
Scotland: which also was obtained. These things thus ordered, The journey for
the holy land.
the K. about the time of Easter, sailed into France, and there deferred their
journey til after Midsommer.

The form of the oath for the holy land.
and bear true fidelity of life, members, and worldly honor: and that neither
of them should fail one the other in their affairs, etc. But these covenants
were not performed on the French kings part: for at Messana, he suffered the
kings part to be abused, The French breaks his oath.
by the inhabitants of the city, and picked quarrels against the Englishmen,
and wrought treason against the king, by sending letters to the king of Cicill
Tancredus, by the duke of Burgundy: the contents whereof were, that the king of
England was a false traitor, and would never keep the peace that was betwixt
them: and if the said Tancredus would war against him, or secreetly by night
would invade him, he with all his power would assist him, and join with him
to the destruction of him, and all his army: which letters Tancredus showed
unto king Richard at Cathmensium a city, where the king found Tancredus: who
gave him very good intertainment three days and three nights: and at his
departing gave him four great ships, and 15. galleys, and furthermore he
himself would needs accompany him the space of two days journey, to a place
called Tauernium.

After the king of England had understood so much by Tancredus, and had also
received of him the very letters, he would show the French king from
thenceforth no loving countenance as before. King Richard having won Cipres,
departed with the French king toward the siege of Achon, and the 6. of June
crossing the seas, he met with a great bark fraught with men of war being
Saracens, and furnished with wild fire and unknown serpents, to the defense of
Achon, whom he vanquished, and the 7. of June came to Achon: which in short
space after was rendered unto the christians, the 12. of July, and the
captains of the Pagans upon agreement, resorted unto the tents of the Templars
to common with the king, touching peace, and giving up of their city The sum
of which peace was this, that ye kings should have the city of Achon, freely
and fully delivered unto them, with all that was therein, and 500. Captains of
the Christians should be restored, which were in Achon: also the holy cross
should be rendered unto the^, and 1000. christian captains, with 200. horsemen,
whom soever they themselves would choose out of al them that were in the power
of Saladine. Moreover they should give to the kings 200000. bysants, so that
they themselves would remain as pledges in the K. hands for performance
hereof: that if within 40. days these couenaunts were not accomplished, Achon
won by the Christians.
they would abide the kings mercy touching life and lims. These couenaunts
being agreed upon, the kings sent their soldiers and servants to the city, to
take an 100. of the richest and best in the city, to close them up in towers
under strong keeping.

The 13. day the two kings divided the spoil of the city betwixt them:
whereat the soldiers grudged, and with somewhat adoo were appeased.

The 20. of July K. Richard desired the French king, that they with their
armies would bind themselves by oath, to remain there still in the land of
Jerusalem 3. years, for the recovering of those countries: but he would swear
(he said) no such oath, and about the beginning of August the French K. departed
from Achon to Tirus, leaving his half part of ye city of Achon to Co^radus
the Marquis. After whose departure, the Pagans refused to keep their covenants
made, and neither would restore the holy cross, nor the money, nor the
captives: sending word that if king Richard did behead the pledges left with
him at Achon, they would chop of the heads of such christian captives as they
had in their hands. Shortly after this the Saladine sending great gifts to king
Richard, requested the time limited for the beheading of the captives to be
proroged, but the King refused to take his gifts, or to grant his request.
Whereupon the Saladine caused all the Christian captives within his possession
forthwith to be beheaded: which was the 18. of August. And albeit the king
understood it, yet he would not prevent the time limited for the execution of
his prisoners, being the twentieth day of August: upon which day he caused
them openly; in the sight of the Saladines army to be beheaded, to the number
of 2500. saving he reserved certain of the principal for purposes,
especially to make exchange for the holy cross, and certain other of the
christian captives.

After this, King Richard purposed to besiege the City of Ioppe, where, by the
way between Ioppe, and Achon, near to a town called Ashur, Saladine put to
flight.
Saladin encountering the king was put to flight, and the chase followed three
miles by the christians: so that he had not such a loss in 40. years before:
and but one Christian captain, called James Auernus in that conflict was
ouerthrown. From thence king Richard went to Ioppe, and then to Ascalon, where
he found Ioppe forsaken, and Ascalon thrown to the ground, and the whole land
of Syria forsaken: throughout all which country, the king had free passage
without resistance.

In the mean space of the kings absence, William, B. William ruffleth in the
kings absence.
the B. of Ely ruffled, and began to suspend the Canons, Clearks, and vicars of
the church, as of S. Peter in York, because they received him not with
procession. Under which interdiction, he held them, til they were fain at last
to to fall down at his feet, causing al their bells to be let down out of ye
steeple. 1500. horse the Bishops train
He commonly never rode under 1500. horses, of chaplens, priests, and other
serving men waiting upon him. He was covetous, given to wantonness, and
intolerable pride: and so long as it lasted, held all under him; but it lasted
not long.

King Richard, at his setting out toward Jerusalem, left order that Earl
John, and Gefferey his brethren, should not enter into England, the space of
3. years, but John was released afterward of that bond. Also the K. being at
Messana in Sicily, sent his mother Alinor to ye Pope for his brother Geffery,
elected before to the sea of York, to be consecrated Archb. but as she was
traveling to Rome, Clement dies
pope Clement died the 6. day of April: Celestine Pope.
in whose room succeeded Celestinus the third, who the next day after his
consecration came from Laterane to S. Peter's Church. Where standing upon the
stairs before the churchdoore of S. Peter, he received an oath of Henricus
king of the Almanes, that he should defend the Church of God, and all the
liberties thereof, and maintain justice: also to restore again the patrimony
of S. Peter, full and whole. And finally, surrender again to the Church of
Rome, the city of Tusculanum, etc.

Upon this grant, the pope took him to the Church, and anointed him for
Emperor, and his wife for Empress: who there sitting in his chair
pontificiall held the crown of gold between his feet: The pope sets the
crown upon the Emperors head with his feet, and dasheth it off again
and so the Emperor bowing down his head to the popes feet, received the
Crown: and the Empress likewise. The crown being thus set upon his head,
the Pope eftsoons with his foot stroke it off again, declaring thereby, that
he had power to depose him, (if he deserved it.) Then the Cardinals taking up
the crown set it on his head again.

Now Geffery being consecrated, through license of the pope Celestine, by the
Archb. of Turon, came into England. After his consecration, the Bishop of Ely
hearing thereof, charged him not to enter,, and to remember his oath made to
the king, at his setting forward toward Jerusalem: moreover, he threatened to
apprehend him. The Archbishop notwithstanding, arrived at Dover in the month
of September: where the Chauncellors men stood ready to apprehend him, from
whom he escaped, and came to the monks house of Dover. Which house, the
Chancellors men beset, so that he could not escape: and on a day when he had
said mass, as he was standing at the Altar with his garments yet about him,
they rushed in, and laid hands upon him, bound him, and drew him through
the dyrt, The Archbish. rudely handled
and so committed him to Mathewe Clarke their Constable to be kept. These
things being brought to his Brothers ear, the Earl John, he the twelfth of
October, and the Archbishop of Roan, with all the Bishops, Earls, and
Barons, and Citizens of London, assembled together in Paules-churche: where,
Ruffeling W. deposed.
for his great enormities, they agreed to depose William, the ruffeling
Chancellor, and to place in his room the Archbishop of Roan.

The third day after this, the Chancellor came to Dover, where he remained a
few days, and (contrary to his promise) purposed to take shipping, to pass
over the Seas: and disguised himself in the apparel of a woman, having in his
hand a meat-wand, and on his arm a piece of linen cloth. And thus, as he was
sitting upon a rock, waiting for his ship, a certain Fisherman espying him,
W. is taken disguised like a woman.
and supposing him to be an harlot, came to him, and so with striving with him
found him to be a man, whereat he wondered, and began to make an outcrie
against him. Whereupon, came great multitudes, wondering at him, haling, and
drawing him by the collar, and sleeves, through stones, and rocks: and at
length laid him in a dark celler, in stead of a prison. Now, Earl John
hearing of this, within viij. days after, sent word that they should deliver
him, and let him go. W. goes over Sea.
So he went over Sea, and directed letters to the Pope of the injuries done
unto him, and also into Siria, unto king Richard. Upon which complaint, Pope
Celestine wrote a thundering letter unto the prelates of England, that they
should with book, bell, and candle proceed against earl John, and other his
adherents, with no less severity, then if the injuries had been done unto
his own person, etc. But none could be got to execute the commandment of the
Pope: And the other part wrote likewise to king Richard, complaining of the
abuses of the Chancellor.

This Bishop of Elie wrote unto him, that the French king set up John, his
brother, to possess his kingdom, being councelled thereunto by the Templars.
Whereupon, the K. seeing the Duke of Burgundy, The K takes truce with the
Saracens.
and the Frenchmen shrink from him, took truce, offered by the Saracens, upon
the condition, that if the king would restore unto him again Silauonia, in as
good state, as it was when he took it, he would grant to him, and to all
Christians in the land of Jerusalem, truce for three years.

Not long after, an. 1193. The K taken in his return from the Saracens war,
and sold to the Emperor Chalices crosses, and shrines sold to redeem the king.
in a Town called Sinaca, was there taken by Lympold, Duke of the same
Country, and so sold to the Emperor for 60000. marks: and was kept by him in
custody, a year and three months: and at length released for 14000. Pounds:
which Sum of money was here gathered and made in England, of Chalices,
Crosses, Shrines and other Church plate: and this was about the 5. year of his
reign, and then it was obtained of the P. that Priests might celebrate with
Chalices of latin, Chalices of lattin and tin.
which continued long after.

In the time of the kings captivity, Philip the French K. incensed John, the
brother of king Richard, to take on him the kingdom of his brother. For which
fact, Ioh. at his brothers return, submitted himself unto him, and craved
pardon: which the king granted.

Fulco Fulco.
(some say he was Archb. of Roan called Gualter) who came unto the king, and
told him, The kings three daughters bestowed.
he had three daughters to bestow, willing him to bestow them in time: that is,
pride, covetousness, and luxuriousnes. Which words the king took in good part,
and calling his Lords, declared unto them what Fulco had councelled him: and
said, I give my daughter swelling pride to be wife to the proud Templars: My
greedy daughter avarice to the covetous order of ye Cistercian mo^ks: And last
of al my filthy daughter Lururie to the riotous prelates of the Church.

The king laying siege to a castle called Galuz, belonging to the Lord Bemonice
in little Britain, thinking there to have obtained great substance of
treasure, was shot into the arm by a soldier named Beyta^dus Cordomi: K
Richard slain.
whereupon the iron remaining and festering in the wound, the king within nine
days after died, having first forgiven the soldier before his death.

After the death of king Richard, King John.
reigned his brother John Earl of Morton.

An. 1200. John and his wife, because they were in the 3. degree of kindred.

An. 1205. Hubert archb. of Canterbury deceased Before his body was yet
committed to the earth, the yoonger sort of the monks elected Reignold their
superior: and placed him in the Metropolitan sea without the Kings license
and knowledge. Who being sent unto by the elder sort of mo^ks, requiring his
gracious license to choose their Archb. consented thereunto: requiring them
also instantly at his request they would show favor to John Gray bishop of
Norwich, which they also did, electing him into that sea. And for the full
establishing, the king sent of his own charges, to have the matter ratified by
the Pope.

The two Suffraganes of Canterbury not being made acquainted with the matter,
sent speedily to Rome, Stephen Langton with his own hand, in the high Church
of Viterby: upon which occasion the king conceived an exceeding displeasure
against the Clergy, and Monks of Canterbury, and banished 64. of them out of
the land: and does also sharply expostulate by letters with the Pope, for that
he had chosen Stephen Langton, a man brought up amongst his enemies a long
time, in the kingdom of France: besides the derogation to the liberties of his
crown threatening except he would favor the kings liking of the B. of Norwich,
The king threatens the Pope.
he would cut of the trade to Rome, and the profits that came thither from
the land.

The Pope writes in the behalf of R. Langton a froward and arrogant letter,
and not long after sends a commandment and charge into England to certain
bishops, that if the king would not yield, they should interdict him through
his realm. For the execution whereof four bishops were appointed: William B.
of London, Eustace bishop of Ely, Walter bishop of Winchester, and Giles bishop
of Hereford. Which four bishops went to him, showing their commission, The
king interdicted.
and willing him to consent: which the king refusing, they went and pronounced
the general interdiction through out the realm, and so the Church doors were
shut up, with keys, walls, and other fastnings, etc. Which with other
demeanor so incensed the king, that he took all the possessions of the four
Bishops into his hands, appointing certain men to keep the living of the
Clergy throughout the realm, and that they should enjoy no part thereof: he
also proclaimed, that all those that had Church living, and went over the sea,
should return at a certain day, or else lose their livings for ever: and
charged all Sheriffs to inquire if any churchman received any commandment
that came from the Pope, The king against the Clergy.
and that they should take their bodies and bring them before him, and also
that they should take into their hands for the kings use, all the church lands
that were given to any man by the Archbishop Stephen, or by the priors of
Canterbury, from the time of the election of the Archbishop: and further
charged, that all the woods that were the Archbishops, should be cut down, and
sold.

Which things the pope hearing of, sends two Legates Pandulph and Durance,
Pandulph and Durance Legates.
to charge the king to make restitution, and cease from those wrongs done to
the church: which when he refused to do, he proceeded to excommunicate him,
and to assoile all his subjects from their oath of obedience, Subjects assoiled
of their oath of obedience.
assoiling also all those of their sins, that would rise against the K. And a
while after upon the Legates return the Pope summoned all bishops, The king
accursed of the Pope.
abbots, and clerks to repair to Rome, to co^sult what was to be done
therein, where he accursed the K. and sent unto the French king upon remission
of all his sins, and of all that went with him, that he should take with him
all the power that he might, and so invade the Realm of England, to destroy
king John. Moreover, he gave sentence, that the K. should be deposed, and
another put in his place: appointing the deposing to ye french K Philip: The
pope gives England to the French king.
promising to give him remission of al his sins, and the clear possession of
all the Realm of England, to him, and his heirs, if he did either kill him,
or expel him. Whereupon, the next year 1212. 300. of his ships, well lade^ with all provision, and burnt another hundred within the haven: and took the spoil:
yet the K. considering the conspiracies of the pope, and the sharp invasion of
ye French K. with the treasons at home, by reason of the popes dispensation
with the oath of obedience, in the 13. year of his reign sent Ambassadors to
the pope, requiring peace: The king submits to the Pope.
promising to satisfy him in all things with due satisfaction: whereupon the
pope sent Pandulph again into England, with other Ambassadors. To who^, in the
behalf of ye court of Rome, the K. submitted himself, and resigning, gave up
his dominions of England, and Ireland from him and his heirs, that should come
of him for evermore: with this condition, that he should take these 2. dominions
of the pope again to farm, The Realm of England and Ireland farmed of ye Pope.
paying yearly therefore to the court of Rome, 1000. marks of silver. The^ took
the K. the crown from his head, kneeling upon his knees, in ye presence of al
his lords, and Barons, and gave it to Pandulph, the legate, saying on this
wise: Here I resign up the crown of the Realm of England into the popes hands,
Inocent the 3: and put me wholly in his mercy, and ordinance. The king
resigneth ye crown to the Popes Legate.
Then took Pa^dulph the crown of K. John, and kept it 5. days, as a
possession, and seisin taking of the 2. Realms England, and Ireland: which
also the king confirmed by a chart obligatory. Whereupon, he was the 2. of July,
discharged from the interdiction. wherein he had continued 6. years and 3.
months. Moreover, those that did stick to the K, of the meaner sort, they were
also fain to resort to the legate for absolutio^: the other being feign to
seek to the pope. Now notwithstanding this submission of the K yet did the
Clergy pretend farther against him, and incensed his Barons: insomuch that
diverse of them desired of Philip, the French king, that he would give them
Lodouike, his eldest son whom they would make their K. so that the king was
feign to use the popes aid, against diverse conspiracies, The Duke of Milaine.
and attempts against him: till at the last, the Barons understanding by the
vicount of Millain, who lay on his death bed at London, how Lodouike had
sworn, most cruelly to use the English nation if he prevailed: they sought for
ye kings favor, and reco^ciliation: which they obtained.

Ann. 1215. Innocent 3. held a synod at Rome, called the council of Lateran,
wherein he established by public decree yt the pope should have from the^ceforth
the correction of al christian princes, Strange decrees of the Pope.
and that no emperor should be admitted except he were sworn before, and also
crowned of him: he ordained moreuer, that whosoever he were, that spoke evil of
the pope, he should be punished in hell with eternal damnation.

He then ordained a pixe for to cover the host, and a Bell when he goes
abroad, Transubstantiation. Pope dies.
and made the mass equal with Christ's Gospel. In this council was also
brought in transubstantiation: he continued also the act of abiuring the wives
of priests.

Anno 1216. Innocent 3. the 17 day of July, and was buried at Perusium in Italy.

After, him succeeded one Cintucus, otherwise called Honorius Honorius.
3. a man of very great age: yet lived he ten years, and a half in the
papacy, and more.

The same year also, king John was poisoned (as most writers testify) at
Swinsted abbey, K. Ioh. poisoned
by a monk of that abbey, of the order of the Cistercians, or S Bernards
brethren, called Simon of Swinsted. The monk did first consult with his abbot,
The propesie of Caiphas.
and showed him what he minded to do, alleging for him self, the porphecy of
Caiphas, 11. of John, saying: It is better that one man should die, then the
whole people perish.

I am well contented (says he) to loose my life, and so become a martyr, that
I may utterly destroy this tyrant: with that ye Abbot did weep for gladness,
and much commended his fervent zeal. The Monk then being absolved of his
Abbot for doing this fact, went secretly into the garden on the backside, and
finding there a most venomous toad, did so prick him, and press him with his
pe^knife, that he made him vomit all the poison yt was within him: this done
he conveyed it into a cup of wine, and with a flattering and smiling
countenance, he said to the K. If it shall please your princely majesty, here
is such a cup of wine, as you never drank better in your life time: I trust
this wassall shall make all England glad, and with that he drank a great
draught thereof: the King pledged him. The monk anon went to the privy, and
there died: The monk dies.
(his guts gushing out of his belly) and had continually from thenceforth 3
monks to sing mass for him, confirmed by their general chapter. The K. within
a short space after, feeling great grief in his body, asked for Simon the
monk: answer was made, he was dead: the^ God have mercy on me said ye K. so
went he to Newark upon Tre^t, and there died: and was buried in ye cathedral
church at Worcester, betwixt S. Oswald and S. Wolstane, K. John dies.
an. 1216. the 19. of October, after that he had been much vexed with the
clergy 18. years, six months, and odd days.

In the reign of this king, the Citizens of London first obtained of the K. to
choose yearly a Mayor.

Next unto King John, succeeded his son. Hen. 3. Mayor in London.
being ix. years of age, and was crowned, an. 1216. at Gloucester, (which was
the^ counted the safest place in the land) by Swallow the Popes Legate. Yet
notwithstanding, Jews the French kings son, greatly molested him, John. til
1219 Jews lost ye field, and was driven to seek peace. and so receued, and
absolved by the Cardinal, who before had cursed him, and all that took part with
him: and had given him 1000. l. in silver for his charges, and so departed.
After the departure of Jews, Swal the Legate looks to his harvest: and
makes inquisition for all those Bishops that had taken against Henry the
third, and held with Jews, and caused them to fine for their fault and
recovery of their seats: Hugo of Lincoln 1000. marks, and an 100. to Swalo
the Legate.

Americus against images. Private tithes. Receiving at Easter. The bell and
candle before the Sacrament. The Mass as from the pope.
Pope Innocent the third, condemned Americus a learned bishop, for an heretic,
for teaching against Images. Also he brought into the Church the paying of
private tithes, and receiving once a year at Easter: he ordained the
reservation of the Sacrament, and the going with the bell and light before the
Sacrament: he ordained also in the Council of Laterane, that the Canon of the
Mass should be received with equal authority, as if it proceeded from the
Apostles themselves: he brought in transubstantiation. Also he ordained that
none should marry within the third degree.

The Pope stirs up dissension in ye world
He stirred up Otho against the Emp. Philip, because Philip was made Emperor
against his will: and afterward against the said Otho, (whom he made Emperor)
he raised up Frederick king of Cecil, and deposed Otho, because he said, he
held certain cities belonging unto him.

Correction of Princes belongs to ye pope.
He ordained also, if any prince offended one another, the correction should
appertain unto the Pope.

In the history of Hermannus Mutius, it is recorded, that an. 1212. 100.
Alsatians burned in one day by the P.
did hold that every day was free for eating of flesh, so it be done soberly.
Also, that they did wickedly, which restrained Ministers from their lawful
wives: For which cause, this Pope and his Bishops, caused an hundred of them to
be burned in one day. Nauclerus reports, that at the same time, many were in
the City of Millan, of the said doctrine, which used to send Collects unto
the foresaid Saints of Alsatia.

The Rablement of Religious Orders in the Popish Church.
AVstinians. Ambrosians. two sorts, 490 Antonians heremites, 324 Austines
heremites, 498 Austines obseruants, 490 Armenians sect. Ammonites, and
Moabites. Basilius order, 384 Benets order, 324 Bernardes order, 1120
Barefooted friars, 1222 Brigets order, 1370 Beghart, or white Spirits, 1399
Brethren of Jerusalem, 1103 Brethren of S. John, de ciuitate, black friars,
1220 Brethren of wilful poverty, Cluniacensis order, 913 Canons of S.
Augustine, 7080 Charterhouse order, 1086 Cistercian order, 1098 Crossebearers,
or Crossed friars, 1216 Carmelites, or white friars, 1212 Clares order, 1225
Celestines order, 1297 Camaldulensis order, 950 Crostarred brethren,
Constantino politanish order Crosse-bearers, Chapter monks. Duch order, 1216
Dominick black friars, 1220 Franciscans, 1224 Grandmontensis order, 1076
Gregorian order, 594 Georges order 1407 Guilhelmites, 1246 Gerundinesis order.
Galileans, Heremites. Helenes brethren, Humiliati, 1166 Hospital brethren.
Holy Ghost order. Ieroms order, two sorts. 1412 John's heremites. Iustines
order, 1432 Iohannites, or knights of the Rhodes, 380 Iniesuati, 1308 Ieromes
heremites, 1365 Joseph's order, 490 Iacobites sect. James brethrens order. James
brethren with the sword. Indians order. Katherin of Senes order, 1455 Keyed
mo^ks, K. of the Rhodes. Lazarites, or Marimagdalins, or our Ladies brethren.
1034 Lords of Vngarie. Minorires, which be divided into Conuentuales.
Obseruants. Reformate. Collectane. De Capucio. De Euangelio. Amedes. Clarini,
etc.
Minorites 1224 Mary's servants, 1304 Monks of mount Oliuet, 1046 Marouinies
sect Monorites sect. Monache, and Monachi. Morbonei, and Merestei. Menalaish,
and Iasonish sect. New chanons of S. Austin, 1430 Nestorini. Nalhart brethren.
New order of our Lady. Nazarei. Paul's heremites. 345 Premonstratensis order,
1119 Preachers order, or black friars, Peter the Apostles order, 1009
Purgatory brethren Rechabites. Sarrabites. Sambanites, 1199 Scourgers, the
first sect, 1266 Soldiers of Jesus Christ, 1323 Scopenites, or saint Saluators
order, 1367 Specularii, or Glass order. Sepulchers order. Shere order. Swerds
order. Starrid monks. Starrid friars. Sclauonie order. Scourgers, the second
sect, called Ninevites. Stool brethren. Scotland brethren order. Sicarii. S.
Sophis order. Templars order, 1110 Templar knights 1120 The vale of Iosaphats
order Vallis Vmbrosae, 1400 Waldensis sect. Wentzelaus order. Wilhelmes order.
White monks of mount Oliuet. 1406 Zelotes order.
IN the days of pope Innocent the 3. began the two sects of Friars, one called
the Preachers order, Dominicks. Minorits friars.
or black friars of S. Dominicks, the other called the Minorits of S. Francis.
The Preachers order began of one Dominicke a Spaniard, about the parts of
Toulouse, who after he had labored 10. years, in preaching against the
Albingenses, afterward coming up to the Council with Fulco B. of Toulouse,
desired the pope to have his order of preaching confirmed: which the pope a
great while refused, till at length thorough a dream he dreamed, he persuades
the Pope. His dream was, that Laterane Church was ready to fall, and he with
his shoulders was feign to hold it: whereupon Dominick had his petitition
granted. The rule which they follow, seems to be taken out of S. August. Their
profession stands upon 3. special point. 1. Having charity. 2 Holding
humility. 3. Possessing wilful poverty: their habit, and clothing is black.

The minorities descend from one Francis, an Italian, of the city of
Assissium, who hearing that Christ sent forth his disciples to preach, thought
to imitate the same in himself, and his disciples: and so left of shoes, had
but one coat, The perfection of the Gospel.
and that of a coorse cloth, in steed of a latchet to his shoe, and a girdle,
took a Hempen cord, and apparrelled his disciples, teaching them (as he said)
the perfection of the Gospel, to apprehend poverty, and to walk in the way of
holy simplicity. He left in writing to his Disciples, and followers, his rule,
which he called the Rule of the Gospel. He was very severe in outward
chastising of him self, so that in Winter, he covered his body with ise, and
snow. He called poverty, his Lady. He kept nothing over night. So desirous
he was of martyrdom, that he went into Siria, to the Souldan, who received him
honorably: for he told him not the truth, as John Baptist did to Herod. Many
sects of Franciscans
The Franciscans be divided into many Sects: some go in treene shoes, or
pattins, some barefooted, some regular Fra^cisca^s, or obserua^ts, some minors,
some minimi, other of ye gospel, other de caputio.

About the same time sprang up the Crooched friars, Crooched friars.
taking their original of Innocent the 3. who raised up an army signed with
the cross on their breast, to fight against the Albingenses, whom the Pope and
his sect accounted for heretics, about the part of Toulouse. The Albingenses
denied the Popes authority and his traditions: they were against Images,
pardons, purgatory: and chiefly they were abhorred of the Pope, because they
set up a contrary pope against him in the coasts of Burgarorum. Of these
Albingenses were slain at times, and burned a great multitude, by the means
of the Pope and Simon de monte forti, with other more.

About this season, or not not much before, died Pope Innocent the third, in
the 19. year of his Popedom: to whose custody, Fredericus the nephew of
Frederick Barbarossa, being young, was committed by the empress his mother.
After this Innocent, succeeded Honorius 3. and after Honorius, when he had
governed ten years, followed Gregorius 9. which popes were in the reign of
Henry 3.

About the year 1218. Becket 50. years after his death, was taken up, and
shrined for a new Saint, made of an old rebel: Becket shrined after his death
to whose shrining came such resort of people of England and France, that the
country of Kent was not sufficient to sustain them.

About the year 1220.

By reason the Realm (through king John) was made tributarie to the Pope, the
exactions upon all estates, from the Sea of Rome (especially upon beneficed
men, Incredible exactions from Rome.
and such as held any thing of the church) were incredible: so that certain of
the Nobles assented with the king, to make a restraint of such rents, and
exactions.

The Pope required by Cardinal Otho, of all ye churches, two prebends, one for
the bishops part, one for the chapter: and also of the monasteries, where be
diverse portions, The Popes request in England.
one for ye Abbot, another for the covent: of ye coue^t so much as apperteineth
to one monk, ye portion of the goods being portionably divided: of the Abbot
likewise as much. This request was denied, so that not long after the said Otho
came again, Cum autentico plenariae potestatis and assembled a Council again
at London, for the former purpose: so that diverse for fear, and many to
obtain further dignities, bestowed diverse precious rewards on him, in
palfreis, in rich plate, and jewels, in costly and sumptuous garments, richly
furred, in come, in vittels, etc. Gifts to the popes Legate.
In so much that only the B. of Winchester hearing that he would winter at
London, sent him fifty fat oxen, and a 100. coome of pure wheat, and eight
tons of chosen wine toward his house keeping: and other likewise according
to their ability. Now the time of the Council drawing near, and the Bishops
assembled, Contention betwixt Canterbury and York for dignity.
there fell great variance and discord betwixt the Archbishops of Canterbury
and York, for sitting at the right hand, and the left hand of the cardinal.
The Cardinal to pacify the^, brought forth a certain Bull of the Pope, in
the midst whereof was pictured the figure of the Cross, with the Image of
Paul on the right side, and Peter on the left, and upon that showed no
derogation to arise for the place or seats. Whereupon from that time forth
Canterbury enjoyed the right hand, and York the left. This strife thus ended,
The strife ended.
the Cardinal preaches unto them, and makes such unreasonable demaundes, for
the filling of his bags, that the king dreading the displeasure of his
commons, for the doings of the Legate, willed him to repair home again to
Rome: yet could he not be so rid of him, but that he gleaned four marks of
every procuration, besides, the rabble of Friars sturred men to go to war
against the Turks, whom when they had once bound with a vow, and signed them
with the Cross, then send they Bulls to release them for money. Besides the
Pope shamed not to ask the fifth part of every ecclesiastical man's living,
and also pope Gregory agreed with the citizens of Rome, that if they would
join with him in va^quishing Frederick the Emperor: he would grant unto
them, that all the benefices of England that were and should be vacant, namely
pertaining to religious houses, should be bestowed at their own will and
commandment, to their children, and kinsfolk: whereupon within a few days
after, the pope sends commandment to the archb. of Canterbury, and four
other bishops, that provision should be made for 300. Romans, in the chiefest,
and best benefices in all England 300. Romans to be placed in benefices of
England.
at the next voidance, so that the archb. and those bishops should be suspe^ded
from all gifts of benefices, until the 300. were provided for. Whereupon the
archb. seeing the unreasonable oppression of the land, went into France and
left the realm, and the rest of the Prelates coming themselves to the king,
desired a council, and that talk might be had in the matter: which being
granted, they made certain exceptions to the Popes request, The Pope desires
to be strong to suppress the Emperor Frederick.
not daring directly to deny the contribution. Now the occasion both of this
collection of the money, and this favor of the Romans, was to the end the Pope
might be sufficiently strong to suppress the Emperor Frederick.

Not long after this, followed at Lions a general Council, A Council at
Lions.
called by Innocent the 4. In which Council the English nation did exhibit
certain Articles of their griefs, touching the Popes great exactions, and
placing Italians in their benefices: but their suite prevailed not, for the
Pope not long after that, New exactio^s in England.
sent for new exactions to be gathered: which when the King heard of, he
commanded the Bishops not to yield to any such matter, till the return of his
Ambassadors, which he sent to the Pope touching that matter. About the latter
end of December, the Ambassadors return, and signify the Popes high
displeasure against the King: whereat he being greatly moved, caused to be
proclaimed through al his realm, that none hereafter should consent to any
tax of money, from the court of Rome: No tax of money out of England to Rome.
which coming to the popes ear, he directs his letters to ye prelates of
England, upon pain of his curse and suspense, that they should make collection
of the sum of money, against the feast of the assumptio^: the charge of the
curse being committed to ye B. of Worcester to execute. The K. relenteth to ye
pope. The 3. part of churchgoods, and the yearly fruit of vacant benefices to
ye pope.
This so terrified the king, that, what with the persuasion of the bishops, and
other prelates, he relented: which made the Pope at length (so past shame) that
he he demanded upon the censure of his curse, the third part of the
churchgoods, and the yearly fruits of al vacant benefices. So that such has
been the insatiable desire of the Romanists, that in the days of Sudburie,
Archbishop of Canterbury, Anno 1360. the pope by his proctors gate from the
Clergy, in less then one year, more the^ 60000. Florins of mere
contributions, 60000. florins in one year to Rome besides, etc.
besides his other auailes, and common revenues, out of benefices,
prebendaries, first fruits, tributes, peterpence, collations, reseruations,
relaxations, and such merchandise.

About this time, ann. 1220. The Albingenses assailed by the pope.
the pope stirred up Lodouike the young French king, through the instance of
Philip his father, to lay siege against the Albingenses, of the city of
Toulouse, and utterly to extinguish them: but God preserved the^, and cast such
a pestilence among the Frenchmen, beside famine and want, that they were
constrained to depart: and Simon de monte forti general of the army, to whom
the land of the Earl of Toulouse was given by the pope, was slain with a
stone before the gate of the city.

Ann. 1221. Friar minorits in England.
and had their first patron, Franciscus, which died ann. 1227. Honorius 3. an.
1224. About their coming in, many english men came into their order: Johannes
de sancto Egidio. Alexander de Hales.
among who^, was Johan. de sa^cto Egidio, a famous phisitio^, and astronomer,
and Alexander de Hales. Not long after by William de longa Spata, which was the
bastard son of king Henry 2. and Earl of Salisbury, the house of Carthusian
Carthusians.
mo^ks, was first founded at Heitrop, anno 1222. whose wife Ela, after his
death founded the house of Nuns at Lacocks, and there continued her self
Abbess of the place.

Not long after, began the new building of the minster of Salisbury, Minster of
Salisbury.
whereat Pandulphus the Popes legate, laid the 5. first stones: one for the
pope, the 2. for the young K. Henry, the 3. for the good Earl of Salisbury,
she 4 for ye Countess, the fifth for the B. of Salisbury. About the year 1221.
fell a contention betwixt Eustace B. of London, and the chapter of Paul's on ye
one side, and the abbot of Westminster with his covent on the other side, about
spiritual jurisdiction, and subjection: whether ye monastery of Westminster
were exe^pted from the subjection and jurisdiction of the B. of London, or not:
which controversy at last, coming to compromise, was committed to ye
arbitrime^t of Stephen, Contention about spiritual jurisdiction.
Archb. of Cant. Philip, B of Winchester. Thomas of Merton, and Richard, prior
of Dunstable: and at length it was agreed, that the monastery of Westminster
should be utterly exempted from the jurisdiction of the B. of london: and that
Stanes with the appurtena^ces thereunto belonging, Westminster exempt from the
B. of London.
should appertain to the monast of Westminster. Also ye the manor of Sunnebury,
should be due and proper to ye church of S. Paul, and also the church of S.
Margaret: with all the la^d belonging to the same, to be exempted from al other
jurisdiction, but only ye B. of Rome, and so was this matter ended, an. 1222.

Anno 1224. Initium malorum.

Wardship initium malorum.
An. 1226 Honorius, a great adversary to Frederik the Emp. after who^ succeeded
Gregory 9. more grievous then his predecessor. In the which year also died
Lodouike ye perjured french K. at the siege of Auinion, Honorius the Emperors
enemy dies.
whom the pope now the second, or third time, had set up to fight against
Raimund, the good Earl of Toulouse, and the Albingenses of that Country, at
which time also, he sent his Legate, M. Romanus, into France, to require of
every Cathedral church two Prebendships: one for the Bishop, another for the
chapter. And in Monasteries also, where the Abbot and Covent had diverse
portions, to require two Churches: one for the Abbot, the other for the Covent,
keeping this proportion: that how much should suffice for the living of one
Monk, so much the whole Covent should find for their part, The Popes
unreasonable request denied in France.
and as much the Abbot for his. Which request of the Legate was denied: with
further discourse, that if such exactions were not restrained, it were to be
doubted, least an universal departing might follow from the church of Rome.
Which words so moved the Legate, that he gave the matter over.

Now while the Legate was in hand for the popes purse, certain preaching
friars were directed by the Legate Romanus, into all France, to stir up the
Frenchmen, to take the cross upon them, and to war against the Earl of
Tolouse, and the people thereof, whom they accounted heretics: War against
the good Earl of Tolouse.
which many did gladly yield unto, rather for fear of the Frenchking, then for
the Legates motion.

Against the Ascension day then next following, they prepared themselves, with
horse, and harness, to set upon the Tholousians, with strength of 50000.
men, besides vitlers, and wagoners. The Earl of Tolouse of excommunicated
The Legate (by the way) did openly excommunicate the Earl of Tolouse, and
all that took his part, and interdicted his la^d. The first City of the
Tholousians, was Auinion: at the siege whereof, the king sustained great loss,
both through the valor of the Citizens, and also by the hand of God, with
pestilence and famine: The French king dies.
so that the king (to avoid the infection) went into an Abbey, not far of, and
shortly after died. Whose death the Popes Legate caused to be concealed, and
endeavored by policy, and treachery, to get the City. For, when he saw that
no other means would prevail, he requested, and friendly desired them, that
he, and his Prelates that were about him, might come into their City, to
examine what faith they were of, and that he neither sought, nor meant any
other thing thereby, but their own safeties, as well of body, as of soul:
(which he faithfully swear unto them) that he might return true certificate
thereof. Which being granted, and the Inhabitants nothing mistrusting, the
Soldiers of that Camp that were there agreed before, made them ready, and
rushed in at the entrance of the Prelates, and slew the Porter, and warders,
Auinson ouerrun by treason of the Popes Legate.
and at length wan the City, and destroyed the same. There be accounted more
than two and twenty thousand French Soldiers, that perished one way or other,
at the siege.

Anno 1228. Gregory the ninth, who succeeded Honorius, The P. chased out of
Rome.
fell at variance with the people of Rome, in so much, that about ye feast of
Easter, they thrust the Pope out of the City, pursuing him unto his Castle of
Viterbium: where also they invaded him so valeantly, that they chased him to
Perusium. Ex Matthew. Parisiensi, Page 69.

In this year also rose a controversy betwixt the King, and the Prior and
Covent of Durham, for choosing of their Bishop: the King taking part with
Lucas, a Chaplen of his, whom he offered to their election: the Monks
preferring a Clarke of theirs, called William, Archdeacon of Worcester: whom
also they presented to the King; but he had no liking unto him. Whereupon, both
the parties sent up to Rome: where the matter being trauersed with great
altercation on both sides, it was at length concluded between them both, that
neither M. William, nor yet Lucas, should be taken, but that Richard, B. of
Sarum, should be translated to Durham, and be Bishop there.

Contention for superiority
The like stir happened also, both the same year, and about the same matter,
between the Monks of Couentrie, and the Chanons of Lichfield, for choosing of
their B. which of them should have the superior voice in the election of their
Prelate: and that matter being had up to Rome, it was concluded that the Monks
of Couentrie, and the Church of Lichfield should choose their Bishop by course,
each part keeping turn the one after the other. Provided, notwithstanding,
that the Prior of Couentrie, should always have the first voice in every
election, whereas the old custom was, that the Covent with the Prior of
Couentrie was wont to have the whole election of the bishop, without the
Canons. ex Math. Paris. page 68.

In this year 1228. Stephen Langton Archbishop of Canterbury, The chapters of
the bible distinct by Stephen La^gton.
by whom (as N. Trivet records) the chapters of the Bible, in that order and
number as we now use the^ were first distinct. The said Langton also made
Postils upon the whole Bible: moreover he builded the New hall in the palace of
Canterbury.

After the death of Langton, fell strife betwixt the King, and the Monks of
Canterbury, for the election of their Archbishop: the Monks choose one of
their own society named Walter Heuesham: the King preferred Richard
Chancellor of Lincoln, and articulated against the other, that he was the
son of a Felon, convicted, and hanged: also that he had lain with a Nun,
and had children by her, etc. The matter being presented before the Pope, and
like to go hard on the Kings part, the Kings proctors promised and granted in
his name, The tenth of all the goods of England and Scotland, to be given to the
Pope.
to be given to the Pope the tenth part of all the goods of the Realm of
England, and Scotland moveable, to sustain his wars against the Emperor, so
that he would incline favorably to the Kings suit, whereat the Pope boiling
(as says Parisiensis) with unmeasurable desire of subduing his enemy the
Emperor, and cherished with so great promises, granted unto them. This was
done, An. 1229.

These things thus finished at Rome, the Pope sends his own chaplain
Stephen, legate into England, to require the tithes of all moveable goods of
England, Ireland, and Wales, which were promised unto him. Whereupon the king
called a Council at Westminster to common of the matter, where in fine,
notwithstanding the dislike of the most part, yet for fear of curse and of
interdiction the sum was gathered: so that the Prelates having no other
remedy, The prelates driven to sell there chalices and copes.
were driven to sell their chalices, cruets, copes, jewels, and other Church
plate, and some to lay to morgage such things as they had, some also to borrow
upon usury, to make the money which was required. Moreover the said Stephen (as
says Parisiensis) brought with him into England for the same purpose, Usurers
brought into England by the Popes Legate.
bankers and usurers, who lending out their money upon great interest, did
unreasonably pinch the English people: which Merchant usurers were then called
Caursini, and such exactions were then upon the poor Englishmen, that not only
their present goods were valued, and taxed, The corn growing against the next
harvest, tithes to pay ye Pope.
but also the corn yet growing against the next harvest, was tithed, etc.
Only the Earl of Chester named Radulphus, stood stoutly against the pope,
suffering none within his dominion, either lay men, or clarks, to yield any
te^ths to the Popes proctors. Parisiensis, page 74.

This year 1229. was finished the New church of Couentrie by Alexander bishop
of the same city, and partly by the help of the king: which Church Richard
his predecessor bishop of Couentry had begone.

The French men again about this time assailed Raymundus Earl of Toulouse,
The, Earl of Toulouse assailed again.
but prevailed not, the Earl having in the conflict taken 500. and many slain
of their seruitours: to the number of two thousand, were taken with their
armor. Yet thrice the same Summer did they assault the godly Earl, and were
put to flight and discomfited. Parisiensis, page 96.

Richard Archb. of Canterbury being now confirmed in his seat, came to the king
complaining of Hubert lord chief Justice, for withholding the Castle and town
of Tumbridge from him, with the appertenance thereto belonging, and other lands
of ye Earl of Clare, lately deceassed: which lands pertained to the right of
that sea, and to the Church of Canterbury: for the which the said Earl and his
ancestors, were bound to do homage to him and his predecessors: and therefore
required the keeping of the foresaid castle, with the demeanes to be restored
unto him. The king misliking the demand, answered not to the appetite of the
Archb. whereby he was so moved, that he brast forth into excommunication of al
such as held those possessions, or took their part, the K. only excepted:
which done, he prosecuteth his matter before the Pope. The K. hearing thereof,
sends up M. Roger Contelu, with certain other against ye Archb. The Archb.
among other the articles, complains to the Pope, of certain Bishops his
suffragans: who, neglecting their pastoral function, did sit on checker
matters, belonging to the king, and exercised sessions and judgments of blood:
Bishops set on checker matters exercised sessions and judgments. The pope
neglects the K. and satisfies the Archb.
he complained also of beneficed parsons, and Clearks, within orders: for
having many benefices joined with the cure of souls, and that they also taking
example of Bishops, did intermeddle in secular matters, and in judgments of
Lay men. The Pope neglects the kings allegations, and favors altogether
the Archbishop, and sent him away satisfied in his requests, who in his
returning homward, within 3. days of his setting forth, died, in the house of
the gray Friars at Saint Gemmes. Parisiensis.

After the death of Richard, the monks did choose Randulph Neuell, Randulph
Neuell.
Bishop of Chester, and the Kings Chancellor, a man faithful, upright, and
constant. The King approved of the election, and only the Popes confirmation
was wanting. Whereupon, the monks addressed the^ to Rome, to have the popes
liking: and first requiring help for the expenses of the journey of the new
Archbish, he denied the same, he should seem in any sort, ambitiously to
seek after it, A good bishop.
and holding up his hands to heaven, thus prayed: O Lord God, if I shall be
thought worthy to be called (although indeed unworthy) to the seat, and
office of this Church: so be it as thou have disposed. But if otherwise in this
troublesome office of Chauncery, and this my inferior ministry, whereunto I
have been assigned, I shall seem more necessary for this thy kingdom and
people, I refuse not my labor, thy will be done. The monks notwithstanding,
proceeded on their journey, and showed the matter to the pope: the popes
holiness inquired of the qualities of the man, of Simon Langthon, brother of
Stephen Langthon Archbish. before mentioned: who did so deprave Radulph Neuell
to the Pope, that he charged the monks to proceed to a new election: who
agreed upon John their prior to be Metropolitan: but he (no other fault being
found, notwithstanding he had bin examined in 3. days together of the
Cardinals) was repulsed for that he was too aged: though he were able to take a
journey to Rome and home again.

Anno 1231. Hubert, L. chief justice Hubert. Lord chief Justice.
of England: who then next under the K, ruled ye most affairs of ye realm.
This done, they sent these letters by certain soldiers thereto appointed: who
did execute ye contents accordingly: so that the Italians throughout the land,
were spoiled, and their corn and fruits bestowed on ye poor commons of the
land. Italians spoiled throughout the land.
This coming to the knowledge of Roger, B. of London: he with the assistance
of other bishops, proceeds to excommunication against them, and such as had
forged the kings letters. Yet for all that, the same year, about Easter next
following, all the Barnes in England, that were in the hands of any Roman,
or Italian, were likewise wasted: who for fear were feign to hide themselves
in monasteries and celles. The Authors and workers of this feat were four
score armed soldiers, of whom the principal Captain was one naming himself
William Withers William Withers.
surnamed Twynge.

The Pope hearing of this, sends his letters to the king upon the same,
threatening him with excommunication, to search out the doers of the fact, and
to punish them accordingly: likewise he sent the same charge to Peter bishop of
Winchester, and to the Abbot of Saint Edmunds, to inquire in the South parts:
to the bishop of Durham, and the Archb. of York, and to Master John Chanon of
York a Roman, to inquire in the North parts for the said malefactors. So
that earnest inquisition, being made, diverse were found favorers, and diverse
even of ye clergy: but the chief author was supposed to be Hugo de Burge, L.
chief justice, who both with the kings letters, and his own, fortified ye
doers thereof, that no man durst interrupt them. Moreover, in the same society,
was R. Twinge, who of his own voluntary accord came to the king, and protested
himself to be the Author of the fact, because that by the sentence of the B.
of Rome, and fraudulent circumuention of the Italians, he was bereaved of the
patronage of his benefices, having no more to give but that one. Then the king,
and other executors of the Popes commandment, counseled him to offer himself
to the pope to be absolved, and there to make declaration of his cause. The
king also wrote letters in the behalf of his Soldiers, requiring favorable
audience. At the request whereof, P. Gregory, both released him of the
sentence, and restored him to his Patronage. But the grudge against Hubert did
not so end, for the Bishops conspired against him: and first comes Peter, B.
of Winchester, to the K. with grievous complaints: and so prevailed with him,
that he caused the Lord Hubert to be put from his office, and procured Steeuen
Segraue to be placed in his room. And afterward, the K. was more and more
kindled against him, and called him to account for old matters whereof he had
the hand of the king to show for his discharge, which notwithstanding was not
accepted: the bishop of Winchester replying, that the charter of king John had
no force after his death, but that ye may now (said he (be called to reckoning
of this king for the same.

The injuries also, and damages wrought against the clarks of Rome, and the
Italians, and the Popes Legates, were objected against him, with diverse other
crimes concerning the estate etc. Whereunto he was required to answer by order
of law. Hubert then seeing himself in such a straight, refused to answer
presently, but required respite, because the matters were weighty which the
king objected unto him: which was granted til the 14. day of September: but in
the mean time, L. Hubert destitute on every side.
fearing the king, he fled from London to the priory of Merton, and was
destitute on every side: saving only that Lucas Archb. of Dublin, with instant
prayers, and tears, labored to the king for him. When the day was come, that
Hubert must appear, keeping amongst the monks of Merton, he durst not show
himself: whereat the King being offended, directed his letters in all have to
the mayor of London: commanding him to muster, and take up all that could
bear harness in London, and by force of arms, to bring him Hubert either
quick, or dead, out of Merton: which was accomplished. The Londoners hate
Hubert.
And on the next morrow, the Londiners (who hated Hubert) issued out with twenty
thousand men, and set forward toward the Abbey of Merton, where Hubert was
prostrate before the Altar, commending himself to God.

In the mean season, while the Citizens were on their journey, it was
suggested to the king by Radolph, Bishop of Chichester, and Lord Chancellor,
that it was dangerous to raise up the rude multitude for fear of sedition.
Moreover, what shall be said (quoth he) among the Frenchmen, and other Nations,
but thus (iestingly, and in mockery) see what a kind bird is this young king
of England, that seeks to devour his old Nurse, under whose wings he has
been brought up in his youth? With which words the king being moved, sent in
all have after the army, willing them to retire. One of the Messengers (for he
sent two) made great speed, and showed the kings pleasure in good time: the
other (desiring the destruction of Hubert) lingered in his way, and
notwithstanding he rode but a soft pace, fell of his horse, that by chance
stumbled, and brake his neck.

After this, the Archb. of Dublin, with great suite entreated, and obtained of
the K. to grant Hubert respite till the xij. of January, to provide him of his
answer. Whereupon, Hubert taking some confidence, and (as it were) coming to
himself) took his journey to S. Edmondsburie, where his wife was: and passing
through Essex, inned at a certain Town, belonging to the B. of Norwich.
Whereof, when the king was certified, (fearing least he should make some
commotion in the Realm) sends in hasty anger after him, Sir Godfrey
Crancombe, knight with 300. men, commanding them under pain of hanging, that
they should bring him to the Tower of London. Which commandment was
accomplished in have. Hubert having intelligence of their coming, (rose out of
his bed, naked as he was) and ran to the Chapel near to the Inn where he
was, and there with one hand holds the cross, and with the other the
sacrament of the Lords body. Godfrey entering the Chapel with his armed
Soldiers, and taking the Cross and Sacrament out of his hands, L. Hubert
brought to Tower.
bound him fast with Fetters and Gives, under the horse belly, and brought him
to the Tower. Whereat the king (having tarryed up, watching for him) greatly
rejoiced, and went merrilye to his bed.

The next morrow following, Roger, Bishop of London, had knowledge after what
sort he was taken out of the Chapel. He comes to the King, blaming him
boldly for violating the peace of holy Church: and protested, that unless the
party were losed again, and sent to the Chapel, from whence he was taken,
he would enter into sentence of Excommunication against the deed doers. L.
Hubert sent back again.
Whereupon, the king sends him back again to the Chapel, by ye same
Soldiers that brought him out before: and gives charge under pain of
hanging, to the Sheriffs of Hartford, and Essex, that in their own persons,
with the strength of both Shires, they should watch, and compass about the
Chapel, and see that Hubert in no wise should escape. In the mean time,
Lucas Archb of Dublin, true friend to the L. Hub.
he continued in prayer, night, and day: and Lucas Archb. of Dublin, his true,
and almost only friend, ceased not to pray, and weep to the King for him,
desiring him at the least to participate unto him, what he purposed to do with
Hubert Whereupon, the King answering, said, of three things he should choose
whether he would. First, either to forswear the Realm of England for ever: or
to be condemned to perpetual imprisonment: or else to confess him self openly
to be a traitor. Hard choice offered to L. Hubert.
But hereunto Hubert made answer, that he would choose none of these, as, who
was neither guilty, nor worthy of any such confusion. But to satisfy
somewhat the mind of the King, he would be content to depart the Realm for a
season: but to abjure the realm, he would not so do.

In this mean time, Radulphus, Earl of Chester, and Lincoln, which was one
of the greatest enemies he had, died. Hubert yet continued enclosed in the
Chapel, until his two servant (which ministered unto him) were taken from
him by the kings commandment.

Then Hubert (seeing no other remedy, but there to be starued with hunger)
offered him self of his own accord unto the Sheriffs: who by the K.
commandment, brought him again to the Tower.

Not long after the K. hearing that Hubert had committed his treasure to ye
Templars in London, sent to the^ to deliver it into his hands who refusing so
to do, the king commanded Hubert to cause the treasure to be delivered: which
he did most willingly, and yielded both himself, his treasures, and all that
ever he had unto the kings will, and pleasure. The enemies of Hubert hereupon
cried out against him, saying: that he was a thief, and had stolen the
treasure from the king, had deserved to be hanged: and thus cried the accusers
daily in the kings ears: but the king now somewhat appeased and satisfied,
answered that there was no need so straightly to deal with him, who from the
time of his youth first served his uncle K. Richard, then his father K. John:
in whose service (as he heard say) he was driven to eat his horse, etc. and
that he had rather be counted a king, foolish and simple, then to he judged a
tyrant toward such as have served him, and his ancestors in so many dangers,
faithfully waying more the few evils (which yet be not proved) then so many
good deserts of his evident, and manifest service, done both to him, The K.
somewhat appeased toward Lord Hubert.
and the whole realm. And thus the king somewhat relented to poor Hubert his
old servant, and granted to him such lands as he had given by king John his
father: and whatsoever he had else by his own purchase.

Thus Hubert had some cheering, Hubert somewhat cheered.
and with the favor of the king, the nobles began to be satisfied: and four
Earls, namely, Richard the kings brother, William, Earl of Warren, Richard,
Earl Marshall, and William, Earl of Ferries, became Sureties for him unto the
King. Upon which Sureties, he was translated to the Castle of Diuisis.

Whereupon, the Bishop of Winchester comes craftily to the King, and
desires the custody of that Castle, Craft of a Bishop.
making no mention of Hubert, to the intent, that by the keeping thereof, he
might the sooner dispatch him. Hubert hearing thereof, opens the matter unto
two of his servants, who conveyed him by night upon their backs (fettered as he
was, his keepers being a sleep) into ye parish church of ye town, and there
remained with him. The keepers (after search) found him in the Church, and with
violence drew him into the castle again, whereof the Bishop of Sarum
understanding, came to the castle where Hubert was, and requires that he might
be brought to the church again, from whence he was taken: which when the
keepers denied to do, the bishop gave sentence of excommunication against
them: and that done, with the bishop of London, and other bishops, goes and
complains to the king of the injury done to Hubert, and contumely against
the church: neither would they leave the king, Great reverence of the church.
before they had obtained that he should be brought again into the Church,
and so he was: but not long after the king commanded to keep him with watch,
The king hard to L. Hubert again.
till either he came forth, or perished by famine.

In the mean season, great dissension arose between the King, and his Nobles:
by means whereof, Hubert was taken by Richard, Earl marshall into Wales, and
there remained til the King at length was reconciled with his nobles, L. Hubert
received into the kings favor.
and so received with the rest Hubert again into his favor.

As Hubert was vexed for emptying the Popes barnes, so likewise Roger, Bishop
of London, being suspected for the same, was enforced to travel to Rome, there
to purge himself before the Pope.

Caursini, Italian usurers.
This Roger, after his return from Rome, labored to expel out of his Dioces,
the Italian Usurers, called Caursini and (they withstanding him) proceeds to
the sentence of excommunication against them. But they so wrought with the
Pope, that they caused the Bishop of London (being both aged, and sickly) to
be cited beyond the Seas, there to make answer unto such objections as were
inferred against him. And so the bishop was compelled to let the cause fall.

The Popes visitation general.
The same year, the Pope (to recover his losses) proclaimed a general
visitation thorough all religious houses, exempt, and not exempt, universally
pertaining to his jurisdiction, where, by the cruel dealing of the visitors,
many were compelled to travel, and appeal to Rome, to the great expenses of
their money, and filling of the popes coffers. And (as Parisiensis says) the
visitatio^ tended not to any reformation, so much as to the deformation of the
universal order: while all they which before through all parts of the world
followed only the rule of Benedict, A deformation no reformation Benedict order.
now through new devised constitutions, are found so divided, and diverse, that
of all the monasteries, and other churches of religion, scarce may two be found,
which do agree in one rule, and institution of life.

In the time that Hubert was secluded from the king. Peter B. of Winchester:
Peter bishop of Winchester.
by whose counsel the natural seruitours of the king were removed, and
strangers placed in greatest offices. To him were joined Peter de Riuallis his
coosin, who had committed to him all the great holds and munitions of the
realm. Stephen Segraue who succeeded Hubert, and Robert Passelew, who had the
keeping of the treasure under Peter Rival: so that by these, all the affairs
of the realm were ordered: and whereof the nobles co^plaining, through the
bishops means could have no audience. So that they sent word to the K. that
unless he would without al delay seclude from him Peter B of Winchester, and
other Alians of Pictauia, they would with the common consent of the realm,
displace him of his kingdom. They would displace the king.
At which message the king was much perplexed: but Winchester wrought so with
him, that the king warred upon the Marshall, with other of the Nobles near two
years.

The same year the king builded a monastery of co^uerts A monastery of
conuerts.
at London, for the redemption of his soul, and the soul of king John his
father, and the souls of all his ancestors, etc. Ex Math. Paris. page 86.
After the election of John Prior of Canterbury was disanulled, one John Blund
was elected: who traveling up to Rome, An 1233. Peter B. of Winchester 1000.
marks, and had another 1000. promised him of the said Winchester: thinking by
his money to make him of his side, and also wrote to the Emperor to help
forward his promotion in the court of Rome: but all was in vain. After whom by
the commandment of the Pope, one Edmund, Chanon of Salisbury, was ordained
Archb. and had his pal sent him from the pope: which Edmund, Edmund.
after, for his virtues was canonized for a Saint: Robert Grosted.
about which time also Robert Grosted was made bishop of Lincoln.

This Edmund with other bishops, An. 1234. A bad counsel followed of the king.
both to him and the realm. Adding moreover except he would in short time
reform himself, they would proceed by censure of the Church against him:
these words of the Bishops being spoken, the king required a little time of
respite to advise him, saying: that he could not of a sudden remove his
council from him, before he had entered his account with them of his treasures
committed unto them, and so the assembly brake up.

Not long after this Edmund the archb. was invested in ye church of Canterbury:
who shortly after his consecration, about the month of April coming with his
Suffragans to the place of counsel, where the King with his Barons and Earls
was assembled, put him in mind of his promise, touching the reforming of
matters: denouncing, that except he would speedily so do, Reformation.
they would proceed to the sentence of excommunication against him, and those
that should show themselves enemies: whereupon the king within few days after
commanded Winchester to leave the court, and to go to his Bishopric:
moreover he commanded Rival the Bishops coosin (some stories say his son)
to render unto him his castles, and to give account of all his treasures, and
so to void the realm: The kings courage.
swearing moreover unto him, that if he were not beneficed, and within orders
of the Church, he would have caused both his eyes to be pulled out of his
head. He expelled also the Pictauians, and sent Edmund, Pictauians expelled.
the Archbishop, with Chester, and Rochester, to entreat of peace with Leolin
and Richard, Earl marshall and others. But in the mean time, while these
things were doing in England, Richard, Earl marshal, by the falsehood of the
Bish. of Winchester, and Peter Rival, forging the kings letters to the
Irishmen against him: and partly by the conspiracy of Gilbert de Morisco, was
circumuented by the Irishmen in war: and there taken, and wounded, and by
them (through the means of his Surgion) slain.

About this time great slaughter was of the^ which are called Catini, about the
parts of Almaine: Catini in Asmaine slain.
they were esteemed of pope Gregory, and the papists, for heretics: but what
their opinions were, it is not certain. Parisi.

In like sort, Albingenses slain.
the Albingenses in great number were slain by pope Gregory in a certain plain
in Spain. Paris. fo. 87

The king hearing of the death of the Earl marshal, made great lamentation for
him.

At Gloucester, the Archb. with the bishops, declared to the K, the conditions
of peace: and desired yt he would be reconciled to the Nobles, and those he
had banished the Realm. Whereupon, the King directed his letters, and gave
safeconduct to all the exiles, that they should repair to him about the
beginning of June at Gloucester. Whereupon first comes to the King, Hubert,
Hubert comes to the K,
offering himself to the kings goodwill, and favor: whom the king with
cheerful countenance, embraced: restoring unto him, all that he had taken
from him, of living, and possessions: and after him, came others that were
embraced of the king, and received into favor again, Reconciliation
and those that were before high in the Kings favor, reproved and rejected,
and among other matters, for the death of the Earl marshal.

The same year the peace grew in England, Dissension betwixt the pope, and the
Romans.
dissentio^ fell at Rome, betwixt the Pope and the Romans: for that the
Citizens claimed by old custom, that it was not lawful for the pope to
excommunicat any citizen, The Pope greater then any man.
nor suspend the city with any interdiction for any manner excess. The Pope
answered, that he is less tha^ God, but greater than any man, therefore
greater then any Citizen: yea greater then King or Emperor: and for so much as he
is their spiritual father, he ought, and lawfully may chastise his children.
For this, and other controversies, such dissension arose, that the pope with
his cardinals, removed to Perusium: but the Romans overthrew diverse of his
houses in the city. Wherefore he did excommunicate them. The Romans then
flying to the Emperor, desired his aid: but he gathered an army, and to
pleasure the Pope, went against them, and joined with the Popes army: whose
Captains were, the Earl of Toulouse (to purchase the popes favor) and Peter
the foresaid B. of Winchest, who joining together with the emperor, vexed the
citizens greatly, who with the number of a hundred thousand without order,
issuing out with purpose to destroy Viterbium the popes cities, were destroyed
themselves (in great number) of their enemies. On both parts were slain 30.
Romans slain.
thousand But the most part were of the Citizens. This dissension continued
long after.

In the time of this Gregory 9. ann. 1230. Schism of the East Chhrch from the
West.
utterly disseuering the East Church from the West, upon this occasion.

There was a certain Archbishop, elected to a Bishopric among the Grecians:
who coming to Rome to be confirmed, could not be admitted without a great
sum of money: which when he refused to pay, and detested the execrable simony
of the Court of Rome, he made his repair home again to his country,
vnconfirmed: declaring to the whole nobility of that land, how the case stood.
Whereupon all the Church of the Grecians hearing this, at the same time
departed utterly from the Church of Rome. Insomuch that the Archbish. of
Constantinople coming afterward to the Council of Lions, declared there
openly, that, whereas he had before time above thirty Bishoprics, and
Suffraganes, now he had not three. Adding moreover, that all the Grecians, and
certain other, with Antioch, and the whole Empire of Romania, even to the
gates (almost) of Constantinople, were gone from the obedience of the church of
Rome. Paris. f. 112. and f. 186.

By occasion of which separation, in the year 1237. Germanus. 1237 Germanus.
Archb. and Patriarch of Constantinople, wrote unto Gregory the ninth,
desiring him to study, and seek means of unity, and that he would not refuse
to meet him in the midwaye, to debate of the matter, that unity might be
recovered. But the Pope refused, and shortly after, sent forth his preaching
Friars, to move all Christians to take the sign of the Cross, and to fight
against the Grecians, The sign of the cross to fight against the Grecians.
even as it were against the Turks, and Saracens. In so much, that in the I Will
of Ciprus, many good men, and martyrs, were slain for the same, as by letters
of the said Germanus does appear: who wrote to the Pope, and Cardinals, to
reform themselves: which was so taken of the Pope, that shortly after he
prepared to send men of war, signed with the cross, to fight against the
Grecians. Whereupon, the Archb. of Antioch, with the foresaid Germanus,
solemnlie excommunicated the Pope. The pope excommunicated Intolerable
exactions of the pope.


The exactions of the Pope were so intolerable in the land, that king Henry
the third wrote to Pope Innocent the fourth, for releasement, in most humble,
and gentle manner, anno 1244. 28. year of the kings reign: Yet it booted not,
for the Pope was not ashamed to take of David, Prince of North Wales, five
hundred marks a year, to set him against the King of England, and exempted
him from all his fealty, and obedience, which he had sworn.

In the year one thousand, two hundred forty five, Prince of Wales set
against the king of England.
the whole Nobility of the Realm, by general consent, with the kings
knowledge, caused all parts of the Sea side to be laid, that no Messenger
with the Popes letters, and Bulls from Rome, should be permitted to enter the
realm. Whereupon, No messenger permitted to, or fro Rome.
some were taken at Dover, and there stayed. Notwithstanding, when complaint
thereof was brought to the king, by Martinus the Popes Legate, there was no
remedy, but the K. must needs cause the letters to be restored again, and
executed to the full effect. Then the king (upon advise) caused a view to be
taken through every Shire in England, to what sum the whole revenues of the
Romans, and Italians, amounted to, which by the popes authority went went out
of England. The whole sum whereof, was found yearly to be 60000. 60000. marks
yearly to Rome.
marks. To which sum, the whole revenues of the crown did not amount.

The Nobles then understanding the miserable oppression of the Realm, being
assembled together at Dunstable for certain causes, sent one Fulco, in the
name of the whole Nobility, unto Martinus, that he should with speed depart
the land, The P. Legate departs England.
except he would be cut all to peers. Which message the Legate showed to the
king, and demanded if his consent were thereto: and finding small comfort,
took his leave, and departed, an. 1245.

After this, followed immediately a general Council at Lions: Council at Lions.
to the which, the estate, and Lords of the Realm, with consent of the
Communaltie, sent two bills: the one containing a general Supplication to the
Pope and Council: the other, with the articles of such greeuances as they
desired to have redressed. The Supplication was sent by Sir Roger Bigotte,
knight, and William de Powick, Esquire, and Henry de la Mare, with other
knights, and Gentlemen. After yt it was there opened, and read, P. Innocent
first keeping silence, differred to answer thereto, making have to proceed to
his detestable sentence of excommunication and curse, Emp. Fred. cursed by the
Pope.
against the good Emperor Fred. Which curse being done, the Pope told them
flatly, they should not have their requests fulfilled: and incontinent during
ye same council, he caused every B. of England to put to his hand and seal,
to the obligation made by the king John for the Popes tribute: threatening
moreover, that if he had once brought down the Emperor Frederick, he would
bridle the insolent pride of England well enough.

In the beginning of the next year following, An. 1246. Innocent came to
Cluniake: Pope persuades war against England.
where he persuaded the French king Jews, to make war against the king of
England: whereto the French king would not agree: but shortly after concluded
with him longer truce.

Over and beside all other exactions, the Pope sending down his letters from
the sea Apostolic, charged the prelates to find him some ten, some five, some
fifteen able men, well furnished with horse and harneis, for one whole year
to fight in the Popes wars: The Popes wars.
and least the king should have knowledge hereof, it was enioined them under
pain of excommunication, that they should reveal it to none, but to keep it
secret only to themselves.

Pope Innocent now intending to subdue the Greek church, sent the provincial
of the Grayfriers, with other associates of the same order into England, with
his precepts authentical, that all goods gotten by usury, should be attached
for his war against the Greeks: War against the Greeks.
and that all those should be absolved from all their sins, that would take
on them the cross to fight against the Grecians, etc. with other articles
tending to the Popes profit.

The same year 1246. 60000. pounds exacted by the Pope.
The execution of this commission, was committed to the B. of London: but as
consultation was had about the matter at Paul's, the King sends straight
charge, that they should not consent thereto. Parisiensis, fol. 207.

And afterward, An. 1247. The grieua^ces of England.
whereto the Pope makes a slender, and an impertinent answer.

In the year 1244. Jews the French king, son to queen Bla^ch fell very
sick, lying in a swound or trance, for certain days, that some said, he was
dead: his mother, amongst the company superstitiously given, went and brought a
piece of the holy cross, with the crown, and spear: which piece of the holy
cross, Baldwinus Emp. of Constantinople (whom the Grecians had deposed a little
before, for holding with the B. of Rome) had sold to the French king, for a
great sum of money, and blessed him with the same: also laid the crown and
spear to his body: making a vow withal, in the person of her son: that if
the Lord would visit him with health, and release him of that infirmity, he
should be marked with the cross to visit his sepulcher. Thus as she with the
Bishop of Paris, and other, was praying: the King with a sigh began to pluck
to his arms, and legs: and so stretching himself, began to speak, giving
thanks to God that had delivered him from death. And as soon as he was well
recovered, The French King receives the sign of the cross.
received the sign of the cross, vowing for a freewill sacrifice, that he
would in his own person visit the holy land.

After that, great preparation was made thorough out France, for the journey.
The most part of the Nobles crossing themselves, after the example of the king.
The Frenchmens example, moved William longa Spata, with the Bishop of
Worcester, The voyage of the holy land.
and certain Gentlemen to the same journey.

Anno 1248. John Baptist drew nigh, which was the time appointed for the
setting forth, and nothing wanted thereto, saving the variance betwixt
Frederike the Emperor, and the Pope: which he thought good to seek to
appease, that he might have both safer passage through the Emperors country,
and less ieopardy might be at home. The Pope refuses al agreement with the
Pope.
But the Pope would not in any sort come to agreement, although the Emperor
offered him whatsoever amends he would require: and if the Pope could not
abide his tarrying in his own dominions and empire: he said he would go fight
against the Saracens, and Turks, never to return into Europe again, there to
recover lands and kingdoms, whatsoever did at any time belong unto
Christendom, so that the Pope would be only contented, that Henry his son
should be Emperor after him. Neither could this be admitted. Then he offered
for truth of his promise, to put in the French king, and the king of England
for his sureties, or else for trial of his cause, to stand to their
arbitrament. Neither would that be granted. At last, he desired that he
might come himself, and answer before the Council: which the Pope also
refused, Paris. fol. 187. Anno 1225.

The French king finding no favor at the Popes hand, Damiata won from ye Turks
for the Emperor, takes his leave of him at Lions, with heaviness, and
proceeded in his journey: and having now taken Damiata, the Sultan sent unto
the king, by certain that were about him: offering to the Christians, the
quiet, and full possession of the holy land, and all the kingdom of Jerusalem:
and besides, other infinite treasure of gold and silver: or what else soever
might pleasure them. Only upon condition, that they would restore again
Damiata, with the captives there: and so would join together in mutual
peace, and amity, etc. It was also firmly spoken, that the Sultan, with most
of his nobles, were intended to leave the law of Mahomet, and embrace the faith
of Christ: so that they might quietly enjoy their lands, and possessions. But
they had commandment from the Pope by his legate, The pope hinders the peace
that if any such offers should be made, they should not in any case accept of
them. Paris. fol. 233.

But afterward the Sultan growing to be more confident, refused that which
before he had offered: and in conclusion, the army of the Christians, was
wholly destroyed The army of Christians wholly destroyed.
by the Saracens: and the French king with his two brethren taken prisoners:
the King was raunsomed at sixty thousand marks, and Damiata delivered again,
upon condition that the Sultan should see him safely conducted to Achon.
80000. Christians perishes in the wars against the Turks.
The number of Christians that perished in that journey, were 80000. persons.
Paris. fol. 237, 238.

After this overthrow of the French king, and his army, the Christians of
Antioch, and of other Christian regions, gave over their holds, and cities.

In the reign of Henry the third, was the good Emperor Federike the second
vexed of the Popes: first, of Innocentius the third: to whom, with his
dominions, he was in his minority committed by his mothers testament,
thinking thereby to have safely provided for him. But this Pope, so soon as
he had protection of the young Emperor and his seigniories, became a false
Traitor against him: and stirred up Sibill, the late wife of Tancredus, whom
Henry put from the kingdom of Sicilie, to recover the same again, and
procured the aid of the French K. thereunto. At which time, the worthy protector
Innocent 3. sent his legates with letters of excommunication against such, that
would not admit one Walterus, (who had married with the eldest daughter of
Tancredus) for their king: and also absolved the Princes electors, and other
Nobles, from their oath which they had made to Henricus, touching the
establishing of his son in the empire: and wrote his Epistle to the Duke
Barthold of Zaringia, to be Emperor: which he refusing, he went about to
procure, that Otho the son of Henry Leo should be made Emperor. But
Frederick now growing to man's estate, gathered his power and pursued Otho:
Frederick crowned Emperor by pope Honorius.
who anon after died, and so he was crowned Emperor of Honorius the Pope, that
succeeded Innocentius, and was of him consecrated, and called Augustus.

After his consecration, he gave many great gifts, Gifts to the Church of Rome.
and assured by his charter, to the church of Rome, the dukedom of Fundanum:
he gave moreover, and remitted what constitutions the Pope would desire:
whereby what soever he were, which for the diminution of the liberties of the
church were excommunicated, and so continued a years space, that then he
should be within danger of proscription, and not be released without
satisfaction made, and that he were admitted by the Pope to the Church again.

A while after Frederike departing from Rome, certain conspirators, both
bishops, and others, against the emperor, fled to Honorius for succor. Which
when Frederik understood, he began to expostulate with the B. considering the
vnseemlinesse of that his fact: the pope on the other side, Honorius curses
the Emp. Frederike.
thundered out his curses, and excommunications against him.

Nicholaus Cisnerus affirms, that whilst Frederike the Emperor was in
Sicilia, his wife Constantia died at Catrana, or Catana. In the mean time, the
Christians with a great many, sailed into Egypt, and took the City Heliopolis,
commonly called Damatia, and long ago named Pelusinu^: being in good hope to
have driven Sultanus ye Sultan, out of Egypt,) had a great, and marvelous
overthrow, by the conueying of the water of Nylus (which then ouerflowed) into
their Camp, and were feign to accord an unprofitable truce with the Sultan,
for certain years, and to deliver the City again. Whereupon, king John,
surnamed Brennius King of Jerusalem, arrived in Italy, and desired help of
Emperor against his enemies.

And from thence he went to Rome, to the Pope, declaring unto him their
calamity, and present peril, desiring aid therein. By whose means, the
Emperor (as says Cisnerus) was reconciled with the Pope and made friends. The
Emp. reconciled with the pope.
To whom also king John gave Ioell his daughter in marriage, which came of the
daughter of Conradus king of Jerusalem, as right heir thereunto by her mother:
by whom also he obtained the kingdoms of Naples, and Sicill, and promised he
would in his own person with all speed, assay to recover the kingdom of
Jerusalem. Honorius that lately was reconciled unto him, Honorius dies.
purposed to have made against him some great and secret attempt: but was by
death prevented. After whom succeeded Gregory the 9. as great an enemy to
Frederick as Honorius: Pope Gregory the 9.
which Gregory came of the race of him whom the Emperor had condemned of
treason, The Pope threatens the Emperor.
wrought against himself. This Gregory was scarcely settled in his papacy,
when that he threatened him with excommunication, unless he would prepare
himself into Asia (according to his promise) unto king John: which was only
(the Emperor being absent) that he might bring some purposes against him to
pass. Fazellus a Sicilian writer, says: that the chiefest cause of the
Emperors stay, was for the oath of truce and peace, during certain years:
which was made betwixt the Saracens, and christians, that yet was not expired

When K. John's daughter of Jerusalem, was brought to Rome, and the Emperor and
the Pope reconciled together, to celebrate the marriage: The Pope offended with
the Emp. for not kissing his foot but his knee.
Gregory (as the manner was) offered his right foot to the Emperor to kiss,
who stouped not so low, but scarce kissed the upper part of his knee, and would
not kiss his foot: whereat the Pope was greatly offended, and purposed to
revenge it, as occasion should serve.

Afterward, the Emperor prepared himself to the journey against the Saracens,
and recovery of Jerusalem, but was stayed by sickness, all other things being
in a readiness. Who, after he had recovered himself, proceeded in his journey:
and when he came to the straights of Peloponesus, and Creta. His disease grew
upon him again, and suddenly he fell sick: whereof the Pope hearing,
thundered against him excommunications, and curses, laying most foul, and
false crimes to his charge. In so much, that the Emperor was feign to purge
himself by his letters, unto the Christian Princes: especially, of Germany,
and the Nobles of ye Empire, his Ambassadors not being suffered to approach the
P. presence.

But now, being recovered of his sickness, he provided all things necessary for
the war: and came to Ioppa, and so used the matter, that the Saracens
granted his demands right profitable for the Christian Commonwealth, and a
peace was concluded for ten years, and confirmed by solemn oath on both
sides: The iourny against the Sara.
the form and condition of which peace, was thus. First, that Frederick should
be crowned K. of Jerusalem Secondly, that all the lands and possessions which
were situate betwixt Jerusalem, The P. false accusation of the Emperor.
and Ptolemaida, and the greatest part of Palestina, the Cities of Tirus and
Sidon, which were in Siria, and all other territories, which Baldwinus the
fourth at any time had, and occupied there, should be delivered unto him:
only, certain Castles reserved. Thirdly, that he might fortify, and build,
what Fortresses, and Castles he thought good, Cities and towns in all Siria,
and Palestina. Fourthly, that all Prisoners in Saracens hands, should be
freely set at liberty: and again, that the Saracens might have leave
(without armor) to come into the Temple, where the Sepulcher of the Lord is,
to pray, and that they should keep still Cratum, and the kings mount.

These things obtained, Frederick desires the Pope, The Emperor craves the P.
favor.
that for as much as he had now accomplished his promise, neither was there any
cause, why he should now be offended with him, that he might be reconciled, and
obtain his favor. In the mean season, the Emperor, with all his army,
marches to Jerusalem: where, upon Easter day, anno 1259. Olive, the Master, or
Captain of the temple, repining thereat. The Emperor crowned K. of Jerusalem.
The P practices against the Emperor whiles he warreth with the Saracens.
In the time of the Emperors being in Asia, the Pope practices against him at
home. And first, caused the Soldiers which the Emperor sent for out of
Germany, to the mainteyning of the holy wars, to be stayed, passing
through Italy, and caused them to be spoiled of all such provision as they
had: and sent letters into Asia, to the Patriarch of Jerusalem, and Soldiers,
that kept the Temple, and Hospital, inciting them to rebel against the
Emperor. And furthermore, dissuaded the Princes of the Saracens, that they
should make no league with Frederike, neither deliver up unto him the Crown,
The P practices with the Saracens.
and Kingdom of Jerusalem: Which letters fell into the hands of the Emperor.

Besides these practices, he also excited his father in law, John Brennius; and
the French king, to invade his Dominions: which jointly they did.

Thus, while the Pope practiced in the dominions of Frederike, he received the
letters of his good success in Asia: which greatly vexed his holiness, so far
of was he from rejoicing thereat. Whereby it may appear, that his desire was, to
have the Emperor take that dangerous journey, there to miscarie, and perish.
But the Pope (that he might have some pretense) blamed the Emperor, for that
he had suffered the Saracens (although without armor and weapon) to enter unto
the Sepulcher of Christ, A quarrel to the Emperor.
and had left for them a lodging, near unto the place.

The Pope also caused a rumor to be spread, of the death of the Emperor, to the
end he might allure unto him, the fidelity of those cities in the kingdom of
Naples (which yet kept their alleagance unto Frederike) of whom they should
now hope for no longer refuge.

The Emp. returns and wins towns from the pope in Italy.
The Emperor now understanding what stir the P. kept in his Dominions,
returned with such power, and success, that he wins in Italy as many towns,
as the Pope had, even almost to Rome, and after that Vmbria and Picena: yet for
Christian and public tranquillity sake, he sends unto him his Legates to
entreat a peace, declaring that he would (if no other conceived grudge were
then pretended) make to him an account voluntarily of all things that he had
done in his life: The Emp. offers to give account of his things to the Pope.
and that he would and was contented to submit himself unto the Church: and
that for this cause he willingly offered unto him both duty and obseruancie,
and sent him Princes and Dukes of the Empire to entreat for this peace: yet
was the popes insolency such, that he would not that year be brought to any
agreement, but the next year after with much ado, Peace betwixt the Emp. and
the pope.
a peace was made and concluded betwixt them by the help and industry of
Leopaldus of Austria, and Hermannus Captain of the Duitch soldiers, and the
President of Messana. The Pope then absoluing the Emperor of his
excommunication, took therefore of him an hundred and twenty thousand ounces
of gold, 120000. ounces of gold to the Pope for the Emperors absolution.
and promised him the titles both of the empire, and also of his kingdoms: yet
kept he not promise with him, for besides other breaches, he neither restored
the customs in the land of Sicil, neither yet the city Castellana. Yet
notwithstanding, Frederike for peace sake, bare the injury, and studied by
liberal gifts to make the Pope his trusty friend. But no means would serve:
so that he moved Henry, the Emperors son in his absence, to rebel against
his father: The P. moves the Emp. son to rebel against his father.
besides other conspiracies procured against the Emperor: who returning into
Italy, to punish those that had rebelled with his son. The P. admonished
those that were faulty, to join themselves together, and to furnish their
Towns, and Cities, with garrisons, and to send for aid to their friends, and
to provide weapons meet for war. And furthermore, sends his Ambassador to ye
Emp. to who^ (under pretense of peace) he sends out commandment, to
interdict him and his land, so soon as he came within the borders of Italy,
yet the Emperor marches forth into Italy, notwithstanding the Popes
forbidding, and brought under the cities that rebelled, as Mantua, The Emp.
prevails for all the Popes curse.
Verona, Ternisium, Patauium, and others, and overthrew the Popes confederates,
whereat the pope being somewhat dismayed, began to fear the Emperor, and now
goes about to deprive him: which he understanding, sends four Legates unto
him, that might answer, and refute the crimes laid against him. With which
Ambassadors the Pope refuses to speak, and at a day appointed pronounces
the sentence of proscription against the Emperor: The pope pronounces the
sentence of proscription against the Emperor.
depriving him of all his dignities, honors, titles, prerogatives, kingdoms,
and the whole empire, and and solicited against him Tewepolus the Venetian,
who yet stood fast and faithful to the Emperor. Yet certain princes of
Germany, by the Popes means, revolted from the Emperor, as Otho the
Governor of Rhemes, and Duke Boiora, who also caused three other Princes and
Dukes, Revolt from the Emperor to the Pope.
to revolt from the Emperor to the Pope: as Vuenceslaus, and Belus, Princes of
che Hungarians, and Henry, Duke of Polonia: to whom also came Fredericus
Austriacus his son. These gathering a Council, (when they had thought to
have translated the empire unto the kings son of Denmark) desired to have
the Popes Legates to be sent from him to the effect of that election.

These news being brought to the Emperor, at Patauium: he purges himself of
the crimes, to the Christian Princes, and denounces a solemn Council of all
ye princes, and other Nobility of the Empire, at Aegera: to whom resorted
diverse States, The Church spoiled to maintain the popes wars.
and Nobles. The pope, on the other side, soliciting against the Emperor all
that he might: so that some had tithes given them to fight against the
Emperor: other, Glebe-lands, and benefices: other, the spoil of such
Colleges, and Monasteries, as took not part with the Pope: And to some other
were given Colleges, and Monasteries themselves: yea there were certain of
the popes own birds that had their ecclesiastical tithes taken from them,
and other some had the rentes and revenues of their Colleges plucked away by
force, The Emp. prevails.
to the maintenance of the popes quarrel against the Emperor. But the
Emperor prevailed and came to Viterbium, which drove the Pope into a fear,
least he would also come to Rome: wherefore he caused a supplication to be
drawn, pourtraying about the same the heads of Peter and Paul, Everlasting
life promised to such as would fight against the Emperor.
and with a sharp and co^tumelious Oration, he much defaced the Emperor,
promising them everlasting life, and giving the badge of the cross to as many
as would arm themselves and fight against the Emperor, as against the most
wicked enemy of God and his church, yet the Emperor by Gods blessing prevailed
and subdued the popes confederates.

Now while this stir was betwixt the Emperor and the pope, Ochodarius the
Emperor of the Tartarians son, with a great power invaded ye borders next
adjoining unto him, and there wan Ropolanum, Rodolium, Mu^danum, with diverse
other cities and towns, killing man, woman, and child, and destroyed all
Hungary, and made great spoil in both the Pannonias, Mesiarum, Bulgaria, and
Seruia. When Belus the king of Hungary had gotten to Pola, a city of Histria:
unto Otho duke of Dalmatia, he sent his Legates to Frederick the Emperor,
promising, if that he would send him aid to expel the Tartars, Hungary should
ever after be under the jurisdiction of the Empire. The Emperor was in
respect of the common cause of Christians, The pope hinders the defense of
christendom.
very willing to satisfy his request, but the pope with his confederats
hindered the same, as he signified to the king of Hungary by his letters.
Notwithstanding he sent Conradus Caesar king of Bohemia, and other Princes more
of Germany, to withstand the enemy, as much as lay in them to do. But ye
great army and number of soldiers that ware the cross, by the Popes
assignement, differed their journey against the Tartarians, and had
commandment given them by Albertus the Popes procurator, to abide at home,
till they should be called for in battle to fight against the Emperor: and
notwithstanding this spoil and havoc of Polonia, Bohemia, and Hungaria, by
the Tartarians, it was determined that at Libussa the Princes confederate
should be assembled, about the deposing of the Emperor, and creating an other:
and the league with him and the French king by the popes means, The Emp.
wastes about Rome.
either was utterly infringed or else in variable suspense. Wherefore
Frederick now seeing no other remedy, prosecuteth his war to the uttermost,
and wastes all the country about Rome, The pope dies for anger.
wherewith the Pope was so dismaide, that being in despair to obtain his
purpose, he died for very anger and thought.

This Gregory brought into the Church much horrible impiety, blasphemy, and
wickedness, and among others brought in that most detestable Canticle, Salve
Regina brought into the Church.
Salve Regina: in which he attributes the honor and worship only due to
Jesus Christ, unto the virgin his mother. This is he, in whose name the book
of the Decretals The decretals.
was set out, a sink of folly and impiety.

Pope Celestine. Pope dies.
After this Gregory was placed Celestine, borne in Mediolanum, among the
Castellians: who (as Blondus declared) by fained promises, offered a league
with Frederick, and the 18. day after he was created, he died.

Now Frederick thinking himself void of fear, lenieth an army against the
Tartarians, An army against the Tartarians.
for the relief of the Christians, who hearing of the coming of the Emperor,
returned another way, by the river Danubius to Tanricia, and so through the
fennes of Meotida, and by the river Tanaum into Sarmatia Asiatica.

After Celestine, the cardinals made choice of Simbaldus a Genouais for pope,
whom they called Innocentius the 4. Innocentius 4.
which election Frederick was well pleased with: as he signified by letters
and Legates gratulatorie to the pope.

The legates of Frederick, with the furtherance of Baldronius Emperor of
Constantinople, labored very diligently for conclusion of promised peace: but
all in vain, for while the Emperors legates attended for answer of peace,
Ramerus the Cardinal went secretly and took Viterbium which was on the
Emperors part. The Emperor (notwithstanding there seemed no hope of peace)
doubted not but if he might himself speak with the Pope, he upon reasonable
conditions should well enough accord with him: wherefore he desired him by his
legates to appoint a place where the Emperor might speak with him. The
Emperor seeks peace.

The Pope will none.


The Pope seemed to be content therewith, but on a sudden went to Lions, and
called a council, and with a loud voice sommoneth Frederick, and appointing
him a day commanded him there personally to appear to plead his cause. The
Emperor agreed, but required convenient time to travail thither. The pope
would not so much as grant 3. days, but being both judge and accuser, Pope
judge accuser.
condemns him before he could come thither without proof of any crime, or
his cause suffered to be pleaded. But Gods judgment failed him not: for the
writers of the annals accord, that when Frederick the Emperor, and Conradus
his son were dead and the pope gaping for the inheritance of Naples and
Sicil, and thinking by force to subdue the same, coming to Naples with a great
army of men, there was heard manifestly in the Popes court a voice,
pronouncing these words. Thou wretch, come to receive thy judgment. A voice
heard. Thou wretch, come and receive thy judgment.
And the next day the pope was found dead all black and blew, as though he had
bin beaten with battes.

When the Emperor had understanding of this cruel sentence, he signified the
injury to all Christian Princes by his letters, and provided every way to
withstand the P. and his confederats: and after diverse aduenturs and
variablenes of things, The Emp. dies.
he came into a certain castle of his in Apulia, called Florentinum, where
he fell sick of an ague, and died. Having had purpose, as Pandolphus
Colonuthius writes, of some marvelous exploite, and great attempt. Frederike
died willingly, and gladly, in the year 1240. 13. day of December, the 57.
year of his age, and 37. of his reign, and was buried at Panorium. The pope
counted him an enemy of the Church: and so both Innocentius the fourth
pronounced him, and the same sentence have other Popes registered in their 6.
Book of decretals, and established the same for a law, that he ought to be
taken for no less.

In the Country of Sueuia, about the time of Frederike the second, anno 1240.
Preachers bold against Pope.
which preached freely against the Pope, and preached that he was an heretic,
and that his bishops and Prelates were Simoniakes, and heretics, and that the
inferior priests had no authority to bind and loose, but were seducers: and
that such cities and countries as were then under the popes curse, might
notwithstanding lawfully resort to the receiving of the sacrament, as well as
before. Item, that Friars, Dominick and Franciscan did subvert the church with
their preaching, etc. And not long after these, rose up Arnoldus de noua villa,
Arnoldus de noua villa was condemned.
a Spaniard, a man famously learned, and a great writer, ann. 1250. Arnoldus
was condemned, so likewise the same time, Johannes Seneca, Johannes Seneca
appealeth from the pope to a Council.
the glosewriter of the popes decrees, and provost of Halberster, was
excommunicated, and deprived of of his prouostship, for resisting Pope Clement
the fourth, gathering certain exactions in Germany, and therefore he
appealed from the Pope to a general Council; and had many great favorers on
his side: till at last, both the Pope and he died.

After this, followed Guilielmus de sancto amore, G. de sancto amore against the
Pope.
a Master of Paris, and a chief Ruler then of that University. Al testimonies
of Scripture, that make against Antichrist, he applies them against the
clergy of Prelates, and against the popes spirituality.

The same Guilielmus is thought to be the author of the Book which is
attributed to the School of Paris, and entitled, De periculis ecclesiae, De
periculis Ecclesiae.
where he proves by thirty and nine arguments, that friars be false Apostles.
39. arguments that Friars be false Apostles.
He was by Antichrist, and his rablement, condemned for an heretic, exiled,
and his books burned.

In the days of this Guilielmus, there was a most detestable, and blasphemous
book, set forth by the Friars, mentioned also in Matthias Parisiensis, which
they called Euangelium aeternum Spiritus sancti, Euangelium aeternum spiritus
sancti.
the everlasting Gospel, or the Gospel of the holy Ghost. In which book,
many abominable errors of the Papists were contained, so that the Gospel of
Jesus Christ was utterly defaced. Which said book, was not to be compared to
this everlasting Gospel, no more then the shell was to be compared to the
kernel, The shell to the kernel.
or the darkness to light, etc.

Moreover, that the Gospel of Christ should be preached no more but fifty
years, and then this everlasting Gospel should rule the Church, etc.

Item, that whatsoever was in the whole Bible, A blasphemous gospel of the
Friars.
was in the same Gospel contained. At the length, this Friars gospel was
accused to the Pope: and so six persons chosen of the whole University, to
peruse, and judge of this book: as, Christianus, Canonicus, Beluacensis,
Ododoaco, Nicholaus de Baro, Johannes de sicca vella, Anglus, Johannes Belim,
Gallus. Among whom, this Guilielmus also was one, who mightily impugned this
pestiferous, and deuillish book. These six (after the perusing of this book)
were sent to Rome. The friars also sent their messengers withal: where they
were refuted, and the errors of the book condemned: but so, that the pope,
with the Cardinals commanded ye said book to be abolished, and condemned, not
publicly (tendering the estimation of the religious orders) but ye they should
be burned secretly, and the books of the foresaid Guilielmus to be burned
withal. Among other besides of ye age-which withstood the B. of Rome, and his
antichristian errors, was one Laurence, Laurence.
an Englishman, and master of Paris: another was Petrus Ioannes, P. Johannes. P
antichrist Rome Babylon. Dead bones burned.
a Minorite. Laurence was about the year 1290. Robertus Gallus, an. 1290. who
being born of right noble Parentage, for devotion sake, was made a dominike
Friar. R. Gallus.
He had diverse visions against the Pope, Visions against the pope.
and Sea of Rome. He called the Pope an Idol. He forewarned (as is in a
certain Chronicle declared) how God would punish the simonie, and avarice of
the Clergy, with such a plague, that rivers should run with blood. It is
said, there is remaining a great volume of his visions.

To these fathers is to be joined Rob. Grosted, B. of Lincoln, R. Grosted, B.
of Lincoln.
a man famouslie learned in the iij. tongues, and in philosophy. He wrote
diverse books, and one special Sermon, he exhibited in four sundry scrowles
to the Pope, and other four Cardinals: beginning, Dominus noster Jesus
Christus, etc. He wrote diverse Inuectiues against the Pope. Inuectiues against
the Pope.


The Pope (amongst his other intolerable exactions) had a certain neuew (so
the popes are wont to call their sons) named Frederike, being yet under age,
whom Innocent would needs prefer to be a Chanon, or Prebende, in the Church
of Lincoln: and directed down his letters, to certain his factors here in
England, for execution of the same. Wherewith Grosted was greatly offended, and
makes a quick, and sharp answer to the Pope: whereat he fretting and fuming,
answered with a proud look, and fierce mind, what old doting frantic wretch
is this, so boldly and rashly to judge of my doings? By sweet S. Peter and S.
Paul, were it not but upon our own clemency and good nature we are
constrained, we would hurl him down to such confusion, that we would make him
a fable, a gasing stock, an example and wonderment to all the world: K. of
England the popes manciple, vassal page.
for is not the king of England our vassal, and to say more, our manciple and
page, which may at our pleasure and beck imprison him, and put him to utter
shame.

This when the Pope had in rage uttered, scarce were his Cardinals able to
appease him with gentle and mild words, declaring unto him the inconvenience,
if he should so proceed, besides giving great comme^dation of Grosteds
learning and godliness. These words spoke Lord Giles a Spanish Cardinal to
the pope, and this Council gave the rest unto him, that he should wink at
these things, Manifest and known that once should come a defection from Rome.
least some tumult might arise thereof, especially seeing this is manifest and
known to all men, that once must come a defection and parting from the church
of Rome.

Not long after, this Robert Grosted died at Budgen. In time of his sickness,
he called unto him a Preaching friar, one John Giles, and did greatly complain
of the disorders of the Friars, and of the Roman clergy, proving the Pope to
be an Heretic: The pope an heretic.
declaring and reproving manifold abuses of the church of Rome, and said that
this old verse may truly be verified upon it.

Eius auaritiae totus vix sufficit orbis.
Eius luxuriae meretrix non sufficit vna.
Roman virtues.
that is: The whole world does scarce satisfy his covetousness, neither does
one harlot suffice for his leacherie: and in the end prophesied: R. Grosted
prophesies against Rome, and dies.
Neither (says he) shall the Church be delivered from the servitude of Egypt,
but by violence and force, and by the blouddy sword. So scarce able to utter
his words, with sighing, sobbing, and weeping, his tongue and breath failed,
and so finished his days. He departed, An. 1253. his decease: thus writes
Math. Paris. page 278. Out of the prison and banishment of this world which he
never loved, was taken the holy bishop of Lincoln, Robert, at his Manor of
Buckdune on the eeuen of S. Dionise: The virtues of R. Grosted.
who was an open reproouer of the pope, and of the king: a rebuker, of the
Prelates: instructor of the clarks: favorer of scholars: preacher to the
people: persecutor to the incontinent: a diligent searcher of the Scriptures: a
maule to the Romans, A maule of the Romans.
and a contemner to their doings, etc.

This Robert Grosted caused to be viewed, and considered diligently of his
clerks, what the reuenew of forrenners and strangers set in by the pope came
to by the year, and it was found, Pope Innocent the 4. a great impouerisher of
christendom.
and evidently tried, that pope Innocent the fourth, did impouerish the
universal Church of Christendom, more then all his predecessors from the time
the pope first began: so that the revenues of forreners and clerks placed by
him here in England, 70000. marks revenues of forreners placed in the land by
the Pope.
mounted to the sum of 70. thousand marks and above: whereas the mere
revenues of the crown came not to 30. thousand.

Mathias Parisiensis reports, that pope Innocentius, an. 1254. being
marvelous angry with Grosted, contrary to the mind of his Cardinals, would
have his bones to be cast out of the church: and purposed to bring him into
such spite, that he should be counted an Ethnicke, a rebel, and disobedient
person throughout the world: and thereupon caused his letters to be sent to the
king of England, knowing that the king would gladly serve his turn therein, to
have the spoil of the bishop and his Church. But the night following Grosted
appeered unto him coming in his Pontificalibus, Grosted appears in a vision
to the pope.
and with a severe countenance, and terrible voice speaks unto him being in
his rest, and smites him on the side vehemently with his crossestaffe, saying:
O thou scurffie lazy, old, bald, lousy, wretched, doting Pope, have thou
purposed to cast my bones out of the Church, to the slander and shame of me,
how came this rash wilfulness into thy head? it were more meet for thee to
make much of the zealous servants of God, although departed: Grosted strikes
the Pope.
with other words of reproof, and so departed from him, leaving him stricken,
and half dead: so that he never enjoyed any prosperous day, or could have
any quiet night til the morning, unto his death: which happened shortly after,
he being at Naples, ann. 1255. N. Treuet records, 1254.

After Innocent the 4. succeeded in the Popedom, Innocent dies.
Alexander the 3. Alexander 3.


After this, about the year 1260. 9. Bishops, which swearing to the same end,
excommunicated all such as should gainstand the said provisions there made.
Whereupon, diverse wholesome laws Wholesome laws.
were enacted, which misliked the King, in such sort, that he required of the
Pope for himself, and his son Edward, to be dispensed with of their oaths,
Anno 1261. The Pope dispenses with oaths.

Pope dies.


the king steps back from all that was before concluded.

The same year died pope Alexander: after whom succeeded Urban the 4. who also
revived and renewed the releasement of the kings oath aforesaid: whereupon grew
war betwixt the king and the Barons. P. Urban 4 War betwixt the king and the
Barons.


Anno 1264. Urban, and after him succeeded Clement 4. Clement 4.
who, (as Nicholas Riuet affirms) was first a married man, and had wife and
children, and was the solicitor and Counselor to the French K. then after the
death of his wife, was Bishop, entitled: Padiensis. after that, Urban dies.
Archb. of Narbourn, and at last, made Cardinal: who being sent of Pope Urban
in legacy for reformation of peace, in his absence, was elected Pope by the
Cardinals.

Thomas of Aquine Bonauenture.
About this time flourished Thomas of Aquine Reader at Paris among the Dominick
Friars: and Bonauenture among the Franciscan Friars, ex Nichol. Riuet.

Anno 1265 Tenthes to the King.
the popes Legate, Octobonus, caused to be proclaimed a new grant of pope
Clement to the King and Queen of all the tenthes for 7 years to come.

Anno 1267 Octobonus departed the land. This Octobonus enrolled to perpetual
memory, Peace betwixt the K. and the Barons.
the valuation of all the Churches in the realm of England, so narrowly as by
any means he might enquire the certainty thereof.

Cathedral churches popes pensions.
The same was he that made all the Cathedral and conuentuall churches to pay
pensions: so that those churches that gave not the vacancie of their benefices
to their Clerks and strangers, should pay unto them a certain yearly pension
during the vacancie of the benefices they should have.

Clement 4. dies
The same year dyed pope Clement the 4. after whose death the church of Rome
was vacant 2. years: and then was chosen an Archdeacon Pope, whose name was
Theardus, as he was taking his journey into the holy land, and called him
Gregory the tenth. Gregory 10.


During the reign of King Henry the 3. Edward the Kings son was one that
made a general expedition against the Saracens Against the Saracens.
to Jerusalem, and in the year 1270, in the month of May he set forward in
his journey.

About the time when Prince Edward was preparing his journey toward Asia,
Boniface the Archb of Canterbury ended his life in the country of Sebaudia,
going belyke to Rome, or coming thence. In whose stead Gregory the tenth
placed Robert Kilwardly, neither according to the mind of the Monks, who
agreed upon the Prior of their house named Adam Chelendine, nor of the king,
who spoke in the behalf of Robert Burnell there Chancellor.

About this time came out the great Concordances, Great Concordances.
by an English friar, called Derminghton. Ex Eulogio.

Anno 1273. Gregory the tenth called a general Council A general Council.
at Lions, about the controversy betwixt the Greek Church and the Latin, and
for the vacancie of the sea apostolical.

This year in the month of April, Richard King of Almaigne, died at the
Castle of Barthamsteed, and was buried at the Abbey of Hailes, Abbey of Hailes.
King dies.
which he builded from the ground.

This year 1273. dyed King Henry, the 16. day before the calendes of December,
in the 56. year of his reign, Westminster church.
and was buried at Westminster. The steeple and church whereof in his life time
he began to build, but did not fully finish the same before his death.

After Henry the 3. succeeded his son Edward, and was crowned anno 1274.

Anno. 1276. Blackfryers by Ludgate.
And in the year 1285. the new work of ye church of Westminster that began in
the 3. year of Henry the third was finished: which was 66 years in edifying.

An. 1291.

King Edward had sharp war with the Scotts, Jews banished ye realm utterly.
and subdued them three times: who seeing they could not make their party good
against the King, sent privily to P. Boniface for his aid, and council: who
immediately sends down his precept to the king, that he should herafter cease
to molest the Scotts, for that they were a people exempt, The Scots pertain to
the Popes chapel.
and properly pertaining unto his Chapel: and therefore it could not
otherwise be, but that the City of Jerusalem must needs defend her own
Citizens: and as the mount Sion maintain such as trust in the Lord. Whereunto
the king made answer with an oath, that he would maintain that which was his
right evidently known to all the world.

The next year after, which was the 29. of the kings reign, the Pope
directs his letters to the king again, wherein he chalengeth the kingdom of
Scotland, to be proper to the Church of Rome, and not subject to the king of
England, and therefore it was against God, etc. for him to hold any dominion
over the same: Scots converted by the relics of S. Peter.
Among other reasons, one was because the kingdom of Scotland was converted by
the relics of S. Peter to the faith of Christ, and therefore if he would
claim any right to the same Church, or any part thereof, he should send up
his procurators, specially to the same appointed, with all that he could for
himself allege unto the sea apostolic, there to receive, what reason and
right would require.

The king calling a parliament Ann. 1301.

The year 1303. Boniface the 8. stirred up Edward, king of England, to fight
against the French king Philip, with whom the Pope had taken displeasure.

After the bishopric of Rome had been long void, thorough the dissension of
the cardinals, for the space of two years, and three months. At the length
Celestinus was chosen Successor to Pope Nicholas the fourth. Which Celestinus,
in his first Consistory, began to reform the clergy of Rome, Celestine
begins to reform ye church of Rome.
thinking to make the same an example to all other Churches. Whereby, he
procured to himself such hatred of the Clergymen, that this Boniface being
called Benedictus, speaking through a Reed, by his chamber wall in the night
season, admonished him (as it had been a voice from heaven) that he should
give over his Papacy, as a burden greater then he could bear. Ex Mass.

Which in deed after six months he did (partly for the voice spoken before,
Boniface a crafty knave. P. thrust into prison. Bon-pope of Rome.
and partly for fear) being told of certain, which were craftily suborned in
his chamber, that if he did not resign, he should lose his life. And, when he
had resigned, Boniface thrust him into perpetual prison, and so he died.
Wherefore, this Boniface was worthily called the viij. Nero: of whom it was
rightly said, he came in like a Fox; reigned like a Lion; and died like a dog.

This Boniface, inuading after Celestinus, behaved himself so imperiously,
that he put down Princes, excommunicated Kings, such as did not take their
confirmation at his hands. Diverse of his Cardinals he drove away for fear:
some of them (as Schismatiks) he deposed, and spoiled them of all their
substance. The pope curses ye french king to the 4. generation.
Philip the French king he excommunicated, for not suffering his money to go
out of his realm, and therefore cursed him and his to the fourth generation.

Albertus the Emperor, not once, or twice, but thrice sought at his hands to be
confirmed, and yet was rejected: neither could obtain, except he would promise
to drive the French king out of his Realm.

The factious discord in Italy, betwixt the Gulephs, and the Gibellines, he
greatly set on fire: in so much, that upon Ashwednesday, when Porchetus, an
Archbishop, came, and kneeled down before him, to receive ashes, The pope
scoffeth etc.
the Pope (looking upon him, and perceiving that he was one of the Gibellines
part) cast a handful of ashes in his eyes: saying, Memento homo, quod
Gibellinus es, etc. Remember man, that a Gibellin thou art, and to ashes thou
shall go.

This P. (moreover) ordained first the Jubilee The first Jubilee.
in Rome: in the solemnizing whereof, the first day he showed himself in his
Pontificalibus, and gave free remission of sins, to as many as came to Rome,
out of all parts in the world. The second day, being waited on with Emperial
ensigns, he caused a naked sword to be carried before him, The power of both
swords.
and said with a loud voice, Ecce potestatem vtriusque gladij. Lo here the
power, and authority of both swords, etc.

By this P. diverse constitutions, extrauagantes of his predecessors,
Extrauagant constitutions. Sextus Nicholaus. Pardons and indulgences.
were collected together: with many of his own lewdly added thereto, and so
made the book, called Sextus Decretals: by whom also sprang up first, pardons,
and indulgences from Rome.

Now, the cause of quarrel betwixt the Pope, and the French king, (according to
N. Riuet,) was this. Anno 1301 The quarrel betwixt the P. and French king.
and so committed to prison. The Pope hearing of this, sends word to the
King by his Legate, to set him at liberty: which the king did, and withal,
discharged both him, and the Legate, commanding them to avoid his Realm.

Whereupon, Boniface revoked all the privileges granted by him or his
predecessors before to the kingdom of France, and not long after thundered out
the sentence of his curse against him: cites all the Prelates, al Deanes and
Lawiers, both Civil and Canon to appear personally before him at Rome, and at
a certain day, which was the first of November.

The king of France forbids to carry treasure to Rome.
Against this citation the king again provides by straight proclamation, that
no manner of person should export out of the Realm of France, either gold,
silver, or any other manner of ware or merchandise, providing withal the ways
and passages diligently to be kept, that none might pass unsearched: also, he
defeated the Pope of giving Benefices, Prebendaries, and other Ecclesiastical
livings: for which cause, most sharp letters passed betwixt them. Boniface
beginning thus: The Popes proud style to the French K.
Boniface the servant of Gods servants, etc. Fear God, and observe his
commandments: we will thee to understand, that thou art subject unto us, both
in spiritual things, and in temporal. The king answers, with this
salutation: To Boniface, bearing himself for chief B. little health, or none
at all. Let thy foolishnes know, that, etc.

In the year 1303. William Nagareta made declaration against the Pope, with
appellation made at Paris, Nagareta against ye pope Four articles against the
pope.
before the King and his Council in the Church at Paris. This William Nagareta
propounded four Articles against the Pope, that he was an usurper, an
Heretic, an horrible symoniacall, and a blasphemer of the way of truth, and
required of the king and prelates to call a council, that provision might be
made for the bettering of the estate of the church: and afterward laid out in
28. 28. Articles against the pope
articles more at large the villainies of this Boniface, as that he believed not
the immortality of the soul: that he should say, whoredom is no sin: that
he caused his images to be made of silver and to be set up in churches. That he
had a private devil. That he was a witch. That he was a Sodomite, a murderer,
etc. Which things the King understanding, with the Archbishops and Bishops
made appellation to a council for the matters. Thenames of the prelates were
these: the archbishops of Nicosien, Remen, Senoren, Narbonen, Turonen: the
Bishops of Landuiren, Belnacen, Catolacen, Antisiodoren, Meldimen, Nurmen,
Carnoten, Aurelianen, Ambiauen, Mornen, Silanen, Andeganen, Abricen, Constant,
Ebroicen, Lexonicon, Sagien, Caloromont, Lemonicen, Auicen, Mascicoren etc.
With Abbots, etc. This appeal was made the 9. year of Bonifaces popedom at
Lupara in Paris.

After these things thus in the Parliament agreed, the Prelates of the Clergy,
consulting among themselves what was best to be done in so doubtful a matter,
and dreading the Popes displeasure for that which was done already, to clear
themseues in the matter, they contrived a letter to the Pope, partly, to
certify him what there was done, and partly to admonish him what he should do.

These things thus done, anno 1304. Marie, came a garrison of harnessed
Soldiers well appointed, sent partly by the French king, partly by the
Cardinals, Columpna whom the Pope before had deposed unto the gates of Auragum,
where the Pope did hide himself, The pope hides himself.
because he was borne in the town, the captains of which army was one
Schaira brother to the foresaid cardinals, and another William de Longareto,
high steward to the French king, who inuading the Popes town, and finding the
gates open, gave assault to the Popes Frontier, where he with his Nephew or
Marquis, and four other Cardinals were immured. The townsmen seeing all their
strength to be bent against the pope, caused the common bell to be rong, and so
assembling themselves in a common counsel, ordained Adulphus Adulphus.
one of the chiefest rulers of the town for their Captain, who (unknown to
them) was a great adversary to the Pope. This Adulphus bringing with him
Reginaldus de Supina, Reginaldus de Supina.
a great Lord in Campania, and the two sons of John Chitan, a noble man, whose
Father the Pope had then in prison: at length joined him with the French
company against the Pope, and so beset his palace on every side: and first
setting upon the palaces of the three Cardinals, which were then chief about
the Pope, The cardinals goods rifeled.
rifeled, and spoiled all their goods: the Cardinals by a back door, hardly
escaped their hands. But the popes palace, through munition and strength of the
Marquis, was something better defended. At length, the Pope perceiving himself
not able to make his party good, desired truce with Schaira and his company,
Pope craves truce.
which was granted him from one of the clock till nine.

During which time of truce, the Pope sends privily to the Townsmen of
Aruagum, desiring them to save his life: which if they would do, he promised
to enrich them, that they should all have cause never to forget, The Pope
rejected.
or to repent the benefit bestowed. To this they made answer again (excusing
themselves) that it lay not in their power to do him any good, for that the
whole power of the Town lay with the Captain.

Then the pope all destitute and desolate sends to Schaira, beseeching him to
draw out in Articles wherein he had offended him, The pope glad to make
amends. Conditions offered to the Pope.
and he would make him amends to the uttermost. Schaira makes answer again,
that he should not escape with life but upon three conditions.

First, to restore again the two Cardinals of Columpna his brethren, whom he
had before deprived, with all other of their stock, and kindred.

Secondly, that after their restitution he should renounce his papacy.

Thirdly, his body to remain in his power and custody.

These conditions the pope would none of: The gates of the popes paface fired.
so that the time of truce expired, the captains and soldiers first fired the
gates of the palace, whereby the army having a full entrance, fell to rifle,
and spoil the house: at length they burst in to the pope, whom they put to
choice, either presently to leave his life, or to forgo the popedom. But that
he denied stiffly to do, rather choosing to die for it, saying: The pope
rather would die then renounce his popedom.
Lo here my neck, lo here my head, protesting that he would never while he
lived renounce his papacy. Then Schaira went about, and was ready to slay him,
but by certain that were about him he was stayed: the Soldiers in the mean
time did lade themselves with gold and treasure, that as Robert Auesb.
reports, The pope spoiled of infinite treasure.
all the Kings of the earth together were not able to disburse so much out of
their treasury in a whole year, as then was taken and carried out of the
Popes palace, and of the palaces of the three Cardinals, and Marquis.

Thus Boniface bereaved of al his goods, remained in their hands three days:
during the which space, they had set him on a wild and unbroken colt, The Pope
homely used.
his face turned to the horse tail, causing the horse to run and course,
while the Pope almost was breathless: The pope almost starued.
moreover they kept him so without meat, that he was thereby almost famished
to death. After the three days the Aruagians with 10000. soldiers slew the
keeper, The pope delivered, almost famished.
and burst into prison, and delivered Boniface almost famished, whom the people
refreshed with vittaile, and received his blessing. From thence he took his
journey to Rome, being accompanied with a great number of harnessed soldiers:
where shortly after, partly for fear which he was in, partly for famine, and
partly for sorrow of his inestimable treasure lost; Pope dies. Benedict 9.
he died. After whom succeeded Benedict the 9. of whom these verses are written.

A re nomen habe, Benedic, Been fac, Benedicte.
Aut rem peruerte, Maledic, Malefac, Maledicte.
Boniface before mentioned was the Author of the Decretals. Decretals.
About this time in the days of king Edward, Boniface directed a Bull to John
Peckham archbishop of Canterbury (whom he had placed against the mind of the
king and Church of Canterbury) as also unto all other quarters of the Church
universal: in which was decreed that no Church, nor Ecclesiastical person,
should henceforth yield to his king or temporal magistrate, either any
giving, or lending, or promising of tribute, subsidies, or portion, whatsoever
of the goods and possessions unto him belonging, but should be clearly
exempted and discharged of such subjection or tallage, Clergy exempt from
subsidy.
to be exacted of the^ in the behoof of the prince, and his affairs.

Not long after, the King held his Parliament at Saint Edmunsburie, where was
granted unto him of all Cities and Boroughs, an eight, and of the commons a
twelfth of their goods: only the clergy by reason of the bull stood stout,
whereupon the king likewise secludeth them from under his protection, The
clergy out of the kings protection.
and sauegard of his laws: and because the Archbishop was more stout, and an
inciter of the rest, he seized upon his goods, and caused an Inuentory of the
same to be enrolled in the excheker.

After the death of John Peckham, succeeded Robert Winchelsy, with whom the
king had like variance, as with the other Peckham: and accused him to the Pope
for breaking of peace, and taking part with them that rebelled against the king
about vsages and liberties of the realm: wherefore the king being cited up to
the court of Rome, was there suspended, till he had purchased his absolution
again. The King of England troubled with the sea of Canter.
And as this King was troubled with Archbishops: so from Hildebrand, and the
time of Lanfrancus, every King in his time had somewhat to do with that sea.

By Peckham before mentioned, No benefices but one.
it was ordained that no spiritual minister should have more benefices then
one: which also was decreed by the constitutions of Octo and Octobonus, the
Popes Legate the same time in England.

The Kings mother was a professed Nun in Amesburie. In the later year of
this kings reign, Cassianus K. of the Tartarians Cassanus K. of the
Tartaria^s.
(of whom come these which now are Turks, fighting against the Souldan, The
Tartarians christened.
king of the Saracens in the plain of Damascus slew a 100000 of Saracens: and
again at Babylon fighting with the said souldan, flue him in the field, and
200000. of his Saracens, and calling upon the help of Christ, and thereupon
became Christian. The same Cassianus his brother also afterward was christened
him self and all his house.

In the reign of this King, Walter Merto Bishop of Rochester builded Merton
College in Oxford: Merton College in Oxford.
in whose reign also lived Henricus de Gandano, Henr. de Gandano.

De villa noua. Scotus, Duns. Clement 5. The court of Rome to Auinion.

The P. reign as Emp. sede vacant.


Arnoldus de villa noua. Dantes Scotus called Duns, and other mo.

After pope Benedict succeeded Clement the 5. who translated the Popes court to
Auinion in France.

By this Clement it was ordained, that the Emperor, although he might be
called K. of the Romans before, yet he might not enjoy the title of Emperor
before he was by him confirmed: and that the Emperors seat being vacant, ye P.
might reign as Emperor until anew were created. By him the orders of the
templars which (at that time were too abominable) were put down at the
council of Vienna: Templars put down.
He also ordained, and confirmed the feast of Corpus Christi, Corpus Christi
day.

The Clementine decretals.


assigning indulgences to such as heard the service thereof: and also compiled
the 7. book of the decretals, called of his name the Clementines.

In the time of this Pope, Henricus the sixth of that name, The Emp. poisoned by
a mo^k in the chalice.
Emperor, was poisoned, receiving the Sacrament, by a false dissembling monk,
called Bernard, which was thought not to be done, without the consent of the
Popes Legate. For the which fact, although he escaped, yet diverse of his order
after that, with fire, and sword, were slain.

The Emp. of Constantinople excommunicated.
This Pope excommunicated Andronicus Paleologus, Emperor of Constantinople, anno
1327. 58. years, during the time of the French Emperors, al which time the
French Emperors, with the Greek Church, were subject to the church of Rome:
but afterward, such was their hate against the Romans, that because Michael
Paleologus, and the Grecians, being called up by Gregory the tenth, to a
Council at Lions, about the controversy of proceeding of the holy Ghost, etc.
did submit themselves to the Church of Rome: the Greek monks and Priests
denied him the due honor, and place of burial.

P. John 22.
After Clement the 5. succeeded pope John the 22. with whom Lodouike the Emperor
had much trouble: after who^, succeeded Benedict the 12. P. Benedict.


This Benedict, on a certain time being desired to make certain new
Cardinals, This world made for the Cardinals.
answers again, that he gladly would so do, if he also could make a new
world. For this world (said he) is for these Cardinals, that be made already.
Ex scripto Engethusensis.

An. 1307. The xxxiiij. year of the reign of the king, in the beginning of
Hillarie Term, the King kept a Parliament at Carlil, Complaint against the P.
for oppressing England.
where great complaints were brought in by the Nobles, and Ancientes of the
land, concerning the oppression of the Church, by the Popes Legate, William
Testa, otherwise called mala Tecta: who came by reason the P. (having
translated his court to Auinion) was denied by the princes of Rome, S. Peter's
patrimony, and lived then barely: he had of contribution, and benevolence,
within the first year, nine thousand, and five hundred marks of silver, and
all his other charges, and expenses, (which he largely yt year bestowed)
clearly borne, besides the benefit of Bulls, sent by the said Testa, and the
first fruits of al churches being vacant, at any time, or by any man, within
the realm of England, Scotland, Wales, and Ireland. And also, the first fruits
of all Abbeis, and Priories, within the said Realms, etc.

Whereupon, the king, in the same Parliament, withstood the Legate, charging him
(with the consent of the Earls, and Barons) to abstain from such exactions:
and said, he would send to the pope about the matter: which he did, and
thereupon the Pope changed his purpose touching Abbeis: and after that, the
first fruits of English Churches was granted unto the king for two years. In
which space, he obtained the fruits of the foresaid Churches, etc.

During which Parliament before specified, as me^ were talking many things of
the Popes oppression, sodeinly fell down (as it were from heaven) among them,
An Epistle of Cass. to the Church of England.
a paper with this superscriptio^. An epistle of Cassiodorus, to the church of
England, concerning the abuses of the Romish church. To the noble church of
England, serving in clay, and brick, as the Jews did in times past, under the
tyranny of the Egyptians: Peter, the son of Cassiodore, a Catholic
soldier, and devout Champion of Christ, sends greeting, and wishes to cast
of the yoke of bondage, and to receive the reward of liberty, etc.

What effect this letter wrought in them to whom it was directed, The P. still
reteineth his exactions.
it is not in stories expressed: by the sequel it may be coniectured, that
whatsoever was said, the P. retained still his exactions.

Anno 1329. The King of France called a parliament at Paris, about the beginning
of December, to confer of the jurisdiction of the Pope, both in Spiritual,
and Temporal things.

In which Parliament, a certain wise Nobleman, called Peter de Cugnerijs, P. de
Cugneriis.
being one of the kings Council, rose up, and spoke on the kings behalf,
taking for his Theme, Render unto Caesar that which is his, and unto God that
which is Gods: which he prosecuted very effectually, and delivered a bil of
64. articles, wherein the Spiritualty usurped upon the temporaltie: and gave the
Prelates time to deliberate: 64. Articles against the spirituality.
which was, til the Friday next ensuing.

On which day, the B. Edwine, and Archb. of S. Senon, elect, in the name of the
whole Clergy, answered for them all before the King, and endeavored to prove,
that a person ecclesiastical, might have temporal jurisdiction, by the
example of Melchizedech, who was k of Salem, and Priest, etc. And in the
conclusion of his reply, said, because a byl of many articles was exhibited,
part whereof did infringe the whole Ecclesiastical jurisdiction: to the
defense whereof, we will stand unto ye death (said he:) some other of them,
contain only certain abuses, which we believe none such to be: but if there
be, we will see redress therein, to the quietness of the people, and praise
of almighty God.

The next Friday following, the Bishop of Eduen (taking the Psalm 89. Lord,
thou art our refuge,) extolled the kings person, sitting with his Barons and
Counselors about him, and prosecuted an answer to the Lord Peter of Cugners
oration, and proved both swords to belong unto the Pope: and answered
particularly the Articles above mentioned.

The next Friday after this the Prelates assembled again at Vicenas before the
king, to hear their answer, where the Lord Peter of Cugner (being Prolocutor
for the king) took for his Theme, I am peace unto you, do not fear:
whereupon he signified that they should have no fear nor be troubled for any
thing that there had been spoken: for that the intent of the King was to keep
the rites of the Church and Prelates, which they had by law, and by good and
reasonable custom, but yet proved that the knowledge of civil causes belonged
not to them, Knowledge of civil causes belongs not to the clergy.
which notwithstanding, he said, the K. was ready to hear the informatio^ of
the^ that would instruct him of any custom: and those customs which were good
and reasonable he would observe: which answer liked not the B. Edwin, but he
replied again in ye prelates defense: and in conclusion beseeched the K. that
it would please him, to give them a more comfortable answer, and that they
might not depart from his presence all pensive and sad, whereby occasion might
be given to the Laity, to impugn the rites and liberties of the Church. It
was answered again, that the kings intent was not to impugn the customs of
the Church.

The Sunday followyng at Vicenas, they had answer and assurance from the King,
that they should suffer no damage in his time: yea, and that he would defend
their rightes and customs, because it should not be said that he would give
examples to others to impugn the Church, and that if the Bishops and
Prelates would see reformation of those things, that were to be amended,
Reformation to be done.
whereabout he would take respite between this and Christmasse next following,
his grace would innouate nothing: and if in the foresaid space, they would not
reform that which was amiss, his Majesty would appoint such order as should
be acceptable to God, and his subjects. After this, the Prelates and Clergy
had leave of the King to depart, and went home. This Parliament of the French is
to be referred to the year, 1329.

Anno 1307. Edward marching toward Scotland died: after whom succeeded his
son Edward the second. The K. dies.
About the year 1310. Crooched friars.
and also began first the Knights of the order of John Baptist, called
otherwise the Knights of the Rhodes, Knights of the Rhodes.
for that they by manly knighthood put ye Turks out of the Rhodes.

54. Templars burned at Paris.
This year the French K. caused to be burned 54. Templars at Paris, with the
great Master of the order: and by his procurement Pope Clement the fifth, who
succeeded Benedict, called a Council at Vienna, where the whole order and sect
of Templars being condemned, was shortly after, by the consent of all Christian
kings, deposed all in one day. The Te^plars put down universally.
The cause why those ungodly Te^plars were put down, was so abominable and
filthy, that it is not with modesty to be named.

After the deposing of the Templars, the King of France thought to make his
son king of Jerusalem, and to convert to him all the lands of the Templars:
but Pope Clement would not thereto agree, transferring all their lands to the
order of the Hospitallers, The Pope sells the Templars lands.
for a great sum of money given for the same.

In the same Council it was also decreed by Pope Clement, that all religious
orders exempted, should be subject under the common laws, as other were: but
the Cistercian Monks with money and great gifts redeemed their privileges,
and exemptions of the Pope, and so had them granted. Cistercian monks exe^pt.
Rob. Auesb.

But the Franciscans sped unhappily with their suite: of which Franciscans,
when certain had offered unto the Pope Clement four thousand Florens of gold,
beside other silver, that the Pope would dispense with them to have lands and
possessions against their rule, the Pope asked them where that money was, and
they answered in the merchants hands. The Pope absolved the merchants of
their bonds, and commanded all that money to be employed to his use:
declaring unto the Friars, that he would not infringe the rule of Saint
Francis, The pope conseneth the Fra^ciscan Friars
lately canonized, neither ought he to do it for any money. Thus the Friars
lost their money, and their indulgence. Ex eodem.

Sabellicus writes, that Clement the fifth excommunicated the Venetians, The
Venetia^s cursed of the popa.
for ayding and preferring of Aroda unto the estate of Ferrarie: and wrote his
letters throughout all Europe, condemning them as enemies of the church, and
giving their goods as a lawful pray unto all men: which caused them to
sustain great harm. So that Fancis Dandulus, a noble man of Venice being
Ambassador, A monstrous tyranny.
was feign so to humble himself before this proud tyrannical Prelate, that
he suffered a chain of iron to be tied about his neck, and to lie down
flat before his table, and so to catch the bones and fragmentes that fell, as
if he had been a dog, til the Popes fury was toward them assuaged.

About this time, Rob. Winchelsey Archb. of Canterbury (whom the kings father
had banished before) was released, and returned home from Rome.

Great disturbance rose betwixt the king, and the nobles: who having their
power lying about Dunstable, sent message unto the king at London, to have
their former acts confirmed: at which time came two Cardinals from Rome, with
letters sent unto the nobles from the pope. The nobles answered to the message
of the Cardinals, that as touching themselves, they should be at all times
welcome unto them, but as for their letters (forasmuch as they were men
unlettered, and only brought up in feats of war) therefore cared they not for
seeing the same: neither would they speak with the Legates concerning their
business. Yet at the last, through the mediation of the Archb and the Earl of
Gloucester, the matter was taken up betwixt the King and the Nobles.

Anno 1313 Robert Winchelsey died, in whose room Robert Cobham was elected by
the King and Church of Canterbury: but the Pope did frustrate that election,
and placed Walter Renald Walter Renald.
Bishop of Worcester.

About this time died Pope Clement the 5. Clement 5. dies.
who keeping in France, never came to the sea of Rome: after whose death the
Papacy stood void two years.

Papacy void two years.
After Clement succeeded pope John the 22. who sent two Legates from Rome under
pretense to set agreement betwixt the king of England and the Scots: they for
their charges and expe^ces required of every spiritual person iiii d. in every
mark: John 22.
Pope makes profit of the variance of princes.
but all in vain. For the legates as they were in the North parts about
Derlington with their whole family and train, were robbed and spoiled of
their horses, treasure, apparel, and whatsoever else they had: and so with an
evil favored handling, retired back again to Duresme: where they stayed a
while waiting for an answer from the Scots. But when neither ye popes legacy,
neither his curse, would take any place with the Scots, they returned again to
London, where they first excommunicated and cursed as black as soote all those
arrogant and presumptuous robbers of Northumberland. Secondly for supplying of
ye losses received, they exacted of the clergy to be given unto them 8. pence
in every mark. But the Clergy thereunto would not agree: seeing it was their
own covetousness, as they said that made them venture farther then they needed:
viii d. in every mark
only they were contented to relieve them after 4. pence in the mark: further
they would not grant. And so they departed to the popes court again.

Michael house founded in Cambridge.
In the time of this king the College in Cambridge, called Michaell house was
founded by Sir Henry Stanton knight. About the same time also was Nicholaus de
Lyra, Nicholaus de lyra.
which wrote the ordinary gloss of the Bible: also Guilielmus Occham
Guilielmus Occham.
a worthy divine, of a right sincere judgment, as the times then would either
give or suffer.

Among others which the King did trouble, and take revenge of, for the
rebellion of the Barons, was one Adam Adam.
Bishop of Hereford, who being appeached of treason, with other more, was at
length arrested in the Parliament, to appear, and answer to that should be
laid against him. To which the Bishop answered: I, an humble minister and
member of the Church of God, and Bishop consecrate (albeit unworthy) can not,
neither ought to answer, to these so high matters, without the authority of
the Archbishop of Canterbury my direct judge, and next under the high Bishop
of Rome, whose suffragane also I am, and the consent likewise of other my
fellow Bishops. After which words, the Archbishop and other Bishops made
humble suit for him to the King.

But when the King would not be won, nor turned with any supplication: the
Bishops together with the Archbishops and Clergy, coming with their crosses,
took him away, chalenging him for the church without any further answer
making: charging moreover under the censures of the church, and
excommunication, none to presume to lay any further hands upon him.

The king commanded, notwithstanding, to proceed in judgment, and the jury
of twelve men to go upon the inquisition of his cause: who finding, and
pronouncing the bishop to be guilty, the king caused immediately, all his
goods and possessions to be confiscate to himself. Moreover, made his plate,
and all his household stuff, to be thrown out of his house, into the street.
But yet he remained still under the protection of the Archbishop.

This Archb. was called W. Winchelsey, S. Mepham, Anno, one thousand, three
hundred, Simon M.
and twenty seven. R. Auesb.

After P. Clement v. (by whose decease the Roman Sea stood vacant two years
and three months. Next was elected pope John 22. Clement 5.
a Cistercian Monk, who sat in the papacy 18. years, a man so stout,
inflexible, and given much to heaping up of riches, A great heresy.
that he proclaimed them Heretics, that taught that Christ, and his Apostles,
had no possessions of their own in the world.

At this time was Emperor Ludouicus Bauarus Ludouicus Bauarus Emperor.
a worthy man: who with this Pope and other that followed him, had no less
contention then had Fredericus before: Contention betwixt the pope and Emp. 24.
years.
in so much that this contention continued 24. years. The cause thereof rose of
the constitution of Clement 5. predecessor to this Pope: by whom it was
ordained that Emperors elected by the Germanine princes, might be called kings
of the Romans: but might not enjoy the title and right of the empire, without
their confirmation, given by the pope. Wherefore, this Emperor, because he used
the imperial dignity in Italy: (before he was authorized by the P) he
excommunicated him: and notwithstanding, the Emperor did oftentimes offer up
himself to make entreaty of peace, Pope has full power to create and depose
Emperors at his pleasure.
yet the inflexible pope would not bend, mainteining that he had full power to
create, and depose kings and Emperors at his pleasure.

In the same time were diverse learned men, who did greatly disallow the B. of
Romes doings: among who^ was Guilielmus Occham, whose Tractations were
afterward condemned by the Pope, for writing against the Temporal jurisdiction
of their Sea: and another named Marsilinus Patauinus, Marsilius Patauinus.
who wrote the book, called Defensor pacis, Defensor pacis.
given up to the hands of the Emperor: wherein, the controversy of the Popes
usurped jurisdiction, in things Temporal, is largely disputed, and the
usurping authority of the same sea, set forth to the uttermost.

At length, when the Emperor (after much suite at Auinion) could not obtain
his Coronation. Coming to Rome, he was there received with great honor, where
he, with his wife, were both crowned, by the full consent of all the Lords and
Cardinals there, and another Pope there set up, called Nicholas the fifte.

After which things, Pope Nicholas v.
the Pope (not long after) died at Auinion in France: whom succeeded
Benedictus the twelft, Benedict xii.
a Monk of Benedictus order, and reigned vij. years. Who by the council of
Philip, the French king, confirmed, and prosecuted the censures that John his
predecessor had published against Jews the Emperor: and deprived him, both of
his Imperial Crown, and Dukedom of Bauaria: Emperor deprived.
that he stood excommunicate, till time that variance fell betwixt this P.
Benedict, and the French K. Wherefore, to have some friends to fly to, he began
to pretend favor and absolution. And not long after, died. After whom followed
Clement vi. a man most furious, and cruel. Variance betwixt the P. and french
K.


This Clement vi. renewing again the former excommunications of his
predecessors) caused his letters to be set up on Church doors: wherein he
threatened, and denounced, most terrible thunderboltes against the Emperor,
except within three days he would renounce the Imperial possession of the
crown: and (resigning up his Empire into his hands) would submit himself,
his children, and all his goods, to the will and pleasure of the B. with
promise, that he would not receive any part thereof, but upon his good grace,
as his will should be to refer it over.

And besides, the Pope sends to the Emperor, a certain form of a bill,
contained in writing, The Emp. must resign all to the P.
with certain conditions, that he commanded to be given to the hands of the
Emperor. Which he gently received, and, not only with his seal confirmed it,
The frintharted pope.
but also swears to observe all the conditions thereof. Which the Pope
hearing, greatly marueyled at it, but was nothing mollified.

The Princes, and Electors seeing the bill, with the articles, and conditions,
desired the Emperor that he would stand to the defense of the Imperial
Dignity, as he had begun, promising their assistance, and aid, And
thereupon, were letters sent to the Pope, desiring him to abstain from such
manner of articles against the State, and Majesty of the Empire.

Upon this, the Pope, upon Maundie Thursday, blustereth out most black curses
against him, Black curses against the Emperor.
and also, renews all the former Processes: as, both against an Heretic, and
a Schismatike.

Commandinge (moreover,) all the Princes Electors, to proceed in choosing a
new Emperor. Which the Archbishop of Mentz refused to do, Archbishop of
Mentz deprived.
and therefore was by the Pope, deprived of all his dignities.

The Archbishop of Colen took eight thousand marks and the Duke of Saxony two
thousand, and were corrupted by John, King of Bohem, and elected Charles his
son to be Emperor, whom Pope Clement in his Consistory, did approve: but
he was repulsed at Aquisgraue, where they were wont to be crowned.

This Charles, with the French King, and the King of Boheme, War with the
king of England.
by the setting on of the Pope, made war against the King of England; but
were all by him put to flight.

The Emperor gives over to the P.
Lodowicke (notwithstanding the States of Germany assembled at Spires,
promised to stick unto him) remembering his oath made before to the Popes Bull,
willingly gave over his Imperial dignity, and went to Bulgaria. The Em.
poisoned.
Where shortly after, through the practice of Clement (as Hieronimus Martius
does write) he was poisoned.

The Princes then hearing of his death, assembled themselves to make a new
election: who refusing Charles, Gunterus de monte nigro chosen Emp.
elected for Emperor, Gunterus de Monte nigro: who shortly afterward falling
sick at Frankford, by one of his Physicians Servants, was also poisoned,
whom Charles had hired to work that feat, and not dying thereof, for avoiding
bloodshed, thorough council of the Germans, he gave over his Empire to
Charles: who to have his son set up after him, Charles chosen Emperor.
granted to the Princes electors of Germany, all the public taxes and
tributes of the Empire.

This pope Clement first reduced the year of Iubile to every fifty year, The
Iubile every 50. year. From Auinion to Rome.
which first was kept but every hundredth year: and so he being absent at
Auinion, which he purchased with his money to the sea of Rome, caused it to be
celebrated at Rome. Anno 1350. 50000. Praemostr. 50000. Pilgrims.


The Bull of Pope Clement given out for this present year of Iubile,
proceeds in these words as follows.

What person or persons soever for devotion sake shall take their peregrination
to the holy City: The form of the Bull of Iubile.
the same day when he sets forth out of his house, he may choose unto him
self what confessor or confessors, either in the way, or where else he
lusts: unto the which confessors we grant by our authority full power to
absolve all cases papal, as fully, as if we were in our proper person there
present.

Item we grant, that whosoever being truly confessed, shall chance by the
way to dye, The pope commands the angels.
he shall be quite and and absolved of all his sins. Moreover, we command
the Angels of Paradise to take his soul out of his body (being absolved) and
to carry it into Paradise, etc. And in another Bull: we will (says he) that
no pain of hell shall touch him: granting (moreover) to all and singular
person, and persons, which are signed with the holy-Crosse, power, and
authority, to deliver, and release three or four Souls, (whom they list them
selves) out of the pains of Purgatory, etc.

This Clement (as says Auesb.) took upon him so prodigally in his popedom,
that he gave unto the Cardinals of Rome, bishoprics, and benefices, which
then were vacant in England, and began to give them new titles for the same
livings, which he gave them in England: wherewith the K. was offended, and undid
all the provisions of the pope within his realm: commanding under pain of
imprisonment and life, Against provisions from Rome.
no man to be so hardy as to bring in any such provisions of the Pope, and
under the same punishment charged the two Cardinals to void the realm. Anno
1343. Tenths to the King.
as also of other spiritual men, were given and paid to the king through the
whole realm.

King Edward the second builded two houses in Oxford for good letters, Oriall
College, and Saint Marie hall. Oriall college and S. Mary hall.


Anno 1326. the towns men of Berry spoiled the Abbey, of treasure inestimable,
and almost burnt up the whole house: The Abbey of Bury spoiled by the towns men.
and in one week burnt up 22. manors belonging to the same, carriyng away
goods to the valor of 9220. pounds, five shillings and eleven pence, besides
other inestimable treasure. While the Abbot all this space was at London at the
Parliament. For which fact, thirty tartes full of towns men were carried to
Norwich; of whom, nineteen were there hanged, and diverse convict, were put in
prison.

The whole Towneshippe was condemned in six score thousand pound, The Town of
Bury fined at 120000. pound.
to be paid for damages of the house. John Berton, Alderman, with two and
thirty Priests, thirteen women, and one hundredth, thirty and eight others,
of the same Town, were outlawed: of whom, certain confederated, and privily
in the night, burst to the Abbot of Chemington, The Abbat of Cheuington.
and took him, and secretelie conveyed him over Sea, to Did in Brabant, where
they kept him in great penury and misery: till at length, being known where
he was, he was brought home with procession, and restored to his house again.
Nich. Trimet. and Flor. hist.

After Edward the 2. succeeded his son Edward 3. K. Edward 3.
about the age of 15. and reigned 50. years.

An. 1344. A charter from the king to the clergy.
containing these privileges. That no Archbishop or Bishop should be arraigned
before his justices, Sieve ad sectam suam, sieve partis. If the said clarke do
submit and claim his clergy, professing himself to be a member of the holy
Church, who so doing shall not be bound to come to his answer before the
Justices, and if it shall be laid unto them to have married two wives, or to
have married a widow, the Justices shall have no power to proceed against
them, to inquire for the matter, so that the cause shall be reserved to the
spiritual court, etc.

About this age (as before) God raised up learned men, who laid open the abuses
of the Church, as Gregorius Arminensis, Gregorius Arminensis.
according to Trithemius, who dissented from the Papists and Sophisters, as
we do in doctrine of Freewill, counting the Papists and Sophisters in that
point worse then the Pelagians. Taulerus Taulerus.
a preacher of Germany in Argentine taught, anno 1350. Franciscus Petrarcha
Franciscus Petrarcha.
of the same age, who calls Rome the whore of Babylon, the mother of error,
the Temple of Heresy, etc. and higher, in the year one thousand, three
hundred, and forty, Johannes de rupe Scissa, Johannes de rupe Scissa.
was cast in prison for rebuking the Spirituality of their great enormities:
he called the Church of Rome the whore of Babylon, Rome the whore of Babylon.
and the Pope the minister of Antichrist, and the Cardinals false Prophets:
being in prison he wrote a book of prophestes, touching the affliction that
honge over the heads of the Spirituality, calling his Book, Vade mecum in
tribulatione. Vade mecum in tribulatione.


About the year 1340. in the city of Herbipone, was one named Master
Conradus Hager, M. Conradus Hager.
who is recorded to have maintained and taught the space of four and twenty
years, the Mass to be no manner of Sacrifice: for which his doctrine he was
taken, and enclosed in prison. Not long after this, about the year 1350.
Gerhardus Rhiddor, Gerhardus Rhiddor.
wrote against the Monks and Friars, a book entitled Lachrima Ecclesiae.
Lachryma Ecclesiae.


About the year 1322. lived Michaell Cesenas, Michael Cefenas.
principal of the Grayfriers, and Petrus de Corbana; of whom writes Antonius
in quarta part summae, and says they were condemned in the extrauagant of
Pope John, with one Johannes de Poliaco. Johannes de Poliaco.
Their opinions were, that Peter was no more the head of the Church, then the
other Apostles, that the Pope has no authority to depose Emperors: that
Priests are equal in authority. Michaell wrote against the pride, tyranny,
and primacie of the Pope, accusing him to be Antichrist, and the Church of Rome
the whore of Babylon, drunken with the blood of Saints, Rome Babylon drunken
with the blood of the Saints.
etc. For this cause he was deprived of his dignity, and condemned of the
Pope: he left behind him many followers, of whom a great part were slain by
the pope, some were burned: as Johannes de Castilion, Johannes de Castilion.
and Franciscus de Alcatara. Franciscus de Alcatara.
In extrauag. Iohannis 23. With the foresaid Michaell was also condemned,
Johannes de Poliaco, (whose assertions were that every Pastor in his own
Church ought to suffice to hear confession: that pastors and bishops had their
authority immediately from Christ and his Apostles, and not from the Pope, etc.

After Simon Mepham Archbishop of Canterbury (who lived not long,) succeeded
John Stretford: after whom came John Offord, and lived but ten months, in
whose room succeeded Thomas, and reigned but one year, Anno 1350. Simo^
Iselip Simon Iselip.
which was made by Pope Clement 6. who sat seventeen years, and builded
Canterbury College in Oxforde: Canterbury College in Oxford.
which Simon Iselip succeeded the Bishop of Ely, named Simon Langham, who
within two years, was made Cardinal. In whose stead, Pope Urban the 5.
ordained William Witlesey, Bishop of Worcester, to be archbishop of Canterbury,
ann. 1366. In which year, William, Bishop of Winchester, The new College in
Oxford.
founded the new College in Oxford.

In the order of Popes, next unto Clement the sixth, ann. 1353. Innocent the
sixth. In the first year of which Pope, two Friars Minors, or Franciscans, P.
Innocent 6.
were put to death at Auinion, for certain opinions, that seemed to the Pope
and his Cardinals erroneous: whose names were one, Johannes Rochetailada, or
Hayabalus, who being a Friar minorite, began first in time of Pope Clement
the sixth, Anno 1345. to preach, that the Church of Rome was the whore of
Babylon, Rome the whore of Babylon.
and the Pope with his Cardinals to be very Antichrist, etc. In the mean
time of his accusation, it happened, that a certain priest coming before the
Pope, cast the Popes bull down before his feet, saying: Lo here take the
Bull unto you, for it does me no good at all. I have labored now these three
years with it, and yet cannot get my right. The pope hearing this, caused the
poor Priest to be scourged, and imprisoned with the Friar. Of Friar
Rachetailada, Froyssard makes mention in his first volume, chap. 211. and
says, that Pope Innocent the sixth held him in prison in the Castle of
Baignour, for showing that many things should fall on the Prelates of the
Church for great superfluity and pride then used amongst them.

About the same time, happened a contention between the French Prelates and
the Friars of Paris, Contention betwixt the French prelates and the Friars.
because they preached, and heard Confessions: and after much adoo, in fine,
the matter coming unto open disputation, it was concluded by master Giles,
one of the Augustine Friars, that after his judgment, the Prelates were more
on the truths side, etc. Ex Godfrido de Fontanis.

About this time, anno 1354. The towns men of Oxford spoil the scholars.
and brake up twenty of the doors of their halles, and wounded many of them,
and slew and threw into priuies, and cut their books and bills into pieces,
and carried away much of their goods: this was done the twelfth of February:
wherefore the whole Town was interdicted by the Bishop of Lincoln. At which
time also was granted to the Vicechauncelour, or Commissarie, to have the
assise of Bread, Ale, Wine, and all other victualles: the Mayor of the town
being excluded. Also it was decreed, that the Commons of the town should
give unto the Students, 251. pounds starling, in part of satisfaction:
reserving notwithstanding to every one of the Students his several action
against any several person of the Town, etc. The cause of the broyle, was,
for that a Student powered the wine on his hosts head: and broke his head with
the pot in a certain brawle.

Simon Islip archbishop of Canterbury, mentioned before with his letters
patent, directed to all parsons, and Vicars within his province, straightly
charged them and their parishioners, upon pain of excommunication, not to
abstain from bodily labor upon certain Saints days: Idle holidaies
which were wont before to be hallowed and consecrated to unthrifty
idleness. A priests wager.
Item, that no Priest should have given unto him more than three 3. pounds,
six shillings eight pence, for his yearly stipend, which made diverse of them
to rob and steal. Anno 1362.

After Simon Islip, succeeded in the sea of Canterbury Simon Langham, then
William Wittlesey: after whom succeeded Simon Sudbury.

About the year 1360. the Nuns of Saint Brigets order began: S. Bridgets
Nuns. Queens college in Oxford.
about which time also was builded the Queens College in Oxford, by Queen
Philip of England, wife to K. Edward the the third.

Also, in the time of this Pope Innocent, Friar John, Bishop of Elie, moved
with certain injuries (as he thought) done unto him by the Lady Blanch, made
his complaint to the Pope: who sending down his curse to the Bishop of
Lincoln, and other Prelates, to be executed upon the adversaries of the Bishop
of Elie, commanded them, that if they did know any of the said adversaries
dead and buried, yet they should cause the same to be taken up: which also
they performed accordingly. Of whom, some had been of the kings Council.

Wherewithal the king being sore displeased, did molest again the said
Prelates: which coming to the popes hearing, certain were directed down from
the court of Rome, in the behalf of the Bishop of Elie: who meeting with the
Bishop of Rochester, the Kings Treasourer, delivered unto him Letters from the
Pope, the tenure whereof was not known. Which done, they incontinently avoided
away. But certain of the kings Servants pursued after, and did overtake
them: of whom, some they imprisoned, and other some they brought to Justices,
and so were condemned to be burned.

This Pope Innocent ordained the feast of holy spear, Holy spear.
and holy nails. Holy nails.


The names of the Bishops of Canterbury, from Lanfrancus, and their
continuance, was this. The order of the Bishops of Cant.


34 Lanfrancus, nineteen years. 35 Anselmus, twenty. 36 Radulphus, eight. 37
Guilielmus Curboyle, thirteen. 38 Theobaldus, twenty four. 39 Becket, nine, 40
Richardus, ten. 41 Baldwinus, seven. 42 Hubertus, fourteen. 43 Stephanus
Lancthon, two and twenty. 44 Richardus, four. 45 Edmond of Abenden, seven. 46
Bonifacius, five and twenty. 47 Kilwarbie, Friar, six.

48 Pecham, Friar, thirteen. 49 Winchelsey, nineteen. 50 Reinold, The order of
the bishops of Cant.
fifteen. 51 Stratforde, twenty nine.

52 Offord, ten months. 53 Bradwarden, one. 54 Islep, forty seven,

About this time begins the losing of Satan, who had been shut up now
1000. years.

The end of the fifth Book.
The fifth Book.
THe first persecution of the primitive Church, beginning at the 30. years of
Christ, was prophesied to continue two and forty months, that is 294. years.

The ceasing of the last persecution of the primitive Church, by the death of
Licinius the last persecutor began, Anno 324. begun from the Nativity of
Christ, which was from the 30. year of his age 299.

The binding up of Satan after peace given to the Church, counting from the
thirty year of Christ, began anno 294.

And lasted a 1000. years, that is counting from the 30. years of Christ, to
the year 1294.

About which year pope Boniface sat in the sea of Rome, and made the sixth
book of the Decretals, confirmed the order of Friars, and privileged them
with great freedoms, Anno 1294.

Unto the which count of years does not much disagree, that which Master Fox
says, A prophecy.
he found in a certain old Chronicle prophesied, and written in the latter
end of a book: which book was written as it seems by a Monk of Dover, and
remains yet in the custody of William Carry, citizen of London, alleging the
Prophecy of one Haynchardus Haynchardus.
a Grayfrier, grounded upon the authority of Ioachim the Abbot, prophesying
that Antichrist should be borne, the year from the Nativity of Christ 1260.
which is cou^ting after the Lords passion, the very same year when the orders
of Friars both Dominickes and Franciscans began first to be set up by Honorius
the third, and Gregorius the 9. which was the year of our Lord counting from
his passion, one thousand, two hundred, and twenty six: and counting after the
Nativity of the Lord, one thousand, two hundred, and three score, whereof the
verses in the author are written, anno 1283.

A prophecy of Antichrist.
Cum fuerint anni completi mill ducenti,
Et Decies seni post partum virginis almae:
Tunc Antichristus nascetur Daemone plenus.
As diverse other before times opposed themselves against the Pope, so now
about the year one thousand, three hundred, three score, against the Pope and
his Clergy was set out a Prayer, A complaint of the Ploughma^ against the
clergy.
and complaint of the Ploughman, faithfully set forth by William Tindall,
against auricular confession, shrift, penance, long prayer, mass, singleness
of priests, Images, etc.

Not much before this Johannes de Rupe Scissa, uttered a prophetical parable
against the clergy of Rome, complaining it to be a bird decked with the
feathers of other fowls, The church Rome a bird decked with other birds
feathers.
whereof because she was proud, and did not acknowledge the benefit, nor from
whom she had it, the fowls pulled every one their feathers, and left her naked:
and so (said he) it will befall to the church of Rome.

About the same time, also God raised up Armachanus against Antichrist, which
Armachanus was Primate and Archbishop of Ireland, Armachanus Archb. of Ireland.
who in the time that he lived had no man that exceeded him either in life or
learning: his name was Richard Fitzrafe: Richard Fitzrafe.
he was brought up in the university of Oxford under John Badenthorp, John
Badenthorp.
who was a great enemy to begging Friars: whose steps also the scholar
following, began to do the like: and being called up to London, made seven or
eight Sermons, wherein he propounded nine Conclusions against the Friars, 9.
Conclusions against the Friars.
for the which he was by the Friars cited up before Pope Innocent the sixth:
before whom he valiantly defended himself, and continued constant therein
until his dying day: his sufferings and deliverances were marvelous great.

The controversy for the Friars held very long in the church, and they had of
popes, some mainteiners, A long controversy of the Friars. Their favorers.
and some adversaries, Mainteiners, Honorius 3. Gregory 9, Alexander 4. Clemens
4. Boniface 8. Clemens 5. Against them, Innoce^tius 3. Innocentius 4. Martinus
4, Benedictus 11.

The learned men that disputed against the Friars, Their assistants.
were these, which either were condemned by the Popes or caused to recant:
Guilielmus de sancto amore, Bernardus super capitulum, Omnis vtriusque sexus.
Godfridus de fontibus, Henricus de Gandauo, Guilielmus de Landuno, Johannes
Monachus Cardini, Johannes de Poliaco, who was caused by the Pope to recant at
Paris. Armachanus, who wrote a Book Defensorium Curatotorum, Defensorium
Curatorum.
and for his defense of Curates against the Friars, he was banished, besides
other vexations, seven or eight years, and died in the same, banished at
Auinion: of whose death, a certain Cardinal hearing, openly protested, that
the same day a mighty pillar of Christ's Church was fallen. Against this
Armachanus, Armachanus a mighty pillar of Gods church
wrote diverse Friars,

After the death of Pope Innocent, was Pope Urban 5. who by the fathers side,
was an Englishman: he mainteyned and kindled great wars in Italy, sending
Egidius his Cardinal, and Legate: and after him, Ardiminus a Burgundian, his
Legate and Abbot, with a great puisance, and much money against sundry cities
in Italy: by whose means, Cities and towns, which before had broken from the
pope, were oppressed. Also Bernabes and Galeaceus princes of Millaine
vanquished, by whose example others being feared, submitted themselves to the
church of Rome, How Rome comes by her patrimony.
and thus came that wicked Church by her great possessions, which her patrones
would needs father upon Constantine the godly Emperor,

In the time of this Pope, and in the second year of his reign, about the
beginning of the year, 1364. even of the nativity of the Lord, the fourth
Sunday of Aduent, one Nicholaus Orem Nicholaus Orem.
preached a Sermon before the Pope and his Cardinals: in which he rebuked the
Prelates and priests of his time: and threatens their destruction not to be
far off, by certain signs taken from their corrupt life, etc. His Text was out
of the six and fifty of Esaie: My saving health is near at hand to come, and
my righteousness to be revealed.

Jesuits begin.
In the fifth year of Pope Urban, began first the order of Jesuits.

Unto this time, which was about the year 1367. Offices removed from the
Clergy to the Laity.
but about this year, through the motion of the Lords in the Parliament, and
partly, for hatred of the Clergy: all those offices were removed to the
Lords temporal.

The P. remoueth from France to Rome again.
After the death of Urban succeeded Gregory the eleue^th: who among his other
acts, first reduced again the papacy out of France unto Rome, which had
now been from thence, the space of seventy years: being thereto moved (as
Sabellicus records) by a Bishop, who being blamed by the Pope, for long
absence from his charge, answered: and why are you so long absent from the
place where your Church does lie? Whereupon the pope sought all means after
that, to remove his Court out of France into Rome.

This Pope Gregory 9, in a certain Bull of his sent to the Archb. of Prage,
makes mention of one named Melitzing, a Bohemian, Melitzing a Bohemian.
and says in the same, that he should teach, Anno 1366. Melitzing had certain
congregations following him: and in the same congregations, certain harlots,
who being converted from their wickedness, were brought to a godly life: which
harlots he used to prefer before al ye holy religious virgins, wherefore he
commanded the Archb. to excommunicate and persecute the said Melitzing: which
he did, and also imprisoned him.

King Edward the third holding a Parliament in the third year of this Pope,
sent his Ambassadors to him: desiring him that he from thencefoorth would
abstain from his reseruations of benefices used in the court of England: and
that spiritual men within this Realm promoted unto Bishoprics, might freely
enjoy their elections within the Realm, and be confirmed by their
Metropolitan, according to the ancient custom of the land: whereto the Pope
sent an answer (but when) it is not recorded) saving that the year following,
Anno 1374. The P. should no more use reseruations of benefices in England.
and likewise the King should no more give Benefices upon the Writ Quare
impedit, etc. But nothing was touched concerning the freedoms of elections
confirmed by the Metropolitanes.

As touching these reseruations, provisions and collations, with the elections
of Archbishops, Bishops, beneficed men, etc. wherewith the Pope vexed the
land, the king in the five and twenty year of his reign, enacted (according
to the Statute made in the thirty year of the reign of his Grandfather king
Edward the first) against the like pillage and ravening, (but not put in
practice) revived it, and enlarged the same: adding (moreover) thereunto, other
straight and sharp penalties, against such as offended in any part of the
same.

And in the Parlements holden the 27. and 28. years of his reign, it was
decreed, that whosoever (for any cause of controversy in law) either
Spiritual or Temporal, whether they were personal or real, Praemunire to
make appeal to Rome for any cause.
should appeal or consent to any appeal to be made to the sea of Rome, should
incur the danger of a Praemunire.

About this time, being the year of our Lord, 1370. Brigit, whom the Church of
Rome has not only canonized for a Saint, Holy Brigit a great rebuker of the
popish clergy.
but also for a prophetess: yet in her books of Revelations, she was a great
rebuker of the pope, and of his filthy clergy, calling him a murderer of
souls, a spiller, The Pope compared.
and a piler of the flock of Christ, more abominable then the Jews, more
cruel then Judas, more unjust then Pilate, worse then Lucifer himself: she
prophecieth that the sea of Rome shall be thrown down into the deep like a
millstone, etc. And that the Clergy have turned the ten commandments into two
words. Da pecuniam: The x comma^deme^ts turned into 2. words. da pecuniam.
that is, give money.

About the same time also, 1379. Catherina Senensis, Katherina Senensis.
which having the spirit of prophecy much complained of the church of Rome,
and prophesied before of the great schism which then followed in the Church of
Rome, and endured all the council of Constance, the space of 39, of years, and
declared also before of the reformation of religion, that now is.

Mathias Parisiensis of Antichrist.
Also, about the year 1370. lived Mathias Parisiensis a Bohemian, who wrote a
large book of Antichrist, and proves him already come, and notes the Pope
to be the same: besides other abuses in the Romish Church, against which he
does inueigh.

Shortly after, anno 1384. Johannes Mountziger, I. Mountziger.
Rector of the University of Vlme, who preached against the worshipping of the
Sacrament, and was resisted by the Friars, till the Senate, and Council of the
City was feign to take up the matter betwixt them.

About this time lived Nilus, Archbishop of Thessalonica, Nilus Archb. of These.
and wrote a large work against the Roman Church, and lays the fault of the
Schism betwixt the East and West Church upon the Pope: and very copiouslie
reprooueth many points of Popery: as, his Supremacy, etc.

About the year 1371. lived Henricus de Iota, H de Iota.
whom Gerson does much commend, and also his companion Henricus de Hassia, H.
de Hassia.
who in a certain Epistle which he writes to the Bishop of Normacia,
Iacobus Cartusiensis, does greatly accuse the Spiritual men of every order:
yea and the most holiest of all, the Pope himself, of many and great vices.

He cites also out of the prophecy of Hildegardis, The devils belly full of
the Popes voluptuousnes
these words. Therefore does the devil himself speak unto you, Priests:
dainty bankets, and feasts, wherein is all voluptuousness, do I find among
these men. In so much, that mine Eyes, mine Ears, my belly, and my veins,
are even filled with the froath of them, and so forth.

About the year 1390. 36. Citizens of Maguntia, for the doctrine of Waldenses,
as Brushius affirms, and Masseus records of diverse, 36. burned for the
truth. 140. suffered for refusing the decretals.
to the number of an hundred and forty, which in the Province of Narbone,
chose rather to suffer whatsoever grievous punishment by fire, then to receue
the decretals of the Romish Church, contrary to the upright truth of the
Gospel.

Also four and twenty suffered at Paris, 24 suffer at Paris.
in the year of our Lord, 1210. And in the same author is testified, that in
the year, there were 400. under the name of heretics, and fourscore beheaded,
Prince Armericus hanged, and the lady of Castile stoned to death.

In the seventeen year of Edw. the third, the Commons found great fault at
prouisio^s coming from Rome, whereby Strangers were dishabled within this land,
to enjoy ecclesiastical dignities: and showed how the Pope had granted in
most covert wise, to two new Cardinals (and namely to Cardinal Peragoth,)
above one thousand marks of yearly taxes.

They (therefore) required the king, and Nobles, to find some remedy, for
that they never could, nor would, leave those oppressions, etc. or else, to
help them to expel the popes authority by force.

Whereupon, the king, Lords, and commons, sent for the act made at Carlil, an.
35. of the reign of king Edward the first, upon like complaint, thereby
forbidding, that any thing should be attempted, or brought into the realm,
that should tend to the blemishing of the kings prerogative, or prejudice of
the Lords, The Act of provision made
or Commons. And so at this time, the statute, called The act of Provision, was
made, by common consent: which generally forbids the bringing in of bulls,
or any such trinkets from the Court of Rome: or using, allowing, or enjoying,
of any such bill, process, instrument, etc.

The penalty of which statute, was, as followed in ye next Parliament, anno
regni, 18.) the transgressors thereof, to lie in perpetual prison, or to be
forbidden the land: and that all Justices of Assise, Jail delivery, or Oier
and determiner, may determine the same: required withal, that the same act and
provision, should continue for ever. And notwithstanding the bishops were
neither named, nor expressed with the other Lords of the Parliament, yet it
stood in full force, notwithstanding.

In which Parliament were also diverse points enacted, touching presentiments of
Ecclesiastical dignities, An act to continue for ever Decrees against the
oppression of the Pope.
and Benefices. Also, in the Parlements, the 20. 25. 38. 40. 50. and 51. of the
kings reign, were enacted decrees against the oppression of the Pope, and his
filthy, and ravenous Clergy: besides diverse other against them.

Moreover, in the book of the acts and rolls of the king, it appears, that
he sent John Wickliffe, (Reader at that time of the Divinity Lecture in
Oxforde) with certain other Lords, and Ambassadors, to treat a marriage
between his Daughter, and Leonell, Son unto king Edward: whereby is to be
noted, the good will which the King bare to Wickliffe, and what small regard he
had of the sea of Rome.

This Wickliffe lived in the reign of King Edward the third, in the year of
our Lord, one thousand, three hundred, Walden his most bitter and cruel enemy:
who in a certain Epistle written to Pope Martin the fifth, says that he was
wonderfully astonished at this his most strong arguments, with the places of
authority that he had gathered, and the vehemency and force of his reasons,
etc.

In Wickliffes time, In VVickliffes time ye world was in worst case.
was the world in most desperate state, and in greatest blindness, and
ignorance, both of the power of the Gospel, and all other good learning: and
the Church of Rome most cruel, and void of all good gift and grace of GOD:
and religion turned to superstition.

Wickliffe first (of matters of religion) began with the Idolatry, committed
in the Sacrament: Wickliffe against images.
which he did not so soon attempt, but the whole glut of monks, and begging
Friars made against him: and after them Simon Sudburie, Archbishop of
Canterbury, took the matter in hand, and for the same cause deprived Wickliffe
of his benefice at Oxford: notwithstanding, he well supported, John of Gaunt
Lord H. Percie favorers of VVic.
and friended of the King, and other: as, John of Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster, and
the Lord Henry Percie, by whom he bare out the malice of the friars, till the
year of our Lord, one thousand,

The opinions for which he was deprived in Oxforde, The opinions of VVic.
were these: That the Pope had no more power to excommunicate any man, than an
other: and that to absolve, is as much in any Priests power, as in his. That
when Ecclesiastical persons do sin habitualiter, continuing in the same
still, the Temporal powers may, and likewise ought to take away from them that
which has been before bestowed upon them, etc. He touched also the matter of
the sacrament, proving, that in the same the accidents did not remain without
the substance, both by the Scriptures and ancient Doctors.

About the year 1376. Simon Sudbury (which before had deprived him, and
afterward prohibited him not to stir any more in those kind of matters) had
obtained by process and order of citation, to have him brought before them,
whereupon both place and time for him to appear, after their usual form was
to him assigned. The Duke having intelligence, that Wickliffe his Client should
come before the bishops, fearing that he being but one, should be too weak
against such a multitude, calls unto him out of the orders of Friars, four
Batchelers of divinity, out of every order one, to join them with Wickliffe,
for the more surety. When the day was come for Wickliffe to appear, which was
Thursday, the 19. of February, John Wickliffe accompanied with the Friars,
Wickliffe brought before the Bishops.
and with them also the Duke of Lancaster, and Lord Henry Piercey, Lord
marshall of England: the said Lord Piercey going before him to make room and
way where Wickliffe should come: such was the throng of the multitude in
Paul's Church (which was the place appointed) that the Lords, for all the
puissaunce of the high Marshall, scarce could with great difficulty get way
thorough. In so much, that the Bishop of London, Will. Courtney, son to the
Earl of Devonshire, seeing the stir that the Lord Marshall kept in the
Church, among the people, speaking to the Lord Piercie, said, that if he had
known what masteries he would have kept in the church, he would have stopped
him for coming in there. Whereupon grew words. At last, after much wrestling,
they preased through, and came to our Ladies Chapel, where the Duke, and
barons were sitting together, with the Archbishops, and other Bishops, before
whom stood John Wickliffe to know what should be laid against him. To whom
first spoke the Lord Percie, bidding him sit down, saying: Wickliffe bid sit
down.
he had many things to answer unto, and therefore had need of some soft
seat. But the Bishop of Lincoln cast into a fumish heat, said he should not
sit there, neither (said he) was it according to law, etc. whereupon grew
great heat of speech among them. The Duke also taking part with the Lord
Percie, From braule to threats.
rebuked the Bishop, who went so far beyond the Duke in railing, that the
Duke (as the Author says) was ashamed because he could not ouerpasse the
Bishop in brawling, and therefore fell to plain threatening: whereupon the
contention grew so great, that the council broken up with scolding and
brauling for that day, was dissolved before nine of the clock.

About this time a proud bishop of Norwich was wounded and sore hurt, A proud
B. wounded.
with his train dispersed at the town of Lennam, for that he presumed to take
upon him to command a mace, or tipstaffe, belonging to the chief governor of
the town, to be carried before him.

Anno 1377. 21. day, died Edward 3. that after he had reigned 51. years, who
of all the kings of the realm unto king Henry the 8. K. Edward dies, the
greatest brideler of the pope.
was the greatest brideler of the Popes usurped power, whereby John Wickliffe
was maintained with aid sufficient.

Richard the second succeeded his father, being but eleven years of age: and
in the same year of his Fathers decease, was crowned at Westminster, anno 1371.

Wickliffe, notwithstanding he were forbidden by the bishops, continued yet
with his fellows, going barefoot, and in long friars gowns, Wickliffe goes
barefoote preaching. Articles out of Wickliffes preachings.
(as their manner was) preaching diligently to the people: out of whose
Sermons, chiefly these articles were collected: That ye Eucharist is the body
of Christ, but figurately. That Rome is not the head of churches: and that
Peter had no more given unto him then other apostles. That the pope had no more
the keys, then any other within the order of priesthood: that the Lords
temporal may take away the temporalities of the clergy, offending
habitualiter, and are bound under pain of damnation, to take them away from
any Church so offending: That the gospel is the only sufficient rule of life.
That neither the Pope nor any other prelate of the church, ought to have
prisons, wherein to punish transgressors, etc. Which were collected with
diverse more by the Bishops, and sent to Pope Gregory at Rome, where the
Articles being perused and read, Wickliffes articles condemned for heretical.
were condemned by 23. Cardinals, to be heretical.

An. 1378. Gregory sends his Bull by the hands of one M. Edmund Stafford
directed unto the university of Oxford rebuking them sharply, imperiously, and
like a pope, for suffering so long the doctrine of Wickleffe to take root:
which Bull when it came to be exhibited to their hands, The Popes bull against
Wickliffe.
the Proctors and Masters of the university, joining together in
consultation, stood long in doubt, deliberating with themselves whether to
receive the Popes Bull with honor, or to reject it with shame.

Beside this Bull sent to the University of Oxford, pope Gregory directed
moreover his letters the same time to the Archbishop of Canterbury Simon
Sudbury, and to the Bishop of London William Courtney, with the conclusions of
John Wickliffe therein enclosed: commanding them by virtue of those his
letters apostolical, and straightly inioyning them, to cause the said John
Wickliffe to be apprehended and cast into prison: and that the King and the
Nobles should be admonished, The Pope diligent against Wickliffe.
not to give any credit to the doctrine of Wickliffe, etc. Besides this Bull to
the Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Bishop of London, he wrote two other
letters concerning the same matter, to the same Bishops, dearing the same date
of day, and year, in the seventh year of his papacy. 11. Kalend. Iunij.

Moreover besides all these bulls, and letters, he directs an other Epistle
bearing the same date unto king Richard the 2. touching the same matter.

The articles included in the Popes letters, 18. heretical opinions against
Wickliffe.
that were held for erroneous, were about 18. as first, none has power but
Christ to ordain, that Peter, and all his offspring, should politikely rule
over the world for ever. 2. God cannot give to any man for him and his heirs
any civil dominion for ever. All writings of men as touching perpetual
inheritance, are impossible. 4. Every man being in grace, justifying, has
right over all the good things of God. 5. A man cannot but only
ministratoriously, give any temporal or continual gift either to his natural
son, or to his son by adoption. 6. The temporal Lords may lawfully take
away the riches from the church when they do offend habitualiter. 7. The Pope
cannot any way make able, or disable any man. 8. A man cannot take hurt by
excommunication, except he be principally excommunicate by him self. 6 No man
ought but in Gods cause, to proceed to any ecclesiastical censure. 10. An
excommunication does only bind, when it is against the adversary of Gods law.
11. There is no power given to excommunicate any subject for denying any
temporalites. 12. The Disciples of Christ have no power to exact by any civil
authority, temporalities by censures. 13. It is not possible by reason of the
absolute power of God, that any can bind or lose the people, or whatsoever
christian he be. 14. The vicar of Christ does only bind and loose, when he
works conformably by the ordinance of Christ. 15. any priest duly ordained,
has power to minister the sacraments, and consequently absolve any man
confessing his faults being penitent for the same. 16. Agrees with the 6. 17.
Whosoever have endued any church with temporalities, it is lawful for them to
take them away by way of medicine, for to avoid sin: notwithstanding any
excommunication etc. For as much as they are not given but under a condition
18. The Bishop of Rome, or any Ecclesiastical minister may lawfully be
rebuked of his subjects, and for the profit of the Church, be accused either
of the Clergy, or of the Laity. These letters made the Bishops marvelous
bold, and brag: but God by a small occasion, did lightly overthrow their
devises, for the day of examination being come, a certain personage of the
Princes Court of no great noble birth, named Lewis Clifford, entering in among
the Bishops, commanded them that they should not proceed in any definitive
sentence against John Wickliffe. By which words, they were amazed, and durst
not proceed: and thus escaped Wickliffe the second time: Wickliffe escapes
the second time.
and was by them clearly dismissed with a certain declaration made of his
articles, and protestation, that he would, while he lived, mainteyne the
law of Christ: and if through ignorance, etc. John Wickliffe was greatly
supported by the Londoners: Wickliffe greatly supported by the Londoners.
by whose means he escaped the hands of the Bishops the second time: and
proceeded, publishing, and preaching the truth: whom also it greatly helped,
because in the same year, or the next following, Gregory the Pope dyed. Pope
Gregory dies.
After whom ensued such schism betwixt two Popes, that it continued in the
Church nine and thirty years, till the time of the council of Constance: A
schism betwixt 2. Popes 39. year.
the occasion of which schism, was through the pride of Urban the sixth. From
whom (about the same cause) of his Cardinals, the most part, and other
Princes shronke, and set up another French Pope against him, named Clement,
Clement.
who reigned eleven years: and after him, Benedictus 13. Benedict. 13
that reigned six and twenty years. Again, of the contrary side, after
Vrbanus 6. succeeded Boniface 9. Innocentius 8. Gregorius 12. Boniface 9.
Innocent 8. Gregory 12.
Alexander 5. John 13. in this order: Urban 6. eleven years, and eight
months. Boniface 9.14. years and 9. months. Popes and Antipopes.
Antipopes, Clement 11. years. Benedictus the 13. 26. years. Pope, Innocentius
the 8. two years. Gregorius the 12. two years, 7. months. Alexander 5. 11.
months. Johannes, 13. five years, ten months.

In which miserable schism fell out many horrible tragedies: as, sheding of
blood; imprisonment of priests; Cruelty among the clergy during the Schism.
murdering of Otho, Duke of Brunswike, Prince of Tarentu^; Joan, Queen of
Jerusalem, and Sicilia, his wife, strangled in prison; racking of Cardinals on
gibets to death; the beheading of five Cardinals together, after long torments;
the slaughter of fifty thousand, slain in battle on both sides: with a
number of other cruelties, practiced among them, which Theodorick Niem, who was
present at P. Vrbanus death, does most largely discourse.

About three years after, there fell a dissension between the nobility and
commons of the land: in which tumult, the rude people took, and beheaded Simon
Sudburie, S. Sudburie beheaded by the rude people.
Archb. of Canterbury. In whose place succeeded William Courtney, who was very
diligent in rooting out Heretics: notwithstanding, in the mean season,
Wickliffes part increased privily, and daily grew to great force, until the
time that William Barton, Vicechancellor of the University of Oxford, about
the year, 1380. W. Barton. Vicechanceler of Oxford, enemy to Wickliff
putting the common seal of the University, to a certain writing, set forth
an Edict, declaring unto every man, and threatening them under grievous penalty,
that no man should be so hardy hereafter, as to associate themselves with any
of Wickliffes sauourers: and unto Wickliffe himself he threateneth the
greatest excommunication, and further imprisonment, and to all his fautors,
unless that they (after three days canonical admonition) did repent, and
amend. Which thing when Wickliffe understood, forsaking the Pope, and all his
Clergy, he thought to appeal unto the Kings Majesty. But the Duke of
Lancaster forbad him that, and counseled him to submit himself to the
censure, and judgment of his Ordinary: whereto he granted, and made such
qualifying of his assertions, that he did mitigate the rigor of his enemies.
Wickliffe mittigateth his enemies.


The next year after 1382. William Archb. of Canterbury there was a
co^uocation holden at London, where John Wickliffe was commanded to be
present: but whether he appeared personally or not, it is not in stories
certainly recorded. In which council Wickliffes articles were some of them
condemned for heretical, and other for erroneous. The articles condemned for
heretical are these.

Articles of Wickl. condemned.
1 There is no transubstantiation after the words of conconsecration. 2. The
accidents remain not without the substance after the words. 3. Christ is
not corporally present in the Sacrament. 4. If a B. or Priest be in deadly
sin, he can not order, consecrate or baptize: (which article seems to be
falsely taken.) 5 A man truly penitent needs not outwardly to be confessed. 6.
Christ did not ordeine the Mass. 7. If the Pope be an evil man, he has no
power over faithful Christians, except it be given him from the Emperor. 8
Since the time of Urban 6. there is none to be received for Pope, but to live
after the manner of the Greeks. 9. That church goods may be taken from the
Clergy, if they so deserve. The erronius opinions were these. 10 That no
prelate ought to excommunicate any man except he knew him first to be
excmo^unicated of God. 11 That he which does so excommunicate, is thereby
himself excommunicated, or an heretic. 12 That any person exco^municating him
that has appealed to the king, or counsel, is thereby himself a traitor. 13
That they that for fear leave the hearing or preaching of the word of God, are
therefore already excommunicated: and in the day of judgment shall be counted
as traitors to God.

14 That it is lawful for any Deacon or Priest to Preach without license of
the, Pope, or Popish Clergy.

15. That so long as a man is in deadly sin, he is neither Bishop or prelate
in the church of God: (which article seems to be hardly gathered of them.)
16. That all the temporal Lords may take away temporal goods from the
churchmen if they so deserve. 17. That tenths are pure alms. Tenths are pure
alms.
18. That all special prayers applied to any private or particular person, by
any religious man or Prelate, does no more profit the same person, then
general or universal prayers do profit others, which be in like state with
them. 19. That whosoever enters into any private religion, is thereby made
the more unapt to keep the commandments of God. 20. That holy men which have
instituted private religions, have grievously offended. 21. That religious men
in their pryuate religions are not of the Christian religion. 22. That Friars
ought to live by their labor. 23. That whosoever gives alms fo Friars, is
in danger of curse.

Now when the Archbishop, Suffraganes, and Prelates, etc. were assembled at the
Grayfriers in London, upon saint Dunstons day after dinner, about two of the
clock, and should go about their business, a terrible earthquake A terrible
earthquake.
fell thorough all England.

The Archbishop endeavored by all means to abolish Wickliffe and his doctrine,
and to that effect wrote both to the Bishop of London, to the commissary of
Oxford, and also solicited the king against the same.

Upon Wickliffes conclusions were examined, Nicholas Herford, Phillip
Repington, and John Ashton bachelors of divinity, who at length with somewhat
adoo, confessed Wickliffes articles to be heretical or erroneous, after a sort
some of them being taken, and in some sense construed: which kind of answer,
because it pleased not the prelates, they were appointed to be examined again
of certain special points, where their answer was not direct and full before.

In the examination of John Ashton the archb. required, that he would answer
in the Latin tongue, because of the Lay people that stood about him, but
Ashton refused so to do: and answered in his mother tongue: and so behaved
himself that the Archbishop called him heretic and erroneous: Persecution.
and at the same time the archbishop being desirous (as he pretended) to be
informed by Thomas Hilman bacheler of divinity (there being present and
somewhat favoring John Ashton) what his judgment was touching the said
conclusions, assigned unto him also a deliberation, to appear with Nicholas
Herford, and Phillip Repingdon: at which time Thomas appeared, and pronounced
the articles all heretical or erroneous: Nicholas, and Phillip, for not
appeering were excommunicated for contumacie. Against which excommunication ye
parties excommunicated, exhibited an appeal unto ye B. of Rome, which appeal
the archb. utterly rejected, and sent a letter to M. Rigge co^missary of
Oxford, to make diligent search for Nicholas Herford, and Phillip Repington, to
apprehend them, and to send them up personally to appear at a certain day
prescribed for the same: and solicited the King to join his sword to assist
him, whereto he also yielded, and directs his letters to that effect, both to
the Archb. and to the Vicechancellor of Oxford, which was anno 1382.

The vicechancellor the same time was Robert Rigges, the proctors John Huntman,
and Walter Dish, who then (as far as they durst) favored ye cause of John
Wickliffe, and that side: in so much that the same time and year 1382. when
certain sermons public should be customably appointed, at the feast of the
Ascension, and of Corpus Christi, to be preached in ye cloister of S.
Frisewide, now called Christ church, before the people, by the Vicechancellor,
and the Proctors: the doing thereof was committed to Phillip Repington, The
favorers of Wickliffe appointed to preach.
and Nicholas Herford, so that Nicholas should preach on the Asce^sion day, and
Repington on the Corpus Christi day. In which sermon on Corpus Christi day,
Phillip preached, (among other matters) that the Pope and Bishops ought not to
be recommended above temporal Lords, and that in all moral matters, he would
defend Wickliffe, as a true Catholic Doctor. And finally, his sermon
concluded, he dismissed the people with this sentence, saying: I will in the
speculatiue doctrine, as pertaining to the matter of the Sacrament of the
altar, keep silence till such time as GOD otherwise shall instruct and
illuminate the hearts of the Clergy. Against this Philip, Peter Stokes a
Carmelite, Stokes an enemy to Wickliff.
was a great adversary. And a while after, the Vicechauncelor and Brightwell
went up to London, to purge themselves, and their adherentes of the accusations
of this Friar, and being examined upon the articles of John Wickliffe, they
did consent, that they were woorthely condemned: and so were with somewhat
ado, discharged, and commanded seek out the favorers of John Wickliffe:
whereof Nicholas Herford and Philip Repington, having privy warning by the
Vicechauncellour, conveyed themselves away, and fled to the Duke of
Lancaster, Duke of Lancaster forsaked the scholars of Wickliffe.
who yet forsook them for fear, or somewhat else, not expressed. So soon as
they were fled, the Archbishop directs letters to the Vicechancellour,
and to the Bishop of London, named Robert Braisbrocke, to excommunicate them,
and to lay for them both in Oxford, and in London, that they might be
apprehended. This was the fourteenth of July, Anno 1382 after which Repington
in the same year, the three and twe^tieth of October, was reconciled to the
Archb. and so was John Ashton.

About the 23. of September the same year, Repington reconciled, and so
Aishton.
the king called a parliament for a subsidy: and the Archbishops and Prelates a
Convocation, in the monastery of Saint Friswide in Oxford, where in the third
day of the assembly, in the presence of the prelates, Philip Repington
Repington abiureth.
(otherwise called of the brethren afterward Rampington) abiured his former
conclusions, and the doctrine of Wickliffe: and immediately after was brought in
John Aishton, who refused to answer, and afterward, was cited and condemned by
Thomas Arundell Archbishop of Canterbury; but what became afterward of him, it
is not certain. It is plain by the Chronicle of S. Albons, that the Londoners
did hinder the Archb. himself sitting in the city of London, when he would
have made process against John Aishton, The Londoners favorers of truth.
anno 1382. Nicholas Herford, during the time of this Convocation did not
appear: and therefore had the sentence of excommunication against him: against
which he put in his appeal to the King, and his Council: the Archbishop
would not admit it, but caused him to be apprehended, and enclosed in
prison: yet he escaped, and returned to his former preaching in secret
manner. Whereupon the Archbishop thundered out excommunication against him, and
wrote letters to the king, requiring his sword to chop of his neck.

In this mean time, it is not certainly known, what became of Wickliffe but
as it may be gathered out of Walden, Wickliffe banished.
it appears that he was banished: but whersoeuer he were, at that time he
wrote a letter to Pope Urban the sixth, purging himself therein: and also in
the same declares a brief confession of his faith. But this Pope Urban
otherwise called Turban, was so hot in his wars against Clement the French
Pope, his adversary; that he had neither leisure, nor list to attend upon
Wickliffes matters, By reason of the schism Wickliffe is more quiet.
by reason of which schism, Wickliffe was in more quiet.

Anno 1383. Urban employed Henry Spencer B. of Norwich (who was hardly
entreated at Lennam, for striving for the mayors mace) in suppressing of the
Antipope, at Auinion in France: and sent Bulls to the same Henry about this
time to Croysser, whosoever would go with him into France, to destroy the
Antipope, that named himself Clement, and to make wars with all those ye took
his part: which was taken in hand accordingly, and to ye end was given to the
Bishop the fiftinth, which was granted to the king the Parliament before, and
about the month of May, being come to Canterbury, and there tarying for a
wind, in the Monastery of S. Augustine, received a writ from the king that he
should return to him, and know further his pleasure. The B. fearing he should
be stayed: notwithstanding the writ, entered the seas, and arrived at Calis, and
afterward besieged Grauendie, that held with the Antipope, and took it, and
there slew man, woman, and child. A cruel Bishop.
Ex Chron. Mon. D. Albons. And after that he had slain at Dunkirke in the
chase, twelve thousand of the French, (of his men only seven missing,) and had
in vain besieged Ipres, and could not keep Graueling, returned again into
England.

In this mean time John Wickliffe, either being banished, or kept in some
secret place, Lutterworth VVickliffes parish Church.
returned again within short space: and repaired to his parish Church at
Lutterworth, whereof he was parson: Siluesters day, and died old: of whom
Thomas Walden his adversary testifies, VVickliffes constancy.
that the same pleased him in his old age, which pleased him being young.

This Wickliffe had written diverse and sundry works, which, anno 1410.
Wickliffe were set on fire, by one Subincus, Archbishop of Prage. The number of
the volumes which he is said to have burned, being most excellently written, W.
books burned.
and richly adorned with bosses of gold, and rich couerings, (as Aeneas
Siluius writes) were above 200.

Johannes Cocleus in his Hist. Hus. records, that there was a certain Bishop
in England, which wrote unto him, that he had yet remaining in his custody, two
mighty volumes of Wickliffes works, which for the quantity, might seem to be
equal to the works of S. Augustine. He wrote also certain answers to king
Richard the second, touching the Title of the King and the Pope: and whether
the king may for his defense in time of necessity withhold his treasure from
the Pope. In which he declares the Popes usurpation, and that Lordly dignity
which by the institution of the Apostles is forbidden him, etc.

Wickliffe had many favorers, even of the Nobility, as well as of the lower
sort. His special favorers were these: John Clenbone, Wickliffes favorers.
Jews Clifford, Richard Sturmes, Thomas Latimer, William Neuell, John
Mountague, which plucked down all the Images in his Church. Beside all these,
was the Earl of Salisbury, who for contempt in him noted toward the Sacrament,
in carrying it home to his house, was enjoined by Badulph Ergon, Bishop of
Salisbury, Penance.
to make in Salisbury a cross of stone: in the which all the story of the
matter should be written: and he eve- Fridaye, during his life, to come to the
Cross barefoote, and bareheaded in his shirt: and there kneeling on his knees,
to do penance for his fact. Ex Chro. Mon. de albon. In vita Rich. 2

The Londoners at this time, trusting in the mayors authority (the clergy and
spiritual men being choked with bribes, The Londoners take upon them, etc.
and winking at vice) took upon them the office of the B. in punishing vices
belonging to the civil law: as, fornication, adultery, etc. Ex eod.

Wickliffe had diverse testimonies of his great learning, and godliness: as, of
the University of Oxford, sealed with the University Seal. But so far did
his doctrine take place, that the Council of Constance, (to destroy it,) did
decree, that forty five of his articles were heretical, and 41. years after
his death, VVic. bones burned after his death. Persecution.
commanded his bones to be taken up, and burned

Thomas Walden, in his book de sacramentis, and sacramentalibus, says, that
after Wickliffe, many suffered most cruel death, and many also did forsake the
Realm. In the number of whom was William Swinderbie, Walter Brut, John Puruey,
Richard White, William Thorpe, Raynolde Peacock, Bishop of Asaph, and
afterward of Chichester: John Scotte, and Philip Norris, which being
excommunicate by Pope Eugenius the fourth, anno 1446. appealed to a general, or
ecumenical Council. Peter Pain, who flying from Oxford into Boheme, did
stoutly withstand the Sophisters, as touching both kinds in the Sacrament of
the supper: and afterward, (among the rest of the Orators) was one of the
fourteen that were sent to the Council at Basil: where, by the space of three
days, he disputed upon the article touching the civil dominion of the
Clergy: in the year 1438.

Also, the Lord Cobham favored, and followed VVickliffes doctrine, as did the
Bohemians, who (by the means of a Bohemian, Student in Oxford, of a noble
stock, that carried with him into Bohemia certain of VVickliffs book De
realibus vniuersalibus, de civilly iure and diuino, de Ecclesia, de
quaestionibus variis contra Cleru^, etc.) had knowledge of the doctrine of
Wickliffe.

A certain noble man in the University of Boheme, had founded, and builded a
great Church of S. Matthias, and Matheus: which Church was called Bethelem,
giving unto it great lands, and finding in it two preachers, every day to
preach (both holy day, and working day) to the people. Of the which Preachers,
John Husse I. Husse.
was one: who having familiarity with the young noble man, that had been
student in Oxford, took such pleasure in reading the books of Wickliffe, and
such profit, that he began to defend the author, both in Schools, and
Sermons.

Anno 1389. William Swinderbie, VV. Swinderb. 1389
Priest, was accused of certain false points, untruly objected against him.
The denouncers were, Friar Frisbie, obseruant, Friar Hinclie, Augustine, and
Thomas Baxton, Dominican.

Now, although he never preached, or mainteyned the articles objected against
him: yet the Friars, with their witnesses, standing forth, declared him to be
conuicte, bringing also dry wood with them to the town, to burn him: and
would not leave him, before he had made them promise, and sworn unto them,
(for fear) never to hold them: and that he should go to certain Churches
and revoke the opinions which he never affirmed: as, that men may ask their
debtes by charity, but it is not lawful to imprison any man for the same.
That a child is not truly baptized, if ye priest ye baptizeth him, or his
Godfather or godmother, be in deadly sin, etc. Which penance he did,
according to their injunctions.

W. Swinderbie removed into Hertfordshire, Articles against S.
where he was much more vexed by the Friars, and by John Tresuant, Bishop of
Hereford. The articles which before were objected, anno 1391. at the church of
Bodenham, in the same Dioces, were these. 1 There is no Transubstantiation. 2
That the accidents cannot be without the subject: and that there remains
material bread. 3 That all Priests are of like power in all things. 4 That
auricular confession is superfluous. 5 That inferior priests have power of
binding, and losing, only, and immediately from Christ. 6 That the Pope cannot
grant yerelie pardons, etc. Whereof, diverse were falsely laid to his charge,
as he in his answer did declare.

In which answer he denied those that were absurd: and the other he protested
he would maintain, till such time as he were by the word of God other wise
infourmed. This answer he should seem to have sent in writing, himself not
daring to appear, being cited four sundry times. Where upon, he was
condemned for an heretic, and his articles, and answers for heretical. From
which sentence, he appealed to the K and his Council, alleging reasons for
the same.

Because the Kings court is above the Bishops, because the matter is of death
and the Bishops (said he) will say, Nobis non licet interficere quemquam. It
is not lawful for us to kill any man, etc. what after became of him it can not
certainly be affirmed, whether he escaped their hands or died in prison, or
was burned: but it remains out of doubt, that during the time of king Richard
2. no hurt was done him, which was in the year 1401. Henry the 4. invaded the
kingdom. In the beginning of whose reign was holden a parliament at London,
wherein Wickliffes books, doctrine, and maintainers were condemned, and his
favorers judged to be apprehended, and except they recanted, to be delivered
to the secular power: Henry the 4. the first persecuting king in England.
whereupon a certain priest is said to have bin burned in Smithfield for the
testimony of the truth, which might be William Swinderby aforesaid.

Next unto William Swinderby, his companion Walter Brute Walter Brute.
was apprehended for the testimony of the truth. He was a Lay man, and a
Graduate of Oxforde: the chief cause that stirred up the zeal of this man,
seems to have bin the impudent pardons and indulgences of P. Urban granted
to Henry Spencer B. of Norwich to fight against pope Clement: and the wrongful
condemnation of the articles and conclusions of W. Swinderby.

The articles laid out against him, were, yt he had taught against the real
presence of the Sacrament. That he inueighed against the croysing, to fight
against Clement, and yt he aduouched the P. to be antichrist, and a seducer of
the people. That he aduouched VV. Swinderbies articles, Articles against Brute.
and answers to be good. Which articles also, they ministered, and laid to his
charge, in the chamber of the Bishop of Hereford, at his Manor of Whitborne,
then being present, M. Rainold, of wolstan, chanon of Hertford, sir Philip
Dilester, person of the church of Blanniorim, etc. To the objections, and
articles Brute did cause an answer to be delivered to the Bishop, which
because it seemed to him too obscure, and short, required him to write upon the
same matters again more at large: whereupon M. Walter declares his mind more
amply of the same matters: and confuteth the Popes usurpation, Pope Antichrist.
and proves him very copiously to be Antichrist. Disputes against the
necessity of tithes: against auricular confession, and the Popes absolution
and pardons, against justification by works, and the real presence: that
Christ's body is not left for a sacrifice, but a Sacrament: against exercising
of Priests selling of prayers, holy water, purgatory, selling of pardons, of
orders, of hallowings, discipline, and fraternity, etc. that the city of Rome
was Babylon: and against Images. Against all these things, he most pithily, and
learnedly treated: and in the end of his declaration, he prophecieth that the
temporalties should be taken from the clergy, The temporalty taken from the
Clergy.
for the multitude of their sins.

After that this declaration was exhibited by Walter Brute unto the Bishop of
Hereford, he further appointed him the third day of October, at Hereford, with
the continuance of the days following, to hear his opinion. Which third day,
being Friday, anno 1393. Walter Brute appears before him, sitting in
commission in the Cathedral Church of Hereford at six of the clock, or
thereabouts having assistance in the same place, diverse Prelates, abbots, etc.
Among whom was N. Herford.

In which assembly Walter submitted himself unto them, after they had
continued Friday, Saturday, and Sunday, in their informations, and
examinations, against him: so as for that time it is like he escaped: what
afterward befell unto him, it is not certain.

Out of the declarations, and writings of VV. Brute, the B. with the monks,
and doctors, did draw out certain articles, to the number of seven and
thirty: which they sent to the University of Cambridge, to be confuted, unto
two learned men, Master Colwel, and Master Newton, bachelors of divinity,
which they to their skill did take in hand.

Certain writings are found in the same register, adioined to the history of
Walter Brute, and one, A turnecote persecutor.
a letter which has no name, written to M. Nicholas Herford, who being at the
first a great follower of Wickliffe, was now in the number of those that sat
upon Walter Brute. The effect of ye letter was to warn him, and put him in
mind of his fall: and beside that epistle, there is found annexed with the same,
A letter of Lucifer prince of darkness to the clergy.
a certain other letter counterfayted, under the name of Lucifer Prince of
darkness, to the persecuting Church of the popish clergy. Which letter seems
to some to be ascribed to Occham above mentioned, wherein Popish Church is
noted to be Antichristian, and the abuses of the same laid open, Ex Registro
Herfordiensi: and diverse other writings of like argument, both before and
since have been devised: as, one bearing the Title Luciferi ad malos principes
ecclesiasticos, imprinted first at Paris in Latin, and under the writing
thereof bearing this date, Anno a palatij nostri fractione, consortiumque
nostrorum subtractione 1351. Wickliffe 1385. that was above six years before
the examination of this Walter Brute. There is also another epistle of Lucifer
ad Praelatos, mentioned in the Epistle of the school of Prage, to the
University of Oxford, set forth by Huldricus Huttenus, Anno 1370.

Also Vincentius in his Speculo historiae, lib. 25. cap. 89. makes mention of
a letter of the feends of hell to the clergy, as in a vision represented before
400. years. The feends glad of want of preaching.
In which the feends give thanks to the clergy, in that by their not preaching,
they sent infinite number of souls to hell, etc. Also Iacobus Cartusiensis
writing to ye B. of Wormace declares the enormities of the church: besides an.
1228. at Paris, in a sinode of the clergy, The Devil teaches what should be
preached.
there was one appointed to make a Sermon, and being careful what to say to
the people, the Devil appeered to him, and bid him preach, and say to them,
the princes of Hell salute you, ye Princes of the Church, because thorough
your negligence all souls go down to hell, adding moreover that he was
enforced by the commandment of God to declare the same: yea and that a
certain token was also given the Clergy, whereby the Synod might evidently
see, that he did not lie. Ex catalog. Illyric. fol. 546.

King Richard the second, was by Boniface the 9. stirred up against the
professors of the truth: which Boniface directed his Bull, both to the Bishop
of Hereford against the professors, and also another unto the King, the sixth
year of his dignity Episcopal: whereupon the King gave out straight
commission against them that held of the side of Wickliffe, and specially
against Walter Brute he wrote a letter the two and twentieth day of September,
the seuententh year of his reign. Albeit during the life of the King none are
expressly found by name that suffered burning: notwithstanding some there were
which by the Archb. William Courtney, and other Bishops had been condemned,
and diverse also abiured, Abiurers.
and did penance, chiefly about the town of Leycester: the names of which
persons detected are these: Well affected about Leycester.
Roger Dexter, Roger Dexter.
Nicholas Tailor, Nich. Tailor.
Nicholas Wagstaffe, Michaell Scriuener, William Smith, John Henry, William
Parchmenar, and Roger Goldsmith, inhabitants of the town of Leycester, who for
holding against the Real presence, against worshipping of Images, and
worshipping of the Cross, against the chaunting of Mass, and mattins, against
pardons, Friars, oblations for the dead, auricular confession to the priest,
etc. were of the Roman church condemned for Heretics: and because Roger and
Nicholas appeered not, being cited, on Alhallow day, being the first of
November, the archb. celebrating high mass, cursed the^ and their adherents,
The town of Leycester interdicted.
with hell, book, and candell, and did interdict the whole town of Leicester,
and all the Churches in the same, so long as any of the foresaid excommunicate
persons should be there, and till all the Lollards of the town should turn
from their heresy, obtaining at the Archb. hand, the benefit of absolution:
at length it was declared, that there was a certain Anchores, An Anchores of
Wickliffes doctrine.
within the Churchyard of S. Peter's of Leicester, infected with Wickliffes
heresy, named Matild, which Matild Matild.
being examined by him, and he not finding her answer directly, assigned her a
day peremptory, to appear before him at the monastery of S. James at
Northampto^, there more fully to answer unto the articles of that heresy,
which was the 6. day of the same month of November: which Matild was so
straightly examined, Recant.
that she recanted, and did 40. days penance.

About that time, there was one Margaret Cailie a Nun, Margaret Cailie a Nun,
forsakes her order.
which forsaking her order, was against her will enforced by the Archb. to
enter into the same again. Moreover, of the number of the 8. persons before
mentioned, 2. recanted, William Smith, Roger Dexter, and Alice his wife, and
had enjoined penance, to hear mass, and go on procession 3. times before the
cross in their shirts, with Tapers and crucifixes in their hands, and in the
open market to do likewise: William singing the antheme, with the Collect,
Sancta Katherina, Penance.
and Roger and Alice a Pater noster, and an Aue Marie: and so also should
again stand the Sunday next, as before in the Church, etc. 1389.

About this time, one Peter Pateshull Peter Pateshul
an Austen friar, obtaining by the Popes privilege, (through the means of
Walter Dys, Confessor to the Duke of Lancaster) liberty to change his coat
and religion, and hearing of the doctrine of John Wickliffe, and other of that
sort, began at length to detect the vices of his order, in such manner, as all
men woondred to hear the horrible reciting thereof. which being brought to the
ears of his order, twelve of them, while he was preaching at the Church of
Saint Christopher in London, stood up openly in his preaching: and one of them
contraried that which he said: which, when the Londoners did see, they thrust
him with his brethren out of the Church, and wounded them, sore beat them,
and followed them home: purposing to destroy their mansion with fire also, had
not the Sheriff of London, with two Friars of good report, The Londoners
zealous.
of the same house with gentle and mylde words mittigated their rage. This
Peter Patshull was afterward desired to put in writing, that he did know,
touching their wickedness: which he did, accusing them of murder, naming
time, place, and persons: sodomitrie, treasons to king and realm, etc. Which
writing, the Londoners caused to be set up on Paul's Church door at London:
and was read, and copied out of many. Anno 1387. the tenth year of the reign
of King Richard the second. Ex Chron. Monast. Albon.

At the same time, Anne the kings wife, had the Gospels in English, The K. wife
has the Gospel in English.
with the four Doctors upon the same. She was a Bohemian borne, Sister of
Vincelaus, king of Boheme: which care of knowledge in her, Thomas Arundell
Archbishop of York, preaching at her funeral, the 18. year of the Kings
reign, greatly commended: and praised for having them in the mother tongue,
and blamed sharply the negligence of the Clergy. Notwithstanding this Tho.
Aru^del, Tho. Arundell.
after this sermon, became ye most cruel eniury that could be against English
books, and the authors thereof: for shortly after the death of the Queen, he
with the B. of London, Robert Braybrock, crossed the seas into Ireland, and
there desired the kings aid against the heresy of Wickliffe.

Anno 1393. Articles in the be half of the Gospel.
and also at Westminster. 1. The first was against the appropriations, and
pride of the Clergy. 2. Against Papisticall priesthood. 3 Against singlenes
of Priests. 4 Against Transubstantiation. Against exorcismes, and blessings of
priests. 6 Against civil jurisdiction of Ecclesiastical persons, 7 Against
masses for the dead, 8 Against pilgrimages, and oblations. 9 Against auricular
confession. 10 Against the purchasing of indulgences, and pardons a poena, and
culpa, by Lords, unto such as do help their armies to kill Christians in
foreign Countries, for temporal gain. 11 Against Nuns, and widows which
vow a single life. 12 Against multitude of arts not necessary, Multitude of
arts not necessary.
used in the Church.

To these articles were adjoined reasons in reproof of the practice of the
Church of Rome therein. And unto the articles these verses were thus adjoined.

The English Nation does lament
of Sodomites their sin:
Which Paul does plainly signify,
by Idols to begin.
But Gersitis full ingrate,
from sinful Simon sprung:
This to defend, (though priests in name)
make Bulwarks great and strong. Rhyme against popish priests.

After these articles were thus set forth, the King, not long after returned
out of Ireland: and at his return called certain Nobles unto him, Richard
Sturie, Jews Clifford, Favorers of the gospel.
Thomas Latimer, John Montacute, etc. Who^ he did sharply rebuke, and
terriblie threaten, for that he heard them to be favorers of that side: and
took an oath of Richard Sturrie, that he should never favor any such
opinions: swearing that he should die a shameful death if he brake his oath,
Ex Chron. D. Alb.

Now Pope Urban was dead six years before: P. Boniface 9.
whom succeeded Boniface the ninth, that labored by all means against the
Gospel, and had written sundry times to King Richard, as well for the
repealing of acts of Parliament, against his provisions, Quare impedit, and
praemunire facias, as for the persecuting of the professors of the truth: which
letter he wrote to the king, anno 1396. which was the year before the death of
William Courtney, Archbishop of Canterbury, after whom succeeded Th. Arundel,
brother to the Earl of Arundel first B. of Elie, then archb. of York, and
Lord Chancellor of England, and lastly, archb. of Canterb. about the year 1397.

Anno 1398. the ninth year of the Pope, K. Richard 2. wrote a certain letter
to the Pope, full of virtuous instruction, to the quieting of the schism: and
a godly admonition, very pithilie, The K. writes a christian admonition to
the P.
and copiouslie: in the end whereof (the rest being of like sort) he
beseeches him to receive his council effectually, that in doing thus, the
waters may return to the places from whence they came: and so the waters may
begin to be made sweet with salt, least the axe swim on that water, and the
wood sink, and least the fruitful Olive degender into a wild Olive, and the
leprosy of Naaman, the Nobleman, cleave continually to the house of Gehezie,
and least the Pope, and the Pharisees crucify Christ again. Christ, the
spouse of the Church, which was wont to bring the chief bishop into the
holiest place, increase your Holiness, or rather, restore it, being lost, etc.
Ex lib. cuiusdam Dunelmen. But the Popes being little moved with good council,
neither of them would give over, to the quiet of the Church, but prosecuted
their titles to the uttermost.

Notes of certain Parlementes holden in the reign of K. Richard 2. making
against the Pope.
Parlements holden against the P.
IN the first year, at Westminster, that first fruits be no more paid to the P.
Item, that no provision be made from Rome, to procure any Benefice. That none
farm any Ecclesiastical living of a stranger.

In which bill it was rehearsed that Frenchmen had six thousand pound a year,
that way in England. Against the Popes reseruations of dignities elective: in
the second, year against Aliens, who had the greatest part of Church dignities
in their hands.

Item, that the benefices of rebels to Pope Vrbane should be seized into the
kings hands. That Vrbane was true pope and who soever fought for any provision
but from Vrbane, should be out of the Kings protection.

In the third year the Prelates and Clergy, made a protestation against a
certain new grant, to wit, their extortion. But the King (notwithstanding
their protestation) would not stay to grant to his Justices in all cases as
was used to be done in times past, etc. In the 4. year against the popes
collectors, that all priors aliens might be removed and Englishmen placed in
their rooms. In the ninth year, that redress might be had against such
religious persons, as under license to purchase 10. pound a year, do purchase
80. or an 100. That clerks should pay to the king first fruits as they do to
the Pope. The 11. year against impositions gathered of the popes Bulls of
Volumus and Imponimus, and that they might be bestowed upon the kings wars
against the Schismatikes of Scotland, and that such as bring into the realm
such, may be reputed for traitors.

In the 13. year, that the Popes collector should be commanded to avoid the
land within 40. days, or else to be taken for the kings enemy: and that every
such collector from henceforth should be an Englishman, and sworn to execute
the statutes made in this parliament, etc. and in the 14, 15, 17, 20, 21, 25.
Decrees, were made against some one point, or other of the Popes authority and
power in England, and abuses of the Clergy. In the five and twentieth year,
Thomas Arundell archb. of Canterbury in the parliament was proved a traitor,
Tho. Arundell proved a traitor.
in that he procured the Earls of Arundell, and Warwick, and the Duke of
Gloucester, to encroch themselves royal power, and to judge to death Simon
Burley, and sir John Barnes, without the Kings consent: whereupon it was
decreed that he should be banished, his temporalties seized, and his lands,
and goods forfaited. The King further prescribed that he should take his
passing on Friday, within six weeks of Michelmas at Dover, toward the parts
of France.

King deposed.
Anno 1399. Richard was deposed from his crown by common consent: after whom
succeeded Henry the 4. who returned out of France, with Thomas Arundell the
Archbishop before exiled, and by him was led to the seat royal. This was anno
1399.

The next after an. 1400. William Sawtree William Sawtre.
priest, desiring to be heard for the commodity of the whole realm, and the
matter being smelt before of the Bishops, they obtained that the matter should
be referred to the convocation house: which it was, and the convocation being
differred till Saturday next the twelfth of February, so was his audience also:
where, at the day appointed he appeering, the Archbishop Thomas Arundell
objected that he had fallen into certain heretical Articles abiured before
the Bishop of Norwich, and caused certain Articles vnabiured to be read, and
objected against him by Robert Hall Chancellor to the B. thus: sir William
Charles, otherwise called Sawtree, Objections against Sawtree
parish priest of the Church of Saint Since the virgin in London, publicly and
privily, does hold these conclusions under written. 1. That he will not
worship the cross. 2. That he would sooner worship a temporal King. 3. That
he would sooner worship the bodies of Saints. 4. That he would rather worship a
man truly contrite. 5. That he is bound rather to worship a man predestinate,
then an Angel of God. 6. That a man is not bound to his vow of visiting the
monuments of Saints; but that he may distribute the expenses of his vow to the
poor. 7. That every Priest, or Deacon, is more bound to preach then to say
the Canonical hours. 8. That after the words of consecration, the substance
of bread remains still.

To which articles, he in the Charterhouse before the bishop, and his
Council, exhibited a scroll of answeares, mainteyning the same: after which
answeares publicly read by master Robert Hal, the Archbishop inquired of the
said William, whether he had abiured these heresies before the Bishop of
Norwich, or not, as was alleged against him: whereto he answered no. Then he
specially examined him of the sacrament of the altar: who answered, that after
the words of consecration, there remained bread: whereupon the Archbishop
gave, sentence of heresy against him. The same prouincial Council being
continued until the 24. day of the same month of February, the Bishop of
Norwich presented a certain process unto William Sawtre, wherein he had
abiured the articles laid against him: which being declared, it was demanded
of William Sawtre, otherwise called Chatris, why he might not be pronounced a
man fallen into heresy, and to be disgraded. Whereunto he answered nothing:
then the Archbishop, and the whole Council gave sentence, he should be taken
for a relaps, Relaps.
and disgraded, and so committed to the secular power. His proceeding in his
degradation, after that he had put on the apparel, was in this sort as
follows. In nomine patris, filii, and spiritus sancti, The manner of
disgrading.
Amen. We Thomas, by Gods permission Archbish. of Canterbury, primate of all
England, and Legate of the Apostolic Sea, do denounce thee William Sawtry,
otherwise called Chawtris, Chaplain fained, in the habit and apparel of a
Priest, as an heretic, and as one refallen into heresy, by this our sentence
definitive, by counsel, consent, and authority to be condemned, and by
conclusion also of all our fellow brethren, fellow Bishops, Prelates, Council
provincial, and of the whole Clergy, do degrade and deprive thee of all thy
priestly orders, and in sign of degradation, and actual deposition from thy
priestly dignity, for thine incorrigibility, and want of amendment, we take
from thee the Patent and Chalice, and do deprive thee of all power of
celebrating mass, and also we pull of thy back, the casule, and take from
thee the vestiment, and deprive thee of all priestly honor, and so proceeded
they in taking away the vestiment, and stool of a Deacon, and and the albe of
a subdeacon, and maniple, and candlestick, taper and cruet of an Acolouth, the
holy water bucket of an exorcist, the Legend book of a Reader in the Church,
the Surplise of a Sexton, The surplesse of a Sexton.
the crown of Ecclesiastical dignity to be shaven, and the Priests cappe
taken away, and a Lay man's cappe put on, that they might favorably receive the
said William thus unto them committed. This done, by their soliciting, the
king directed a terrible decree against him for his speedy execution to the
Mayor and sheriffs of London: which was performed accordingly. Anno 1400.

The time of Henry the 4. The time of Henry 4.
was full of trouble, blood, and misery. He was the first of the kings of
England, that put out his hand to the shedding of the blood of Saints, since
the conquest.

After the burning of this godly man, the rest of the company began to hold
themselves more close, for fear of the King, who was altogether bent to hold
with the Popes prelacie.

Anno 1405. Richard Scroop, with the L. Mowbery, marshall of England (which
both conspired against the king) ten articles were set upon Churchdoores,
against the king: wherein he was charged to be a traitor, perjured, a murderer,
a breaker of the orders of the church, a tyrant, a miss-gouernor of the
commonwealth, an oppressor, etc. But they with their adherents were
apprehended, and put to death.

Anno 1409. Thomas Badby 1409 Thomas Badby martyr.
a tailor and lay man, was by Thomas Arundell archbishop of Canterbury brought
to condemnation for the testimony of the truth. His Articles were: 1. That the
sacrament of the Altar is not the real body of Christ, and that after
consecration it remains bread still. 2. That it was impossible, that any
priest could make the body of Christ. 3. That he said, Jack Baker of Bristow
had as much power to make the like body of Christ, as any priest had. He was
pronounced an Heretic, first by the B. of Worcester in the chapel Caluary
of S. Thomas martyr, nigh the cathedral Church of Worcester, which was
afterward approved by the archbishop of Canterbury, Archb. of York, London,
Winchester, Chichester, Norwich, (the prince Edmund, Duke of York being also
by) etc. and he condemned in Paul's Church in London, Crocodiles tears.
and so was delivered to the secular power to be burned: which when they had
done, (like false hypocrites) they desired ye te^porall Lords present, very
instantly, that they would not put the said John Badby to death, etc. But this
being done in the forenoone (the 15. day of March) on the afternoon, ye kings
writ was not far off: he was brought into Smithfield, and there being put in
an emptye barrel, was bound with iron bars fast to a stake, and dry wood
put to him, and so burned. At which time, Courtney Chancellor of Oxford,
preached and informed him of the faith of holy church. the Prince, the K.
eldest son being also present. When the tun was put over his head, and fire
put to, he cried mercy, (belike upon the Lord,) whereat the Prince commanded to
take away the tun, and to quench the fire, promising him pardon (if he would
recant) and a yearly stipende out of the kings treasury.

Which when he denied, and refused to recant, he commanded the tun to be put
over him again, and fire put to, and so was he consumed.

The Clergy still persecuted the faithful, and moved the king at the
parliament (which yet continued) to enact the Statute Ex officio, The Statute Ex
officio.
which he yielded unto: and to fortify the same, the Archbishop made also a
constitution against the professors of the truth: and such was the straitness
in those times, that although many did constantly abide, yet some did shrincke
back: among whom was one John Puruey that reca^ted at Paul's cross, Diverse
shrink back.
John Edward priest, who revoked at the Green yard at Norwich, Richard
Herbert, and Emmot Willy of London, also John Beck at London, John Seynons of
Lincolnshire, who was caused to revoke at Canterbury. The articles which
commonly they did hold were these: First, that ye office of the holy cross did
contain mere idolatry, Articles.
and that the cross woorshippers are mere Idolaters: that there is not the
bodily presence in the sacrament. That the Eucharist was instituted for a
memorial only. That the same Sacrament is a figure of his body. That every
Priest ought to preach without license of his ordinary. That it is sin to
give any thing to the preaching Friars. That we ought not to offer at the
burials of the dead. That confession of sins to the priest is unnecessary. That
the infant, although he die unbaptized, is saved. That neither the Pope, nor
any whosoever, can compel any man to swear by any creature of God, or by the
Bible. That no man is bound to give any bodily reverence to any prelates, etc.

Anno 1407. was William Thorpe W. Thorpe.
examined of articles before the Archbishop, Thomas Arundell: which William,
set forth his examination, written with his own hand. He was called, and
examined the Sunday next after Lammas, having been before imprisoned in the
Castle of Saltwood: He was burdened to have preached in Shrewesburie, in Saint
Chads Church. 1 That the Sacrament of the Altar was material bread. Articles.
2 That Images are in no wise to be worshipped, 3 that men should not go on
Pilgrimages. 4 That Priests have no title to tithes. 5 That it is not lawful
to swear in any wise.

Which articles he denied that ever he taught, yet being examined of them
particularly, he (first declaring that every Priest has power to preach, and
ought so to do,) answered to the first, that Transubstantiation was invented
by Friar Thomas Aquinas, Transubstantiation invented by Tho. Aquinas.
since the devil was let loose. To the second, that, as in the Church of the
Jews, it was not lawful, nor put in practice, to make the image of the
Trinity, or of any of the Saints, or Prophets: so neither, in the time of the
Gospel. And so to the rest, he holds, and aduoucheth against the Romish
Church: saving, concerning the matter of swearing. He said, he preached that
it was not lawful to swear by creatures, and so not by a book: and alleged
Chrysostom for that purpose, who blames them greatly, that bring forth a
book to swear by. Against swearing on a book.


Besides these articles, it was also objected to him, what he thought of
auricular confession: which he auswered to be unnecessary, but only a
contrite, and penitent heart unto God. And if any man feel the burden of his
sins grievous, and his conscience disquieted, then were it not amiss, to
resort to a good priest: and if he failed, that a man might lawfully take
council, and comfort at a Lay man's hand. The discourse was long betwixt the
archb. and him, and very excellently, and courageously did Thorp maintain the
truth, against the archbishop. Who, among many arguments of no weight,
alleged the examples of P. Rampington (who now persecuted the brethren,
although he had before professed the truth,) the B. of Hereford, and Puruey,
etc. that had relapsed from the truth which they once mainteyned: but nothing
could discourage, or alter the constant heart of the godly man. Which the Archb.
perceiving, after many threatenings, A constant confessor of the truth.
and contumelious words, he called a Clearke, and rounded him in the ear, who
went forth, and straightway fette the Constable of Saltwood Castle, whom the
Archb. commanded to carry William away: who led him into a foul and filthy
prison: where notwithstanding, he felt the exceeding comfort of Gods spirit most
plentifully. Besides his examination written with his own hand, there is also
extant a treatise, under the title of his will, containing a complaint against
vicious priests: their pride; pleasure of this life; neglecting of their
duties; etc. What became of him is not in stories specified: but it is most
likely (being committed to most straight prison) he was closely made away, or
died by sickness.

T. Walden writes thus of I. Puruey before mentioned, in his second tome. I.
Puruey (says he) was the library of the lollards, I. Puruey, the library of
the Lollards.
and glosser upon Wic. He said that the worshipping of Abraham was but a
salutatio^. And tom. 3. he says: This I. Puruey, with Herford, a doctor of
divinity, were greeuouslie tormented, and punished, in the castle of Saltwood:
and at last recanted at Paul's cross in London, T. Arundel then being Archb.
of Cant. Afterward again he was imprisoned under H. Chicheslie. archb. of
Ca^t. 1421. R. Lauingam, his adversary. First, as touching the sacrament of
the last supper, the sacrament of penance, the sacrament of orders, the power
of the keys, the preaching of the gospel, of marriages, of vows, of
possessions, of correcting of the Clergy, of the decrees of the church, of the
state of the P. and Clergy: of all these generally, he left diverse
monuments, gravely, and exactly written.

Articles tecanted.
The articles which he taught, and afterward was forced to recant at Paul's
cross, were these. 1 No transubstantiation. 2 No auricular confession. 3 Every
godly Lay man, is a priest unto God. 4 That the wicked prelates have not the
keys, and that the cursing of the Pope should do good, and no hurt: for that
they which are so cursed, are dismissed, and freed from his cursed laws. 5
Against vows of perpetual chastity. 6 That priests ought to preach the
Gospel freely. 7 That Innocentius 3. with 600. bishops, and 1000. other
prelates, which set down in a council, transub. and real presence, were fools,
blockheads, heretics, etc. in so doing: and therefore no man ought to obey
their constitutions, except they be grounded upon the Scriptures, or upon some
reason which can not be impugned.

Besides these, Richard Lauingam collected other articles, out of ye books of
Puruey, as against the chapter of penance, and committing of sins, Omnis
vtriusque sexus. Item that Innoce^tius the third was the head of Antichrist:
against the Sacrament of Orders. And if there were no Pope, yet all the bishops
might govern the Church by common consent, as once they did before, Once they
did before, etc.
such worldly pride crept in among the Bishops, etc. As touching the authority
of the keys no man ought to esteem Satan (whom men call the Pope) and his
unjust censures, more then the hissing of a serpent, or the blast of Lucifer.
Concerning the Sacrament of matrimony, that gossipry ought to be no let. The P.
curse the blast of Lucifer.
That no vow ought to be made, but in such things as a man may and ought
lawfully to perform.

Touching the possessions of the Church, he declares that the king, and the
Lords, and commons, may without any charge at all, keep 15. garrisons, and
find 15000. soldiers, having sufficient lands and revenues to live upon) out
of the temporalties, gotten into the hands of the Clergy, How the temporalties
of the clergy should be bestowed.
and feigned religious men, which neither do that which belongs to the office
of Curats to do, nor yet to secular lords. And moreover, the king may have
20000 pound, to come freely every year to his cofers, and above: also, may
find, and sustain, fifteen Colleges more, and 15000. Priests and Clerks,
with sufficient living, and an hundred hospitals for the sick, and every house
to have one hundred marks in lands: and all this to be taken out of the
te^poralties of the clergy, without any charge to the realm, etc. That the law
of Siluester the P. which is declared in 2. q. 5. ca. praesul. and cap. Nullam,
is contrary to the law of Christ, and either Testament. And yt those decretals
of accusations, cap. quando, and qual. which do prohibit any clarks to be
brought before a secular judge, to receive judgment, do contain blasphemy,
heresy, and error, and brings great gains to Antichrists cofers. That
punishment of adultery belongs to secular persons: and furthermore he makes
an exhortation to the Princes, to judge the Church of Rome, which he calls
the great and cursed strumpet, of whom S. John writes Apocalips. 17. Touching
the laws, and determinations of the popes church, the Christians ought to
repeal such of them as are against the word of God: and that the Canon laws
are full of heresies. This was written of him, anno 1396. Thomas Arundell
Archbishop of Canterbury.

Now all this time, the schism continued betwixt the popes: and so endured,
til the Council of Constance, which was in whole, the space of 29. years: the
original whereof, began at Vrbanus the fifth, who dying ann. 1389. Boniface 9.
Boniface 9. impudent in selling of pardo^o.
who sat 14. years: he in selling his pardons, was so impudent, that he
brought the keys of S. Peter (as says Platina) in contempt.

After him succeeded Innocentius 7, and sat two years: who being dead, the
Cardinals consulted together, and seeing the inconvenience that grew of the
schism, minded to provide some remedy for the same: and took order, being
assembled in their conclaue, for the election of a new Pope: and promised among
themselves, with a solemn vow made to God, Marie the blessed virgin, to Peter,
and Paul, and all the company of holy Saints, that if any of them within the
College, or without the same, should be called to that high place of the
Apostolical pre-eminence, he should effectually renounce the jurisdiction,
and title of his Popedom, if, or whenever, Order against the schism.
the contrary Pope for the time being, would in like manner renounce his
place, and title: and his Cardinals in like manner condiscended to the
cardinals of Rome. So that these two Colleges of Cardinals agreeing together,
that one chief B. might be chosen, and taken out of the^ both, to be made ye
true pope: Provided moreover, that none should seek absolution or releasement
from the said vow and bond once passed among them. Unto all which things every
one subscribed with his hand, and so they proceeded and chose Gregory 12. who
in the same day of his election, Pope Gregory the 12.
in the presence of all the Cardinals, confirmed the vow, subscribing the same
with his hand, in form as follows: And I Gregory this day being the last of
November, anno 1407. 80. years: Pope Gregory 12. perjured.
but the holy Father perjured himself, and therefore diverse did forsake him,
and sent to Kings and Princes of other lands for their assistance, to appease
the Schism: and amongst the rest, Cardinal Bituriensis was sent to the King
of England, who publishing diverse conclusions (which remain in the registers
of Thomas Arundel) disputes that the pope ought to be subject to the Laws and
Counsels: by whose motion the King directs his letters unto Gregory the Pope,
Anno 1409. 200000. 200000. Christians slain in a popish quarrel.
Christians had been slain, and that of late thirty thousand thorough the
dissension about the Bishopric of Leodium, between two set up: the one by
the authority of the one Pope, and the other by the authority of the other,
and further moved him to give over, as the natural mother did her son before
Solomon, The king writes to the Pope.
rather then it should be parted and divided, according as ye harlot would it
should be. He wrote also to the college of Cardinals, requiring them that if
according to their desire and request, Gregory would at the Council of Pise
give over his Popedom, they would take order for the state of the Church

This being done, an. 1409. the year next following 1410. Gregorius, and
Benedictus, by common advise assembled at Pise, and chose a new pope Alexander
the 5. Pope Alexander 5. Three popes together.
But to this election neither Pope Gregorius nor Benedictus did agree: whereby
there were three Popes together in the Romish Church. This Pope scarcesly had
warmed his triple crown, but he gives full remission of all manner of
sins, whatsoever to all them that would bestow any thing to the Monastery of
S. Bartholmew by Smithfield, resorting to the said Church any of these days
following: On maundy thursday, goodfriday, the feast of the Annunciation, from
the first ensuing to the latter. But within the same year he died: and after
him succeeded John 23. Pope John 23.


In the time of Alexander, great trouble grew in Bohemia, by reason of the
books of John Wickliffe, which were embraced of diverse, but specially of John
Husse, John Husse.
by whose means the people began to grow to great knowledge: whereof complaint
was made to Alexander 5. that caused by and by John Husse to be cited up to
Rome: and when he came not, directed his letters to ye archb. Swinco, charging
him to forbid that way, and condemn such as he should apprehend, for
heretics, except they would recant. Against which Bull, Husse objected many
things, and showed how it stood against ye word of God: An appeal to the same
better advised.
and therefore (says he) from this mandate of pope Alexander, I do appeal to
the said Alexander being better advised. And so as he was prosecuting his
appeal, immediately Alexander died. Then Swinco, when he saw that John Husse
contemned the bull, and had no hope in Vinceslaus the king, of redress: he
went to complain to Sigismund king of Hungary, and brother to Vinceslaus, with
whom after he had spoken, immediately he died for sorrow. By reason of whose
death the Gospel took root among the Bohemians, Pope John 23. bends all
his power against the Bohemia^s.
which held not long, for John the 23. bent all his might against the Bohemians.

About the year 1412. Thomas Aru^dell brought into England the tolling of
Auies in honor of our lady: with certain Auies to be said, The tolling o
Auies.
and days of pardon to be given for the same: and for the ratifying hereof,
he directs his mandate to the B. of London. He granted to every one that
should say the Lords prayer, and salutation of the Angel, five times at the
morning peale, with a devout mind totiens quotiens, 40. days of pardon for
saying Auies.
(how often soever) 40. days of pardon.

This Archb. was so proud, that because the bells of London did not ring at his
coming to the city: Bells, steeple, and organs, suspended by a proud Bishop.
he suspended both belles, steeple, and organs, til the ministers of such
churches might attain to the benefit of grace and mercy. For this cause of
ringing belles, debate also fell between the B. of Worcester, and Pryor of the
town, insomuch that the Archb. was saine to take up the matter betwixt them:
such was the pomp and pride of Prelates in those days. Not unlike was the
dealing of William Courtney, Predecessor to Arundell: who, because certain
poor men did not bring litter for his horse in carts, but in sackes; did call
and cite them before him, sitting in his tribunal seat Pro littera, A
contention pro littera, for litter.
that is, for litter, after his own Latin: and after their submission,
enjoined them penance, that they going leisurely, before procession, Penance
for bringing litter in sacks, and not in Carts.
every one of them should carry openly his sack, or bag stuffed with hay,
and straw: so that the hay and straw might appear, hanging out of the mouths
of the sacks being open: the names of the poor men were, Hugh Penny, John
Forestall, John Boy, John Wanderton, William Hayward, and John White, tenaunts
to the Lord of Wingham.

In this kings time, diverse acts were established against the authority of
the Pope, and excess of his Clergy.

In the first year, it was objected against Richard 2. that he procured
letters Apostolical from the Pope, to confirm certain statutes of his, which
seemed to the Parliament to tend to the disgrace of the crown and dignity, and
against the liberties of the land.

In the 2. year, it was required in the Parliament, that all such persons as
should be arrested by force of the statute, made against the Lollards in the 2.
year of king Henry the the fourth may be bayled, and freely make their
purgation. In the eight year it was propounded, that none should sue to the
Church of Rome for any Benefice, collation, or presentation of the same, under
pain of the statute of Prouisoes, made in the 13. year of Richard the 2.
whereunto the king granted,

Item, in the same parliament, it was put up in petition, that the King might
enjoy half of the profits of any Parsons benefice, not resident thereon:
whereunto the king answered, that Ordinaries should do their duties therein,
or else he would provide further remedy, or stay their pluralities.

The 9. year of the kings reign, the commons required the king, that none
presented be received by any ordinary, to have any benefice, of any incumbent,
for any cause of privation, or inhabitation, whereof the process is not founded
upon Citation, made within the realm: and also that such incumbents may
remain in all their benefices, until it be proved by due inquest in the court
of the K, that the citations whereupon such priuations, and inhabitations are
granted, were made within the realm, and if such ordinaries do, or have
presented, or others do present to the contrary: that the^ they and their
procurators etc. incur the pain contained in the statute made against
prouisoes, ann. 13. Richard. 2.

Also, that no Popes collectour should from thenceforth levy any money within
the realm, for first fruits of any ecclesiastical dignity, under pain of
incurring the statute of prouisoes.

A bill in Parliament to take the temporalties from the Clergy.
Besides, in the same parliament, the commons of the land put up a bill unto the
king, to take the temporalties out of ye spiritual men's hand. The effect of the
bill, was that the temporalties disorderly wasted by men of the Church, might
suffice to find the king fifteen Earls, fifteen hundred knights, six
thousand two hundred Squires, and an hundred houses of alms, more then were in
those days in the land. And over all these charges, the K. might put yerelie
in his Cofers, 20000. l.

Provided, that every Earl should have of yerelie rent, 3000. marks, every
knight 100 marks, and four Plow land, every Squire 40. marks by the year,
with two plow land, and every alms house, with oversight of two true Seculars
to every house: and also with provision, that every Township should keep al
poor people, Towne-dwellers, which might not labor for their living: with
condition, that if mo fell in a town, than it was able to maintain, the said
alms houses to relieve such towns.

And to bear these charges, they alleged by their bill, that the Temporalties
being in the possession of Spiritual men, amounted to three hundred and two and
twenty thousand marks by the year: whereof, they affirmed to be in the sea
of Canterbury, with the Abbey of Christes-church, of saint Augustines,
Shrewesburie, Coggeshall, and Saint Osiris, 20000. marks by the year. In the
Sea of Durham, and other abbeyes there, 20000. marks. In the Sea of York, and
other abbeyes there, as much. In the Sea of Winchester, and abbeyes there as
much. In the Sea of London, and abbeyes there, and other houses, as much. In
the Sea of Lincoln, with the abbeies of Peterborow, Ramsey, and other, as
much. In the Sea of Norwich, and abbey of Bury, and other, as much. In the Sea
of Elie, and Spalding, as much. In the sea of Bath, with the abbey of Okinburn
and other, as much. In the sea of Worcester, with the abbey of Euesam,
Abingdon, and others, as much. In the sea of Chester, with the precinct of the
same, and the seas of S David, Salisburie, and Exceter, with their precincts,
as much: with many other abbeyes, bishoprics, etc. Moreover, they alleged,
that diverse in England possessed so many temporalties, as might suffice to find
yearly 15000. priests and clerks, every priest to be allowed vij. marks by
the year. To this bil no answer was made, but yt the K. would take some
aduiseme^t, and deliberatio^.

Anno 1413 Henry the 4. died in a chamber at Westminster, called Jerusalem,
and was buried at Canterbury, by the tomb of Thomas Becket. After him
succeeded his son Henry the fifth, and not long after his coronation a
Parliament was holden after Easter, at Westminster, an. 1413. At which time,
Tho. Arundel, Archbishop of Canterbury, collected in Paul's church at London,
an universal Sinode of all the bishops, and clergy in England.

In which Sinode, among other matters, it was determined, that the day of S.
George, and of saint Dunstan, should be double feast. Now, the Popish feasts
are thus divided: either they be double feasts, or simple. The double feast is
subdivided into principal double; The kinds of popish feasts.
greater double; lesser double; and inferior, or lower double. To the
principal double feast belonged eight days in the year: so the greater double
had given unto him in this Convocation, the day of Saint George, and of S.
Dunstan. And albeit it was so decreed, yet by custom it was not so used. Notes
of principal souls feast.
The principal double, and the greater double, were known from al other by 4.
notes. By service in the kitchen; by service in ye church, both the which were
double; by ringing in the steeple, with double peale; by copes in the quire,
and censing of the altar. For in these two great and principal double feasts,
the vij. the viij and ix. lessons must be read with silken copes: and at the
said feasts, in the time of the Lessons, the altars must be censed: and
likewise, the lesser double, and inferior double, had their peculiar service to
them belonging. And thus much of their double feasts. The simple is also
divided into either triple inuitorie or double inuitorie, or else single. Of the
which moreover some have three lessons, some have 9. etc. And thus much of
popish feasts.

The chief cause of the Synod was to oppress the Gospel (as records the
chronicle of S. Albo^s.) And to withstand the Noble and worthy Lord Cobham, The
noble and worthy Lord Cobham.
who principally mainteyned and received the preachers, and set them up to
preach, whom the Bishop had not licensed: which was against a constitution
principal of theirs. In the mean time as they were talking and conspiring
against the Lord Cobham, there resorted unto them 12. Inquisitors for heresy,
whom they appointed at Oxford the year before, to search out for Heretics,
with all Wickliffes books: who brought 246. conclusions, which they had
collected as heresies out of the said books.

The names of the Inquisitors were these: John Witna^, Inquisitors for heresy.
a master in new college, John Langdom monk of Christ church in Canterb.
William Vfford regent of ye Carmelits, Thomas Clayton rege^t of the Dominicks,
Robert Gilbert, Richard Enthisdale, John Luck, Richard Sindishame, Richard
Fleming, Thomas Rotborn, Robert Rowberry, Richard Grafdale: who all concluded
that the chief favorers were first to be dealt against: and there present, ye
noble knight sir John Oldcastle, L. Cobham, was complained of by the general
proctors, to be the chief, principal, and a mighty mainteiner of suspected
preachers, in the dioces of London, Rochester, and Hereford, contrary to the
mind of the ordinaries: and to have assisted them by force of arms.

And last of all, they accused him to be far otherwise in belief of the
sacrament of the altar, of penance, of pilgrimage, of image worshipping, and of
the ecclesiastical power, then the holy Church of Rome had taught many years
before. Upon this it was concluded among them, that without any further delay,
process should be awarded out against him, Processes against the Lord Cobham.
as against a most pernicious heretic, and because they considered his great
birth, and the favor he was in with the K. counsel was given, and they were
advised, first to know his pleasure who the^ remained at Keningstone: which
they did. Who although he too much yielded to them, yet required the^ in
respect of his Noble stock, and Knighthood, that they would (if it were
possible) without rigor reduce him again to the unity of the Church, and
promised them also, that in case they were not contented to take some
deliberation, himself would seriously common the matter with him, which he
anon after accordingly did, and sent for the L. Cobham, and when he was come,
he called him secretly, admonishing him betwixt him and himself, to submit
himself to his mother the holy church, and as an obedient child to acknowledge
himself culpable: The answer of L. Cobham to the king.
unto whom the Christian knight made this answer. You most, worthy prince
(says he) I am always prompt and ready to obey, for as much as I know you a
christian prince, and the minister of God, bearing the sword to the punishment
of evil doers, and safeguard of them that are virtuous: unto you next unto my
eternal God, owe I most reverence, and submit thereunto (as I have done ever)
all yt I have either of fortune or nature, ready at all times to fulfill
whatsoever you in that Lord command me, But as touching the pope and his
spirituality, I owe them neither suit nor service, for so much as I know him by
the scriptures to be the great Antichrist, The Pope known by the scriptures to
be the great Antichrist.
the son of perdition, the open adversary of God, and the abomination
standing in the holy place. When the King had heard this, with such like
sentences more, he would talk no longer with him, but left him utterly, and
the archbishop resorting again unto him, The L. Cobham forsaken of the king.
he gave him full authority to cite him, examine him, and punish him, according
to their devilish decrees: whereupon after a private citatio^ by one John
Butler, and the archbishops somner, at the castle of Cowling, about the
wednesday before the Nativity of our lady in September, he commanded letters
citatory to be set upon the great gates of the Cathedral Church of Rochester,
but three miles from thence, charging him to appear personally before him at
Ledes the eleventh day of the same month and year, all hindrances set aside:
and these being pulled down, new letters were set up, on the Nativity day of
our Lady, which also were rent down and consumed.

Then forasmuch as he did not appear at the day appointed, at Ledes, where he
sat in his consistory, as cruel as ever was Caiaphas, with his court of
hypocrites about him: he judged him, denounced him, and condemned him of most
deep contumacy. And afterward it being reported unto him, yt he laughed and
scorned his censure, without just proof thereof, he excommunicated him, and
commanded him to be cited afresh, to appear before him the saturday before
the feast of Matthew, threatening that if he did not then appear before him, he
would more extremely handle him: and compelled the lay power by most terrible
curses to assist him against that seditious apostata, schismatike, heretic,
the troubler of the public peace, that enemy of the realm and great adversary
of the holy Church: for all these hateful names did he give him. The Lord
Oldcastell hearing this, The L. Cobha^ makes a draught of the confession of
his faith.
and perceiving in what danger he stood, took pen and paper in hand, and made
a draught of the confession of his faith, and sealed it with his own hand:
which confession was nothing else but the Apostles Creed, with a brief
declaration upon the same. In which he answered the 4. chiefest articles, that
the Archb. laid against him: and that done, he took the copy with him, and
went therewith to the king, trusting to find mercy with him, and offered it to
him, who would in no case receive it, but commanded it to be delivered unto
those that should be his judges. Then he desired in the K. presence, that an
hundred knights and esquiers might be suffered to come, as upon his purgation,
which he knew would clear him of al heresies.

Moreover, he offered himself, after the law of arms to fight for life or
death, with any man living, Christian, or heathen, in the quarrel of his faith,
the kings majesty, and the Lords of his Council, excepted: and furthermore
protested, that he would obey al manner of laws agreeable to ye word of God.
Yet notwithstanding all this, the K. suffered him to be summoned personally in
his own privy chamber. Then said the Lord Cobham to the king, that he had
appealed from the Archb. to the Pope of Rome, and therefore he ought in no case
(said he) to be my judge: and having his appeal there, ready written, he
showed it with all reverence to the king: whereat the king was much more
displeased, and said unto him, The L. Cobha^ arrested at the kings
commandment.
that he should not pursue his appeal: and so was he there arrested at the
kings commandment, and led forth to the tower of London, to keep his day
(as was then said) which the Archbishop had appointed him before, in the kings
chamber.

Now the day of examination being come, which was the 23. of September, the
saturday before the feast of S. Matthew, Tho. Arundell the Archb. sitting in
Caiphas room, in the Chapter house of Paul's, with Richard Clifford, Bish. of
London, and Henry Bullinbrook Bishop of Winchester: Sir Robert Morley knight,
and Lieutenant of the tower, brought personally before him, the said L. Cobha^,
and there left him for the time: unto whom the Archb. (after that he had
exhibited unto them the confession of his faith, which they did not altogether
mislike) required his belief on the Sacrament of the Altar: and whether there
be a transubstantiating or not? Whether (as concerning the Sacrament of
penance) every man be necessarily bound to confess himself to a Priest
ordained by the Church? but he would answer no otherwise then he had
exhibited in his bill, The L. Cobham answers.
which was, that he believed all the Sacraments that ever God ordained in his
Church: he believed the blessed Sacrament of the altar to be Christ's body in
form of bread: That it is necessary for every man to do penance for sin,
with true confession and due satisfaction, as Gods law teaches: That who so
does ye worship to dead images, yt is due to god, he does therein commit ye sin
of Mahumetry. That every man is a pilgrim in this world, and he that knows
the holy commandments of God, and keeps them shall be saved, although he never
in his life go on pilgrimage, as men do to Rome, to Canterbury, etc. None
other answer could they get of him: which troubled them greatly, and the
archb. bad him take deliberation till the Monday next following, which was the
25. of September, and then justly to answer: especially whether there remained
material bread in the Sacrament of the Altar, after the words of consecration
or not? and promised to send him the matters clearly determined: which the
next day he did, even a blasphemous and foolish writing, made by him and his
unlearned clergy.

Now, when the 25. of September was come, which was the Monday before
Michaelmas Anno 1413. Cobham,, with innumerable mocks, and scorns. reckoning
him to be an horrible heretic, The L. Cobham mocked of knaves.
and a man accursed before God: and after the day spending in reasoning to, and
fro; of ye sacrament of the altar, of shriuing, of the authority of the Pope,
of pilgrimages, and worshipping of Images, because he did not believe in these
points as the holy Romish Church did teach; the Archbishop stood up, The L
Cobham condemned.
and read a byll of condemnation against him: after which bill read, the L.
Cobham said with a most cheerful countenance. Though you judge my body, which
is but a wretched thing, yet am I certain, and sure, that ye can do no harm
to my soul, no more than Satan could do to the soul of Job. And as
concerning these articles, I will stand to them to the very death, by ye grace
of my eternal god. And after a short instruction to the people, he fell there
upon his knees, holding up his hands, and eyes to heaven, and prayed for his
enemies: O lord God eternal, I beseech thee for thy great mercies, A worthy
martyr.
to forgive my pursuers, if it be thy blessed will. And then he was delivered to
sir R. Morley, and so led again to the tower. This being done, the B. and
priests feigned an abiuration in the name of the L. Cob. to ye end to bleare ye
eyes of ye unlearned multitude for a time; neither did it ever come to the
hands of the L. Cobham.

The L. Cobham, after he had a certain space remained in the Tower (sentence
of death being given upon him) he escaped (it is not known by what means)
and fled into Wales: The L. Cobham flees and escapes.
where he continued by the space of four years.

Anno 1413. 1414. in the month of January, sir Roger Acton knight, Master John
Brown, and John Beuerley the preacher suffered martyrdom (as some say) in the
field of S. Giles, with other more to the number of 36. 36. martyrs.
(if the stories be true) they suffered before the Lord Cobham three years.
They were hanged and burnt. Some say, Sir Roger Acton was hanged naked at
Tyborne, saving that certain parts of him were covered, and after certain
days, a Trumpetter of the kings called Thomas Cliffe gate grant of the King,
to take him down, and to bury him.

After the decease and martyrdom of these above mentioned, in the next month
following, in the same year the 20. day of February, God took away the great
enemy of his word, Thomas Arundell dies.
and rebel to the king, Thomas Arundell Archbishop of Canterbury, who was so
stricken in his tongue, that he could neither swalow, nor speak for a certain
space before his death. He continued Archb. eighteen years. After him
succeeded H. Chichesley, an. 1414. and sat 25. years, a great enemy to the
gospel.

About the same year, the king began the foundation of ij. Monasteries: one, of
the Friars obseruants on the one side of Thames: H. Chichesley.
and theother on the other side of the same river, called Shene: Brigette
Nuns, or Recluses, to the number of 60. dwelling within the same precinct. So
that the whole number of these, with priests, monks, deacons, and nuns,
should equal the number of 13. apostles, and 72. disciples.

The order of these was according to the description of the Apostle, Coloss. 1.
Eat not, taste not, touch not, etc. Eat not, taste not, touch not.
To eat no flesh, to touch no money, to wear no linen, and so forth.

About Michaelmas the same year, the king began his parliament at Leicester: in
which, the Commons put up their bill again, which they had put up before, anno
11. Hen. 4. that the Temporalties wasted so disorderly by the Clergy, might be
converted to the use of the king, and of his Earls, and knights, etc.

In fear of which bill, least the king should give thereunto his comfortable
audience, (as testifyeth Robert Fabian, and others,) certain of the Prelates,
and other of the head Churchmen, put the king in mind, to claim his right in
France. Whereupon, Hen. Chichesley made a long, Craft of the Clergy.
and solemn Oration to the king, to persuade him thereunto: offering to him
(in behalf of the Clergy) great, and notable sums: by reason whereof, the
bill was again put of.

Now, about this time, Io. Husse, preaching at his church of Bethlehem, was
accused therefore by some, Husse accused.
to P. John the xxiij. for an heretic. The Pope committed the whole matter to
Cardinal Columna, who having heard the accusation, appointed a day for John
Husse to appear in ye court of Rome. But the king Vinceslaus sent his
Ambassadors to Rome, to desire the bishop to quitte, and clear deliver John
Husse from that sentence, and judgment.

In the mean season, John Husse also sent before the day appointed, his
lawful procurations to the Court of Rome: who with strong reasons did prove
his innocence, till Columna would accept no reasons: and so his Procurators
appealed unto the high Bishop. H. excommunicated for an heretic.
But the appeal prevailed not, but that he would excommunicate John Husse, as
an obstinate heretic, because he came not at his day appointed, to Rome:
notwithstanding, by reason of the appeal, they had other Judges appointed unto
them: as, Cardinal Aquildianus, and Cardinal Venetus, etc. Which Judges,
after they had deferred the matter a year and a half, they confirmed the
sentence of Cardinal Columna: and because his Procurators (being commanded)
would not yield to give over their suite, certain of them were cast into
prison, and greeuouslie punished: the other (leaving their business undone)
returned again into Boheme.

The Bohemians (notwithstanding) little cared for this: but increased more and
more in knowledge, and less regarded the Pope.

Now, after the death of Swinco, the pope placed one Co^radus chief general:
who with the doctors, and divines of the University of Prage, greatly
conspired, and labored against the truth; and drew out articles, whereunto
they would have John Husse to consent. Whereof when I. Husse, and his adherents
had word, they also drew out articles in his purgation.

Now, in the mean time of this altercation between them: Pope John raised
war against Ladislaus, king of Naples, (who had besieged the Popes towns,
and territories) and gave full remission of sins to all that would war on his
side, to defend the church. Which Bull, when it came into Boheme, the king (that
favored the Pope) gave commandment, that none should attempt any thing
against those Indulgences. But certain of the faithful could not abstain,
but called the Pope Antichrist, and spoke against him. Wherefore, they were
taken, and beheaded. Their names were, Persecution in Boheme.
John, Martin, and Stascon. The people (after their death) took their bodies,
and with great solemnity, brought them unto the Church of Bethlehem: at whose
funerals, diverse priests (favoring that side) song on this wise: These be
the saints, which for the testament of God gave their bodies, etc. And so they
were sumptuously buried in the church of Bethlehem. I. Husse preaching at the
funerals, and much commending them for their constancy.

Thus the city of Prage was divided: Prage divided.
the Prelates with the greatest part of the clergy, and most of the Barons
which had any thing to loose, held with the Pope, especially Stephen Paletz,
being the chief doer of that side: on the contrary part the commons with part
of the clergy, and students of the university, went with John Husse.
Vinceslaus the K. fearing the matter would grow to a tumult, caused I. Husse to
be removed out of the city: and assented to the Popish Clergy, in the 18.
articles against John Husse for the maintenance of the sea of Rome. I. Husse
now departing out of the city, went to his country, where being protected by
the Lord of the soil, he continued preaching: neither yet was he so expelled
Prage, but that sometimes he resorted to ye church of Bethlehem, and there also
preached to the people.

Moreover, against the decree of the Doctors, John Husse, with his fellows,
replied again: answering their articles, with contrary articles, and
objections: whereto the Catholic Doctors answered again with a long and
tedious process: the scope whereof principally tended to the defense of the
principality of the pope.

Thus then, master Ioh. Husse being driven out of Prage, and moreover, being
excommunicated, that no mass might be said, where he was present: the people
began mightily to grudge, and cry out against the Prelates: laying great, and
horrible vices to their charges.

The K. seeing the inclination of the people, The people against the Prelates.
being also not ignorant of the vices of the clergy; began to require great
exactions of such as were known to be wicked livers.

Whereupon, such as favored John Husse, began to accuse many. In so much, that
by this means, None controleth Husse.
Husse began to take unto him more liberty, and to preach in his church at
Bethlehem, and none to control him.

Now, Steven Paletz, and Andreas de Broda, chief doers against Husse, wrote
unto him sharp and cruel letters The Pope also writes letters to Vinceslaus
the King, for suppressing of John Husse and his doctrine: which was in the last
year of his Popedom, An. 1414.

This year Sigismund the Emperor and Pope John 23. Council of Constance. To
pacify the Schism of three Popes.
called a sinod for the pacifying of the Schism at Constance, which was
between the three popes. The first whereof was John, whom the Italians set up:
the second Gregory, whom the Frenchmen set up: the third Benedict, whom the
Spaniards placed. This council endured four years, and had in it 45. A
Council that lasts four years, and had 45. Sessions.
Sessions. In this council all the matters were decided, chiefly by four
nations, English, German, French and Italian: out of which four nations were
appointed and chosen four presidents, to judge and determine all matters of
the Councelles: the names of which four, were these: John the patriarch of
Antioch, for France, Anthony, Archb, of Rygen, for Italy, Nicholas, Archb. of
Genesuensis, for Germany, and Nicholas, Bishop of Bath, for England.

In this Council nothing was decreed worthy of memory, but this only, that
the Popes authority is under the Council, The Council ought to judge the Pope.
and that the council ought to judge the Pope, and as touching the Communion in
both kinds, although the Council did not deny it, yet by the same Counsel
it was decreed to the contrary.

In this Council John did resign his Papacy, for the quiet of the schism:
and the Emperor (giving him thanks) kissed his feet. Afterward, the same John,
repenting him yt he had so done sought means to fly: whereunto, Frederike
Duke of Austrich, did assist him: and when he was now coming to Schafezonse,
P. repents of well doing.
to go into Italy, the Emperor pursuing, took him and proclaimed Frederike
traitor, and for that cause took away Cities from him, but was at last
reconciled again.

The Pope being thus deposed, was committed unto the County Palantine, and by
him carried to the castle of Manheim, where he was kept prisoner by the space
of 3. years, and afterward he was again by Pope Martin admitted to the number
of the Cardinals.

This pope John was deposed by the decree of the council: more then 40. most
grievous crimes proved against him, 40. articles against Pope John.
as that he had hired Marsilius Parmensis a physicion, to poison Alexander his
predecessor: that he was an heretic, a simoniake, a lier, an hipocrite, a
murderer, an inchanter, a dice-player, an adulterer, a sodomite: and finally,
what crime was it wherewith he was not infected, etc.

In the 14. Session came in ye resignatio^ of P. Gregory 12.

The 37. Session did publish definitive sentence against the 3. pope Benedict:
and in the 39. they proceeded to elect a new pope, and on S. Martins eeuen they
chose one, Pope Martin.
and therefore named him Martin: who according to the custom was honorably
brought by the Council, and the Emper. into the church of Constance, unto the
monastery of S. Austine, to be crowned: The Emperor leads the popes horse.
the Emp. on foot, leading his horse by the bridle on the right hand: the
marquis of Brande^burgh prince elector, also leading his horse on the left
hand: the P. himself riding in the midst on his palfrey. The Council being
dissolved, a cardinal was sent by the P. named Anthony, to declare his
Indulge^ce unto them: who granted to every point in that counsel, full
absolution once in their life, so that every one within 2. months after the
hearing of this Indulgence should procure the same in form of writing. Also an
other Indulge^ce was granted of full remission at the hour of death: and that
was as well understood of the household, as the Masters themselves; but under
this condition that from the time of notification of the same, The popes
Indulgence.
they should fast every Friday for the space of one whole year, for absolutio^
in their life time. And for absolution in the hour of death, that they should
fast an other year in like sort, except some lawful impediment: so that after
the second year, they should fast out their lives end, or else do some other
good work. This being proclaimed, the Synod brake up, and every man departed.

3940. Prelates at the Council.
The number of prelates at this council, was 3940. whereof the number of B. and
Archb. was 346. Abbots and doctors 564. Secular me^, princes, dukes, earls,
knights, esquires 16000. Common women belonging to the council, Common women
belonging to the council 450.
450. Barbers, 600. Minstrels, cooks, and iesters, 329. So that ye whole
multitude which were viewed to be in the town of Constance, between Easter
and Whitsontide, where nu^bred to be 60500.

Now although this council was thought principally to be called to appease the
schism, yet a great part of the cause was the Bohemians, and especially for
John Husse. For before the Council began, the Emperor Sigismund sent certain
gentlemen Bohemians, which were of his own household, giving them in charge to
bring John Husse bacheler of Divinity to the Council, and that under his
safeconduct, to the intent he should purge himself of that which they had to
lay against him. John Husse trusting upon the Emperors safeco^duct, sent word
to the Emperor that he would come to the Council, and with all, caused
certain bills to be written in Latin, Bohemian, and Almaine language, that if
any one had to object ought against him, he should come to the council, and
there he would answer him. The same time also John Husse sent his Procurators
to the lord Bishop of Nazareth, ordained by the Apostolic sea, inquisitour of
heresy in the cities and dioces of Prage, requiring that if he found any
error in him, he would declare it openly. The Bishop gives good testimony of
Husse.
But the Bishop gave good testimony of John Husse, and signified the same by
his letters. John Husse also required of the Archbishop of Prage, that if he
knew any error by him, he would signify the same unto him: who cleared him
before all the Barons of Boheme, that were assembled in the Abbey of S. James,
for the affairs of the land. Of which testimony the Barons made report by
their letters to the Emperor Sigismund, in the town of Constance. Moreover,
John Husse required for his further purgatio^ before he went to the Council,
that he might make profession of his faith before the Archb. and clergy of
Prage, which might not be granted him, but by excuse was put of.

About the Ides of October, ann. 1414. Wencelat de Duba. John de Clum.
John Husse being accompanied with 2. noble gentlemen, Wencelat de Duba, and
John de Clum, parted from Prage toward Constance, and in every market town, as
he passed, he set up writings: in which he required, that if any could lay
heresy to his charge, they should prepare to meet at the Council: there he
would be ready, to satisfy the^. When he was passed out of Boheme into
Almaigne, he was greatly entertained of the Citizens, and Burgesses, and of the
people, and found much favor, especially at Norimberge.

In this mean time, the greatest adversary that Ioh. Husse had, Stephen Palletz
a Bohemian, was come to the council: but his companion, Stanislaus znoma was
not yet passed the borders of Boheme, when he was stricken with an Impostume,
whereof he died. As Soon as Palletz was come to Co^sta^ce, he did associate
unto him, one Michael de Causis, who was sometime Curate of Prage, and (having
cousened the King Vinceslaus of a great sum of money, to renew the mines of
gold in Gilorroy, fled from thence to Rome) he and Palletz sometime of Husses
acquaintance. These 2. promised the adversaries of Husse to deal against him:
which they did, and drew articles against him, especially out of his book de
Ecclesia, and offered them unto the cardinals, monks, etc. and did so incense
them, that they determined to cause John Husse to be laid hands on.

The 26. day, after John Husse was come to Constance, John Husse come to
Contance.
the Cardinals, through the instigation of Palletz and de Causis, sent the
Bishop of August, and the Bishop of Trident, and with them the Archborough of
Constance, and a certain knight to John Husses lodging, which should make
report, that the Pope and Cardinals willed him to come and make account of
his doctrine before them, as he had often times desired: and that they were ready
to hear him. John Husse understanding of their mind, went out to the Popes
court, and being come before them, they required him to declare unto them the
points which were reported of him to be taught erroneous, and against the
Church, which John Husse was willing to do, and protested that he never (by
Gods assistance) would maintain or teach any doctrine that were not sound. The
Cardinals said, they liked that answer well, and so went their way and left
him, and master John Clum, under the custody of armed men, till four of the
clock at after noone: at which time the Cardinals assembled again in the
Popes court to take counsel what they might do with John Husse. And a little
before night, they sent the provost of the Roman court, to show master John
de Clum, that he might return to his lodging, for as for John Husse they had
other wise provided for him. And after this, John Husse was led by the officers
of the Chapter house of the great Church of Constance, where he was kept
prisoner by the space of eight days. From thence he was carried to the
Iacobins, hard by the Rhine, and was shut up in the prison of the abbey, which
was hard by the Bogardes; John Husse kept in prison. Husse falls sick.
where he fell sore sick of an ague, by reason of the stench of the place:
where he became so weak that they dispayred of his life: and for fear he
should die in prison, the Pope sent his physicians to cure him. In the time of
his sickness, his accusers made importunate suit to the principals of the
Council, that he might be condemned: and presented unto the Pope articles. 1.
That he held against transubstantiation. That Priests can not consecrate
being in deadly sin. Articles against Husse.
That he does not allow that the church signifies, Pope, Cardinals, Bishops,
etc. That he says, all Priests have like power. That the Church being in
sin has no power of keys. That he fears not excommunication. That he
keeps not the inuesstures and institutions of the church. That he holds, if
a man be once ordained a Priest or Deacon, he can not be holden or kept back
from the office of Preaching, etc. With diverse other matters which they
maliciously objected against him. Upon this occasion they appointed three
Judges: The Patriarch of Constantinople: the B. of Castle: and the B. of
Libusse, who recited the accusation unto John Husse, at which time his ague was
fervent and extremely upon him: and required he might have an advocate to
answer for him: An advocate denied to H.
but that was plainly and utterly denied him, because the matter was of heresy,
for which he was called in question.

Afterward, when John Husse had gathered a little strength, there were (by the
commandment of the three commissioners) certain articles gathered, some by
Palletz, and some by them selves.

Thus, John Husse remained in ye prison of the covent of Franciscans, until
the Wednesday before Palmesonday, and certain appointed to keep him.

The same day, John the 23 changed his apparel, and conveyed himself
secretly out of the town of Constance. Whereupon John Husse (because the
Popes men, who kept him, delivered up their charge, Husse cruelly handled in
prison.
and followed their master) was put into the hands of the B. of Constance,
who sent him to the castle on the other side of the river of Rhine, not far
from Constance, whereas he was shut up in a tower with fetters on his legs,
that he could not walk in the day time: and in the night time he was fastened
up to a rack on a wall hard by his bed side. In the mean time certain
noblemen of Pole and Boheme put up a supplication to the four nations,
Almaine, Italy, France and England, for the delivery of John Husse. 14. of
May 1415. John Husse. Which answer of his the nobles of Boheme confuted
again. And when they by long time could receive no answer of this
Supplication, which they had already put up, they determined the last day of May
following, (by another Supplication, put up to the Principals of the Council)
to entreat that I. Husse might be delivered out of prison, and defend his own
cause openly,

They also put up the testimonial of the B. of Nazareth, touching I. Husse: to
which Supplication they answered, that although there might be a thousand
sureties put in, yet they were not to be taken in this man's case, unto whom,
there is no faith, nor credit to be given. How be it, this they will, upon the
fifth day of June next, John Husse shall be brought again to Constance, and
there have free liberty to speak his mind freely before the Council, and
that they would lovingly hear him: but in the end, the matter fell out far
contrary to this promise. The same day, the barons, and Lords, presented a
supplication to the Emp. requiring him to further the supplication put up to
the council: to which, what answer the Emp. made, it is not certain: but
likely it was, by process of the matter, that the Emp. was feign to break his
promise, The Emperor breaks promise with H.
touching the safeconduct which he promised Husse: by reason (as they
pretended) that no defense of safeconduct might be given unto him, that was
suspected, or judged to be an heretic.

The fifth day of June, the Cardinals, etc. in the Covent of the Franciscans in
Constance, purposed, in the absence of I. Husse, to have condemned him in those
articles which they had drawn against him, but for a Notarie, named I.
Meadoniewitz, who loved John Husse, and went to M. Vencelat de Duba, and John
de Clum, and told them the matter: who went and made report thereof to the
Emperor.

The Emp. understanding their intent, sent Jews, ye county Palatine of
Heydelberge, and the L. Frederike, Burgraue of Noremberg, to signify unto them
which ruled the counsel, that nothing should be done in ye cause of I. H.
before it were hard with equity: and yt they would se^d him al such articles as
were laid against the said Husse, which were either false or Heretical, and he
would do so much that the said Articles should be examined, by good and learned
men. Then according to the Emperors will, the judgment of the principals of
the council was suspended, unto such time as the said Husse himself were
present. Now John Husse being brought forth, and beginning to answer, Husse
begins to answer for himself.
scarce had he opened his mouth, but they all began to cry out against him, yt
he had not leisure to speak one word: besides some did outrage in words
against him, and other some spitefully mocked him: so yt he seeing himself
overwhelmed, with this rude and barbarous noise, and that it profited nothing
to speak, he determined finally to hold his peace and keep silence. After
that time, they cried, he is dumb, he is dumb (thinking they had won the
field) this is a sign he consents to these his errors. But some more
moderate then the rest, misliking the dealing, departed from the council for
that present, and appointed to meet there again the morrow, to proceed in
judgment.

The next day, which was the 7. of June (in which the Sun was almost wholly
eclipsed) somewhat after about 7. of the clock, the same flock assembled
again in the cloister of the Friars minorites, and by their appointment John
Husse was brought before them, Husse appears again.
accompanied with a great number of armed men: thither went also the Emp. whom
M. De Duba, and Clum, and the notarie named Peter, did follow, to see what the
end might be. When they were come thither, they heard the accusation of
Michaell de Causis, who first objected against him, the matter of real
presence, that he should maintain, after the words of consecration, there
remained material bread: which article John Husse denied that ever he
mainteyned. Upon that matter there grew dispute among them.

Then was there read an article, wherein was objected yt he maintained Wicklifs
errors, which he also denied. Besides, diverse false accusations were brought
against him: which done, and Palletz having endeavored as much against him as
malice would serve: John Husse was committed to the custody of the Bishop of
Rigen, under whom Ierom of Prage was also prisoner: but before he was led
away, the Cardinal of Cambray exhorted him to submit himself unto the
Council; and so did also the Emperor: which if he refused to do, he said,
he would sooner make the fire with his own hands to burn him, then he would
suffer him to hold such opinions, etc. And so having thanked the Emperor for
the safeconduit, Husse not suffered to proceed in his answer.
and proceeding farther to make answer, he was cut of, and led away with the
sergeants.

The morrow after, which was the 8. of June, the same company assembled again
at the Franciscans: and in this assembly was John Husse, De Duba, and De Clum,
and Peter the, notary his friends. In which assembly there were read against
Husse 39. 39. articles against Husse.
articles, the which they said were drawn out of his books. Husse
acknowledged all those that were faithfully collected (of which sort there were
but a few) as, That their is but one universal Church, the company of the
predestinate. That Paul, nor Peter were ever members of the Devil, although
some their acts did resemble the malignant Church. That no true member of the
Church does at any time fall away from the body. That the Predestinate is
always a member of the Church, although not in present justice. That there is
no sensible sign that ca^ make a man the member of the Universal Church. That
a reprobate man never is a member of the Universal church. That Judas was
never a true Disciple. That the congregation of the Predestinate, whether they
be in the state of grace, or not according, unto present Justice, is the holy
universal Church. That Peter never was, neither is the head of the universal
church. That if he that is called the vicar of Christ, do not walk according
to Christ, he is the messenger of Antichrist. That all those that use simonie
do not know the duties of the keys and censures of the church. That the
papal dignity is sprung from the Emperors authority. That no man would
reasonably affirm, that any man is the head of any particular Church. That it
ought not to be believed, that the Pope may be the head of any particular
Church, unless he be predestinate or ordained of God. That the Popes power of
Vicarship, is but vain, Articles auowed of Husse.
if he do not conform his life according to Jesus Christ. That the Pope is most
holy, only if he do follow Christ in humility, gentleness, patience, etc. That
the Cardinals are not the true successors of the apostles of Christ, except
they fashion themselves to ye keeping of Christ's commandments. That
ecclesiastical censure ought not to proceed to execution of death. That the
nobles of the world ought to compel the ministers of the church, to keep the
law of Jesus Christ. That the Cleargies ecclesiastical obedience is invented
without warrant of the scriptures. That he appealed from the Pope to Christ,
and did not esteem the Popes curses. That a vicious man lives vitioustly, and
a godly man godlily. That if a minister be wrongfully forbidden to preach, he
ought not to obey, for any commandment of power to the contrary, because it
is a work not of indifferency, but of express commandment. The next article
was almost one with this. That the ecclesiastical censures are antichristian:
which Husse denied to be vttred in that form. That there ought no
interditement, or curse to be appointed unto the people. And these were the
articles both alleged out of his book of the Church, and by himself
avouched before them. Besides these, there were other articles brought against
him: among which were 19. yt brought him into prison. That Paul according to
present justice, was a blasphemer, but the child of God by predestination.
That Christ more loves a predestinate man, being sinful, then a reprobate, in
what grace soever he be for the time. That al sinful, according to present
justice, are not faithful. That ye words of Christ touching binding and losing,
except they be well understood, bring much fear, or much presumption That the
binding and loosing by God is simply and plainly the principal. That priests
do only heap up those things out of the scriptures, which serve for their
bellies. That the Popes power, when he does wickedly, is not to be feared. That
an evil Pope is not the successor of Peter, but of Judas. That the Pope is the
beast spoken of in the Apocalipse. This he denied to have been uttered by him.
That it is lawful to preach, notwithstanding the Popes inhibition. That the
Popes commandment being not agreeable to the Gospel, is not to be obeyed.
That the Clergy and Laity may judge of the works of prelates. That God
himself does suspend every wicked priest from his ministry. That the Clergy
supplanteth the Lay people, etc.

To these Articles above mentioned, were other also annexed, which the
Parisiens had set down against him, to the number of 19. The chief author
whereof, was one Gerson Chancellor of the University of Paris, whereunto he
had no time to answer.

Now when the foresaid articles were read, with their testimonies, the cardinal
of Cambray, with the rest, exhorted Ioh. Husse to submit himself to the
council, and to suffer patiently yt they would determine, which was, that he
should confess himself to have erred in the articles, and promise by oath,
neither to teach nor maintain them: and moreover, openly recant all of them.
To this, the Emp. moved him also with the rest to whom he answered, that
whatsoever were repugnant to the scriptures, being so proved unto him: he would
reca^t and renounce, otherwise durst he not do against his conscience, and
after much debating, Husse will not recant.
and many false accusations, John Husse was carried to prison again, Ioh. de
Clum following and co^forting him, who after he was carried away, the Emp.
mightily inueyed against him, The Emperor against Husse.
and incited the Council against him, and his scholar, Hierom of Prage, to all
severity, as also against his friends and favorers: and so they departed out
of the cloister, and brake up the assembly for that time.

The day before his condemnation, which was the sixth of July, the Emperor
Sigismund sent unto him four Bishops, with M. Vincelat de Duba, and John de
Clum, to understand of him what he would do, and when he was brought out to
them, and his mind demanded, he delivered his resolution, that he was ready
to be reformed if it could be proved by the scriptures, that he had erred.
Which the Bishops counted an arrogant answer, and commanded him to be carried
to prison again.

The next day the Emperor with all the spiritual and temporal Lords, held a
general Session in the head church of the city of Constance: in which John
Husse was disgraded, condemned, and delivered to the civil power. Husse
disgraded, condemned, and delivered to the seculars.
When Ioh. Husse was brought thither, he fell down upon his knees, and prayed
a long time. In the mean while, the B. of Lundy went up and made a sermon:
when his sermon was ended, the Procurer of the Council rising up, named
Henricus de Pyro, required that the process of the cause of John Husse, might
be continued, and so proceed unto the definitive sentence: then they alleged
other articles against him. And last of all, that he should say, there should
be a fourth person in the divinity: whereto John Husse said, O miserable and
wretched man, which am forced, and compelled to fear such blasphemy, and
slander. Afterward the article was read, how he appealed to Christ, and that by
name was called heretical. Whereunto John Husse answered: O Lord Jesus Christ,
whose word is openly condemned in this Council, unto thee again I make my
appeal: who, H. appealeth to Christ.
when you wast evil entreated of thine enemies, did make thine appeal unto
God thy father, committing thy cause to a most just Judge: that by thy example,
we also (being oppressed with manifold wro^gs, and injuries) should fly unto
thee. Last of al, was read ye article touching the contempt of his
excommunication: whereto (after he had yielded a reasonable and lawful answer)
one of the judges read the definitive sentence against him.

When the sentence and judgment against him was ended, Husse prays for his
enemies and is derided.
kneeling down upon his knees, he said: O Lord Jesus Christ forgive mine
enemies, by whom thou know that I am falsely accused, and that they have used
false witness and slanders against me, forgive them, I say, for thy great
mercies sake. This his prayer, the greater part, especially of the Priests
derided.

At the last the 7. bishops disgraded him, every one taking a piece from him,
and when they came to the rasing of his shaven crown, before the Bishops would
go in hand with it, there fell a great contention among them, with what
instrument it should be done, with a razor, or a pair of shieres.

The courage of Husse.
In the mean season, John Husse turning toward ye Emperor, said, I marvel much
that they being all of like cruel mind, Cruelty of the bishops against Husse.
and stomach, yet they cannot agree of their kind of cruelty. Notwithstanding
at the last, they agreed to cut of the skin of his head, with a pair of
shieres: which being done, they caused to be made a certain crown of paper,
almost a cubite high: in the which were painted 3. ougly devils of a wonderful
ougly shape, and this title set over their heads. Heresiarcha.

The which when he saw, he said, My Lord Jesus Christ for my sake did wear a
crown of thorns, why should not I then for his sake again, wear this light
crown, be it never so ignominious? Truly I will do it, and that willingly.
When it was set upon his head, the Bishops said, now we commit thy soul to
the devil. But I (said Ioh. Husse, lifting his eyes toward the heavens) do
commit my spirit unto thy hands, O Lord Jesus Christ: to thee I comme^d my
soul, which thou have redeemed. So (after he was committed to the Secular
power,) the Emperor commanded Ludouicus Duke of Bauaria, that he should take
Husse of the Bishops hands, and deliver him to those that should do the
execution.

The place appointed for his execution, was before the gate Gothebian between
the gardens, and gates of the suburbs. When John Husse was come thither,
kneeling upon his knees, and lifting his eyes up to heaven, he prayed, and said
certain Psalms, and specially the 51. and 31. psalms: and they which stood
by, heard him oftentimes in his prayer, with a merry countenance, repeat this
verse: Unto thy hands O Lord, I commend my spirit, etc. Which thing when the
Lay people beheld, which stood next unto him, they said: what he has done
before we know not, but now we see, and hear, that he prays very devoutly,
and godly.

When as by the commandment of the tormentors he was risen up from the place
of his prayer, with a loud voice he said: Lord Jesus Christ, assist and help
me, that with a constant and patient mind, by thy most gracious help, I may
bear and suffer this cruel and ignominious death, whereunto I am condemned,
for the preaching of thy most precious word, and holy Gospel.

So he was tied to a stake, toward the West, because (said they) he was not
worthy to look toward the East: The behavior of Husse at his death.
and straw, and fagots being put to him, Ludouicus Duke of Bauaria (before
fire was put unto the wood, with another with him, the son of Clement) came,
and exhorted him, that he would yet be mindful of his safety, and renounce
his errors. To whom he said, what errors should I renounce, when as I know my
self guilty of none. This was the principal end, and purpose of my
doctrine, that I might teach all men penance, and remission of sins,
according to the verity of the gospel of Christ, and the exposition of holy
Doctors. Wherefore, with a cherefull mind and courage, I am here ready to suffer
death.

When he had spoken these words, they left him, and having shaken hands, they
departed. Then was the fire kindled, and John Husse began to sing with a loud
voice: Jesus Christ, the son of the living God, have mercy upon me: and when
he began to say the same the third time, the wind drove the flame so upon his
face, that it choked him: yet notwithstanding, he moved a while after, by the
space that a man might say almost three times, the Lords prayer.

The body being burned to ashes, with great diligence they gathered them
together, and cast them into the river of Rhine, They cast the ashes of Husse
into ye Rhine.
that not so much as any memory, or remnant of him might be left. Cocleus in
his second book contra Hussitas, thinks, that the author that writ this
history of I. Husse, was called Johannes Prizibram, a Bohemian, who after
succeeding in the place of John Husse, at Prage, at last is thought to have
relented unto the Papists.

And thus much concerning the death of I. Husse, who was burned at Constance,
an. 1415. about the month of Iulie. Being in prison, Treatises of H. in prison.
he wrote diverse treatises: of the commandments of the Lord, of prayer, of
mortal sin, of matrimony, of the knowledge and love of God, of three enemies
of mankind, the flesh, the world, and the devil, of repentance, of the
sacrament of the body and blood of Christ, of the sufficiency of the law of
God to rule the church, etc. He had also many prophetical visions.

An. 1415. Ierom of Prage, grievously sorowing for the slanderous reproach, and
defamation of his country of Boheme: and also, hearing tell of the manifest
injuries done unto ye man of worthy memory: I. Husse, freely, and of his own
accord, came to Constance, Ier. of Prage comes to Constance.
and there perceiving that I. Husse was denied to be heard: and yt watch and
ward was laid for him on every side, he departed to Iberlinge, a City of
the Empire, until the next day, which City was a mile from Constance. From
thence he wrote his Letters to Sigismund king of Hungary, and his barons,
requyring him of safeconduct: which being denied him, ye next day he wrote
certain intimations, which he sent to Consta^ce, to be set upon the gates of
the city, and of the churches, and monasteries, and houses of Cardinals, and
other Nobles, and prelates, requiring that if any had ought to charge him with
of Heresy, they would repair thither, where he should be ready to satisfy
them, requiring also in the same, safeconduct and free access: which when it
would not be granted, the Nobles, Lords, Knights, etc. especially of Boheme
present in Constance, gave unto Master Jerome their letters patentes,
confirmed with their seals, for a witness and testimony of the premises:
wherewith Jerome returning again into Boheme, Treason against Jerome of Prage.
was by treason of his enemies taken in Hirssaw, by the officers of Duke John,
and was brought back again to the presence of the Duke.

In the mean time, Palletz and de Causis, and such as were enemies to John
Husse, required that Hierome might be cited before the Council, which was
accordingly performed, and master Hierome cited, by reason of his intimation:
and the Duke brought him bound unto Constance, with a great and long chain: to
whom, after they had objected certain frivolous matters, they delivered him
(being bound) unto the officers of the city of Constance, to be carried to
prison, for that night: where he was comforted of Peter the Notary, and one
Vitus. Hierome carried to prison. Peter the Notary, and Vitus.
Which being known, when it drew toward evening, ye Archb. of Rygen sent
certain of his servants, which led away Hierome, being strongly bound with
chains, both by the hands, and by the neck: and kept him so for certain
hours. When night drew on, they carried him unto a certain tower of the city,
in S. Paul's Churchyard, where they (tying him fast unto a great block, and his
feet in the stocks, his hands also being made fast upon them) left him. The
block was so high, that he could by no means sit there upon, but that his head
must hang downward: where he lay, (none of his friends knowing of his
conueya^ce away) two days, and ij. nights, relieved only with bread and water:
whereof M. Peter having knowledge by one of his keepers, desired yt he might
have leave to provide him meat: which was granted.

Within 11. days after so hanging by the heels, he used so small repast, Ierom
falls sick.
that he fell sore sick even unto death: whereupon he desired to have a
confessor, which was hardly and with great importunity granted him. Now he
had been in prison one year lacking but seven days.

After they had put John Husse to death, about the feast of the Nativity of
Mary the virgin, they brought forth M. Ierom (whom they had kept so long in
chains) unto the church of S. Paul, and wrought so with fear of death with
him, Ierom abiureth.
that he abiured in the cathedral Church in open Session, and gave assent that
John Husse was justly condemned and put to death: after which they caused him
to be carried again to the same prison, but not so straightly chained as he
was before. Now Palletz and de Causis hearing of this and understanding that he
made this abiuration, only to escape their hands, together with certain
Friars of Prage, put up new accusations against master Hierom: New accusations
against M. Hierome.
whose malice did appear so much against him, that the Cardinal of Cambray,
and the Cardinal de Vrscons, the Cardinal of Aquilegia and of Florence, with
his judges also: considering the great injury done unto him, labored before
the whole Council for his delivery. Which when they were about, his enemies,
and among them, one Doctor Naso greatly urged the matter against M. Hierome,
Doct. Naso a great enemy of Hierome.
insomuch that he said unto the^, I greatly fear, least that you have received
some rewards either of the K. of Boheme, or of these heretics.

The Cardinals thus rebuked, gave over Master Ieroms cause, and his enemies
obtained to have other Judges appointed: as, the Patriarch of Constantinople,
who had condemned M. John Husse, and was a great enemy to M. Hierome, and
another Germane Doctor. But Jerome refused those private Judges, and required
open audience: which in hope he would confirm his recantation before them,
was granted unto them.

Anno 1416. 25. M. Jerome was brought into open audience in the cathedral
church of Constance, where the commissioners, in the behalf of his
adversaries, objected against him 107. new articles: and because the time would
not suffer to answer, New articles against M. Jerome.
they appointed him the third day after: the residew of the articles, he
answered most learnedly, and eloquently, and put to silence his adversaries. At
length came in false witnesses that testified against him: whom he again most
pithily, and eloquently confuted.

All this while the popes council did wait when he should make recantation,
and crave pardon. But he persisting still in his constant Oration, did
acknowledge no error, neither gave any signification of recantation. And at
last entered into the praise of M. I. Husse, and finally concluded, that all
such articles, as I. Wickliffe, and I. Husse, had written, and set forth
against the enormities, pomp, and disorder of the prelates, Jerome constant.
he would firmly and constantly defend unto the death: greatly condemning his
fact, in that he did consent unto the condemnation of M. I. Husse, and
Wickliffe. The counsel whispered together, and said: by these his words, it
appears, he is at a point with himself. Then was he carried again into prison
(having bin in prison before 340. days) and grievously fettered, Jerome
grieuouslie fettered.
by the hands, arms, and feet, with great chains, and fetters, of iron.

The saturday next before the Ascension day, early in the morning, he was
brought with armed men into ye church to have judgment: where they persuaded
him to revoke the testimony, and praise he gave of I. Husse, and Wickliffe:
which he would not in any sort do: then a certain B. named the B. of Landy,
made a certain sermon exhortatory, against Master Hierome, persuading to his
condemnation.

After the Sermon ended, M. Jerome again said unto them, you will condemn me
wickedly, and unjustly: but I after my death, will leave a remorse in your
conscience, and a nail in your hearts. Et cito vos omnes, vt respondeatis mihi,
M. Jerome prophecieth.
coram altissimo and iustissimo Iudice, post centum annos. That is: Here I cite
you all, to answer unto me before the most high and just Judge, within an
hundredth years.

Finally, when no persuasions would move him to recant, they gave sentence of
condemnation against him: Jerome condemned.
which sentence being given, a great miter of paper was brought, painted about
with red Devils: the which when he beheld and saw (throwing his hood upon the
ground) he took the miter, and put it on his head: saying, my Lord Jesus
Christ, when he suffered for me most wretched sinner, did wear a crown of
thorn upon his head, and I for his sake, in steed of that crown, will were
this miter and crown. And afterward he was laid hold on by the secular power:
and when he was led out of the church, with a cheerful countenance and loud
voice, M. Jerome sings after his condemnation.
lifting up his eyes to heaven, he began to sing, Credo in vnum Deum: as it is
accustomed to be song in the church: after that, other certain Canticles of
the Church.

At length coming to the place of execution, where as M. John Husse before had
suffered death innocently, kneeling down by the picture of Master John Husse,
which was there prepared to burn him, he made a certain devout prayer.
Whiles he was a praying, they took him up, and stripped him, and bound him to
the Image: and when they begun to lay wood about him, M. Jerome sings at the
stake.
he began to sing: Salve festa dies: and the Hymn being ended, he song again
with a loud voice, Credo in vnum Deum, unto the end: that being done, he
said unto the people, in the Germane tongue, to this effect: Dearly beloved
brethren, even as I have now song, so do I beeleue, and no otherwise, and this
Creed is my whole faith: notwithstanding now I die for this cause, for that I
would not consent and agree to the Council, and with them affirm and hold,
that M. John Husse was by them justly condemned: for I do know well that he
was a true preacher of the gospel of Christ.

When the wood was begun to be set on fire, he song, In manus tuas Domine,
commendo spiritum meum. When that was ended, and he began vehemently to
burn: he said in the Bohemian tongue: O Lord God, father almighty, have mercy
upon me, and be merciful to mine offenses, for thou know, how that sincerly
I have loved thy truth. He was by reason of the stoutnes of his nature, long in
burning. After he was dead, they brought his bedding, books, hood, etc. and
burned them all to ashes in the same fire: which after they did diligently
gather, and cast into the river of Rhine. Thus much, touching John Husse, and
Hierome of Prage: whose history was written by a Bohemian, who was present,
and a beholder of the action.

In the mean time, while Hierome was in trouble, and brought before the
council, the nobles of Boheme, Letters of the nobles of Boheme to the Council.
and Morania, (grieved with their dealings) directed letters unto this
barbarous Council of popish murderers, greatly blaming them for their fact,
and defending both master John Husse, and master Hierom, ending their letters
in this sort: the premises notwithstanding, we (setting apart al fear and
men's ordinances provided to the contrary,) will mainteyn and defend the law of
our Lord Jesus Christ, and the devout, humble, and constant preachers thereof,
even to the shedding of our blood: dated at Sternberg, ann. 1415.

Round about the same letters, were 54 seals ha^ging, and the names of them,
whose seals they were, 54. seals to the letter.
subscribed.

An. 1414. Henry Chichley Archb. of Canterbury, much was the affliction and
trouble of good men here in England: which cruelty, John Claydon John Claydon.
currier of London, and Richard Turming Rich. Turming
first tasted of.

The 17. day of August, an. 1415. John Claydon did personally appear, arrested
by the mayor of London, for suspicion of heresy, before Henry Chichley
Archbishop of Canterbury, in Paul's Church: who being demanded, Constancy.
denied it not, but frankly confessed that for 20. years space, he had bin
suspected thereof: for which also he had suffered 2. years imprisonment at
Convey, and three years in the Fleet: out of which prison, he (in the reign
of king Henry the fourth, was brought before L. John Scarle, then Chancelour
to the king, and there did abjure all heresy, and error. And being demanded
of the Archbishop, confessed that since his abiuration, he had in his house
written English books of religion, and had frequented the company of diverse
godly me^. Which confession being made, the Archb. did command the books to be
delivered to master Robert Gilbert Doctor of divinity, William Lindwood, Doct.
of both laws, and other Clearkes to be examined. And in the mean time, David
Bear, Alexander Phillip, and Balthazar Mero, were taken for witnesses against
him: and were committed to be examined to master John Escourt, general
examiner of Canterbury. This done. the Archb. continued his session til monday
next in the same place, which was the 20. day of the same month, and master
Escourt publicly exhibited the witnesses: which being read, there were after
that read diverse tractations, found in his house: out of which, especially out
of a book called, the Lantern of light, The Lantern of light.
(that Claidon at his own costs, caused to be written by one, called Ioh.
Grime) being examined, diverse points were gathered, and noted for heresy.
Articles.
First, that the Pope was Antichrist, and the enemy that sowed tares among the
laws of Christ. That ye Archbishops and Bishops, speaking indifferently, are
the seats of the Beast Antichrist. That the Bishops license, for a man to
preach the word of God, is the Character of the Beast. That the Court of Rome,
is the head of Antichrist, and the Bishops the body. That no reprobate is a
member of the Church. That Christ did never plant private religions. That the
material Church should not be decked with gold. The causes of persecution.
That Priests unlawfully keeping temporal goods, and insatiable begging of
Friars, were the two chief causes of the persecution of Christians. That
alms were to be given to the honor of GOD, only of goods justly gotten, to
be given to one that is in charity, and to those that have need. That often
singing in the Church, is not founded on the scripture. That bread and wine
remain in the Sacrament. That all Ecclesiastical suffrages do profit all
godly persons indifferently. That the Popes Indulgences be unprofitable. That
the Laytie is not bound to obey the prelates, in what so ever they command
except the prelates do watch, to give God a just account of their souls. That
Images are not to be sought to by pilgrimages.

For these articles, the archb. with the rest, did condemn and burn I.
Claydons books, and proceeded to a definitive sentence of condemnation against
him: and shortly after, he was had to Smithfield, where meekly he was made a
burnt offering unto the Lord, an. 1415.

R. Fabian adds, that Richard Turning, Baker, was the same time also burned
in Smithfield.

The next year, 1416. the archb. of Canterbury in his Convocation holden at
London, makes sharper constitutitions then were before, Sharper constitutions
then before.
against the Lollards. During the time of which Convocation, two priests,
noted for Heretics, were brought before the Bishops: the one, John Barton, and
the other, Robert Chapel. John Barton. Robert Chapel.
Barton, because he had been excommunicated, and so stood 6. or 7. years
before, upon articles of religion, and yet sought no reconciliation: which
being proved against him, he was committed to Philip, B. of Lincoln, to be kept
in prison, til otherwise it were determined. R. Chapel, otherwise Holbech,
sometime chaplen to the L. Cobham, because he (being under excommunication 3.
or 4. years) did yet in contempt of the keys, continue saying mass, and
preaching, and sought no reconciliation. So the session brake up for ye time,
which was about ye end of May, 1416.

The 12. of Iulie next following, Chapel submits.
Chapel appeared again, and (submitting himself) with much a do, received
pardon: and was (in stead of penance) enjoined certain articles to publish at
Paul's Cross. As, Articles enjoined Chapel.
that Prelates might lawfully hold Temporal Laws. That it were unjust, and
unlawful for temporal men, upon any occasion to take away the Prelates
temporalties, notwithstanding the abuses of them. That peregrinations are
available to the remission of sins. That, to worship Images, does profit
Christians. That auricular confession is necessary. That, though a priest be
in mortal sin, yet may he make the body of Christ. That Priests ought not
to preach, without the Bishops license. That private religions are profitable
to the universal Church. That he would promise, and swear, never to hold
any thing against the premises.

Diverse caused to abjure.
After the setting out of the constitutions of H. Chichesly, Archb. of
Canterbury, diverse godly men were sore vexed, and caused outwardly to abjure:
as, John Tailor, of the parish of S. Mary's at Querne, William James, Master of
art, and Physician, who had long time remained in prison: also, John Duerfer,
John Gourdeley, of Lincolnshire, well commended for his learning, Katherin
Dertford, a Spinster. the Parson of Hyggley, in Lincolnshire, named M. Robert:
William Henry of Tenderden, John Gall, a Priest of London, Richard Monk,
Vicar of Chesham, in Lincolnshire, with other mo.

Collection for the P. to war against the Bohemians.
During the time of the Convocation provincial, Pope Martin had sent down to
the clergy of England, for a subsidy, to be gathered of the Church, to
maintain the Popes war, against the Lollards of Bohemia. Also, another
subsidy was demanded, to persecute William Clarke, master of art in Oxford,
who sailing out of England, was at ye council of Basil, disputing on the
Bohemians side: and thirdly, another subsidy was also required, W. Clarke. W.
Russel.
to persecute William Russel, which was Warde^ of the Gray Friars in London,
who the same time was fled, and there escaped out of prison.

Among the rest which were at this time troubled for their faith, was, Radulph
Mungin, R Mungin.
priest: against whom, it was articulated at the Bishops convocation. First,
Articles.
that it should not be lawful for any Christian to fight against the
Heretics of Bohemia. That he should keep company with Master Clarke
aforesaid. That he should disperse certain books of Wicklifs, as Trialogus,
etc. That he spoke against the Popes Indulgences: which points he refused to
abjure, and therefore by the Archbishop was condemned to perpetual prison:
after whose condemnation the Sunday next following the recantation of Thomas
Granter, Recantation.
and Richard Monk, priests above mentioned was read openly at Paul's church:
after which Granter was put to seven years imprisonment, under the custody and
charge of the Bishop of London. Edmund Frith also recanted, who was the butler
of Sir John Oldcastell.

Besides these, many other, who likewise for religion were greatly vexed,
especially in the Dioces of Kent, in the towns of Rumney, Tenterden,
Woodchurch, Kent well affected.
Cranbrooke, Staplehurst, Beninden, Halden, Roylnenden, and others: where as
whole housholdes, both man and wife, were driven to forsake their houses, and
towns, for danger of persecution. Among whom in the certificate of Burboth
the Archbishoppes official: these are named, William White priest, Thomas
Grensted priest, Bartholmew Chronemonger, John Waddon, Joan his wife, Thomas
Euerden, William Euerden, Steven Robin, William Chineling, John Tame, John
Facolin, William Somer, Marian his wife, John Abraham, Robert Munden, Laurence
Cook: which persons because they would not appear, were excommunicated by the
Archbishop, and what happened after unto them, it does not appear, but like it
is, they were at length forced to submit themselves.

About the year 1417. Cobham having now been in Wales the space of four
years (the King proclaiming a great sum of money to him that could take sir
John Oldcastle either quick or dead) the L. Powes brought him up to London,
The L. Powes takes the lord Oldcastle in Wales.
about the month of Dece^ber: At which time there was a Parliament assembled at
London, for the relief of money to be sent to the K. whom the bishops had set
to work to fight in France: the records of which parliament do thus say: that
on tuesday the 14. of December, and the 20 of the parliament, sir John
Oldcastell of Cowling, being outlawed in the Kings bench, and excommunicated
before the Archb. of Canterbury for heresy, was brought before the Lords, and
having heard his said conuictions, answered not thereto in his excuse: upon
which record and process, it was adjudged that he should be taken as a traitor
to the king, and carried to the Tower of London, The lord Cobham condemned.
and from thence drawn thorough the city unto the new gallows in S. Giles
without temple bar, and there hanged, and burned hanging.

After the martyrdom of sir I. Oldcastle, motion was made in the parliament,
that the L. Powes might be thanked, and worthily rewarded for his great labor
in apprehending him.

All mischief imputed to the Lollards.
In this time all horrible mischiefs and facts, if any were done, were imputed
to the poor Lollardes.

The nobles of Boheme, which before wrote unto the council of Constance,
Bohemians cited to the council of Constance.
were therefore cited up to the council. The letter of Sigismund answers in ye
name of the whole council: excusing himself of Husses death. Secondly, he
requires them to be quiet, and to conform themselves peaceably unto the
orders of the Romish church.

Also the Council hearing, and fearing some stir to arise among the Bohemians,
did make laws to bridle them, to the number of 24. 24. laws to bridle the
Bohemians.
As that the king of Bohemia should be sworn to give obedience, and defend
the liberties of the church of Rome. That all Masters, Doctors, and Priests,
shall be sworn to abjure the doctrine of Wickliffe, and Husse, in that
council condemned: the rest being of like sort.

The Bohemians, notwithstanding these cruel articles, contemning the vain
devises of the Prelates and Fathers of the council, ceased not to proceed in
their league and purpose begun, joining themselves more strongly together.

This year, after the deposing of Pope John, The Popes goods. 75000. li.
and spoiling of his goods, which came to 75. thousand pounds of gold, and
silver, Pope Martin was elected. Now the Pope coming upon his palfry, trapped
with scarlet down to the ground, and the Emperor on the right side, and the
Prince Elector on the left, playing the footmen, and holding the horses bridle,
unto the market place: there the Jews according to the manner, offered unto
him their laws, and ceremonies: which the Pope receiving cast them behind him,
The Jews offer their ceremonies to the Pope.
saying: Recedant vetera, noua sunt omnia: that is, Let old things pass,
every thing is new. Ex histor. Alba. Ex Paralip. Vrsperg.

The Pope now confirmed, threateneth very grievously the Bohemians, both with
apostolical, and secular arm: Pope thretneth the Bohemians. A solemn yearly
memorial of the death of Husse and Jerome. Monasteries suppressed. Captain
Nicholas.
but the Bohemians nothing moved therewith, assembled together, and first
agreed to celebrate a solemn memorial of the death of John Husse, and
Hierome: decreeing the same to be celebrated yearly: and afterward obtained
certain Churches of the king, where they might freely preach and minister the
sacraments unto the congregation. This done, they suppressed diverse
monasteries, beginning first with the great monastery of the black friars 7.
miles distant from Prage, driving the vicious priests and monks out of them:
and so their number increased under their Captain, called Nicholas.

Their number increasing now more and more, they went unto their K, requiring
to have more ample churches: the king seemed willingly to give ear unto
Nicholas, entreating for the people and commanded them to come again the next
day. The people being departed, the king turned himself to Nicholas, remaining
still behind, and said: The King thretneth Nicholas.
Thou have begun a web to put me out of my kingdom: but I will make a rope of
it to hang thee. Whervppon, the K. presently departed into the Castle of
Visegarde, and within a while after, entered into a new castle, which he
himself had builded, 5. stones cast from thence, sending Ambassadors to his
brother to require aid.

These protestants being assembled in the town of Prage, holding their
conuentions, the king sent forth his chamberlain with three hundred horsemen,
to run upon them: but he having respect unto himself, fled When ye news was
brought unto the king, his cupbearer (standing by) said, I knew these things
would thus come to pass: for which words, the king would have slain him with
his dagger, had not they which stood by dissuaded him, with much ado.
Immediately the K. being taken with a palsy, fell sick, and within 18. days
days after, having marked the names of them, whom he would have put to
death, The kings cruel determination disappointed by his own
departed his life, before the Princes, unto whom he had sent, were come,
having reigned 55. years, and being of the age of seven and fifty years.

Immediately after the death of Wenceslaus, there was a noble man, named Zisca,
Zisca.
borne at Trosnonia, who gathering together a number of men of war, spoiled
the Abbeies and monasteries, and his number increasing to 4000. took the
Castles of Vicegrade, and Pelzina, wan the bridge, and the nether part of the
lesser Prage, which upon conditions he rendered again.

About Christmas, Sigismund the Emp came down, and by reason of execution done
at Vratoslania, the head city of Slesia, was had in such jealousy, that they
stopped him from entering into the cities of Bohemia, and counted him an enemy
unto the kingdom.

In the mean time, Zisca took Ausca, a Town situated upon the river of
Lusintius, and rased it: and forasmuch as he had no fenced town to inhabit,
chose a plain, fenced by nature, Tabor builded by Zisca.
about eight miles from Ausca, and compassed the same with walls, and there
builded houses, and called the same Tabor. Afterward, he surprised Nicholas,
master of the Emperors Minte, whom the Emperor had sent with 1000. horse
into Boheme to set things in order.

In this mean time the Emperor gathering together the nobles of Slesia,
entered into Boheme, and allured one Chenco with large promises (who had before
revolted once to the Protestants) to render up again the castle of Prage unto
him, and there placed himself to annoy the town: Which done the citizens
sent for Zisca, who went with his Taborites, and received the city under his
government: which the Emperor did besiege, Zisca puts the Emperor to
flight.
but was compelled to raise it: and to be short, Zisca put the Emperor to
flight, subuerts the abbey of Pelsina, and as he laid siege to Raby, having
but one eye before to see, Zisca loses his other eye.
he lost the same being stricken with an arrow: which yet notwithstanding, he
would not forsake his army, but after that, took diverse towns, caused the
Saxons his enemies to retire, and again puts the Emperor to flight, and took
Broda.

At these troubles, the consuls of Prage, being grieved, Johan.
Premo^stratensis and his, companions put to death.
called for Johannes Premonstratensis, and nine other of his adherents, whom
they supposed to be the principalles of of this faction, into the Council
house, as though they would confer with them of the common wealth: and when
they were come, they slew them, and departed home, every man to his own house,
thinking they had made the city quiet. But their servants, not circumspect
enough, washing the houses, did wash down with all the blood of those that were
slain, into the sinkes, and channels. The which being once seen, the people
knew what was done. By and by, there was a great tumult, the Council house was
straight way overthrown, and eleven of the principal Citizens, which were
thought to be the authors thereof, were slain, and diverse houses spoiled.
Zisca in the mean while, very valiantly behaved himself. But, betwixt him and
the City of Prage, at the length fell great dissension. In so much, that they
prepared an army against him, and caused him to fly: who at last finding
opportunity of place, caused his standard to stand still, Dissension betwixt
Prage and Zisca.
and sought with them of Prage, and slew 3000. of them, and put the rest to
flight, and went to besiege Prage, but by the wisdom of one named Johannes de
Rochezana, reconciliation was made betwixt Zisca and them of Prage:
Reconciliatio^.
Which when the Emperor understood, and perceived all things fell out
according to the mind of Zisca, and that upon him alone the whole state of
Boheme did depend: he sought privy means to reconcile, and get Zisca into his
favor, promising him the guiding of all his army, the gouernante of the whole
kingdom, and great yearly revenues, if he would proclaim him king, and
cause the cities to be sworn unto him: upon which conditions, when as Zisca,
for the performance of the covenants, went unto the emperor, in his journey at
the castle of Prisconia, he was stricken with sickness, Zisca dies.
and there died.

It is written, that being demanded in the time of his sickness, where he would
his body should be buried: he commanded his skin to be plucked off, his dead
carkase, and the flesh to be cast unto the fowls and beasts, and a drum to be
made of his skin, which they should use in their wars: affirming, that
when the enemies should hear the sound of the drum, they would not abide,
but take their flight. The Taborites despising all other images, yet set up the
picture of Zisca over the gates of their Cities.

The Epitaph of John Zisca, the valiant Captain of the Bohemians.
I John Zisca, not inferior to any Emperor, or Captain, in warlike policy:
The epitaph of Zisca.
a severe punisher of the pride, and avarice of the Clergy, and a defender of
my Country, do lie here. The same which Ap. Claudius in giving good council,
and M. Furius Camillus did for the Romans, in valiantness, the same I (being
blind) have done for my Bohemians. I never slacked opportunity of battle,
neither did fortune at any time fail me. I being blind, did foresee all
opportunity of well ordering my business. Eleven times, in joining battle, I
went victor out of the field. I seemed worthily to have defended the cause of
the miserable, and hungry, against the delicate, fat, and gluttonous
priests: and for that cause, to have received help at the hands of God. If
their envy had not let it, without doubt I had deserved to be numbered amongst
the most famous men. No^twithstanding, my bones lie here in this hallowed place,
in despite of the Pope. In despite of the P.
John Zisca, a Bohemian, enemy to all wicked, and covetous priests, but with a
godly zeal. Ex Aen. Sil.

All this while the Emperor, with the whole power of the Germans, were not so
busy on the one side, but Martin the Pope was as much occupied on the other:
who, about the same time, directed out a most terrible Bull against all those
that took part with Wickliffe, Husse, or Jerome: A Bull.
and set forth certain articles, whereof examination was to be had: with a
certain manner also, how they were to be dealt withal, set down.

Not long after Ziscas death, certain Bohemians set forth another contrary
writing, against the pestiferous Sea of Rome: bearing the names of Procopius,
and Conradus, Procopius. Conradus.
Captains of the Bohemians.

Now, after ye Zisca was dead, immediately followed division in the host: the
one part choosing Procopius, surnamed Magnus, to be their Captain: the other
part saying, there was none worthy to succeed Zisca. Whereupon, they,
choosing out certain to serve the wars, named themselves Orphans. Orphans.
And albeit there was oftentimes dissension among them, yet they joined, and
defended themselves against foreign power.

These two armies obtained great victories, in so much, that Sigismund the
Emperor sent for the Nobles of Bohemia, unto Posonium, a town of Hungary, in
the borders of Austria: but they would not enter into the town, but remained in
their tents without the town: whether the Emperor going to them, and promising
them kindness, they objected again, the falsifying of his safeconduct to
John Husse, etc. So nothing being finally concluded, the Emperor returned home.

Pope Martin, perceiving the Gospel to increase more and more, sent the
Cardinal of Winchester, an Englishman, borne of a noble house, into Germany,
to move them to war against the Bohemians: whereunto the Emperor also did
assist him.

3. Armies.
There were iij. armies provided: in the first were the Dukes of Saxony, and
the lower cities. The second army was gathered of the Francomans, and was
under the conduct of the Marquis of Brandenburgh. The third was led by Otho,
the archbishop of Treuerse, whom the Rhenenses the Bauarians, and the Imperial
Cities of Sweuia, followed.

The 3. armies flee before they see their enemies.
These armies joined together, and pitched before Misna, and understanding that
the Protestants drew near, they fled before they saw their enemies. Then (all
lettes set aside) they vanquished Thraconia, and having obtained great store of
warlike Engines, they destroyed Misna: and when they would have returned home
by Franconia, they had great sums of money sent them, that they would not
destroy the Countries of Bramberge, and Noremberge, whereby the Host of the
Bohemians was greatly enriched.

Sigismund the Emperor having news of these things, went straight unto
Noremberge, and there gathered new aid. Also, Pope Martin sent Julian, the
Cardinal of Saint Angel, into Germany, with embassage, to make war upon
the Bohemians, who went straightway to Noremberge to the Emperor, where many
nobles of Germany were assembled, and a decree made of a new expedition
against the Bohemians, against the 8. of the Calends of July. It is said, the
company of the aid of Sweuians, which they called the company of S. George, and
the Magistrates of the Imperial cities, the Bishops of Mentz, Treuers, and
Colen, and the Chieftaines of their Provinces were above forty thousand horse,
40000. horse against the Protestants.
but their footmen not fully so many.

After this, the Cardinal entered into Bohemia with a large army, and on the
borders of Boheme destroyed many of the Protestants towns, and spared neither
man, woman, nor child. But the Bohemians making toward them, there fell such a
fear among the popish army, The popish army flees, before they see their
enemies.
that they fled before any enemy appeared: whom the protestants pursuing, had
a great pray, and spoil of them: notwithstanding Albertus prince of Austrich,
who was appointed to bring his army through Morania, hearing tell that the
Cardinal was entered into Bohemia, with all speed, came out of Austrich, with
his army, and besieged the town of Prezorabia, but when he understood how the
cardinal was fled, he left of his purpose, and returned through Morania, which
was not yet subject unto him: and destroyed above 50. 50. towns destroyed.
towns with fire and sword, and so afflicted them that they promised him
subjection, on condition, that he would be bound to do that, which the Council
of Basil should determine.

Then was there an Embassage sent out of Boheme, unto Basil, where Sigismund
held the Council: who during the time of the wars, held himself at Noremberge,
and wrote unto the Bohemians, what law he had of them, and exhorted them to
repair unto the Council of Basil, Council at Basil.
where their greefes should be heard, and remedy provided. The Council of
Basil also wrote their letters to the Bohemians, that they should send their
Ambassadors, which should show a reason of their faith, promising them
safeconduct to go and come, and free liberty to speak what they would. The
Bohemians stood in doubt, considering how John Husse, and Hierome of Prage had
been handled by them at Constance: But the Nobility followed the mind of
Maynardus, prince of the New house, who persuaded them to go. And after his
council an Ambassade of 300. An Embassage of the Bohemians to Basil.
horse was sent to Basil: the chief whereof was William Cosca a valiant
knight, and Procopius surnamed Magnus, a man of worthy fame for his manifold
victories, John Rochezana preacher of Prage, Nicholas Galerus minister of the
Thaborites, and one Peter an Englishman, Peter an Englishman.
of excellent, prompt, and pregnant wit. These Bohemian Ambassadors were gently
received.

The next day after, the Cardinal Iulianus sending for them unto the Council
house, made a gentle, long, and eloquent Oration unto them, exhorting them to
peace, and unity: saying, that the Church was the spouse of Christ, etc. This
Oration the Bohemians answered, clearing themselves of crimes laid to their
charges, and required open audience, whereas the laity might also be present, to
manifest their innocence: which request was granted unto them, and so they
propounded four points, 4. points wherein the Bohemians dissent from ye church
of Rome.
wherein they dissented from the Church of Rome. First, that all that would be
saved, ought of necessity to receive the Communion under both kinds. Secondly,
all civil rule and dominion to be forbidden unto the Clergy, by the law of
God. Thirdly, that the preaching of the word of God, is free for all men, and
in all places. The fourth was, as touching open offenses: which are in no wise
to be suffered, for the avoiding of greater evil.

These were the points, objected in the name of ye whole Realm. The Bohemians
chose out four Divines, that should declare their Articles to be taken out of
the word of God. Likewise, on the contrary part, there were four appointed
by the Council. This disputation continued fifty days. The disputation
continued fifty days.


In the time, while the Bohemians were thus in long conflicts with Sigismund
the Emperor, K. Henry the 5. the Prince of priests.
King Henry the fifth likewise fighting in France died: who was so devout to
the Pope, and Prelates, that he was called the Prince of Priests.

The names of the Archbishops of Canterbury.
54. Simon Iselip seventeen years. 56. The names of the archb. of Canterbury.
Simon Langham two. 57. William Witlesey five. Simon Sudbury six. 59. William
Courtney fifteen. 60. Thomas Arundell eighteen. 61. Henry Chichesly nine and
twenty.

The end of the fifth Book.
The sixth Book.
HEnry the sixth succeeded his Father, Anno 1422. The sixth part of the Section.
W. Tailor.
was burned a constant witness of Christ's truth, William Tailor a Priest,
under Henry Chichesly Archbishop of Canterbury. He was first apprehended in
the days of Thomas Arundell, and abiured afterward in the days of Henry
Chichesly, Anno 1421. which was the year before his burning. The said William
Tailor appeered again in the convocation before the Archbishop, being brought
by the Bishop of Worcester, having been complained of, to have taught at
Bristow these articles following.

Articles.
That whosoever hangs any Scripture about his neck dishonoreth God, and gives
it to the Devil. That God only is to be adored. That Saints are not to be
worshipped nor inuocated.

These Articles he denied that he preached of, but only communed of the
same: especially upon the second and third, only in way of reasoning, and so
brought out of his bosom a Paper, containing certain Articles, with
testimonies of the Doctors alleged, and exhibited the same unto the
Archbishop: who delivered it unto Master John Castle, and Rikinghale, the two
Vicechancellours of Oxford and Cambridge, and to John Langdon Moonke of
Canterbury, who the Monday following, presented the said articles to the
Archbishop and Prelates as erroneous: Whereupon William Tailor being called,
Recant.
in conclusion was content to revoke the same, and for his penance was
condemned to perpetual prison: whereof notwithstanding, through favor, he
was also released, putting in sufficient sureties in the Kings Chauncery, and
swearing that he would never hold, or favor any such opinions after that. And
so he being absolved, and taking his oath, he was committed to the B. of
Worcester, to be released upon conditions aforesaid: yet so, that he should
appear at the next Convocation, whenever it should be before the Archb.

In the mean time, while William Tailor was in the custody of Worcester, there
passed certain writings between him, and one Tho. Smith, priest of Bristow: in
the which writings, William Tailor replying against the said Thomas, concerning
the questions of worshipping of Saints: which being brought to the hands of the
B. of Worcester, William Tailor began anew to be troubled ann. 1422. the xj. of
February, and being brought before the co^uocation, his writings were brought
before him, which he would not deny.

The Archb. caused it to be delivered to the 4. orders of friars in London, to
be examined: who found out these 4. heretical points in them. Four heretical
points.
1. Every prayer, which is a petition of some supernatural gift, or free gift,
is to be directed only to God. 2. That prayer is to be directed to God alone.
3. To pray to any creature, is to commit idolatry. 4. Much like the rest, but
to fill the number of their orders, they made a fourth.

When the Saturday was come, which was the 20 day of March, the orders of
Friars having declared their censure in the Chapter house of Paul's, touching
Tailors articles: he was upon the same, forthwith condemned as a relapse:
Tailor condemned and burned.
first to be disgraded, and after burned: who being had to Smithfield, the
first day of March, did finish his martirdom, Anno 1422.

Anno 1424. John Florence Ioh. Florence.
a Turner, appeared before William Bernam, Chancellor to William, B. of
Norwich, for these articles. 1. That the Pope, and Cardinals, Articles.
have no power to constitute laws. 2. That only the Sunday is to be kept
holy. 3. That men ought only to fast the quatuor temporum. 4. That Images are
not to be worshipped. 5. That Curats ought not to exact tithes. 6. That al they
that swear by their life and power, shall be damned, except they repent.
Submission.
But being threatened, he submitted himself, Penance.
and abiured, and was enjoined this penance.: three Sundaies in a solemn
procession in the cathedral Church of Norwich he should be displaied before
all the people, The like also should be done about his parish Church, of
Shelton, three other several Sundays, he being bareheaded, barefoote, and
barenecked, after the manner of a public penitentiarie, his body being
covered with a canuase shirt, and breeches, carrying in his hand a taper of a
pound weight.

Ann. 1424. Richard Belward Rich. Belward. 1424
of Erisam, abiured these articles before the B. of Norwich, the 24. of July,
and purged himself by his neighbors, and swear that he would neither teach,
nor assist any against the church of Rome. His articles were these. Articles.
1. That ecclesiastical ministers have no power to excommunicate. 2. That he
held the opinions of sir Ioh. Oldcastle. 3. That me^ ought not to go on
pilgrimage. 4. That the Curats sell God on Easter day, when they receive
offerings. 5. That he gave counsel against offerings for the dead, and for
women that were purified. 6. That saints ought not to be prayed unto, etc. He
denied these Articles, and purged himself by three of his neighbors: yet
because the bishop greatly suspected him of Lollardy, he swear him, that he
should never teach any thing against the Romish Church, and so dismissed him.

In like manner, was John God de Sell, John God de Sell.
of Dichingham, Parchment maker, for the same articles, feign to purge himself,
and swear, and so was set at liberty, til ann. 1428. Sir Hugh Pie, Sir Hugh
Pie.
also Chaplain of Ludney, in the dioces of Norwich, was accused before the
Bishop, ann. 1424. for holding these points: first against pilgrimages: Ite^,
that alms is only to be given to the needy beggars at their doors. That no
Image is to be worshipped. And that he cast the cross of Bromehold into the
fire. These articles he denied, purged himself by witness of 3. Lay men, and
3. Priests: was sworn, and so dismissed.

Anno 1428. Henry the sixth sent down most cruel letters of Commission unto
John Exetor, and Iacolet Germain, keeper of the castle of Colchester, for the
apprehending of sir William White, Priest, W. White, Priest.
and others, suspected of heresy. By virtue of which commission, it is found
in old Monuments, that within short space after, John Exetor, who was
appointed one of the Commissioners, attached six persons, in the town of
Bongay, in the Dioces of Norwich, and committed them to William Day, and
William Row, constables of Bongay, to be sent within ten days following,
under safeconduct, to the castle of Norwich: where by reason of the antiquity
of the record, these names remain only to be read: John Wadden of Tenderden,
in the County of Kent, Bartholmew Monk of Ersham, in the County of Norfolk,
Cornleader, a married man, William Skuttes. These three were in the custody of
the Duke of Norfolk, in his Castle of Fremingham.

Besides these, there are found in old monuments, in the dioces of Norfolk and
Suffolk, especially in the towns of Beckles, Ersham, and Ludney, a great
number, both of men and women, to have been cast into prison, and after their
abiuration, brought to open shame, in Churches, and Markets, by the Bishop of
Norwich, named William, and his Chanceller, William Bernham, John Exetor being
Register: So that within the space of three or four years, Great vexation for
the truth of Christ.
that is, from the year 1428. unto 1431. about ye number of 120. men and women,
were examined, and suffered great vexation for the profession of Christian
faith. Of whom, some were taken only upon suspicion for eating of meats
forbidden, upon Vigill days: Who, (after their purgation made) escaped more
easily away. Whose names follow here subscribed.

Robert Skirring of Harlestone, William Skirring, John Terry of Ersham, John
Aibre of Ersham, John Middleton of Haluergate, John Ward of Ersham, Richard
Clark of Sething, Thomas White of Bedingham, Master Robert Beert of Berrie,
and Richard Page of Clepslie.

The other were more cruelly handled, and some of them burned: among whom
special mention is made of these 3. Father Abraham, Father Abraham, William
White priest, I. Wad priest, burned.
of Colchester, William White, Priest, and John VVaddon, Priest: The residue
abiured, and suffered penance: as, John Beuerley, I. VVardon, Io. Middleton,
John Baker, I. Knight, Margerie Baxter, John Skillie, John Godhold, Tomas
Albeck, John Pierce, Nicholas Canon, of Ey. Thomas Pie, John Mendham, Io.
Middleton, Thomas Chatris, Thomas VVade, William Taylour, John Capper, Vicar
of Tunstall, with three score and two other.

The articles which they held, were these. Against auricular confession. That
there remains bread and wine after the words of consecration, and that no
priest can make the body of Christ. That every true Christian is a Priest to
God. Articles.
That no man is bound to Lent, or any days prohibited by the Church of Rome.
That the pope is Antichrist. That (necessity urging) it is lawful to do
bodily labor on holie-daies, That Priests may marry. That Ecclesiastical
censures of the Prelates, are not to be regarded. Against swearing in private
causes. Against Pilgrimage. Against honoring of Images. Against holy water.
That the death of Becket was neither holy, nor meritorious. That Relikes ought
not to be worshipped. That prayers in all places are acceptable unto God. That
no Saint is to be prayed unto. That Bel-ringing was ordained to fill Priests
purses. That it is no sin, to withstand the Ecclesiastical processes. That
the Catholic Church is only the congregation of Gods elect.

In these articles they all agreed, and it seems, William White scholar to
Wickliffe.
they had the doctrine from William White, who was scholar and follower of John
Wickliffe.

This William White gave over his priesthood and benefice, Ione: yet ceased
not he from his duty of teaching, but preached continually, wrote, and
instructed the people at Canterbury. Before time, he had recanted these points:
That men should seek for the forgiveness of sins only at Gods hands. That
the wicked living of the pope and his holy ones is a devilish and heavy yooke
of Antichrist. That men ought not to worship images, nor holy men after they be
dead. That the Romish church is the fig tree which Christ accursed. That such
as wear coules, or be anointed, or shorn, are the launceknights of Lucifer,
etc. Which articles he abiured An. 1424. before Henry Chichesly at Canterb. but
now being stronger in the truth, endured to the end, and was condemned of 30.
White burned in Norwich.
articles, and was burned at Norwich, in the month of September 1428. having
labored diligently before in teaching the people of Norfolk. He was a man very
godly, and devout, in so much that all the people had him in great reverence:
and were wont to desire him to pray for them. When he was come unto the stake,
thinking to open his mouth to speak unto the people, to exhort and confirm
them in the truth, one of the Bishops servants stroke him on the mouth,
Cruelty.
thereby to force him to keep silence: and so there patiently he ended his
course, being made a witness of Christ Jesus. His wife Ione followed her
husbands footesteps, and confirmed many in the truth: and therefore suffered
much trouble, and punishment at the Bishops hands, the same year.

About the same time also, suffered by burning father Abraham of Colchester,
and John Waddon priest, for the like articles.

John Beuerly, alias Batild was enjoined that the Friday and Saturday, next
after his dismission he should fast bread, and water, and upon the Saturday to
be whipped from the Palace of Norwich, going round about by the Tomlands, and
by S. Michaels Church, by Cottell Row, and about the market, having in his hand
a wax candle of two pence, to offer to the Image of the Trinity, after he
had done his penance, etc. and this done, he should depart out of the
Dioces, and never come there any more. Besides, the same year diverse did
penance and abiured: and the year following, 1429. 16. or 17.

An. 1430. R. Houedon Rich. Houedo^.
a woolwinder and citizen of London, was burnt at the Towrehill, for the
doctrine of Wickliffe.

Anno 1431. Thomas Bagley Thom. Bagley.
a Priest, vicar of Monenden beside Malden, being a valiant disciple of
Wickliffe, was condemned of Heresy by the Bishops at London, about the midst
of Lent: was disgraded and burned in Smithfield.

The same year also Paul Craw Paul Crawe.
a Bohemian, was taken at S. Andrews, by the Bishop Henry, and delivered over
to the secular power to be burnt, for holding against the faith of Rome,
touching the sacrament of the Lords supper, worshipping of Saints, auricular
confession, with other of Wickliffes opinions.

Tho. Rhedon at Rome.
An. 1436. Th. Rhedon a Frenchman, and a Carmelite friar, was burned at Rome
for these articles, which notwithstanding they gathered falsely against him.
That the church lacks reformation, and that it shall be punished and
reformed. Articles.
That Infidels, Jews, Turks, and Mores, shall be converted unto Christ in the
later days. That abominations are used at Rome. That the unjust
excommunication of the Pope is not to be feared. Eugenius at this time was
Pope, Eugenius Pope.
and succeeded Pope Martin a little before. After sundry torments he was
condemned for an heretic and was burned. He was accused by William of Roan
cardinal of S. Martins in the mount, vicechancellor of the court of Rome.

About the same time, Persecution about Germany
diverse other suffered in the places about Germany, as Henry Grunfelder, priest
of Ratispone, ann. 1420. Henry Rodgeber, priest in the same city, anno 1423.
Ioh. Draendorf a priest, and of noble birth, at Worms ann. 1424. Peter Thraw,
at Spire. ann. 1426. Matthew Hager also suffered at Berline, in Germany, not
long after. Ex Basilei Centur. sept.

After the death of pope Martine, who reigned 14. years: succeeded Eugenius
the fourth. about the year 1431. Eugenius begins the Council at Basil.
which Council Martine had before intended.

In the 39. session of the council of Constance, it was decreed, and provided,
Order for the times of general councels.
concerning the orders and times of such general councels, as should after
follow, The first that should next ensue, to be kept the 5. year after ye council
of Co^stance. The 2. 7. years after that, and so orderly al other to follow
successively from x. year, to x. year. Wherefore, according to this decree,
followed a general council 5. years after the Council of Consta^ce holden at
Seen, under pope Martin, an. 1424. 7 years after another Council was holden at
Basil, ann. 1431. which was the most troublesome Council, that ever was: and
continued 17. years. The troublesome Council at Basil continued 17. years.
Wherein it was concluded (as before at Constance) that the general councels
were above the Pope.

When pope Martin the 5. had appointed Julian, Cardinal of S. Angel, to hold
a general council at Basil, for rooting out of Heresies, he died: and Eugenius
4. succeeded: who confirmed the same authority to the Cardinal Julian. Unto
this Council, came the Emperor Sigismund, and during his life, protected the
same.

After his death, Pope Eugenius altering his mind and purpose, would transport
the Council unto Bonony: and thereby hindered the success of the council of
Basil: and first he held a contrary Council, at Ferraria, and afterward at
Florence. Eugenius the Pope pretended that the Greeks, who should come to ye
council, would not pass the Alps: and that he himself could not go so long a
journey, and that ye Germans in their own country, Contention betwixt the P.
and the fathers of the Counsel.
would be so intractable, that nothing could there be attempted for their
reformation. Whereupon he cited the fathers of the council up to Bonony, upon
great peril. They again cited the pope, that either he should come himself,
or send his ambassadors, under great penalty.

For the appeasing of this dissension, the Ambassadors of Albert, king of the
Romans, and of the other princes of Germany, assembled together; first, at
Norimberg, where they could determine nothing; and again at Frankford, to
appease the dissension between the Council and the Pope. In the mean time, the
Emperors Ambassadors, and the Ambassadors of the electors, went to Basil, and
conferring with the Ambassadors of other Princes, there they earnestly desired
the fathers of the Council, that they would transport the council to another
place (the which only thing pope Eugenius seemed always to seek and desire)
that either he might thereby divide the fathers of the Council, or take away
their liberties. Notwithstanding, the Synod thought good, neither to deny the
princes request, neither grant that which Pope Eugenius desired. During this
doubt, the Emperors Ambassadors, and the B. of Patauia, and Augusta, (being
much required thereunto) appointed a noble Baron, named Conrade Weinsperg, by
the K. commandment, to be the protector of the Council, and the fathers: but
by means of a great pestilence, which began to grow, the assembly that should
have been holden at Frankford, was transported unto Mentz. The Ambassadors of
the Princes thought good also to go thither, if by any means they might find
unity. The asse^bly was very famous: for there were present, the Archb. of
Mentz, Collen, and Treuers, electors of the sacred empire: and all the
Ambassadors of the other Electors. Notwithstanding, the Archb. of Collen was
the chief favorer of the Council in this assembly. The sacred Synod also
thought good to send thither their Ambassador the patriarch of Aquileia, the
Bishop of Venice, and the Bishop of Argen, divines: John Segonius, and Thomas
de Corcellis, with diverse others. There was no man there present that would
name himself the Ambassador of Eugenius. But the chief Hercules of the
Eugenians was Nicolaus Casnanus, Nicholaus Casnanus.
a man singularly well learned, and of great experience.

After diverse consulatations had, the electors of the Empire, and the
Ambassadors of the other Princes of Germany thought good, to give forth
commandment through out their whole country and nation, that the decrees of
the council of Basil should received and observed.

While these things were thus debated at Mentz, there rose up a doubtful
question among the divines, which remained at Basil, whether Eugenius might be
called an heritike, who so rebelliously contemned the commandment of the
Church. Among these divines, the chiefest both in learning, and authority, was
the Bishop of Ebrium, Ambassador to the king of Castile, and a certain
Scottish abbot: to whose reasons, the rest did consent or give place: and so
Eugenius was pronounced both an heretic, and a relapse. Eugenius pronounced an
heretic and relapse
Eight conclusions were there determined, and allowed amongst them, which they
called verities: the copy whereof they did diuulgate thorough al Christendom.

The verities were these. That the Council has authority above the Pope.
That the Pope cannot transport, nor proroge the general Council, lawfully
assembled, 8. Verities.
without the consent of the whole. That he that resists those verities, is to
be counted an heretic. That Eugenius the fourth had resisted those verities.
That Eugenius, being admonished by the sacred Council, did recant the errors
repugnant to those verities. That the dissolution, or translation of the
Council, attempted the second time by Eugenius, is against the foresaid
verities. That Eugenius, in going about to dissolve and transport the council
again, is fallen into his first revoked errors. That Eugenius being warned by
the council to give over, and notwithstanding perseuering and erecting a
council at Ferraria, showed himself thereby obstinate.

When the Ambassadors of the council were returned from Mentz, and that
certain report was made of the allowing of their decrees, the Fathers of the
council thought good to discuss the conclusions and verities of the divines
more at large: whereupon by commandment of the deputies, all the Masters and
Doctors of the clergy, with the residue of the Prelates, were called together
into the chapterhouse of the great Church, there openly to dispute and discuss
the heresy of Eugenius.

A disputation of 6. days against Pope Eugenius. Panormitane a defender of
Eugenius.
This disputation continued 6. days, both forenoone, and after noone. Among
whom, Cardinal Ludouicus Archb. Arelatensis was the judge of the whole
disputation. They concluded according to the former verities, and all in a
manner allowed them, except Panormitane, Archbishop, who much disputed against
them. Likewise did the bishop of Burgen, the king of Aragons Almoner: yet did
they not gainsay the 3. first conclusions, but only those wherein Pope Eugenius
was touched. Panormitane greatly contending with the B. of Argens, John
Segonius, and Francis de Felix, Divines that Eugenius was not relapsed, wrought
so, that the word Relapse, was taken out of the Conclusions, and in stead
thereof, the word Prolapse put in. Neither durst Panormitane himself
altogether excuse Eugenius of heresy, but defended more the first resolution,
than the second: yet departed he not without answer, for John Segonius, I.
Segonius.
an expert Divine, fully answered him, and scarce could finish his oration
without interruption: for, Panormitane oftentimes interrupting him, went about
(disorderly) to confute, now this, and now that reason.

Whereupon, the B. of Argen interrupted Panormitan, in his arguments, and put
him from his purpose. Yet they passed so far, that that they did not abstain
from opprobrious taunts: and when ye B. of Argen said, that the pope ought to
be the minister of the Church, Panormitan could not suffer that, but so far
forgot himself, that he said, the Pope was Lord over the Church. Segonius, on
the contrary part, Panormitane will have the P. Lord of the Church. Servant of
servants, the P. honorablest title.
answered, yt it was ye most honorable title the P. had, to be called the
servant of the servants of God: and alleged why they ought not to seek after
foreign Lordshippe, because Christ himself came not to be ministered unto, but
to minister, etc. With whose answers, he being somewhat disquieted, the
Council brake up, and departed.

The next day after dinner, they returned all again, where the Archb. of
Lions, the Kings Orator, requested to speak his mind. After he had by diverse
reasons proved Eugenius to be an Heretic, he bitterly complained, detetesting
the negligence, and slothfulness of those, which had preferred such a man to
the Papacy: and so moved all their hearts that were present, that they al with
him, The Council above the P.
did bewail the calamity of the universal church.

The Bishop of Bruxels, Ambassador for the King of Spain, did excellently
prove, that the Council was above the Pope: yet doubted he whether they were
verities of faith. The K. of Arragons Almosiner (being a crafty, and subtle
man) did not directly dispute upon the conclusions, but picking out here and
there, certain arguments, sought to hinder the Council: against whom, an
Abbot of Scotland and Tho. de Corcellis, did largely dispute in defense of the
Conclusions.

When the Disputation was ended, and a final conclusion of those matters even
at hand, the Archbishops of Millaine, and Panormitane, armed themselves to let
the matter, and exhorted all men of their faction, to withstand it. And first
of all, as soon as the congregation was assembled, the Bishop of Burgen
exhorted them to defer the conclusion, and to tarry for the Ambassadors of
other Princes, who would shortly return from Mentz.

After him Panormitane spoke also to the same end, and so did Ludouicus the
Prothonotarie of Rome. But Ludouicus, the Cardinal Arelatensis, Ludouicus.
Cardinal Arelatensis.
made an eloquent, and pithie Oration; and persuaded them to constancy, and to
the maintenance of the conclusions.

And when he had made an end of his Oration there was a great noise, crying
out, and brauling every where. Which when Ludouicus the Patriarche of Aquileia
perceived, he said unto Panormitane, and unto Ludouicus Prothonotarie: do
not think the matter shall so pass, you know not yet the manners of the
Germans: for if you go forth on this fashion, it will not be lawful for you
to depart out of this country with whole heads.

But John, Earl of Diersten, (who then supplied the Protectors place) and the
Citizens of Basil, gave assurance of safety, and the Earl willed them to be
of good cheer: who, never discouraged at the Patriarchs words, and by an
Interpretor declared, that his mind was not to threaten, but to nourish the
Fathers: they should foresee, that they should not depart from the council,
nothing being done, and furthermore, desired pardon, if his words had offended
the Council, Panormitane, or any man. Yet for all this the noyses and cries,
could not be stayed: for, as often as mention was made of reading the
Concordatum, great noise, and rumors were still made to stop the same: so
that Amideus Archbishop of Lions, and Primate of all France, a man of great
reverence and authority, was moved to speak in the behalf of the Conclusions,
and to admonish them, not to give ear unto the disturbers of concord. In the
end, the Concordatum of the xij. men, concerning the articles, were required to
be read by the Cardinal Arelatensis, many whispering him in the ear, that he
should go forward, and not alter his purpose.

Then Panormitane, as soon as the concordatum began to be read, rising up with
his companions, and the Aragons, cried out with a loud voice, saying: you
Fathers do contemn our requests, and despise prelates: you would conclude, but
it is not your part to conclude: we are the greater part of the prelates: we
make the council, and it is our part to conclude. And I in the name of the
rest do conclude, that this is to be deferred and delayed. With this word there
sprang such a noise and rumor in the council, Great dissentio^ in the
council.
as is accustomed to be in battle when two armies join: some cursing that
which Panormitane went about: other some allowing the same.

Then Nicholas Amici, Nicholas Amici.
a divine of Paris, according unto his office, said: Panormitane, I appeal
from this your conclusion, to the judgment of the Council here present,
neither do I affirm any thing ratified, which you have done, as I am ready to
prove, if it shall seem good. The contrary part seemed now in better place, for
they had already concluded. The other part, neither had concluded, neither was
it seen how they could conclude among so great cries and vprores.
Notwithstanding, amongst all these troublous noyses, Ioh. Sigonius, a singular
divine, of the University of Salamentine, had audience, and reproved
Panormitane, in that he had concluded, without deciding of the Deputies, and
without examination of twelve men, or any rite, or order: and so proceeded to
exhort them to constancy, and not to depart without final conclusion.

In the mean time, Panormitan is obstinate.
many grave men exhorted Panormitane, to give over his conclusion: but neither
was he minded so to do, nor the Fathers determined to depart without a
conclusion. All things were disturbed, neither did the prelates sit in their
seats: but as affection led them, some went to the Cardinal Arelatensis, some
to Panormitane. Then Arelatensis seeing the matter to be in danger, and that
there was no ready way to make a conclusion, thought to use some policy to
appease the multitude: and told them all, he had news to declare them, A
policy of Arelatensis.
wherewith they were marvelous attentive, and kept great silence. Eugenius
messengers (says he) has filled all France, preaching a new doctrine,
extolling the authority of the Bishop of Rome above the sacred council, and
therefore the Council must of necessity provide remedy: and to conclude, at
the least upon the three first verities, which the Fathers had done, even as
I also (says he) do here conclude, in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy
ghost. And when he had finished his oration, Arelatensis concludes.
with a cheerful and merry countenance, rising up he departed: some of the^
kissed him, some of them kissed the skirtes of his garments, and commended his
wisdom.

It is reported, that Panormitane, when he came to his lodging, and was gone to
his chamber, complained with tears, that he had both wittingly and willingly
impugned the truth.

After this, there was a great consultation among the Eugenians, what was best
to do in this matter. Some thought to leave the Council, other some to tarry,
and to resist, that nothing should farther be done against Eugenius: and this
opinion remained among them.

The next day after, being the 25. of April, the Archb. of Lions, and the
Bishop of Burgen calling together the Prelates into the Chapter house of the
great Church, began many things as touching peace. The Bishop of Burgen
persuaded, that there should be deputations appointed that day, unto whom, the
Archbishop of Lions should give power to make an agreement. Unto whom it was
said, there could be no agreement, before the adversaries confessed their
fault, and desired pardon therefore. Anon after, the Fathers of the Council had
drawn out a form of a decree upon the former conclusions, and had approved
the same in the sacred deputations. By this time the Princes Orators were
returned from the assembly at Mentz: and holding a Council among them selves,
they had determined to let the decree.

The 9. day of May, there was a general convocation holden, whereunto all men
resorted. The princes Ambassadors were called by the B. of Lubecke, and Conrade
de Winsperg the proctor, into the quire, and there kept: where they tarried so
long, that (the form of the decree being appointed to be concluded that day)
the Cardinal perceiving the congregation to be full, and that the twelve men
had agreed, and that there was great expectation with silence, thought good not
to delay it for fear of tumult, but commanded by and by the public
Concordances to be read. Wherein this was also contained, that the Cardinal
Arelatensis might appoint a Session, whenever he would: which having read,
and being desired by the promoters, concluded as the manner and custom is.

Whereof when the Princes Ambassadors which were in the quire understood, they
brake of their talk, and being much vexed, they imputed all to the B. of
Lubecke, The Bishop of Lubecke.
which of purpose had kept them in the quire, and protracted the time.
Whereupon they entering into the congregation, filled the house full of
complaints, and greatly blamed Arelatensis: which diverse others did also,
especially the bishop of Millane, railing upon him, calling him another
Catiline, unto whom all desperate and naughty persons had refuge.

To whom after Arelatensis had made answer, he commanded the form of the
decree to be read. Then Panormitane and those that were of his part, would
needs have a certain protestation first to be read. There was great
contention on every side: notwithstanding, at the last, Arelatensis prevailed,
and the form of the decree was read unto this word Decernimus, that is, we
decree. Then Panormitane rising up, would not suffer it to be read any further,
and the Bishop of Patauia said, that it was uncomely, that Arelatensis with a
few Bishops by name, should conclude the matter: the like did also all they
that favored Panormitane. The Cardinal of Terraconia also did grievously
rebuke his partakers, that they did not read the protestation: and commanded
one of his familiars to read it. But the fathers of the Council would not give
place to the reading of the protestation. Which when Albingane^sis did
consider, he commanded the writing to be given unto him, and as he began to
speak, sudde^ly Arelatensis rose up, with a great number of the Fathers to
depart: but by the means of George the Prothonotary of Bardaxina, the multitude
which were departing, were called back again, and the Cardinal and the
Patriarch were required to sit down again, and that they should not leave the
church void and quiet for the adversaries: whereupon suddenly all the whole
multitude sat down, and the gates were shut again.

In the mean time Matthaeus Albinganensis a B. read the protestation, to none
else but to himself alone, for it could not be heard for noise: which being
ended, the Lumbards and Cathelans confirmed the protestation: and afterward by
reason the Cardinal of Terraconia said, he agreed to that dissension, because
the Ambassadors of his king dissented from them, with him almost all the
Arragons, Lombards, and Cathelans departed: all the other tarried still. So
Arelatensis seeing the congregation quiet, willed the co^clusions and form of
the decree to be read again (There remained in the congregation the
Ambassadors of the Empire, and of France, talking together of their affairs)
Notwithstanding the B. of Turnon heard mention made of the conclusions, and
turning himself to the B. of Lubecke, said: Lo the matters of faith are now in
hand again, let us go hence I pray you, that we be not offense to others, or
that we be not said to dissent from the Ambassadors: the B. of Lubecke answered
tarry father, The Bishop of Lubecke favors the truth.
tarry here: are not the conclusions most true? why, are you afraid to be here
for the truth?

Arelatensis after all things were read, which he thought necessary, at the
request of the deputies concluded: and so making an end, dismissed the
congregation.

After this, it was determined between the Lombards, and Arragons, to abstain
from the deputations for a certain time. Which they did not long observe:
notwithstanding the deputations were holden very quietly for a certain space,
neither was there any thing done worthy of remembrance, until the 15. day of
May. During which time, al means possible was sought to set a concord betwixt
the fathers, but it would not be. Then Nicholas Amici required Arelatensis, to
appoint a Session against the morrow after: which he did according to his
motion. The B. of Lubecke made protestation in his own name, and in the name
of his protector, that he would not consent, that there should be any session,
if it should in any part derogate from the agreement had at Mentz. George Miles
also, his fellow Ambassador, consented to this protestation: but the protector
of the Council would in no case consent unto the protestation of the B. of
Lubecke, and said, that he did not know any thing of their doings at Mentz.

After the other, the Bishop of Concense made his protestation, and after him
followed Panormitane, who reproved the promoter of the faith, because he
required the prelates to have a session, and instantly required, there might be
no sessson as yet holden.

Unto whom, Arelatensis answered: that the promoter of the faith, The promoter
of the faith.
ought by his office to call the prelates to determine a matter of faith;
especially, for so much as the deputation of the faith and the whole Council
had so given him in commandment: and further, confuted Panormitane, and
required him to consider, in this standing for Eugenius, whether he spoke
according to his conscience, or not: for (says he) ye conclusio^s which now
shall be decreed, are most general, neither is there any mention in them of the
pope, and moreover, the verity of faith is contained in them, against the
which, if Eugenius did contend, it were more meet, that the pope should be
corrected, then the verity omitted. And thus he making an end, all were
warned to come the next day to the Session.

When the 16. day of May was come, all they whom the Session pleased, assembled
at the hour: the Ambassadors also of the princes were come together into the
Church quire, to attempt further what they could do: and sending the Bishops
of Lubeck, and Concense, and the Deane of Turnon, an excellent learned learned
man, they offered themselves to be present at the Session, if the deposition of
Eugenius might be deferred yet 4. months: who when they had received a gentle
answer of Arelatensis, and the other principals, returning again, the
Ambassadors would have only the first conclusion decreed: and thereupon sent
again unto Arelatensis, unto whom answer was made, that the chief force did
consist in the two other conclusions,, and that the Council would specially
determine upon them: with which answer they departed, and the Session began to
be celebrated, and Arelatensis caused prayers and lamentations to be made,
Prayers with tears.
with lamentations and tears, that God would direct them. Although there were
not many Bishops, yet all the seats were filled, with Bishops, Proctors,
Archdeaco^s, Presidents, Priors, etc. to the number of 400. or more, all in
great peace, exhorting one another to the profession of the faith. The B. of
Massilia, a Noble man, read the decree, which was attentively hearkened unto,
and not one word interrupted: when it was ended, Te Deum laudamus was song,
with great joy and gladness: and so the session dissolved, which was the 33.
Session; and amongst all the rest, most quiet and peaceable. The 33. session
most quiet.


The day following being the 22. of May, the Princes Ambassadors, The Princes
Ambassadors yielded.
without al men's expectatio^s (it was thought being touched with remorse of
conscience, even now to detest, and abhor that which they had done before)
came unto the general congregation, and excused themselves of their absence:
namely, the Bishop of Lubecke, and the Bishop of Turnon: who, after he had
made an end, Cardinal Arelatensis gave thanks to God, that had so defended
his Church, etc. Eugenius deposed.
Having declared the necessity of the decree, he rose up, and the Congregation
was dissolved.

Now, after that Gabriel Condulmarius, called Eugenius the fourth, was deposed
from the Bishopric of Rome, by the advice of John Segonius, they stayed two
months, before they proceeded to elect another Pope. In the mean time,
Letters were sent to the Princes, to declare the deposing of Eugenius, by the
Sinode: and to publish it abroad.

During this time, many died of the pestilence, Death of the pestilence at the
Council.
at the counsel: as, Ludouicus, the Prothonotarie, Ludouicus, the Patriarch of
Aquileia, the Abbot of Doxa.

About the same time, died also the K. of Arragons Almosiner, in Switzerland,
the Abbot of Virgilia, at Spire, and John, the B. of Lubeck, between Vienna
and Buda. Yet, Arelatensis would not depart, but kept constant, and held out
the Council. And after that the time of the decree was passed, and Gabriel
deposed, the Fathers proceeded to the election of another P. And first of all,
they nominated those that (together with the Cardinals) should elect the Pope.

The first, and principal of the Electors, was Cardinal Arelatensis: the rest
of the Electors were chosen out of the Italian, French, German, and Spanish
Nations.

The next day after there was a Session holden, wherein Marcus, a famous
Divine, made an Oration, and reckoned up the manifold vices of Gabriel, and
described what kind of man he ought to be that should succeed: even one quite
contrary unto him in all respects. The Electors received the Communion
together, and afterward took their oath, Thoe ath that the Electors of the
Pope take.
and the Cardinal Arelatensis (opening the book of Decrees) read the form of
the oath in the audience of all men, and first of all took the oath himself:
which was, that he would only have respect to the salvation of Christ's
people, and profit of the universal church: and after him, in like manner, all
the other Electors did take their oath: then they went with great solemnity
unto their conclaue, where they remained seven days.

The manner of their election was on this sort. Before the Cardinals seat was
set a deske, wherein there stood a Basin of silver. The manner of electing the
pope.
Into the which Basin, all the Electors did cast their Schedules: which the
Cardinal receiving, read one by one, and four other of the Electors wrote as
he did read them.

The tenure of the Schedule was in this manner.

I George, Bishop of Vienna, do choose such a one, or such a one, for
Bishop of Rome, and peradventure named two. Every one of the Electors
subscribed his name unto the Schedule, that he might thereby know his own, and
say nay, if it were contrary to that which was spoken: whereby all deceit was
utterly excluded.

The first scrutinie thus ended, 17. of diverse nations were nominated:
notwithstanding, Amideus, D. of Sauoy (who had been married, a man of singular
virtue) surmounted them all: for in the first scrutinie he had the voice of 16.
Electors. In the next scrutinie, which was holden in ye nones of November, he
had 21. voices, and so likewise in the 3. and 4. scrutinies. And forasmuch as
there was none in all the scrutinie, found to have two parts, all the other
Schedules were burnt. And, because there lacked but one voice to the election
of the high B. they fell to prayer, desiring God, that he would direct their
minds to the unity of the Church.

Amideus, duke of Sauoy.
The next scrutinie the matter was ended, and when the scrutiny was opened, it
was found, that Amideus, the most devout Duke of Sauoy, was chosen Pope.

Then the Cardinal Arelatensis published unto them the name of the elect
Bishop. After this, they gave thanks in the great Church, and declared the
election again to the people, and having song an himne, departed.

Amideus thus being elected about November, was called Felix v. and was crowned
in the city of Basil, the month of July. And thus much hitherto touching the
council of Basil, which endured 17. years.

About the 6. year of the council, Sigismund the Emp. died: Emp. Sigismund
dies.
after him succeeded his son in law, Albert second duke of Austrich, a sore
adversary of the Bohemia^s: he was made Emp. an. 1438. 2. years. After whom
succeeded his brother Frederick 3. duke of Austrich.

Now to return to the Ambassadors of the Bohemians, who came to the council
of Basil, the ninth of January, to whom when cardinal Julian had made an
unpleasant oration, Rochezanus one of the Bohemians made also an oration, and
required to have a day appointed to be heard, which was appointed the sixtenth
day of the same month, Upon which day John Rochezanus Rochezanus.
having made his Preface, began to propound the first Article, touching the
Communion to be ministered in both kinds, Disputation upon the Bohemians
articles.
and disputed upon the same three days, always before noone.

Then Vincelaus Vincelaus.
the Thaborite, disputed upon the second article, touching the correction and
punishment of sin, by the space of two days. After whom Vldericus Vldericus.
Priest of the Orphans disputed upon the third Article two days, touching
the free preaching of the word of God. Last of all Peter Pain Peter Pain.
disputed three days, touching the civil dominion of the clergy, which was
the 4. article. And afterward gave copies of their disputations unto the
Council in writing, with hearty thanks, that they were heard. The three last
did somewhat inueigh against the council, commending I. Husse, and I.
Wickliffe for their doctrine. Rhagusius. The Bohemians offended.
Whereto John Rhagusius a Dalmatian, and a divine, did so reply, that the
Bohemians would needs depart from Basil, and could scarsly be appeased.
Certain of ye Bohemia^s would not hear Rhagusius finish his disputation,
which endured upon the first article 8. Popish disputers, against the Bohemia^s.
days in the forenoone. After him Egidius Carlerius answered unto the second
article by the space of four days.

To the third article answered one Henricus, surnamed Frigidum Ferrum, three
days together. Last of all, one Johannes Pollomarius, master of the requests
of the Palace, answered unto the fourth article three days together: so that
the long time, which they used in their disputations, seemed tedious to the
Bohemians.

Notwithstanding this answer, the Bohemians still defended their articles, and
especially the first: in so much that John Rochezanus did strongly impugn
Ragusinus answer by the space of 6. days. But for so much as one disputation
bred another, and it was not perceived, how that means could make concord, the
protector of the council, William duke of Bauaria, attempted to bring the
matter to a frie^dly debating: but agreement could there be none, for the
Ambassadors of ye Bohemians said: they came to propou^d those four articles in
the name of the whole kingdom of Boheme, and to speak no more. Whereupon
William the protector of the council, found means that the council decreed,
to send a famous ambassade with the Ambassadors of Boheme unto Prage, whereas
the people should assemble upon the Sunday. And upon 14. Ambassadors from the
council to Prage.
day of April, there were 10. chosen out of the council, to go with the
Bohemian Ambassadors unto Prage.

After the coming of these Ambassadors much contention began to rise betwixt
the parties. The Bohemians standing to their 4. articles, and refusing to
yield, except they were first accepted of, or justly reproved: which when ye
Ambassadors saw, they desired to have these articles delivered unto them in a
certain form, which they sent unto the council by 3. Bohemian Ambassadors.
Afterward the council sent a declaration into Boheme, to publish unto ye
people in the common assemblies of the kingdom, by the ambassadors which were
commanded to report unto the Bohemians in the name of the council, that if
they would receive the declaration of those three articles, and the unity of
the church, there should be a mean found, whereby the matter touching the
fourth article, of the communion under both kinds, should be passed with peace
and quietness.

After the Bohemians had taken deliberation upon these declarations, they said,
they would give no answer unto the premises, before they understood what
should be offered them touching the communion: whereto the council: declared that
license should be given unto the Bohemians, to communicate unto the people
under both kinds, License to the Bohemians to co^municat under both kinds
to such as be of lawful years, and discretion: this always observed, that
the ministers shall say unto those that communicate, that they ought firmly to
believe, not the flesh only to be contained under the form of bread, and the
blood only under the form of wine, but under each kind, the whole and perfect
Christ. Moreover, other doubts were so answered by the council, that after much
communication had to and fro, at last a concord was concluded, and confirmed by
sentence of their hands. The Bohemians promised to receive the peace, and
unity of the church, and the declaration of the 3. articles. This was done,
ann. 1438. Martin.

It was afterward agreed both by the Ambassadors of the Council, and of the
Bohemes, that whatsoever remained, should be determined, first at Ratispona,
afterward, at Brugain, in the dioces of Olymintus, then at Alba in Hungary,
before the Emp. Sigismund: Concord betwixt the Bohemians and the Council.
but the matter could be ended in no place. At last, ye concord was concluded
by writing, with their seals at Inglania, a city of Morania: the 5. day of
July in the presence of the Emperor.

Anno 1438. in the month of November, the Bohemians put up certain petitions
to the Council that it might be free for all in Boheme, and the marquesdom of
Morania, to communicate under both kinds. That they might have good pastors.
That the Gospels and Epistles, and Creed, might be song in the vulgar tongue.
That the University of Prage might be increased by Prebends, The University to
be increased with Prebends, etc.
and certain Benefices of cathedral churches. That they would provide for the
reformation of the Churches of Boheme. To these demaundes, answers were made
ready by the Council, but were kept back, it was not known wherefore.

At this Council of Basil the 36. session holden the 17. day of September, ann.
1439. 44. The feast of the conception of the virgin.
Session of the same Council, holden the first of July, ann. 1441.

The feast of the visitation. Good laws ordained in the council of Basil.
This Council did ordain diverse wholesome laws for the Church, as, that meet
ministers might be appointed in every church to shine in virtue and knowledge:
whereto expectatiue graces of benefices were an hinderance: and so took the^
away, that no actions of controversy should be brought to Rome, beyond 4.
days journey from thence, and that no frivolous appeals should be made to the
Pope. That the Cardinals should not be of kin to the pope, and not exceed
the number of 24. 24. Cardinals. Jews to be converted. Stipend for the tongues.
That the first fruits should no more be paid to the Pope. That means should
be provided for ye conversion of the Jews. That the Hebrew, Greek and Latin
tongues might be maintained, and stipends provided for the teachers of them.
Against priests keeping of Concubines.

During the life of Sigismund the Emperor, no man resisted this Council, also
during the time of Charles the seventh, the French King, the Council of
Basil was fully and wholly received through all France.

After the death of Sigismund, when Eugenius was deposed, and Felix Duke of
Sauoy elected Pope, great discordes arose, and much practice was wrought, but
especially, on Eugenius part: who being now excommunicate, by the Council of
Basil, to make his part more strong, 18. new Cardinals.
made eighteen new Cardinals. Then he sent his Orators unto the Germans,
laboring by all means to dissolve the Council of Basil.

The Germans were at that time so divided, that some of them did hold with
Felix, and the counsel of Basil, others with Eugenius and the council of
Ferraria, and some were neuters.

After this the French K. being dead, which was Charles the 7. about the year
1444. the Pope began to stir up the Dolphin of France by force of arms, to
dissipate that council collected against him. Who leading an army of fifteen
thousand men into Alsatia, The Dolphin of France against the counsel of Basil
is vanquished.
did cruelly wast and spoil the country: after that laid siege unto Basil,
to expel and drive out the Prelates of the Council. But the Heluetians with a
small power did vanquish the Frenchmen, and put them to flight. Although Basil
by the valia^tnes of the Heluetians was thus defended: yet the Council could
not continue, by reason of the Princes Ambassadors, which shronke away, and
would not tarry: so that at length Eugenius brought to pass, partly through
the help of Frederick, laboring for the empire, and partly by his Orators
(in the number of whom, was Eneas Siluius) among the Germans, that they were
content to give over both the Council of Basil, and their neutralitie.

This Frederick of Austrich, being toward the Empire, brought also to pass,
that Felix, which was chosen of the council of Basil to be Pope, was contented
to renounce, and resign his papacy to Pope Nicholas, the 5. Pope Nicholas the
5.
successor to Eugenius. Of the which Nicholaus, Frederike was confirmed at Rome
to be Emperor, and there crowned, an. 1451.

As these things were doing in Basil, in the mean season Eugenius brought to
pass in his Convocation at Florence, that the Emperor, and Patriarch of
Constantinople, with the rest of the Grecians then present, were persuaded to
receive the sentence of the church of Rome, The Greeks abhor the Romans.
concerning the proceeding of the holy Ghost. Also, to receive the communion in
unleavened bread, to admit Purgatory, and to yield themselves to the
authorttie of the Romish Church. Whereunto (notwtsta^ding) ye other churches of
Grecia would in no wise consent at their coming home. In so much that with a
public execration they did condemn afterward all those Legates that had
consented to those articles, that none of them should be buried in Christian
burial: which was Anno 1439. Ex Gas. Pencer.

11. battles won by the Protestants against the Papists.
Thus much concerning the council of Constance, Basil, and the Bohemians, who
in the quarrel of John Husse, and Hierome of Prage, fighting under Zisca their
captain, had eleven battles with the popes side, and ever went away victors,
Ex paral. Abb. Vrsp. in Epitap. Ioh. Zisc.

Moreover in the history of Pencer, it is testified that Pope Martin the 5.
sending for the Bishop of Winchester the Cardinal, had levied three maine
armies, intending to overcome all the Bohemians: one army of th Saxons, under
the Prince elector. The second of the Francons, under the Marquis of
Brandenburg. The third, of Renates, Bauarians, and Swechers, under Otto
Archbishop of Treuers.

With these, Sigismund also the Emperor, and Cardinal Julian, the Popes
Legate (who at last was slain in war: and being spoiled of all his attire,
was left naked in the field) joined all their force, who joining together five
times (says the story) with five sundry battles, invaded the Bohemians. At
every which battle 5. times, the said adversaries (daunted with a sudden fear)
ran away out of the field, before any stroke was given. Five times the papists
ran away before any stroke was given.
Gasp. Peucer. lib. 5.

And so they continued invincible during the life of Zisca, and Procopius:
after whose death, Maynardus, a captain, and a traitor to the Bohemians, found
means, by a Proclamation, made as though he would war against other
Countries of their enemies, bordering about them, craftily to train all them
which were disposed to take wages, Cruelty, and treason against the Bohemians.
into certain barnes, and houels, prepared for the same purpose: and so
shutting the doors upon them, set fire to them, and burnt of them diverse
thousands, and so brought the rest by that means, under the subjection of the
Emperor, during his life time: which lasted not long. Ex Aen. Sil.

About the year 1439. Henry the sixth, one Richard Wiche, R. Which.
Priest, was burned at Tower hill. It is testified of him, that he, before his
death, prophesied that the Posterne of the Tower should sink: which
afterward came to pass. In so much, that the people counted him for an holy
man, and made their prayers to him after he was dead, and reared a great heap
of stones, and set up a cross there by night: so that a great clamor ran upon
those that put him to death. For appeasing of which rumor, the king gave
commandment to punish all such as went thither on Pilgrimage. And by that
means, the concourse of people was stayed. He was burnt about the Month of
June.

In the same year about November, Henry, archbishop of Canterbury, called a
Convocation: wherein, the Prelates took aduisement to make a Supplication to
the king, for abolishing the law of Praemunire facias.

To which supplication the king made answer, he would pause upon the matter,
and in the mean time, he would send to all his Officers, and Ministers in
the Realm, that no such brief of Praemunire should pass against any of them,
til the next Parliament, an. 1439.

About the year 1440. Eleanor Cobham, Duchess of Gloucester, and Roger Only,
Priest, were condemned: the one to perpetual Prison, Duches of Glocest.
condemned to perpetual prison. R. Only burned. Articles of D. Humfrey against
the Cardinal.
(which was the Duchess) for the profession of the truth: and the other unto
death, (although treason were pretended against the^, of practicing the kings
death, which was not likely: but rather, their profession, and the malice
which the Cardinal of Winchester bare unto the good Duke Humfrey, Duke of
Gloucester, who complained of the Cardinal to the K. in 23. articles, as also,
of the archb. of York. That Winchester presumed to be Cardinal against the
mind of K. Henry the fifth. That he was in danger of Praemunire, for bringing a
Bull from Rome, to hold his Bishoprike though he were a Cardinal. That he
intended himself to be the Kings governor. That he defrauded ye King of his
jewels, etc.

The hearing of which accusations the K. committed unto his Council, whereof
the most part were spiritual persons, The destruction of D. Hu^frey.
so that nothing was said thereto. But upon the neck of this, ensued the
condemnation of the Duchess, and within six years after, the destruction of
the Duke himself.

Anno 1445. H. Chichesly, Archb. of Canterbury, died, by whom the Lady Eleanor
the Duchess, was condemned in S. Steuens Chapel at Westminster, Penance.
for penance, to bear a taper through Chepesyde three sundry times, and
afterward outlawed to the I Will of Man, under the custody of Sir John Standley
knight.

This Henry Chichelesley builded in his time 2. Colleges in Oxford the one
called Alsoln college, Alsoln, and Bernard College of Oxford.
and the other called Bernard college. About the year 1447. Henry Bewford
Cardinal, and William de la poole duke of Suffolk with the Queen, conspired
duke Humfreyes death, and devised how to trappe him: and for the more speedy
furtherance thereof a parliament was sommoned to be kept at Berry, far from the
citizens of London: whither resorted all the Peers of the Realm, and amongst
them the Duke of Gloucester, who on the second day of the Session was by the
Lord Beumond high constable of England being accompanied with the duke of
Buckingham, and others arested, apprehended, Duke Humf. imprisoned.
and put in prison, and upon the same, all his servants put from him: of whom
32 of the principal being also under the arrest were dispersed into diverse
prisons. After this arrest thus done, and the duke put into ward: the night
after (says Hall) six nights (says Fabian and Polychronicon) he was found
dead in his bed the twenty fourth of February, D. Humfrey found dead in
prison.
and his Body showed unto the Lords and commons, as though he had been
taken naturally with some sudden disease. This was the end of the good Duke,
after he had politikely by the space of 25. Good Duke Humfrey.
years governed this realm.

The next day after, the Cardinal died, an. 1448. The desperate Cardinal.

Mary Magdalens college in Oxford.




After the Cardinal succeeded William Wainfleet, in the Bishopric of
Winchester, who founded the college of Mary Magdalene in Oxford.

Anno 1450. William de la Poole, being accused of treason to the land, and
indeuouring to fly into France, was encountered with a ship of war,
belonging to the tower: whereby he was taken, and was brought into Dover rode,
and there on the side of a shipboat, one struck off his head: and this end had
the other of the good Dukes enemies.

The year 1450. Ioh. Faustus, a goldsmith, dwelling first at Argentine,
afterward a Citizen of Mentz: Printing invented.
who perceiving the invention to come well to pass, made one John Guttemberg,
and Peter Scafford of his counsel: binding them by oath to keep silence for a
while. After five years, John Guttemberg Copartner with Faustus, began then
first to broch the matter at Strasborough, Vlricus Han, in Latin called Gallus,
first brought it to Rome.

This printing was after the invention of gunnes, which were invented in
Germany, an. 1380. 130. years. Printing later then gunnes 130. years.


Anno 1453. Constantinus Paleologus being Emperor of Constantinople, the great
City of Constantinople was taken by the Turk Mahumet, after the siege of 54.
days: which siege began in the beginning of April. Within the city (beside
the Citizens) were but only 6000. Constantinople taken by the Turks.
rescuers of the Greeks, and 3000 of the Venetians, and Genowayes. Against
these, Mahumet brought an army of 400000. collected out of the Countries and
places adjoining near about: as out of Grecia, Illyrica, Wallachia, Dardanis,
Triballis, Bulgaris, out of Bithinia, Galatia, Lidia, Cicilia, and such other:
which places had yet the names of Christians: thus one neighbor for luker sake
helped to destroy another. One neighbor destroys an other for gain
The Emperor Palaeologus seeing no way but to flee, making toward the gate,
either was slain or trodden down with multitude. The city being thus got, the
Turks sacking and ranging about the streets houses, and corners, did put to
the sword most unmercifully whosoever they found, Cruelty of the Turks.
both aged, and young, matrons, virgins, children, and infants, sparing none:
the Noble matrons and virgins, were horribly ravished, the goods of the city,
and treasures in houses, the ornaments in Churches, were all sacked and
spoiled, the pictures of Christ opprobriously handled, in despite of Christ.
The spoil and havoc of the city lasted three dais together. These things
thus being done, and the tumult ceased, after three days, Mahumetes the Turk
enters into the City, and first calling for the heads and ancients of the
City, such as he found to be left alive, he commanded to be mangled and cut in
pieces. It is also said (as the author reports) that in the feasts of the
Turks, honest matrones and virgins, and such as were of the kings stock,
after other contumelies, were hewn and cut in pieces for their disport.

This end had the noble City Constantinople, which continued before
flourishing equally with Rome, 1120. years. Ex. Hist. Wittenberg. Peucer.

After the death of Henry Chichesley, next succeeded Ioh. Stafford, an. 1445.
8. years. After him came John Kemp, anno 1453. Thomas Bursther.

In the time of which archbishop, Raynolde Peacock, bishop of Chichesley, was
afflicted by the Popes Prelates, for his faith, and profession of the Gospel:
and being cited up to Lambeth was caused to recant these points. That we are
not bound by necessity of Faith, to believe that our Lord Jesus Christ after
his death descended into hell. That it is not necessary to salvation, to
believe in the catholic church. That it is not necessary to salvation, to
believe the communion of Saints. That it is not necessary to salvation, to
affirm the body materially in the Sacrament. That the universal Church may
err in matters which pertain to faith. That it is not necessary for the
Church, to hold that which every general council shall ordain. With this
Pecocke, were diverse mo condemned for heretics: and notwithstanding his
recantation, he was deteyned still in prison, where some say, he was privily
made away by death.

Pope Nicholas 5. made Felix, who renounced his Popedom unto him, a cardinal:
and crowned Frederick for working the feat, and confirmed him to be full
Emperor: The Emp. not Emp. but king of the Romans before the pope confirmed
him.
for before they be confirmed by the Popes, they are not Emperors, but are
called kings of the Romans.

This Pope for to get great sums of money, appointed a Iubile A Iubile.
in the year 1450. Math. Palmerius wrote a book De Angelis, in defending
whereof he was condemned by the Pope, and burned at Crona, Anno 1448. Ex
Tritemio.

After him succeeded Calixtus 3. P. Calixtus.
who amongst diverse other things, ordained both at noone and at evening the bell
to toll the Auies, as it was used in ye popish time, to help the soldiers
that fought against the Turks: Auies does help the^ that fought against the
Turks.
for which cause he ordained the feast of the transfiguration of the Lord, The
feast of transfiguratio^.
sole^nising it with like pardons and Indulgences as was Corpus Christi day.
Also, this pope proceeding contrary to the councels of Constance and Basil,
decreed that no man should appeal from the Pope to any Council: by whom also
S. Edmund of Canterbury, with diverse others were made Saints. S. Edmund of
Canterbury made Saint.


Next unto Calixtus, succeeded Pius Secundus, Pius Secu^dus Pope.
otherwise called Aeneas Siluius, who wrote the 2. books of commentaries, upon
the council of Basil, This Aeneas at the writing of these his books, seemed
to be a man of indifferent and tolerable judgment and doctrine, from the
which afterward being Pope, he seemed to decline and swerve, seeking by all
means possible, to abolish the books which before he had written: and whereas
before he preferred general councels before the P. now being P. he did decree,
Pope Pius altered his former judgment.
that no man should appeal from the B. of Rome to any councels: and likewise
for priests marriages, whereas before he thought it best to have their wives
restored, yet afterward he altered his mind otherwise. There was great discord
betwixt this P. and Dorotheus archb. of Mentz: and upon the same between
Frederike the Palatine, and the duke of Wittenberg, with others: by occasion
whereof, Mentz loses his freedom.
besides ye slaughter of many, the city of Mentz which was before free, lost
the freedom and became servile.

The causes of the discord betwixt Pius and Dorotheus, Discord betwixt P. Pius
and Dorotheus.
were these: 1. Because that Dorotheus would not consent unto him in the
impositio^ of certain tallages and taxes within his country. 2. For that
Dorotheus would not be bound unto him, requiring that the said Dorotheus being
prince elector, should not call the electors together without his license. 3.
Because he would not permit unto the Popes legates, to conuocate his Clergy
together after his own lust. This Pius began, Anno 1458.

After Pius 2. succeeded Paulus Secundus, a pope wholly set upon his belly,
Paulus Secundus Pope.
and ambition, and a hater of all learned men.

This Paulus had a daughter begotten in fornication, whom because he saw her to
be therefore hated, began (as the stories report) to repent him of the law of
the single life of Priests, The pope for marriages of Priests.

Pope Sixtus 4. Stews at Rome.

The year of Iubile altered once again.


and went about to reform the same. Ex Stanisl. Rutheo.

After this Paulus, came Sixtus the 4. which builded up in Rome a stews for
both kinds, getting thereby no small re^ts and revenues. This pope among other
his acts, reduced the year of Iubile, from the 50. to the 25. He also
instituted the feast of the conception, and of the presentation of Marie, and
Anna her mother, and Joseph: also he canonized Bonauenture and S. Francis, for
Saints.

By this pope also were brought in beads, Beads and Ladies Psalter.
and he instituted to make our ladies psalter, through the occasion of one
Alanus, and his order: who were wont (by putting beads upon a string to number
their prayers.

This pope made 32. Cardinals in his time: of whom Petrus Renerius was the
first: who, A prodigal Cardinal.
for the time he was Cardinal (which was but 2. years) spent in luxurious riot
200000 Florens, and was left 4000. in debt.

Weselius Groningensis, in a certain treatise of his, de indulgentijs
Papalibus, writes of this pope Sixtus: that at the request of this Peter
Cardinal, and of Hierom his brother, he granted unto the whole family of the
Cardinal S. Lucy, in the 3. hot months, June, July, and August, Liberty for
Sodomitry.
free liberty to use Sodomitry: with this clause, Fiat vt petitur. That is, Be
it as it is asked.

Next after this Sixtus, came Innocentius the eight, Innocentius 8. Pope.
a man very rude, and far from all learning. Amongst the noble acts of
this Pope, this was one, that in the town of Paulus Equicolus, he caused 8.
men, and 6. women, with the Lord of the place, to be apprehended, and judged
for heretics, because they said that none of them were the Vicars of Christ,
which came after Peter, but only they which followed the poverty of Christ.

Also he condemned of heresy, George, the K. of Boheme, King of Boheme
condemned of the P.
and deprived him of his kingdom, and procured his whole stock, to be utterly
rejected: giving his kingdom to Matthias king of Pannonia.

Anno 1461. Henry the 6. was deposed by Edward the 4. after he had reigned 38.
years and an half.

Henry the 6. founded the college of Eaton, College of Eaton.
and another house, having then the title of S. Nicholas in Cambridge, and now
called the kings College. Ex scala mundi.

This king Henry rejected the popes bulls; which granted to Jews, Archb. of
Roane, the profits of the Bishopric of Ely, after the death of the Bishop,
by the name of the administration of the said bishopric.

Anno 1461. (Henry the 6. being deposed) Edward the 4. was crowned king.

An. 1471. Henry being prisoner in the tower, departed this life, and was
brought by Thames, in a boat to the abbey of Chertsey, and there buried.
Polydor after he had described the virtues of this king, records that king
Henry the 7. did afterward translate the corpse of him from Chertsey, to
Windsore: and adds moreover, that by him certain miracles were wrought:
Henry the 6. to be canonized a Saint, for successiue change.
for the which cause, Henry the 7. labored with pope Julius, to have him
canonized for a Saint: but the death of the king was the let. Edward Hall
writing of this matter, declares, that the cause of the let, was the excessive
fees, which were so great, of canonizing a king above any prelat, that the king
thought best to keep his money in his chest.

About the year, 1465. Paulus 2. the next year following: who eftsoons sent
down his bull, signifying to the Prelates, that this heresy, that
pestiferously does affirm, An heresy to hold ye Christ was a beggar.
that Christ did openly beg, was condemned of old time by the Bishop of Rome,
and his Councels: and that the same ought to be declared in all places for a
dangerous doctrine, and worthy to be trodden down under all men's feet.

Anno 1473. John Goose, or Husse was condemned, and burned for the truth, at
Tower hill: so that, since the time of Richard the 2. John Goose martyr.
there was no king hitherto, in whose reign, some godly man or other had not
suffered the pains of fire, for the testimony of Christ. This godly man
being entertained in the Sherifes house, before he went to execution, desired
some meat: and (eating) he said to those about him: I eat now a good and
competent dinner, for I shall pass a little sharp shower, before I go to
supper. And having dined, he gave thanks, and requested that he might shortly
be led to the place where he should yield his spirit to God. Ex Polychro.

Anno 1437. Sigismund the Emperor, in Morania, after whom succeeded Albert, D.
of Austrich, who in the second year of his reign died. After whom succeeded
Fredericus 3. Duke of Austria, an. 1440.

After Fred. (unto whom the Germans complained in vain of ye oppressions of
ye P.) succeeded his son Maximilia^.

An. 1476. the B, of Herbipolis, condemned, and burned for an heretic, one
John, a neat-heard, I. a neat-heard.
because he held yt the life of the clergy was abominable before God. Ex
Munst.

An. 1479. Ioh. de Wesalia, was forced to revoke these articles, being greatly
hated by the Thomistes. I. de Wesalia recanteth.
That men he saved freely thorough mere grace, by faith in Christ. That free
will is nothing. That only the word of God is to be believed, and not the
gloss of any man, or fathers. That the word of God is to be expounded, by
comparing, and weying one place with another. That Prelates have no power given
them to expound Scriptures by any peculiar right, more than another. That men's
traditions, as, fastings, pardons, feasts, etc. are to be rejected. That
extreme vnctio^, and co^firmatio^, are to be rejected. That confession with
satisfaction is to be reprehended. That the primacie of ye P. is vain, etc.

He was complained of by the Thomistes (who were reals, and greatly hated the
nominals) unto Diethrus, Nominais, Reals.
archb. of Mentz. His articles being examined by the Divines of Heydelberge,
and Colen, were condemned, and he compelled to recant, Ex Ost. Great.

An. 1484. died P. Sixtus the fourth, of whom writes Platina, that unjustly
he vexed all Italy with war and dissension. Agrippa writing of him, says,
that among all the Baudes of these other later days, which were buylders of
Brothelhouses, this Sixtus 4. surmounted all other: who at Rome erected Stews
of double abomination, not only of women, but also etc.

Whereupon, no small gain redounded to his cofers, for every such common
harlotte in Rome, paid to him a Iulie piece, Reuenes of the Pope from the
stews of Rome.
the sum whereof grew in the year somewhile to 20000 at length to 40000.
ducats. He was a man rather borne to war, then to religion, as says Carrion,
for he warred against Vitelius Tiphernates, against the Florentines, and
Venetia^s, whom he excommunicated, and absolved not till he died. Also, against
Colonienses, against Ferdinandus, K. of Apulia, and Duke of Calabria: also,
against other nations and princes. Ex Ioh. Laziardo.

This Sixtus was a special Patron of begging Friars, Begging friars.
granting them to enjoy revenues in this world, and in the world to come
everlasting life. Among which Friars, there was one named Alanus de Rupe,
Alanus de Rupe.
a black friar, which made the Rosarie of our Ladies Psalter, The Rosarie of
our Ladies Psalter.
and erected a new fraternity upon the same, called Fraternitas Coronariorum,
Fraternitas coronariorum
pertaining to the order of the Dominikes: of which order, Iacobus Sprenger,
one of the condemners of Johannes de Wesalia, was a great aduauncer: and
especially this Sixtus the fourth, who gave unto the said Fraternity large
Privileges.

Concerning the institution of this Rosarie, there was a book set forth, about
the year 1480. The institution of the Rosarie.
that the blessed virgin entered into the Cell of Alanus, and was so familiar
with him, that she did there espouse him for her husband, and kissed him with
her heavenly mouth: opened unto him her Pappes, and poured great plenty of her
own milk into his mouth. For the confirmation whereof, the said Alanus did
swear deeply, cursing himself, if it were not, thus as he had made
relation. This book being in Latin, and printed, bears this title: Rosareae
Augustissimae Christiferae Mariae Corona. And in the front it shows the name
of Iodocus Bisselenis, a noble man of Aquine.

After yt this pope Sixtus had understanding, that Hercules Estensis duke of
Ferraria, had joined peace with Venetians against his will, he was so grieved
thereat, Sixtus dies for anger. Platina a shameful flatterer of the Popes.
that for rancor of mind, within five days after he died. About which time
also died Platina, a shameful flatterer, and bearer with the wicked lives of
the Popes.

Anno 1483. Edward 4. died, after he had reigned two and twenty years, whom
succeeded Edward 5. who with his brother Richard was slain, by one James
Tyrell. John Dighton and Miles Forest, Richard 3. the usurper.
by the suborning of Richard the third, usurper, who proclaimed himself King,
Anno 1483. Richard reigned but two years and two months, being overthrown of
Henry 7. who succeeded him, an. 1485. Henry 7. king.
23. years and eight months.

Anno 1494. Frederike, who had reigned 53. years, after whom succeeded
Maximilian his son, who reigned seven years wit his father Frederike.

This Maximilian set up the university of Wittemberg, Maximilian the founder
of the university of Witte^berg.
and was excellently well learned himself, and was the cause why diverse gave
themselves to learning, namely to searching out of Histories, whereto the
Emperor was given himself, and wrote diligently in the Latin toonge his own
acts, as did Julius Caesar. The men who flourished by his means, were:
Cuspinianus, Nauclerus, Co^radus, Pentingerus, Learned men flourished in
Maximilianus time.
Ma^tius, and others. In that age also excelled Baptista mantuanus, Angel.
Politianus, Hermolaus Barbarus, Picus Mirandula, and Franciscus his cousin:
Rodulphus Agricola, Pontanus Philippus, Beroaldus, Marsilius Ficinus,
Volaterranus, Georgius Valla, with infinite other.

Amongst whom also is to be numbered Veselus Groningensis, otherwise named
Basilius, who was not long after John de Wesalia: both much about one time, and
both great friends together. This Veselus died, anno 1490. Lux mundi, Veselus a
learned man called Lux Mundi
the light of the world: he did disallow the popish doctrine, of confession and
satisfaction, in the matter of repentance: likewise he did disprove both at
Rome, and at Paris, purgatory, supererogation of works, and pardons, and
Popes Indulgences: he disalowed Masses and praying for the dead, and
supremacy of the Pope: he held that the Pope might err: he disalowed the
great riches of the Clergy: that the Popes keys do not open, but shut heaven
gates, etc.

Not long after the death of this Weselus an. 1494. 9. year of Henry the 7.
the 28. of April, was burned a very old woman, Ione Boughto^ martyr.
named Ione Boughton widow, and mother to the Lady Young: which Lady was also
suspected to be of the same opinion that her mother was. Her mother was four
score years of age, and held eight of Wickliffes opinions, for the which she
was burned in Smithfield. The night following that she was burnt, the most of
her ashes were had away, of such as had love unto the doctrine for the which
she suffered.

An. 1497: 17. of January being Sunday, two men one called Richard Milderall,
and the other James Sturdy, bare faggots before the procession of Paul's,
Fagots borne.
and after stood before the preacher in the time of his Sermon.

And the Sunday following stood other 2. men at Paul's cross, all the sermon
time, one garnished with painted, and written papers, the other having a faggot
on his neck.

After that in Lent season, upon Passion Sunday, one Hugh Glouer bare a faggot
before the processio^ of Paul's, and after-with the faggot stood before the
preacher all the Sermon while.

And on the next sunday following, four men stood, and did their open penance
at Paul's, and many of their books were burnt before them at the cross.

Anno 1498. in the beginning of May, A priest burnt.
which was so strong in his opinion, that all the Clearks, and Doctors, being
there present, could not remove him from his faith: whereof the King being
informed, caused the priest to be brought before his presence: who, by his
persuasions, could not cause him to revoke, and so he was burnt immediately.

Anno 1499. Babram, Babram martyr.
was burnt in Norfolk, in the month of July, as Fabian reports: yet the
printed Fabian reports it to be the year, 1500. 20. day of July, was an old
man, burnt in Smithfield, An old man burnt.

Sauanorola burnt.




This year, Hieronimus Sauanorola, a monk in Italy, with two other Friars,
named Dominicke and Siluester, which favored Sauanorolas learning, were
condemned to death at Florence: the articles wherefore they suffered, were
these. 1. Free justification by faith. 2. Articles.
The communion under both kinds. 3. Indulgences and pardons of the pope, are of
no effect. 4. For preaching against the filthy life of the clergy. 5. For
denying the Popes supremacy. 6. The Pope Antichrist.
The keys were not given to Peter alone, but unto the universal Church. 7.
That the Pope was Antichrist, because he did attribute more to his own
indulgences, and pardons, then to Christ's merits. 8. That the Popes
excommunication is not to be feared. 9. That auricular confession is not
necessary. 10. That he had moved the city to uproar. 11. That he conte^ned the
Popes citation. 12. That he had slandered the Pope. 13 That he said, Italy must
be cleansed with Gods scourge, for the manifold wickedness of the Princes and
Clergy. They were first hanged up openly in the market place, and after burnt
to ashes, and the ashes cast into the river of Arum, the 25. day of May, Ex
Catalogo, testium Illirici.

Spirit of prophecy in Sauanorola.
This Jerome Sauanorola had the spirit of prophecy, and foreshewed many things
to come, which fell out accordingly. He suffered under pope Alexander 6.

About this time, was one Philip Norice, Philip Norice.
an Irishman, professor at Oxford, long vexed and troubled for his profession
of the truth.

The Germans had twice before sued to Frederick the Emperor, Suite of the
Germans to ye Emperor against ye church of Rome.
to be a means to ease them of their manifold grieuances, from the Church of
Rome, and were repulsed: and now again, made the same suite to Maximilian his
son: unto whom they delivered x. grieuances, Ten grieuances.
whereby ye Germans had been long oppressed: showing also remedies against the
same, with certain aduisements, how the Emp. might avoid the popes
subtleties. The grieuances were these: 1. That the Bishops of Rome, do at the
request of every vile person, withstand the covenants of their predecessors
bulls, privileges, etc. 2. That elections of Prelates are oftentimes put back.
3. That election of Presidentships are withstood, notwithstanding the graunts
have been purchased before, to the Chapter houses. 4. That greatest
ecclesiastical dignities, are reserved for Cardinals, and head Notaries. 5.
That expectatiue graces, called Vowsons, are granted without number. 6. That
yearly revenues are exacted without delay, or mercy: and oftentimes more
extorted then ought to be. 7. That rule of Churches is given at Rome, to such
as are more fit to keep mules, then to govern and instruct men. 8 That new
pardons, with reuocation of the old, are granted to scrape money. 9. That
te^ths are exacted, under pretense of making war against the Turks, when as
no expedition does follow therevppon. 10. That causes, which might be
determined in Germany, are indistinctly carried to the Court of Rome. After
these grieuances propounded, they subscribed the remedies, and aduertisementes
to the Emperor, whereupon the Emperor set forth an Edict against certain
abuses of the Clergy. Edicts of the Emperor against certain abuses of the
Clergy.
That none should have two Canonships, etc. Against the covetousness of the
Clergy: concerning which reformation the Emperor required (as it seems)
advise of Iacobus Selestadiensis, Iacobus Selestadiensis.
who wrote unto him concerning the matter.

After Innocetius 8. succeeded Alexander 6. Pope Alexander 6.
which Alexander among other horrible things, when he was compelled to send
Gemes or Demes, brother to Baiazetes the great Turk, to Jews 11. the French
king for a pledge, because the French king should not procure the great Turks
favor by sending his brother Gemes to him to be slain, Pope hired by the
Turk to poison his brother.

The P. procured the Turk to fight against the French K.


he being hired by the Turk, caused the same Gemes to be poisoned: who in his
journey, going toward the French king, died at Terracina, Ex Hieronymo Marcis.
And the same Alexander the 6. taking displeasure with Jews the French king,
about the winning of Naples, sent to Baiazetes the Turk, to fight against
Jews. Ex eodem.

Moreover, this pope caused Antonius Mancinellus hands, and tongue to be cut
off, because he wrote an eloquent oration against his horrible life. At length,
as he was sitting at Rome with his Cardinals, and other rich Senators, of
Rome, The P. and his Cardinals poisoned.
his servant at unawares brought to him a wrong bottle, whereby both he was
poisoned, and his cardinals about him.

After this Pope succeeded next Pius 3. P. Pius 3. Pope casts away Peter's
keys.
about the year 1503. After whom came next Julius 2. a man more abominable
then all his fellows: who on a time when he went to war, cast the keys of S.
Peter into Tibris, saying, that for as much as the keys of Saint Peter would
not serve him to his purpose, he would take to himself the sword of S. Paul.

Of this Pope Julius it is certainly reported, that, partly with his wars,
and partly with his cursinges, within the space of seven years, 200000.
Christians slain by the Popes means.
as good as 200000. Christians were destroyed: first he besieged Rauenna
against the Venetians, then Seruia, Imola, Fauentia, Foroliuinum, Bononia, and
other cities, which he gat out of princes hands, not without great bloodshed.
This Julius took an oath when he was made Pope (as John Sleidan makes mention)
that he would have a counsel within two years: which because he did not
perform, nine of his Cardinals departed from him, and came to Millan, and
there appointed a council at Poyse: A council at Poyse.
among whom the chief were Bernardinus Crucenis, Guilielmus Prenestinus,
Franciscus Constantinus, with diverse others: among them also were the
procurators of the Emperor Maximilian, and of Lodouike the French king. So the
Council was appointed, anno 1511. Julius hearing, giuetn out contrary
commandment, under great pain, no man to obey them: and calls himself
another council against the next year, to be begun the 19. day of April.

The French king understanding, Pope Julius to join with the Venetians, and so
to take their part against him, conuented a Council at Thurim, in the month
of September. In which Council, these questions were propounded. 1 Whether it
were lawful for the Pope to move war against any Prince without a cause.
Questions against the P.
2. Whether any prince (in defending himself) might invade his adversary, and
deny his obedience. To which questions it was answered, both to be lawful,
and that the pragmatical function Pragamatical function.
was to be observed throughout all France.

After this, the king sent unto Julius the answer of this Council, requiring
him, either to agree to peace, or to appoint a general Council, where this
matter might be more fully decided.

Pope curses the french K.
Julius would neither of these, but forthwith accursed Ludouike the french
king: and after much bloodshed, P. dies.
and mortal war, the pope died, an. 1513. 21.

A note touching the miserable persecution, slaughter, and captivity of the
Christians, under the Turks.
THe beastly tirannie of the Turks, Persecution under ye Turk
above all the rest incomparably, surmounteth all the afflictions, and cruel
slaughters that ever were in any age, or read in any history: especially by
ye space of these latter 300. years. Whose cruelty has been such, that there
is no place almost where they vanquished, that they did not, either slay all
the inhabitants thereof, or lead away the most part into such captivity, that
they continued not long alive: or else so lived, that death had been unto them
more tolerable.

And as in the time of the first pesecutions of the Roman Emperors, the saying
was, that no man could step with his foot in Rome, but should tread upon a
Martyr: so it may be said, that almost there is not a Town, City, or village,
in all Asia, Grecia, and also in a great part of Europa, and Africa, whose
streets have not flowed with blood of the Christians, whom the cruel Turks
have murdered. Of whom are to be seen in histories, heaps of Soldiers
slain: of men and women, cut in pieces: of children, sticked upon poles, and
stakes: whom these detestable Turks most spitefully (and that in the sight of
their parents) use to gore to death. Some they drag at horse tails, and famish
to death: some they tear in pieces, tying their arms and legs to four
horses: other some they make marks to shoot at: upon some they try their
swords, how deep they can cut and flash: the aged, and feeble they tread
under their horses: women with child, they rip their bodies, and cast the
infantes into the fire, or otherwise destroy them. In their promises there is
no truth.

After the Citizens of Croya had yielded, and were promised their lives, yet
were they destroyed, and that horrible. In Mosia, after thee king had given
himself to the Turks hand, having promise of life, Mahumet slew him with his
own hands. The Princes of Rasia had both their eyes put out, with basins
read hot set before them. Theodosia, otherwise called Caphum, having had
promise of safety, being surrendered, was likewise destroyed. At the yelding of
Lesbos, a number of young men and children, were put upon sharp stakes, and
poles. At the winning of Hidruntum, a City in Apulia, the old were trodden
under horses, matrones, and virgins ravished, women with child, cut, and
rent in pieces. The Archbishop of that City, an aged man, was cut in sunder
with a wooden saw, etc.

At the taking of Nigropontus otherwise called Calcides, anno 1471. the Turk
(contrary to his promise) most cruelly caused all the youth of Italy to be
pricked upon sharp stakes, some to be dashed upon hard stones, and other
some to be cut in sunder in the midst, and other mo, with other kinds of
death to be consumed. In so much, that all the streets of Chalcides did flow
with the blood of them that were slain. At the winning of Constantinople, the
Turk never rose from dinner, but he caused every (day for his disport) three
hundred Christian Captives of the nobles of that City, to be slain before his
face. So in Methone (after his Captain Omardo had sent unto him at
Constantinople, 500. prisoners of the Christians) he commanded them all to be
cut, and divided in the middle, and so being slain, to be thrown out into the
fields: Omares having likewise slain all the Townsmen.

In Seruia, the Prince of the Country being sent for, under fair pretense of
words, and promises, to come and speak with the Turk, after he was come of
his own gentleness, was apprehended, and had his skin fleane off, and so
was put to death. His Brother and Sister brought to Constantinople in a
triumph, and all the Nobles of his Country (as Faber adds) had their eyes put
out: and this was the manner of their cruelties toward those they put to death.

Other some he carries into miserable captivity, for the Turk never comes
into Europe, to war against the christians, but there follows after his army
a great number of brokers and merchants, such as buy men, and children, and
sell them again, bringing with them long chains, in the them again, bringing
with them long chains, in the which they link them, by fifty or three score
together, such as remain vnderstroied by the sword: whom they buy of them
that spoil and rob the christian countries, which is lawful for any of the
Turks army to do: so that the tenth of the spoil be reserved for the great
Turk.

Of such as remain for tithe, if they be aged, (of whom very few be kept
alive, because little profit comes of them) they be sold to the use of
husbandry, and keeping of beasts. If they be young men or women, they be sent
to certain places there to be instructed in their languages, and arts, as
shall be most profitable for their advantage, and such are called in their tongue
Saris. Saris.
And the first care of the Turks is this, to make them deny Christ, and to be
circumcised: and after that they are set, and appointed, every man as he
seems most apt, either to the learning of their laws, or the feats of
war. Some are brought up to be placed in the number of the Ianizaries,
Ianizaries.
who are the Turks Champions. And if any of the young men, or children, shall
appear to excel in beauty, him they so cut, that no part of that which
Nature gives, or man, remains to be seen in all his body, whereby (during
the freshnes of his age) he is compelled to serve their abomination: and when
age comes, then they serve in stead of Eunuchs to wait upon Matrones, or to
keep horses and mules, or else to be scullia^s and drudges in their kitchens.

Such as be young maidens, and beutifull, are deputed for concubines: they
which be of mean beauty, serve for to do their drudgery work in their
houses, and chambers: or else to spinne, or such other labors: but so as it is
not lawful for them either to profess Christians religion, or ever to have
any liberty: and thus are they used which fall to the Turk by tithe.

The other which are bought and sold among private subjects, first are allured
with fair words, and promises, to take circumcision: which if they will do,
they are more favorably entreated, but all hope is taken away from them, of
returning into their country: which if they but attempt, the pain thereof is
burning. And if such come at length to liberty, and will marry, they may: but
then their children remain bond to the Lord, for him to sell at his pleasure:
and therefore few marry, of such as are wise, among them. They ye refuse to be
circumcised, are miserably handled amont them. Such captives as be expert in
any manual art, or occupation, can better shift for themselves: but they which
have no handicraft to live upon, are in worse case: and therefore such as have
been brought up in learning, or be noble men, and such other, whose tender
education can abide no hardness, are the least reputed of by him which has the
sale and keeping of them: and no cost is bestowed upon them, but they are
carried about barehead, and barefooted, both summer, and Winter, in frost and
snow: and if any be faint, or sick in the way, there is no resting for him in
any Inn, but first he is driven forward with whippes: and if that will not
serve, he is set peradventure upon some horse: and if his weakness be such,
that he cannot sit, then is he laid overthwart the horseback, on his
belly like a calfe: and if he chance to die, they take of his garments, such
as he has and throw him into a ditch.

Beside, in the way, they are all manicled by the hands, least they should
harm their leaders. For many times x. persons have the leading of fifty
captives: and when ye night comes, their feet also are fettered, so that they
lodge in no house, but lie upon the ground all night.

The young women have a little more gentleness showed them, being carried in
paniards on the day time: but when the night comes, pity it is, so hear
the miserable crying out, by reason of the filthy injuries they suffer by their
carriers, in so much that the young tender age of six or seven years, as well
of the one sex as of the other, can not save them from the filthy villainy of
the beastly Turks. When the morning comes, they are brought forth to the
market to sale: where the byer (if he be disposed) plucking of their garments,
veweth all the bones and joints in their bodies. And if he like them, he
gives his price, and carries them away into miserable servitude; in so much
that some Christian captives have been yooked like Oxen to draw the plough.
The maid servant likewise are kept in perpetual toil, in close places,
where neither they come in sight of any man, neither be they permitted to have
any talk with their fellows servant. Such as are committed to keep
beasts, lie abroad both day and night in the wild fields, and at spare hours
are employed also in handy labors.

Out of these miseries there is no way for them to flee, especially they that
are carried into Asia beyond the seas: How the christian captives use to flee
from their masters.
or if any do attempt so to do, he takes his time chiefly about harvest,
when he may hide himself all day in the corn, or in the woods, or marshes,
and find food: and n the night only he flees, and had rather be devoured of
Wolves, then to return again to his Master. In their flying they use to take
with them an hatchet, and cords: that when they come to the sea side, they may
cut down trees, and bind together the ends of them, and so where the sea
Hellespontus is narrowest, about Sestos and Abidos they take the Sea, sitting
upon trees: where if the wind and tide do serve luckely, they may cut over
in four or five hours, but the most part either prish in the floudes, or are
driven back again upon the coast of Asia, or else be devoured with wild
beasts in the woods, or perish with hunger and famine.

If any escape over the Seas into Europe, by the way they enter into no town,
but wander upon the mountains, following only the North star for their guide.

As touching such towns and provinces, as are won by the Turks, and wherein
Christians are suffered to live under tribute: First of all nobilities there
they kill, and make away the churchmen and clergy: hardly they spare the
churches; How ye Turk uses the churches of christians under his subjection.
but bells and all the furniture thereof, either they cast down, or else turn
to their blasphemous religion, leaving to ye christians certain blind old
chapels, which when they decay, it is permitted to repair them again, for
great sums of money given to the Turk: neither be they permitted to use any
open preaching, or ministration, but only in silence, and by stealth to
frequent together. Neither is it lawful for any christian to bear office
within the city or country, nor to bear weapon, nor to wear any garment like
the Turks: and whatsoever blasphemy be spoken against Christ, it must be borne
with silence: or if one speak a word against the Turks religion, he shall be
forced to be circumcised, and then if he speak one word against Mahomet, he
shall be burned. And if a Christian being on horseback, do meet or pass by
a Masselman, that is a turkish Priest, he must light from his horse, and with a
lowly look do reverence to him: or if he do not, he is beaten down from his
horse with clubbes and staves.

Tribute paid of Christians to the Turk.
For their tribute they pay the fourth part of their substance and gain to the
Turk, beside the ordinary tribute of the christians, which is to pay for
every head within his family a ducket unto the Turk: which if the parents ca^
not do, they are compelled to sell their children into bondage: others not able
to pay, go chayned in fetters from door to door begging, to make up their
payment, else must they lie in perpetual prison: and yet notwithstanding, when
the Christians have paid all duties, it remains free for the Turks to take
up, among the Christians children, whom they best like, and them to circumcise,
and to carry them away, being young, from the sight of their parents, into far
places, to be brought up in the popes wars: so that they may not return to
them again, but first are taught to forget Christ, and then their parents. And
albeit, the same children do afterward greatly degenerate from the faith of
Christ, yet many of them have privily about them, the gospel of S. John
written: In principio erat verbum, etc. in Greek and Arabicke, for a
remembrance. And thus much touching the misery under the Turks, and their
cruelties.

In the year 1499. Perseuell, many were taken for heretics in Kent, Fagots
borne.
and at Paul's Cross they bare fagottes, and were abiured: and shortly after
the same year, there went thirteen Lollardes before the procession in Paul's,
and there were of them eight women, and a young ladde, and the laddes mother
was one of the eight; and all the thirteen bare fagots on their necks before
the procession.

Ann. 1506, William Smith being B. of the same dioces) one William Tilseley was
burned at Amersham, in a close, William Tilseley a martyr.
called Stanely: at which time, one Joan Clark, a married woman, which was the
only daughter of the said Tilseley, Cruelty against nature.
and a faithful woman, was compelled with her own hands to set fire to her
father. And at the same time, her husband Ioh. Clarke, did penance at her
fathers burning, and bare a faggot, as did also 20. mo: which afterward were
compelled to wear certain badges, and went abroad to do penance, Penance.
as to Buckingha^, William Page burned in the cheek.
Aylesbury, and other towns nigh: and also diverse of these men were afterward
burned in the cheek: as William Page, etc.

Some report, that sixty were put to bear fagots for their penance: of whom
diverse were enjoined to bear, and to wear fagots at Lincoln, 7. years
together, etc. In which number, was also, one Robert Bartlet, a rich man: who
for his profession sake, was put from his Farm and goods, and was condemned to
be kept in the monastery of Ashrige, where he ware on his right sleeue, a
square piece of cloth, 7. years together.

About the same time, of the burning of William Tilseley, (as the Amersham men
do say, or the next day after, was one father Roberts burned Father Roberts
burnt.
at Buckingham. He was a miller, and dwelled at Missenden: and at his burning,
there was above twenty persons, Fagots borne.
that were compelled to bear fagots, and to do such penance, as the wicked
pharisees did compel them.

After that, by the space of two or three years, was burned at Amersham,
Thomas Barnard, Thomas Barnard.
a husbandma^, and James Morden, James Morden
a labourer: they two were burned at one fire. And there was William
Littlepage, burned in the right cheeks, and Father Rogers, and Father Reuer,
alias Reiue, which after was burned. Also, there were 30. mo, that were burned
in their cheeks, and bare fagots at the same time. Father Rogers was in the
Bishops prison, fourteen weeks together, night and day: and was so cruelly
handled with cold, hunger, and iron, that after his coming out of prison, he
was so lame in his back, that he could never go upright, as long as he lived.

Anno 1506. Thomas Chaste Tho. Chaste.
of Amersham, was (after other great afflictions) strangled in the Bishops
prison, in Wooburn, under W. Smith, B. of Lincoln, and was buried of the
wicked wretches, in ye wood, called Norland wood, in the high way betwixt
Wooburn and little Marlow: to the intent he should not be taken up to be seen.

Tho. Norice martyr.
Anno 1507. Thomas Norice was burnt, for the testimony of the truth, at
Norwich, being condemned by the B. the last day of March.

Anno 1508. Elizabeth Samson, of the Parish of Aldermanburie, was compelled to
abjure, before Master William Horsey, Chaunceller to the Bishop of London. She
spoke against pilgrimages, worshipping of Images, and the Real presence.

About this time was burned Laurence Glest, L. Glest. martyr.
at Salisburie, after they had kept him in prison two years, for the matter of
the Sacrament. At whose burning, William Russell was burned in the cheek.

After this, there was a godly woman burnt at Chipping Sudburie, by the
Chaunceller Doctor Whittington: who, A woman burnt.
after she was burned, and the people returning homeward, a Bull brake loose
from a Butcher, that was in hand to have slain him, singled out Doctor
Whittington from all the people, and (hurting neither old nor young) took him
alone, gored him thorough and thorough, carrying his guts, Gods judgment.
and trayning them with his horns all the streets over, to the great
admiration of all the people. This is testified by diverse credible witnesses.

An. 1485. John, bishop of Couentrie and Lichfield, in S. Michaels church, and
recanted.

John Blumston, for holding against purgatory, and images.

Robert Crowther, for the matter of the Sacrament, the authority of the keys,
and Images.

John Smith, for the Lords prayer, and Creed in English.

Robert Brown, for images, flesh-eating in Lent, purgatory, auricular
confession, and satisfaction.

Thomas Butler, for purgatory, and merits.

John Falkes, for images, and that he did eat Cowmilke the first sunday in
Lent, etc.

Richard Hilman, for the scripture in English; for the matter of the sacrament,
etc.

In the year of our Lord 1488. Margerie Goit, wife of James Goit, was
constrained by John, B. of Couentrie and Lichfield, to recant concerning the
real presence.

In the reign of K. Henry 7. lived Johannes Picus, earl of Mirandula. He
coming to Rome, booted and spurred, set up 90. Picus Mirand.
to dispute in the same with any in Christendom, whosoever would come against
him. Of the which, diverse were touching the matter of the Sacrament: against
whom, none in all Europe was found to dispute. But the Prelates (appointed by
the Pope) consulted to enquire upon his Conclusions. 90. Conclusio^s to be
disputed on by Picus.
Whereupon they did articulate against him, for suspicion of heresy. He died,
being of the age of 32. of great learning. In his sickness Charles the eight
French king, (moved with the fame of his learning,) came to visit him. The
furniture of Mirandulas Study.
The furniture of his books cost him 7000 Florens. A little before his death he
was minded to give al away, and to take a Coule, to go about and preach. With
two Popes, that is, with Pope Innocent, and Alexander 6. he had much vexation.

The names of the Archbishops of Canterbury, in this sixth book continuing.
62 John Stratford, eight years. 63 John Kemp, three. 64 Thomas Burchier,
thirty three. 65 John Morton, fourteen. 66 Thomas Langton ws elected
Archbishop, and died before he was confirmed. 67 Henry Dene, two. 68. William
Warrham, twenty eight.

A brief note of Ecclesiastical Laws, ordained by certain ancient kings of
this land, for government of the church, before the Conquest.
Laws of K. Iuas, or Iua.
That Ministers should frame their conversation according to the form in laws
prescribed.

That Infants should be baptized within thirty days. That no man should
labor on the Sunday. Also he established immunitie of Churches and
Sancturarie, and took order for the true payment of Church duties, and of the
first fruits of all that was sown, to be paid at the day of S. Martin. Anno
712.

Laws of king Alured or Alfred.
He enlarged the privilege of Sanctuary: he laid double pain upon such as
committed offenses in the solemnities of certain feasts: also against them
that committed Sacrilege: he made a law against Priests committing murder:
also he made a law against whoredom, adultery, and fornication:he appointed
days of fasting, and ceasing from labor. Item, he set order for making and
keeping of vows.

Ecclesiastical laws of king Edward the Elder, and Githine the Dane king.
They agreed upon the sanctuary: they forbad paganism: they laid punishment
upon the Clergy, committing theft, perjury, or murder, fornication, or any
capital crimee: they made a law against all buying selling, and labor upon
the Saboth. Item, that no execution be done on the Sunday: also against
witches, and sorcerers.

Laws of king Ethelstane. Anno 924.
He commanded that every village of his own, should give a mo^thly Corrody to
a poor person. That 50. psalms should be soong daily for the king, etc. He
also ordained punishment for witches, and sorcerers, etc.

Laws of king Edmund. Anno 94.
He provided laws against ye unchaste living of churchme^: He made laws
concerning tithes, first fruits of every man's crop, and alms money duly to
be paid: that Bishops of their own charges should repair churches, and
admonish kings for furnishing of the same. For perjury also, and fighting
within the Church.

Laws of King Edgar. Anno 959.
He ordained that Sunday should be kept holy, from Saturday at noone till
Monday morning: also concerning freedom and liberties of the Church tithes,
first fruits of corn, and paying of Peter pence. For holydaies and
fastingdaies. That Synodes should be kept twice every year, whereat as well
the Bishop of the Dioces, as the civil magistrate should be present.

King Canutus. 1016.
That ecclesiastical persons being accused of fighting, murder, or any other
offense, should answer to their purgation therein. That Priests should be
disgraded for perjury, and put in sureties of good behavior: he limited the
degrees of marriage: he commanded touching the Sabbath day, that which Edgar
did before: he commanded every christian to come to the housell thrice every
year at least. That they inquire and search after Gods law and
commandments. That every Christian understand the points of his faith: at
least that he learn perfectly the Lords prayer, and Creed, else to be excluded
from the Eucharist, and undertaking for others at Baptism. That Bishops and
Priests should do their duties. That at the court of every shire the Bishop
of the Dioces shall be present with the Sheriff, and that the one shall teach
them Gods law, and the other man's.

King Henry 7. finished his course of life, 1509. Henry 8. Henry 8.
and shortly after married Lady Katherine, the daughter of Ferdinandus, K.
Henry 7. dies.
his late brother Prince Arthurs wife, by the dispensation of pope Julius, and
the requests of Ferdinandus her father.

At this time was renewed the old strife betwixt the Dominicke friars, and the
Franciscans, Old strife betwixt the Dominicks and Franciscans.
about the conception of ye the virgin Mary: the Franciscans held, that the
virgin was without original sin, the Dominicks were of the contrary mind.
Ann. 1476.

Pope Sixtus 4. joined with the Franchiscans, The feast of the virgin Mary's
conception.
and ordained a solemnization of the feast of the virgins conception, offering
all men and women, which would hear mass, and service, from the first
euensong of the same feast, to the Octaues of ye same, as many days pardon, as
Pope Urban 4, and Martin 5 did grant for hearing service of Corpus Christi
day. He made also an addition to the Aue Marie, An addition to the Aue Mary.
granting pardon of sins to all that would with the same addition, pray unto
the Virgin. The addition is: and blessed is Anna thy mother, of whom thy
virgins flesh has proceeded without blotte of original sin. This did pope
Sixtus afterward, that the Dominicks might conform themselves thereto,
confirm with a bull: dated 1483. whereby the Dominicks were compelled to give
to the virgin every night an Antheme in praise of her conceptio^, and to
subscribe to the Franciscane doctrine. The virgin Mary conceived without sin.
Although the greatest number of the school Doctors, were of the contrary
faction, Petrus Lombard, Thomas Aquinas, Bernardus, Bonauenture, etc.

After the renewing of this dissension, ann. 1509. Sleight of Friars.
to weep, to groan: and by their devises, to make answer to them, that asked:
for which deed, the false friars were taken and burned at Bernes the same
year: Peucer, Munster, Carrion, etc. Their names were, Johannes Vetter,
Franciscus Vliscus, Stephanus Balisthorst, and Henricus Steinegger.

Pope Julius was condemned, an. 1510. an. 1512. Jews the French K. about
Rauenna: and on Easter day the next year died: Pope Leo.
after whom succeeded Leo the 10.

It appears by the registers of Richard Fitziames, in the dioces of London,
that betwixt the year 1509. and 1527. deuers persons were compeleld to abjure,
for denying to worship ye Crucifix, for transubstantiation, holy days,
pilgrimages, Abiuration.
adoration of images, speaking against the immoderate riches of Churchmen, the
reading of English books: for denying, a priest to have two benefices, etc.

Ann. 1511. 18. of October, William Sweeting and John Banister, who before had
recanted: receiving farther strength from God, William Sweeting, and John
Banister, martyrs.
were burned in Smithfield, for the testimony of the truth: which was
concerning the real presence.

Ann. 1517. Ioh. Brown, who had born a faggot before, in the days of K. Henry
7. was burned at Ashford, for ye profession of the truth, John Brown martyr.
condemned by Archb. Warrham, first having had his feet burned to the bones by
Warrham and Fisher, bishops, to compel him to deny the truth.

Ann. 1514. Richard Hunn, merchant tailor in the city of London, was privily
made away, and hanged in the Lollards tower, Rich. Hunn.
for the truth: and after his death, to make him more odious, they picked
certain articles against him, out of the preface of his English Bible. This
was done by one Doct. Hedd. The 20. of December. the dead corpse of Richard Hunn
was burned in Smithfield: first having condemned it of heresy, (after they had
hanged him in prison secretly) is body was burned, 16. days after his
murdering. But the matter having bin fully examined by the council, and judges,
and justices of the realm: it was found by good proof, and sufficient
evidence, that D. Horsey the Chancellor, D. Horsey the Chancellor.
Charles Joseph the Summer, and John Spalding the hel-ringer, had committed the
murder But by the suited of the Bishop of London unto the Carinall Woolsey, at
the jail delivery, the next Sessions, the kings attorney pronounced the
judgment against Horsey to be fales, and him not to be guilty of the murder.

An. 1518. the 24. of September, John Stilman who had before recanted 11.
years past, was apprehended and brought before Richard Fitz-Iames B. of
London, and the 25. John Stilman burned.
of October was condemned for a relapse, and burned in Smithfield, Doctor Hedd
vicar general reading the sentence. It was objected yt he spoke against
pilgrimages: that he used to read books of Wickliffe, at his wicket, etc. That
he called the Pope Antichrist, etc. and that the inferior were the synagogue
of Satan, etc.

The same year the 29. of March, Thomas Man martyr,
Tho. Man was burned in Smithfield: who had before abiured, ann, 1511. the 14.
of August: against auricular confession, the sacrame^ of extreme unction:
against worshipping of images, that ye popish church was not ye church of God,
etc. Doct. Hedd pronounced likewise sentence against him, and delivered him to
the sheriff of London, to be presently burned: Pilate washes his hands.
with this protestation made before, that he might not consent to the death of
any: and therefore he desired the sheriff not to punish him with rigor.

This year was the great abiuration at Amersham, The great abiuration at
Amecsham.

700. converted by T. Man, Known men, Iustfast men.




Tho-Man confessed of himself, as it appears by the register, that he had
converted 700. from popery to the truth.

In those days, those that were professors of the truth, were called known
men, and Iustfast men. After T. Man, was Robert Cousin also condemned, and
burned at Buckingham, for holding against pilgrimages, confession to priests,
and worshipping of Images, etc.

Anno 1511. William Sweeting, alias Clerk, was condemned, and burned for a
relapse. He was taken at Chelsith, where he kept the Town beasts, and was
their Netheard. His articles were, against Pilgrimages, real presence,
worshipping of Images. He had dwelt 16. years and more with the prior of Saint
Osich, named George Lawne; where he so turned the Prior, that he was
afterward compelled abjure: which also William himself through frialtie had
done before. He being asked, what cause he had why he should not be judged
as relapse, said: he had nothing else, but only that he committed himself to
the mercy of God. With William Sweeting was also condemned the same time,
James Brewster.
of the parish of Saint Nicholas in Colchester, Anno 1505. He had been abiured
by William Warham Archbishop of Canterbury. They were burned together in
Smithfield at one fire, the 18. of October, his Articles were against images,
pilgrimages, worshipping of Images, the sacrament of the altar, etc.

Anno 1518. Christopher Shoemaker Christopher Shoemaker.
was burned at Newbery, for like articles before. For then the Church of Rome
was chiefly withstoode, for Pilgrimages, adoration of Saints, the Scripture
in English, and real presence.

William Smith, Bishop of Lincoln, died, an. 1515. College of Brasen-nose in
Oxford.
after who^ succeeded John Longland a Friar, and cruel vexer of poor
Christians: who propounded such captions interrogatories, that he forced one
brother to detect another; One brother detecteth another, the husband the wife,
etc.
the husband, the wife; the brother, the sister; the son, the father. Yet
notwithstanding all cruelty, the number did so increase, that the B. seeing
the matter almost paste his power was feign to require aid of the king for the
suppressing of them. Whereto the king granted, and sent down his letters to
the Sheriffs, Baylifes, Officers, etc. to aid the Bishop in that behalf.
Whereupon, a great number abiured, anno 1521. A great number abjure.
who because they had abiured under Bishop Smith, were now condemned for
relapse, and were burned: T. Bernard burned.
whose names are these: Thomas Bernarde, James Morden, Robert Raw, John
Scriuener, Ione Norman, and Thomas Holmes, which had detected many of the
brethren, yet escaped he not the relapese. John Scriueners, own children were
compelled to set fire to their Father, Unnatural cruelty.
as Ione Clarke was before compelled to do to her Father William Tilsworth.

About this time D. Collet D. Collet.
was troubled of B. Fitziames, Bricot, and Standish, but found favor with the
king. Paul's schole builded.
He erected the School of Paul's. The first Schoolmaster of his School was
W. Lilius. This Collet was very learned. He died anno 1519.

After Pope Julius 2. succeeded Leo 10. who (under pretense of warring against
the Turks) sent a Iubile, with his pardons, through all Christian Regions, and
Dominions, whereby he gathered innumerable riches, and treasures. The gatherers
whereof persuaded the people, yt whosoever would give x. s^ should at his
pleasure deliver one soul out of purgatory: but if it were one iotte then
then shillings, Pardonous sold.
they preached that it would profit them nothing. Ex Christ. Mess. li. 20. Chro.

This filthy merchandise was brought into Germany by a Dominike Friar, called
Tecellius: whereupon, Tecellius Friar,
Luther a Friar Augustine, then abhorring this shameless practice, anno 1517.
Luther. an augustine fire.


Whereupon, the Friar Tecellius inueighed against Luther in his sermons,
calling him heretic, and worthy to be persecuted with fire: and burned
Luthers Propositions ope^lie, and a Sermon which he wrote of Indulgences.

This rage of the Friar caused Luther to entreat more amply of the matter:
Luther accused to the B. of Rome.
wherefore he was accused to the Bishop of Rome, and (minding as yet no
further) endeavored to get the popes favor, writing unto him for the same,
with all submission, in these words.

Most holy Father, Luther writes to the P.
I offer my self prostrate under the feet of your holiness, with all that I
am, and that I have. Save me, kill me, call me, recall me, approve me, reprove
me, as you shall please: your voice (the voice of Christ in you speaking) I
will acknowledge. If I have deserved death, I shall be contented to die, etc.
This was in the year of our Lord,

Dialogues against Luther. Eckius against Luther.
Not long after the impudent dealing of Friar Tecellius, steppeth out one
Siluester de Priero, a Dominike Friar, which published railing dialogues
against Luther. Unto whom Luther made answer again.

Next after this Siluester, stepped up Eckius, and impugned the conclusions of
Luther. With whom encountered D. Andreas Bedensteme, Archdeacon of Wittemberge,
making his apology in the defense of Luther.

Afterward, Martin Luther was cited up the 7. day of August, by one Hieronimus
Bishop of Ascalon, to appear at Rome. The University of Wittemberg hearing
thereof, directed up their letters, with their public seal, to the P. in
Luthers behalf.

Duke Frederike also by his letters, sued to Cardinal Caietanus, (who was then
at Augusta,) that the cause of Luther might be freed from Rome, and removed to
Augusta to the hearing of the Cardinal.

The Cardinal (at the Dukes suite) wrote to the Pope, and received answer,
that he should call Luther before him at Augusta: and if he found him
obstinate, that he should interdict him, with all his adherents, and mainteiners
whosoever, the Emperors person only excepted.

The Pope also directs other letters at the same time to Duke Fred.
complaining with many grievous words against Luther. P. co^plaineth against Lut.


About the beginning of October, M. Luther came to Augusta, at the charges of
the prince Elector, and having obtained safeconduct from the Emperor
Maximilian, presented himself to the cardinal: who propounded unto him 3.
things. 1. That he should revoke his errors. 2. That he should promise from
that time forward to abstain from the same. 3. That he should abstain from
any thing that might trouble the Church, whereunto he answered: that he was
persuaded it was sound and Catholic which he had said: and that he was ready
to answer, to that should be objected against the same: and that concerning
the matters, he would hear the judgment of the universities of the Empire,
Basil, Friburg, and Louane.

After this, Luther prepares an answer by and by to Caietanus, teaching that
the merits of Christ are not committed to men: that the Pope may err: that
he ought to be reprehended: that authority of Scriptures ought to lead in
matters of faith: that the extrauagant contains untruths, etc.

The Cardinal would hear no Scripture, but commanded Luther to come no more
in his presence, except he would recant: yet Luther abode there still, and
departed not.

The Cardinal sent for Johannes Stupitius, Vicar of the Augustines, and moved
him earnestly to bring Luther to recant of his own accord. Luther tarried two
days after, and nothing was said unto him: Luther submits himself.
the third day he delivered his mind in writing, submitting himself, and
promising, that he would have more moderation, and that (touching the matter of
pardons) he would proceed no further. Only he said, he could not retract
his sentence before defended, for so much, as he had said nothing, but with a
good conscience, and that was agreeable to the testimony of the Scriptures.

This writing the Cardinal lightly regarded. Which when Luther saw, and
tarrying yet two days longer: understanding that the Cardinal had said, that
he had commandment to imprison John Stupitius, and Luther, after he had made,
and set up his appeal, he departed from the Cardinal.

After Luthers departure, the Cardinal writes a sharp letter unto duke
Frederick, declaring the dangerous doctrine of Luther, and exhorts the Duke
to tender his own honor and safety, and to expel Luther out of his
dominions. Whereto the Duke answers, both purging himself, and Luther:
desiring the Cardinal to be a means to the Pope, that innocence and truth be
not oppressed, before the error be lawfully convicted. This done, the Duke
sends the letter of the Cardinal to Luther: Luther writes again to the
duke, and declares how he was dealt with at Augusta, what he offered, and how
he attended, offering also him self to banishment, to avoid the malice of his
enemies: and no doubt, both the Duke and Luther were brought into a straight.
In which mean time, the University of Wittenberg wrote their letters in
defense of Luther, which caused the Duke now seriously to hearken to his cause.
This was, ann, 1518.

In the mean time, in the month of November, the pope sends forth new
indulgences into Germany, New pardons.
and into all quarters, with a new edict: wherein he declares, that the bishop
of Rome has power to release dispense, and to grant indulgences available,
as well for the living, as the dead: lying in the pains of purgatory.

Luther in the mean time, hearing how they minded to proceed against him at
Rome, appealeth from the Pope to a general Council: which the Pope
understanding, practices with the Duke, by flattery, and by secret letters,
to Noblemen of the Dukes Council, that they might remove the Dukes mind from
Luther. But before Melitus his ambassador approached Germany, Maximilian
Maximilian.
died, an. 1519. Frederike, Prince Elector, the Empire fell to Carolus v.
surnamed Prudens, about the end of August.

In the month of June before, there was a public disputation ordained at
Lypsia, a city in Misma, A disputation of Lipsia.
under the dominion of George duke of Saxony, uncle to duke Frederick. At that
disputation Eckius and Carolostadius disputed of free will: and thither came
Luther, and Phillip Melancthon, to hear what was done. Luther not minding,
nor purposing to dispute: but there being provoked he disputed with Eckius, of
the Popes supremacy, of Purgatory, of Indulgences, and of Penance. This was
in the month of July, an. 1519. About the beginning of which year Zuinglius
Zuinglius.
came first to Zurich, and taught: who at Zurick withstood Sampson a Friar,
that came thither with the Popes pardons.

Anno 1530. Luther as heretical: against whom also Luther effectually
defends himself, and shows to the nobility of Germany in another book,
The yearly money that went out of Germany to Rome.
that the money that goes yearly out of Germany to Rome, amounts to
3000000. Florens.

Now a while after the coronation of the Emperor, the Pope sends again to
Duke Frederick, requiring him to cause Luthers books to be burned, and that
he would either see Luther executed himself, or send him fast bound to Rome.
To the Ambassadors the Duke answered, that before the matter were disputed,
and the cause made manifest, he might not with any equity or honor proceed
in such sort.

Two Cardinals (notwithstanding) took and burned Luthers books: whereof he
hearing, Luther burns the popes Decrees.
burned also as many of the Popes Decrees as he could get, and the late Bull
also set out against him, openly, and solemnly, with a great number of people
following him. This was done the 10. of December. On Maunday thursday the Pope
curses Luther: Pope curses Luther.
and shortly after he having the Emperors pasport, Luther appears at Worms.
and being sent for also by him, appears at an assembly at Worms, Anno one
thousand, Luthers courage.
as there are tiles to cover the houses at Worms.

The fourth day after his repair to Worms, at four of the clock in the
afternoon, he appeered before the imperial majesty, Princes, Dukes, etc.
where Eckius above mentioned, who was then B. of Triers, general official,
with a loud voice propounded unto him, in the name of the assembly two
questions. Eckius questions to Luther.
1. Whether the books that went abroad in his name were his. 2. Whether he
would recant them if they were his. To the demaundes Luther answered: that the
books whose titles they had read unto him, he did acknowledge: and as for the
second point he craved respite of deliberation, that he might without
prejudice of the word of God, and peril of his own soul, answer the
interrogatorie: which was granted unto him, till the next day the same hour:
and then his opinion should not be in writing, but pronounced by word of mouth.

Luthers books of three sorts.
The next day he appeered, and answered, his Books were of three sorts: The
first, in which he simply declared the religion of Christian faith and good
works, which the popes Bull it self justifies, and is not to be revoked. The
second sort, wherein he had inueighed against the papacy, the cruelty and
exhortio^ of the same, which if he should revoke it should add more force to
their tyranny, and open wide gates to their impiety. The third sort, which he
had written, was against private persons, which labored to maintain the
Roman tyranny, and to withstand the true doctrine which he had professed. In
which he confessed he might have dealt, not with such vehemency of spirit,
yet that he could call nothing of the same back, without prejudice of the
cause. Albeit, he offered himself, both to be showed wherein he erred, and to
hearken to those that could give reason, and out of the scriptures, to the
contrary: etc.

These words thus pronounced, Eckius the Emperors prolocutor, with a stern
countenance, refused his answer, as not direct, and plain. Then Luther,
considering (says he) your sovereign majesty, and your Honors require a
plain answer: this I say, and profess as resolutely as I may, without
doubting, or sophistication, that if I be not convicted by testimony of the
Scriptures, and by probable reasons, (for I believe not the Pope, nor general
Councels, which have erred many times, and have been contrary to themselves) my
conscience is so bound and captiued in these Scriptures, and word of God,
which I have alleged, that I may not, Luthern answers directly.
nor will not revoke any manner of thing; considering it is not lawful, nor
godly, to do any thing against conscience. Herevppon I stand, and rest: I
have not what else to answer, God have mercy upon me.

To this answer, Eckius replied again, as insufficient, and indirect, and
fled to the councels: but Luther replied, and declared, how they have erred,
and were not meet to determine matters of faith. The official again
answered, that could not be proved, that the councels have erred: but Luther
promised to prove it: and now night approaching, the Lords arose, and departed.
Upon Friday following, the Emperor signified to the States of Germany, by his
letters, that he minded to extirpate Martine Luther, and his doctrine.

The monday following before supper, The Emperor purposes to root out the
Gospel.
the Archb. of Triers advises Luther, that on Wednesday next, he should
appear before him at nine of the cloak, before dinner, and assigned him the
place. Luther appears, where, in the presence of the Archbishop, Marquis of
Brande^burg Duke of Saxony, and other States, Doct. Vocus the marquis of Bades
chaplain, exhorted Luther with a rhetorical oration to recant: and spoke in
defense of the Councels. To whom Luther replied, that he spoke not against al
councels: but that they might err it appeared by the council of Constance,
which condemned this article of Wickliffe, the Church is the communion of the
predestinate, with other words more: which being finished, he was bid to stand
aside: and in the mean while, the princes conferred, and sent for him again,
and exhorted him. To whom he answered: except he were ouerthrown by the
scriptures, he might not yield with a safe conscience. Afterward, the
Archbishop himself, with gentle and courteous words, exhorted Luther to
submit: which would not be. So that within a while after, ye Archb.
official, declared unto Luther, from the Emperor, that he should within 20.
days return home, under his safeconduct, from whence he came. And the six and
twentieth of April, he returned: Luther returns.
the Emperors Herald, Gasper Sturm safely conducting him.

Afte this, the Doctors, and Schoolmen of Paris, wrote against Luther, and
condemned his books, and not long after, The Emp. outlaweth Luther, etc.
Charles the Emp. directs a writ of outlawrie against Luther, and all them
that took his part: commanding, wheresoever he might be gotten, to apprehend
him, and his books to be burned. Upon this, Duke Frederick conueyeth Luther
away secretly, by certain faithful Noble men: in which time, he wrote, among
other Books, one entitled, De abroganda Missa, De abroganda Missa.
dedicated to his company of Augustine Friars: who upon that, began to lay
down their private Masses. This doctrine, Wittemberg favors Luther.
the University of Wittemberg (their Council being asked by the Duke) did
confirm: and councelled the Duke, to put down the use of the mass in his
dominions.

About the same time, king Henry the 8. bare the name of a certain book
written against Luther: Book against Luther.

Defender of the Christian faith


in which he defends the Popes pardons, his authority, and the matter of the
sacrament. For which, the pope added to his style and title, Defender of the
Christian faith.

Within the compass of the same year, P. Leo died, rejoicing of 3. blessings
that God had bestowed upon him. First, that he, being banished out of his
Country, was restored again with glory. 2 That he deserved to be called
Apostolic. 3 That he had driven the Frenchmen out of Italy. After that he had
spoken these words, he was stricken with a sudden fever, and shortly after
died, being of the age of 47 years, albeit some suspected he died of poison.
After him succeeded Hadrian, 6. In whose time the Turks wanne Rhodes, Pope
Hadrian 6.

A meeting at Noremberge.


He lived not much above one year and a half in his Papacy.

In the time of this Hadr. the council of Worms brake up, and another meting
appointed by the Emp. and States at Noremberge, an. 1522.

To which meeting the Pope sent his letters, and beside, gave his Legate
Cheregalius instructions against Luther. To whom the princes answered again,
giving reason, why (as yet) the Emperors Edict was not executed against Luther,
and requiring also, that his holiness, with the consent of the Emperor would
summon a general Council, with as much speed as might be: wherein matters
might be freely debated for the benefit of the Church, and reformation of the
same: and that the assembling of that Council, might not be deferred longer
then one year. In ye mean time, they promised to take reasonable order, etc.

At the same time also, at Noremberg, 100. greeuances of Germany against the
pope.
the states propounded an hundred greeuances of the Germans, which they did
sustain from the Sea of Rome: as, forbidding of marriage in degrees not
forbidden by the law of God: forbidding of meats, not forbidden by God:
restraint of marriage at certain times: selling remission of sins for money:
innumities of clergy men: excommunication abused: number of holy days over
burthenous: suspending, and halowing of churchyardes: against Officials, and
ecclesiastical Judges: that ecclesiastical Judges annex lay matters unto
their jurisdiction, etc. These greeuances they delivered to the popes legate,
an. 1523. 1523 P. Hadrian dies. P. Clement 7.
and so the assembly of Noremberge brake up, and was proroged to the next year
following. In the mean time Hadrian died: after whom succeeded Clement 7. who,
ye next year after, sent his Legate, Cardinal Campeius, unto the assembly at
Noremberg, with many fair petitions, and sharp complaints against Luther,
etc. but not a word of the greeua^ces, or of any reformation. While Luther was
absent from Wittemberg, Carolostadius.
And. Carolostadius stirred up the people, to throw down images in the
temples, besides other things mo, which Luther (returning to Wittemberg)
misliked, because it was not done orderly, and by the magistrate, to whom it
did belong. Ex Ioh. Sleid. lib. 3.

1546 L. dies. Luthers prayer at his death.
An 1546. in the 63. year of his age, L died, after he had continued writing
and preaching 29. years. Before his death he prayed thus: My heavenly Father,
eternal and merciful God, thou have manifested unto me, thy dear Son our
Lord Jesus Christ. I have taught him, I have loved him as my health, my life,
and my redemption: whom the wicked have persecuted, maligned, and with injury
afflicted. Draw my soul unto thee. After he had thus prayed, he said as
insueth, thrice: I commend my spirit into thy hands, thou have redeemed me O god
of truth. God so loved the world, that he gave his only son, that all that
believed in him, might have life everlasting. Frederike prince Elector, died
before Luther, an. 1525. 1525 L. fulfilled Jerome of prages prophecy.


Thus Luther fulfilled the prophecy of Ierom of Prage, I cite you al to
answer before the most high and just Judge, after 100. years. Ierom was burnt
1416. and Luther began to write anno 1516.

An. 1524. At the diet of Noremb. was much reasoning concerning the marriage of
priests: which cardinal Ca^peius impugned: and concerning the liberties of the
city of Strausburgh, which the B. would have infringed, taking into his hands,
ye cause of married priests from the magistrate of the town, against ancient
custom and agreement betwixt them.

After the council of Noremberg, immediately followed another sitting at
Ratisbone, A council at Ratesbone.
where were present Ferdinandus Campeius Cardinal of Salisburgh, the two dukes
of Bauarie, the Bishops of Trent, and Ratisbone, etc. and made many popish
Decrees and acts against Luther: Acts against Luther.
which Campeius labored to have enacted in a full council, and with the
consents of all the Empire: but the minds of diverse were gone from the Pope:
and he was feign to get the same ratified in this particular conuenticle.

An. 1519. Vldricus Zuinglius, 1519 Zuinglius.
first abiding at Glocrona in a place called our Lords hermitage, removed to
Zuricke, and there began to teach, dwelling in the Minster among the Canons or
Monks, of that close, and using the same rites with them, the space of two or
three years: and because Leo the same year had renewed his pardons again, he
continued by the space of two years and more, detecting of the abuses of the
same, till Hugo B. of Constance, to whose jurisdiction Zurick did then belong,
wrote letters to the senate of Zuricke, co^plaining greatly of Zuinglius: to
whom certain of the city made answer, desiring the B. yt he would do nothing
prejudicial to the liberty of the gospel; Zuinglius having referred his
cause to the Senate. This was An. 1522. Zuinglius also wrote a letter to the
whole nation of the Heluetians, monishing them not to hinder the course of the
gospel, and not to molest priests that were married: and exhorted them to
withdraw the liberty of concubines.

Thus, Zuinglius continued certain years, Dominicks against Zuinglius.
and at the last the Dominicke friars opposed themselves, whereupon the Senate
of Zuricke sent forth their commandment to all Priests and Ministers to
repair to Zurick, against the 29. of January next ensuing, Anno 1523. That
matters touching religion might be freely disputed of; directing of their
letters to the B. of Constance, that he would either repair thither himself,
or send his deputy. At the day, came Ioha^nes Faber Johannes Faber against
Zuinglius.
the Bishops Vicegerent. ( Zuinglius had before contrived his doctrine into
three score and seven Articles, and published the^ abroad, that they that
minded to dispute, might be better prepared.) Faber he denies to dispute the
matter, and said, it was meeter for a general Council, (which (said he) was
near at hand) then in that assembly to be handled: notwithstanding Zuinglius
urged, that if he, or any, had ought to say against his doctrine, they would
then declare it: but when no man would appear to dispute, the assembly was
discharged. Whereupon the Senate of Zuricke caused to be proclaimed thorough
their dominion, that the traditions of men should be abandoned, Traditions of
men aba^doned in Zuricke. 1523 Decree at Lucerna.
and the Gospel of Christ purely taught, out of the old and new Testament.
Anno 1523. Sleid. lib. 3.

The next year after, there was an other decree made at Lucerna, of the
contrary part, to the maintenance of Popish religion, and against Luthers
doctrine. After this co^clusio^ at Lucerna, the Cantons of Heluetia directed
their letters to the men of Zuricke, lamenting their estate, and blaming the
new doctrine of Zuinglius, and Leo Judah, Leo Judah. Cantons divided.
and showing to them the danger that might follow. Whereunto the Tigurins and
men of Zuricke made their answer again, the same year, the one and twentieth
of March, purging themselves, and justifying the doctrine of the Gospel
preached by Luther, Zuinglius, etc. and offered themselves to be reformed (if
they were in error) by the Scriptures, and that they would attend therefore
till toward the end of May next ensuing, as also from the Bishop of Constance,
and university of Basil.

The month of May being come, the B. of Constance, answers to ye me^ of
Zuricke in a book, wherein he defends images, and popish mass. This book
they answered: and proved his doctrine, by the scriptures, to be false: and
(before they sent their answer) pulled down all the images in their dominion,
about the 13. of June. And a few months after, Images pulled down.
an order was taken in the city of Zuricke, between the Canons of the church,
and city, for disposing the lands, and possessions of the College.

This profession of the Tigurins, of the 13. pages, The Cantons that misliked
Zuinglius.
six did chiefly mislike: to wit, Lucernates, Vrani, Suicenses, Vnterualdii,
Tugiani, Fiburgenses. These in no case would be reconciled, but laid diverse
slanderous matters to their charge: whereof the Tigurins diligently purged
themselves.

Anno 1525. in the month of April, next following: the city of Zuricke
banished the mass in all their dominion, Mass banished.
and placed in steed thereof the supper of the Lord, the reading of the
Scriptures, praying. Also, a Law was made against whoredom, and adultery: and
Judges ordained to hear ye causes of matrimony, an, 1525. Sleid. lib. 4.

The other seven pages appointed among themselves, concerning a meeting, and
disputation to be had at Baden: where were present among other Divines,
Johannes Faber, Eckius, and Murnerus. The Bishops also of Lucerna, Basil,
Suriake, and Lawsanna, sent thither their Legates: the conclusions propounded,
were: that the body and blood of Christ are present in the Sacrament. That the
mass is a sacrifice for quick and dead, That the blessed virgin, and other
saints are to be inuocated, as mediators and intercessors. That images ought
not to be abolished. That there is a Purgatory. Which conclusions, Eckius took
upon him stoutly to defend. Against him reasoned Oecola^padius, (who was then
chief preacher at Basil) with other mo. Zwinglius was not permitted of the
Senate to be heard. The conclusion of the disputation was, that al should
remain as it was. This was done in the month of June.

1527 A disputation at Berne.
Anno 1527. in the month of December, the people of Bern appointed a
disputation at Bern, and sending forth writings thereof, called all the Bishops
about them thither, as of Constance: Seduno Lansanna warning them both to come
themselves, and to bring their Divines with them, or else to loose such
possessions as they had lying within the precinct of their territory. After
this, they appointed ecclesiastical persons of their own jurisdiction to
dispute, Scriptures only to decide controversies.
determining the whole disputation to be decided only by the authority of the
old and new Testament. And to the intent, men might come thither better
prepared, they propounded in writing ten conclusions, Ten conclusions.
to be defended of their ministers, by the scriptures: which ministers, were,
Franciscus Colbus, and Berthaldus Hallerus.

The themes were these. 1. The true church hears only ye word of God. 2 It
makes no laws without it. 3. That traditions ordained by the Church only,
bind, as they agree with the word of God. 4. That Christ only has made
satisfaction for our sins. 5. That Christ's body is not really in the
sacrament. 6. That the sacrifice of the mass is co^tumelious to Christ his
sacrifice. 7. That Christ is only to be inuocated as mediator. 8. That there is
no purgatory. 9. Against images. 10. Against single life of priests.

To these letters, and articles, the Lucernats, Vranites, Scinthians,
Vnterualdians, Tugians, Glareans, and Soliturnians, and they of Freiburg
answered again by contrary letters, exhorting them of Bern to desist from their
purpose; concluding, that they would neither send, nor suffer any learned man
to come thither, nor grant safeconduct for any to pass through their country.

The Bishops refuse disputation.
All this notwithstanding, the Lords of Bern, the 7. of January, proceeded in
their disputation. Of the bishops before assigned nor one came, nevertheless the
city of Basil, Zuricke, and Schafuse, and Abbecelle, Sangallium, Mallusia, with
ye neighbors of Rhetia, also, they of Strasborough, Vlmes, Ausburgh, Lyndane,
Constance, and Isne, sent thither their Ambassadors. The Doctors of Berne
began their disputation: there were present Zuinglius, Oecolampadius, Bucerus,
Capito Blaurerus, with other mo, which defended the affirmative. On the
contrary part, the chief was Conradus Tregerius a friar Augustine: who
shifting from the Scriptures, to the Doctors, not being permitted so to do by
the moderators of the disputation, would dispute no more. This disputation
endured 19. days, The dispute lasted 19. days
and in the end it was agreed, that the conclusions were agreeable to the word
of God, and should be ratified not only in Berne, but also in certain other
cities near adjoining. Furthermore that masses, altars, and images should be
in all places abolished.

At the city of Constance, certain things began to be altered before: in which
city, the preacher, Ambrosius Blanreus was a notable man, and had bin a monk
before, in the monastery of Alperspacke, in the Duchy of Wittemberg.

After this disputation thus concluded at Berne, Berne reformed.
the Images, and altars, with ceremonies, and masses, were abolished at
Constance: Geneua reformed.
they likewise of Geneua followed the example of Bern, by reason whereof, the
Bishops and Clergy departed the city.

The Bernates after they had redressed with them the state of religion, The
Bernates refuse ye league of the french K
they renounced the league made before with the French king, refusing the warly
stipend, following the example of the Tigurins, which before had done ye like,
and were contented only with their yearly pension, which the K. pays to
every page of the Heluetians, to keep peace. The day and year when this
reformation began with them, they caused to be engraven in a pillar, with
letters of gold, A monument of their reformation. 1528
for a perpetual memory to all posterity to come. This was an. 1528.

By these examples, the ministers of Strausburgh began also to affirm, and
teach, that the mass was naught. The P. clergy labored on the contrary part.
The Senate would have brought it to a disputation, but the Priests would agree
to no reasoning: whereupon the magistrates commanded them silence. The Bishop
desired the Senate to persevere in their old religion: but not prevailing, they
did solicit the assembly of the Empire at Spires, who sent a solemn
Embassade to Strausborough, requiring them to alter nothing, but to refer all
things to a general Council. In like manner the Bishop of Heldessem, having
been with them a little before, exhorted them in the name of the Emperor.

But the Senate of Strawsborough, seeing the matter did now hang in
controversy two years, the preachers daily calling upon them for reformation,
and also suite being made by other Citizens, assembled their great Citizens, to
the number of 300. in which, the most voices went against the mass. Whereupon,
immediately the twentieth of February, ann. 1529. 1529 Mass put down in
Strawsborough. Basil reformed.
a decree was made, that the mass should be laid down, til the contrary part
could prove it to be lawful by the scriptures.

Anon after, at Basil also, the mass was excluded, and twelve Senators
favoring popery, displaced by the commons, and the images thrown out of the
churches, and a decree made, that the mass and images should be abolished,
through their whole jurisdiction: in this city, taught Oecolampadius. A
memorial of their reformation.
The day of burning their images (which was Ashwednesday) they do with mirth
and pastime solemnise at this day.

Anno 1529. Ferdinando the Emperors brother, and his Deputy in Germany,
decreed against the Protestants at Spires, and refused to admit the
Ambassadors of Strausburgh, because they had rejected ye mass. The other
princes which were received, as, the Duke of Saxony, George, of Brandenburgh,
Ernesus, and Franciscus, Earls of Lueburgh, and Lantgraue Anhaldius did
withstand the decree, and showed their cause in a long protestation written:
which done, all such Cities as subscribed, and consented to ye Protestation of
the Princes, joined themselves in a common league with them, whereupon, they
were called protestants.

The names of the Cities were these: Strausburgh, The name of Protestants.
Norembergh, Vlmes, Constance, Ruteling, Winsenium, Me^ning, Lindania,
Campodinum, Hailburnim, Isua, Wesseburgum, Norling, and Sangallum.

The other Pages on the contrary side, made like confederacy, which were
especially five: Lucernates, Vrani, A division of the Pages for religion.
Suicences, Vnterualdij, and Tugiani, purposing to ouerrun the religion of
Christ: who also, despitefully hanged up ye arms of the Cities, Zurich and
Berne, upon the gallows. In so much, that Berne and Zurich raised a power
against the Suitzers aforesaid. But as they were both ready to encounter,
through the means of the City of Strausburgh, and other Intercessors, they
were parted at that time, and so returned. Which peace continued two years
between them, till by reason of contumelies against the reformed cities, the
Tigurins, and Bernates, stopping al passage, suffered no corn, nor vitle to
pass one to the other this was 1531.

The French king, with the Glarians, Friburnians, and Soliturnians, endeavored
to make peace betwixt them, upon certain conditions, which the other five
Pages refused, and armed themselves, and approaching near Surich, ouermatched
them of Zurich with multitude, and discomfited the army: among whom, at that
time Zuinglius was slain, Zuinglius slain.
also, the Abbot of Capella, and Commendator Cunacensis, with 13. other learned
men, as it is thought, being falsely betrayed, and brought into the hands of the
enemy. The manner of the Suitzers is, when they go to war, the chief
Minister of their Church goes with them, which was the cause why he was
present at the war. The minister goes with the army.
After he was slain they burnt his body, being dead. Ex Sleid. li. 8.

Zuinglius was 44. years of age when he died. They took the Abbot Capellensis
being slain, and put out both his eyes, and clothed him in a Monks coule, and
so set him in a pulpit to preach, railing on him in most despitefull manner.
This battle was the xi. of October. The Bernats hearing of this overthrow,
armed themselves to make revenge, and attempting to take Tugie, were
ouermatched of the Page-men. At the last (through mediation) a league was made
between them, A league betwixt the Canons. D. of Saxon dies. 1532
that the Tigurins, Bernats, and Basilians, should forsake the league made with
Strausburgh, and the Lantgraue: and likewise the v. pageme^ their league with
Ferdinandus. And hereof were obligations sealed the last of November.

Oecolampadius hearing of the death of Zuinglius, departed this life also the
last of November, being of the age of 49.

The next following, in the year of our Lord, 1532. in the month of August,
died John Frederike Duke of Saxony, a great mainteiner of the truth. After
whom succeeded John Frederike his son.

1533 H. Voes, I. Each, burned.
Anno 1527. Two young men were burned at Bruxels, one named Henry Voes, of the
age 24. The other Ioh. Each, which were before of the order of Augustine Friars:
they were persecuted by Egmondanus the Popes Inquisitor, and the divines of
Louane. The examiners were, Lochestratus and others. The cause was, that they
denied, it was deadly sin to transgress the decrees of the fathers, and of
the B. of Rome. They were burned the first of July, marvelously ioying at
their death, in so much, that one of them seeing fire kindled under his feet,
said: me think you strowe roses under my feet. The courage of the martyr.
After their death, their Monastery was dissolved; the President thereof
(called Iacobus Lutherianus,) after diverse afflictions, was forced to recant at
Bruxels: but afterward being delivered, departed, and fled to Luther.

An. 1524. H. Sutphen monk burned, without al order of judgment, or just
comdemnation. He was preacher at Breame, and greatly wtstoode by the chanons
and prelates, but maintained by the senate and people: in so much that being
sent for to the Archbishop, and to a provincial council at Burstade, they
refused to send him thither, foreseing the malice of the council. But when the
time came, that the Lord would have him witness his truth, an. 1524. he was set
upon on a sudden at Meldorph in Diethmar (whether he went to preach) by the
rude multitude, through the instigatio^ of ye Fra^ciscane friars, associated
with certain preside^ts of the country, who to the intent the husbandmen of
the country should be more courageous, gave them 3. barrels of Hambrough beer
to drink. About midnight they came in armor to Meldorph: the Iacobins and
Monks prepared torches for them, least Henry should slip away in the dark. So
with great violence, they brake into the house of the parish priest, where
Henry was; who sent for him also to preach, and having rifeled the house, and
shamefully abused the priest, they ran with fury upon Henry, and pulled him
naked out of his bed, and drew him naked to Heyda, and brought him to a man's
house, called Calden, and bound him there in the stocks, with chains, in the
frost and snow: which, when the good man of the house (taking compassion on
him) would not suffer, they carried him away to Hamburgh, and shut him up in a
cupbord. The common people, all the night continued drinking, and swilling.

In the morning, about 8. of the clock, the rude people, (boiling with drink)
cried out: burn him, burn him. This rude people the Franciscans greatly
encouraged. So they bound Henry, hands, neck, and feet, and with great noise
brought him forth to be burned. When he came to the fire, for very weakness he
sat down on the ground. By and by, there was present one May, a president,
corrupted with money, that condemned him, and pronounced sentence. Which done,
one stroke him behind on the head with a sharp dagger, John Holmes of the new
Church, stroke him with a mace. Other thrust him into the back, and arms: and
that so often as he began to speak. One named Master Gunter criyng out, and
encouraging them, and saying: go too good fellows boldly, truly God is with us
present.

After this, he brought a Franciscane Friar unto Henry, that he should be
confessed, to whom he said: because he never offended him, he could not forgive
him, and so refused to be confessed. The fire as often as it was kindled, would
not burn, notwithstanding they satisfied their minds upon him, striking, and
pricking him, with all kind of weapons. Henry in the mean time standing in
his shirt before the rude multitude, at the last having gotten a great ladder,
they bound him fast thereto, Cruelty.
and cast him into the fire, and when he began to pray, one struck him on the
face with his fist, saying: thou shall first be burnt, and after pray, and
prate as much as thou will. Then another treading upon his breast, bound his
neck fast to a step of the ladder, that the blood gushed out of his mouth,
and nose: at last, after long tormenting, they cast him, ladder and all into
the fire: and one John Holmeus ran unto him, and struck him with a mace upon
the breast, till he died. Afterward, they roasted him upon the coals, for the
wood would not burn out: an. 1524 Ex Epist. Luth.

About the same time, many other godly persons were thrown into the river of
Rhine, and into other rivers, whose bodies were after found, and taken up.

Also, in the said town of Diethmar, one John John M.
suffered martyrdom like Henry.

At the town of Hala, a Preacher named M. George, M. George.
was murdered by the rude multitude, incensed thereunto by the Monks, and
Friars, for ministering in both kinds. Ex Crisp. and Pantal.

At Prage also in Bohemia, another changing his Monkerie into Matrimony, did
suffer in like manner. Ex Lud. Rab.

Anno 1524. John Clerk was martired at Metz in Lorain, for breaking down the
Images, which they were (at certain times wont to worship in the suburbs of
ye city: for which fact he was condemned, and first his right hand stroke of,
then his nose with violence pulled from his face with pinsers, after ye both
his arms and his paps, Great cruelty, and great patience.
were likewise plucked and drawn with the same instrument: the martyr in the
mean time singing the verse: Their images are but silver and gold, the work
of men's hands, etc. The residue of his life they consumed with fire. This man
before, an. 1523. had been whipped, and marked in the forehead, at Melden 10
miles from Paris, for setting up a bill against the Popes pardons, lately sent
thither: in which bill he named the Pope Antichrist. Ex Crisp. and Plant.

Anno 1525. The 12. of January M. John Castellane 1525 I. Castellane.
doctor of Divinity, was burned in the town of Wiken, for preaching the truth
in Mentz, being apprehended by the servants of the Cardinal of Loraine, and
carried away to the castle of Nomenie, where he was most cruelly handled, from
the fourth of May, to the twelft of January, and from thence to the town of
Wiken: where he was condemned by the Bishop of Nicopolis, sitting in his
Pontificalibus, being suffragane of Mentz, with the Clergy, Nobles, and people
about him. He suffered with such constancy, Constancy.
that a great number were drawn to the knowledge of God thereby, and many
confirmed.

The same year, a godly minister after diverse torments most terrible, as well
by the privy members, as otherwise, was drowned at Eushisheim, because he
married a wife secretly in his own house, with a few witnesses: after he was
thrown down he striued a while, so that the river was red with his blood. Ex
Oecolampadio.

About this time, by reason of a rebellion of the commons against the rulers of
Germany, diverse protestants were fasly accused and put to death: Cruelty.
among whom one after most grievous torments diverse times of the Strapado,
which he sustained six hours together, that the sweat which dropped from his
body, for pain and anguish, was almost blood, had his head stroke of. Ex
Oecolampadio.

Wolgangus Schuchus having converted a town in Lotharing, belonging to duke
Anthony prince of Lorrain, bearing the name of S. Hippolitus, the Duke hearing
thereof, and being misinformed by the adversary, threatened the town
destruction with fire and sword. Wolgangus hearing thereof wrote a letter to the
Duke, purging the town of the crime of sedition, and rebellion laid against
it, and likewise declaring the truth of religion. But the Duke nothing pacified
therewith, Wolgangus of his own accord went to Nancie, which is the head town
of Lorrain, there to render a confession of his doctrine, and to deliver the
town of Hippolitus, who was not so soon come thither, but hands were laid on
him, and he cast in a stinking prison, where he was sharply handled. After a
while he was had to a house of Grayfriers, to make profession there of his
faith, where he confuted learnedly all those that stood against him: one
Bonauenture a friar, monstrous in body, and conditions of mind, was moderatour
of the disputation, who having been long confessor to the Duke, and of great
authority in Lorrain, was ever persuading the duke, to banish all learned men
out of Lorrain, and that it was sufficient to salvation, only to know the Pater
noster, and Auie. This man being judge of the disputation, Wolgangus maintained
the truth against the rabble of the Clergy: who being not able otherwise to
make their party good against him, took his Bible with the notes in the
Margin, and burned it. At the last disputation Duke Anthony himself was said
to be there disguised, who although he understood not the speech of Wolgangus,
being in Latin, yet perceiving him to be bold and constant, Courage and
constancy.
departing from the disputation, pronounced, he should be burned, because he
denied the Church, and sacrifice of the Mass: Wolgangus hearing the sentence
of his condemnation, began to sing the 122. Psalm: I rejoiced when they said
unto me, we will go into the house of the Lord: and at the execution, sang the
51. Psalm, till the smoke, and flame, took from him his voice, and life.

Shortly after his death, the Commendator of Saint Anthony of Vienna, who sat
as spiritual judge over him, and gave sentence of his condemnation, fell
suddenly down and died. Also, his fellow which was abbot of Clarilocus, Gods
vengeance.
and suffragane of the Bishop of Mentz, suddenly at the coming in of the
Duches of Denmark, into the city of Nancie, stricken with a fear at the
crack of guns, fell down, and died. Ex Lud. Rab. and Pant,

Ann. 1526. Ioh. Huglein, 1526 Ioh. Huglein.
priest, was burned at Mespurgh, by the Bish. of Constance, for that he did not
hold with the B. of Rome his doctrine in all points.

This year, the Lady Katherine, the old Emperors young sister, was promised
in marriage, with John Frederick, son and heir to the Prince electour of
Saxony: but thorough the alteration of religion, they swarued from their
covenants: and Hawnart, No promise to be kept with heretics.
the Emperors Ambassador in Germany, said plainly, that there was no promise
to be kept with heretics.

Anno 1527. George Carpenter 1527 George Carpenter.
of Emering, was burned in the town of Munchen, in Bauaria. 1. Because he did
not believe, that a priest could forgive sins. 2. He believed not, a man could
call God out of heaven. 3. He believed not, that God was in the bread. 4. He
believed not, that the element in Baptism gives grace.

The same year, Leonard Keyser, Leonard Keysar.
of the country of Bauaria, was put to death, for the testimony of the truth:
he was of the town of Raw, 4. miles from Passaw, of a famous house. He being at
his study in Witte^berg, was sent for by his brethren: who certified him, that
if he would see his father alive, he should come with speed: he was scarce come
thither, when as by ye co^mandme^t of ye B. of Passaw, he was taken by his
mother, and brethren. The mother and brethren against children and brethren.
The articles with he was accused of, were, ye faith only justifies. 2. Works
are the fruits of faith. 3. The mass is no sacrifice, nor oblation: also he
denied confession, satisfaction, vow of single life, Purgatory, difference of
days, invocation of Saints, and for holding only two Sacraments, etc. They
that sat in judgment of him, were, the Bishop of Passaw, the suffraganes of
Ratisbone, and Passaw: and with them Eckius, being guarded with armed men. He
suffered the 16. of August, Ex 6. tomo operum Lutheri.

Wendelimuta.
Anno 1527. a virtuous widow, named Wendelmuta, was first strangled, and after
burned at Hage in Holland the twentieth of November, for the profession of the
truth. ex Pantal.

Anno 1529. Peter Filsteden and Adolph Clareback, 1529 Peter Filsteden and
Adolph Clarebacke.
Germans, by the commandment of the Archb. and Senate of Collen, were burned
there for the truth, especially of the supper of the Lord after that they had
endured imprisonment a year and a half.

At that time, certain popish Preachers persuaded the people, that the putting
to death of certain wicked persons, (meaning the Gospellers) should pacify
the wrath of God, who then plagued Germany with the sweating sickness. Sleid.

Nicholas.
Ann. 1524. one Nicholas of Antwerp, was apprehended, (preaching without the
town) by two butchers servants, and put into a sack, and drowned by the Crave
at Antwerp: Persecutor, Charles the Emperor.

Johan. Pictor.
At the same time, Johannes Pictorius, a learned man of Holland, A courageous
martyr.
and partly of kin to Erasmus Roterodamus, was first strangled, and then
burned, pronouncing at his death: O death, where is thy victory? The
Persecutors, Margaret, aughter of Maximilian, princess of Holland, M. Montane,
M. Rosemund Inquisitors, M. Iodocus Louering, Vicar of Mechling. He was
condemned for speaking against mass, and pardons, and subtle abuses of
priests.

Anno 1525. Mathias Weibel, 1525 M. Weibell.
Schoolmaster, was hanged by Campadonium in Sweuia, for saying somewhat
agoinst the Abbots first Mass, and against carrying about of relikes. The
persecutor was Sebastian Baitesteni.

The same year, a good priest being commanded to give good council to 16.
Countrymen that should be beheaded, A Priest martyr.
was afterward himself bidden kneel down, and had his head cut off, only
for mere hatred against the Gospel. The persecutors were certain noble men,
after the commotion of Countrymen in Germany. Ex Gastia.

Anno 1528. G. Sherrer, 1528 G. Sherrer.
a Preacher, was put to death at Rastat, from Saltzburgh x. miles. He was
condemned to be burned alive, but means was made that he was first beheaded.
Going toward his death; he said: That you may know I die a Christian, I will
give you a sign, and so he did: for when the head was stricken from his
shoulders, the body falling upon the belly, A sign.
so continued the space that one might well eat an egg: after that, it softly
turned it self upon the back, and crossed the right foot, and likewise, the
right hand over the left. At the fight whereof, the Magistrates would not burn
his body, but buried it with other Christian men's bodies, Mat. Flat. Illiric.

An. 1522. At Dornick Henry Flemming 1522 H. Fleming.
was burned, by Balthazar, Official. He was sometimes a Friar, and being
offered life by Balthazar, if he would confess his wife to be an harlot,
denied so to do, and was thereupon burned at Dornicke.

Anno 1539. Ex Ioh. Gast. and Pantal.

Anno 1543. 28. men and women were taken, that professed the truth, and
tormented severally. Among whom, there was one Paulus, a Priest, of sixty
years, who (staggering in his confession for fear of death) was had out of
Louan, and condemned to perpetual prison, which was a stinking dungeon: where
he was suffered neither to read, nor write, and was fed only with bread and
water. Other two there were, who (because they had revoked before) were
burned, which they endured cherefullie.

There was also an old man, and two aged women, brought forth: of which, the
one was called Antonia, Antonia.
of an ancient stock in that City. The man was condemned to be beheaded: the
women to be burned quick. The other which abiured not, were condemned to be
burned. Ex Fran. Eucenate.

Anno 1544. At Louan was Master Perceuall, 1544 M. Perseuall.
of ye same University, adjudged to perpetual prison, for reprehending
certain popish superstitions: and there fed with bread and water. At last,
some judge that either he was famished, or secretly drowned, Ex Eucenate.

The same year, was Justice Imsberge, Justice Ims.
a Skinner of Louan, beheaded, his burning being pardoned, at the suite made to
the Queen: for speaking against the P. supremacy, mass, purgatory, and the
real presence, Ex Euc.

The same year, one Giles Giles.
of Bruxels, a Gutler, was burned for the testimony of Jesus. He was detected
by the parson of Bruxels. After they had kept him prisoner 8. months in Louan,
they sent him to Bruxels to be judged: where he comforted diverse that were
there in prison: among whom also was Franciscus Eucenas. F. Eucenas.
He was in prayer so ardent, (kneeling by himself in some secret place) that
he seemed to forget himself: being called to meat, he neither saw, nor heard
them that stood by him many times, till he was taken up by the arms. At
sundry times he might have escaped, (the doors being left open) but he would
not, for bringing the keeper in danger.

At the length, about the month of January, he was assayed with torments, to
confess the truth (as they called it) which was, purgatory, and to utter mo
of his fellows, but it would not prevail: then they secretly condemned him,
for fear of the people. Standing before the hangman to be strangled first, he
would not, saying: he should not need to mitigate his pain, for I fear not
(says he) the fire, do therefore as thou art commanded. After this the
blessed martyr gave testimony to the truth in the fire. Francis. Eucenas.

An. 1543. and 1544. at Gaunt was very sharp persecution, 1543 Sharp
persecution.
as also in all Flanders, but specially at Gaunt, there were many headmen
burned for the truth.

And afterward the Emperor coming to Bruxels, there was terrible slaughter
and persecution, especially in Brabant, Hennegow, and Artoise. In so much that
at one time as good as 200. 200. martyrs.
men and women together, were brought out of the country about to the city of
whom some were drowned, some burned, some privily made away, others sent to
perpetual prison. Ex Eucenate.

An. 1545. Martin Heurblot 1545 Martin Heurblot.
a fishmonger, before he was converted to the Gospel, a man of evil life, but
afterward a sincere professor of the truth, was first tormented, to declare and
to bewray other of his profession, which he would not do: after, he was
brought before the council of Flanders, and was condemned the ninth of May, to
be burnt at Gaunt in Verle place, for denying Purgatory, the real presence,
and praying for the dead. His persecutors were the Franciscane friars of Gaunt.
Ex Pantal.

The next day Nicholas Vanpole, and John de Bruck, Nicholas Vanpole, John de
Brucke.
and his wife were burned at Gaunt for the same causes: the council of
Flaunders being persecutors.

The same year at Delden a town in the low country, Vrsula and Mary, Vrsula
and Mary.
of noble parentage were committed to the fire, for professing of ye truth.
First, Mary being the yoonger was put to the fire, where she prayed ardently
for her enemies. Then the Judges exhorted Vrsula to turn: if she would not,
at the least she should require to be beheaded: but she refused so to do,
and as touching the kind of death, she said she feared not the fire, but
rather would follow the example of her dear sister that went before. The
executioners could not consume their bodies, but left them whole lying upon
the ground white: which certain godly Christians privily took up, and buried
in the night. Ex Lud. Rab. Pantal. etc.

Two brethren and the mother.
The same year Franciscus and Nicholas brethren, with their mother Catherina,
were condemned at Mechlin, for denying the Church of Rome, to be the Church of
Christ: for the Sacrament in both kinds: for denying confession, invocation of
Saints, and Purgatory. The mother was condemned to perpetual prison: the
brethren after torments, were condemned to be burned: and least they should
exhort the people, they had gagges, or bals of wood thrust into their mouths:
which they thorough vehemency of speech thrust out again: and sang with a
loud voice, I believe in one God. The one feeling the flame come to his beard,
said: ah what a small pain is this, in comparison of the glory that is to
come. There were besides another yoonger brother, and a sister with them in
prison, who being as yet not settled neither in doctrine nor years, somewhat
relented, and were delivered. Ex Phil. Melanc.

The persecutors were the parson of S. Katherins, Doctor Tapertons, William
Cericken ruler of Mechlin.

The same year, were apprehended one Adrian and Marian his wife. The cause of
their trouble was the edict of the Emperor against Lutherans, in the council
of Worms. Adrian (for fear) gave back, and was only beheaded: she was
burned quick, being enclosed in an iron grate, as the manner of that country
is. Ex Pant. lib. 4.

The same year M. Peter Bruly Peter Bruly.
preacher, after he had endured four months imprisonment, was judged by the
Emperors commissioners to be burned to ashes, and his ashes to be thrown into
the river. The Priests caused a small fire to be made, to increase his pain:
but he endured cheerfully, and constantly. He being searched for by the
magistrates of Dornick, where he preached, was hidden, and at length, let down
in a basket, over the city wall, where he that let him down leaning over the
wall to bid him farewell, caused unawares, a stone to fall of the wall: which
lighting upon him, brake his leg: and so he was token by the watch. Ex Lud.
Rab. lib. 6.

The same year, suffered Peter Miocius Peter Miocius
a silkweauer, before his conversion, a very wicked man: but after,
maruellously reformed by Peter Bruly before mentioned: they first imprisoned him
in a filthy dungeon, among frogs, toades, and filthy vermin. Shortly after,
the Senate sent for him: and when he would have answered unto their
examinations, from point to point: they interrupting him, bad him say, yea, or
nay. Then said he, if you will not suffer me to answer A round answer.
for my self in matters of such importance, then send me to prison again,
among my toades, and frogs, which will not interrupt me, when I talk with my
Lord my God. So being condemned, with gunpowder put to his breast, he was put to
death, and endured the fire. The Friars hearing the crack of the powder on his
breast, told the people yt the devil came out of him, and carried away his
soul. There was at the same time, one Bergeban Bergeban.
in prison: whom, when the judges sent for, as one suspected, being then out of
the way, he conceived thereof such sorrow in his mind, that he went of his own
accord, and presented himself unto the judges: whereupon, (they being sorry for
his voluntary appearaunce) they committed him to prison, and after, the
commissioners threatening him with cruel torments, and the Friars flattering
him, to have his punishment changed, and to be beheaded: he yielded unto them.
The persecutors were, the Senate of Dornick, and Doctor Hasurdus, a gray Friar.
Ex Rabo, etc.

Anno 1546. Johan. Diazius, a Spaniard, was martired, and killed of his own
brother, at Norberg in Germany: where Diazius Johan, Diazius killed by his
brother.
was busy in printing of Bucers Book. His brothers name, was Alphonsus, who
brought with him from Rome, a cut throat, and a ruffian, to kill his brother.
To whom, he coming, and persuading him to revoke the truth, and the other
refusing so to do, he fained himself to depart, and took his leave of his
brother: and by the way, buying an hatchet of a carpenter, sent his man
disguised, with letters to his brother, himself following after: as John
Diazius in the morning was rising out of his bed, to read the letters: the
wretched hangman, with the hatchet, claue his head insunder to the brains,
leaving the hatchet in his head: and so he, with Alphonsus, took them to their
heels. They of Norberg hearing of the fact, made after them, and one of the
company ouertooke them, and caused them to be put in prison at Genipont: but
the Papists handeled the matter so, that the Emperor took it into his own
hearing, and no judgment was given. Ex Claudio Senarclero.

Ann. 1546. Charles the Emp. held an armed Council at Augusta, 1546 An armed
counsel at Augusta. The interim.
after his victory gotten of the Germains: where, Julius Vfling, Michael
Sidonius, and John Islebius, going about to concord together the Gospel of
Christ with popish traditions, drew out a new religion, called an Interim,
which the Emp. endeavored with the sword to maintain: and understanding, that
among other, the citizens of Constantia refused his Interim, purposed to
surprise them: but the Spaniards were driven back, and their captain
Alphonsus slain. Ex Sleid. lib. 21.

At the same time, many godly ministers of the churches in Germany, were in
great danger, specially, such as refused the Interim: of whom, some were cast
in prison, as Martine Frectius, superintendent of Vlms, with four other
preachers mo.

Also, his brother George, for coming to his house, but to comfort him: for
which cause Musculus the same time, with other preachers mo, went from
Auspurgh, Brentius from Hala, Blanrerus from Constance, Bucer from Strausburgh.

In Hungary a certain godly priest, A priest in Hungary.
because he preached that eating of flesh was not forbidden in the Scriptures,
the Bishop caused his body to be tied round about with hares, geese, and
hens, A strange cruelty.
and so caused dogs to be set upon him, which cruelly tare and rent his body
to death. Within few days after, the vile Bishop fell sick and died mad. Ex
tomo 2. Conwal. sermon.

Anno 1547. the Duke of Saxony, The Duke of Saxony
John Frederick being taken prisoner of the Emperor at Albis, the 24. of
April, because he would not forsake the truth, was 5. years detained from his
wife and children, and carried about with the Emperor. At the last, 1552. 1552
Lantgraue of Hesse.
he was set at liberty, and continued in his religion, till the hour of his
death. Sleid. lib. 19.

Such also was the case of Philip, the Lantgraue of Hesse: who was six days
after the Duke of Saxony, freed out of long captivity. Lib. 9. and 24.

Anno 1547. Hermannus, Archbishop of Colen, 1547 Hermannus Archb. of Cole^.
was deposed by the Emperor: because he had reformed his church of certain
Papisticall superstitions, using therein the advice of Martin Bucer. In his
room was placed Adolphus Earl of Scauenburgh. Sleid. 18.

An. 1549. 1549 Martyrdom for the truth.
Nicholas, a Frenchman, and Barbara his wife, with one Marion, the wife of
Augustinus, a Barber, a godly man, suffered: who fled, and traveling toward
England, passing by Dornick, were there detected to ye Lieutenant of Dornick
and so carried to Bergis, and there put into a dungeon. And afterward, Nicholas
Nicholas. Marion.
was condemned to be burned, Marion, wife of Austin, to be buried quick.
Nicholas (going to the place of execution) was commanded to speak nothing to
the people: Yet (forgetting his silence unto ye people) he cried with a loud
voice: Charles, Charles, how long shall thy heart be hardened? A worthy martyr.
whereupon one of the soldiers gave him a blow, and the Friars cried, he has
a Devil. To whom he spoke the verse of the psalm: Depart from me all ye
wicked, for the Lord has hard the voice of my weeping. Ex Lud. Rab. and alijs.

Augustine.
A while after, Augustine the husband of Marian was taken at Bellemount in
Hennegow, and was carried to Bergis, where he was burned, heartily calling upon
the Lord. Ex Crisp. and alijs.

1551 Two virgins.
Anno 1551. at Bamberg two virgins were burned for the testimony of the truth:
they had garlandes of straw put upon their heads: whereupon one comforted
another, saying: Christ bare a Crown of thorns, and why should not we wear
a crown of straw? etc. Ex Phil. Melancth.

The same time, the city of Magdeburg, Magdeburg.
for refusing the Emperors Interim, had been distressed the space of a whole
year: but by reason of war, which fell that time betwixt the Emperor, and
the French king, they were received into favor, and suffered to enjoy their
former religion quietly. Sleid. lib. 23.

Anno 1555. one Hostius, 1555 Hostius.
otherwise called George, for reproving a Friar that preached false doctrine,
touching the Sacrament of the Lords body: after his Sermon in the Church, was
apprehended by Hesselius, the Chamberlayne, and first being strangled, was
afterward consumed with fire. Ex Lud. Rab,

Anno 1554. Johannes Frisius 1554 Ioh, Frisius.
Abbot of Newstate in Bauaria, was deposed, for mayntayning the truth. The 25.
of June.

Anno 1555. Bertrand le Blasse, 1555 Ber. le Blas.
a Silke-weauer, went upon Christmas day, to the high Church of Dornick, where
(the Priest being at mass) he took the cake out of his hands, as he would
have lifted it over his head, and stamped it under his feet. For which fact,
he was first drawn to the castle of Dornick, to the market place (being before
thrice tormented on the pinebanke.) Then he was set upon a Stage, where his
right hand (wherewith he took the host) was crushed, and pressed betwixt two
hot Irons, till the form and fashion of his hand was misshapen. In like manner,
they used his right foot, which he thrust out of his own accord, A wonderful
constancy.
to be used as his hand was before. This done, they took the ball of Iron out
of his mouth, and cut out his tongue: who (notwithstanding) with continual
crying, ceased not to call upon God. Whereupon, the Tormentors put the Iron bal
into his mouth again.

From thence they brought him down into the lower Stage: he going to the same
as quietly, and cherefullie, as if no part of his body had been hurt. There,
his hands and legs were bound behind him with an Iron chain, and so he was
let up and down into the fire flat, so long, till his whole body was
consumed to ashes, which were (by the Governors commandment) cast into the
river.

This done, the Chapel where the crustie god The crustie Ood.
received the shame, was locked up, and the boorde whereupon ye priest stood,
burnte: the marble stone, on which the god brake his neck, was broken to
pieces. And forasmuch, as Bertra^d had received his doctrine at Wesell,
commandment was given, that no person of that Country, should go to Wesel,
under incurring the danger of the Emperors plackard. Ex Crisp. Plant. and alijs.

The same year 200. ministers, and preachers of the Gospel, were banished out
of Bohemia, 200 preachers banished Boheme. Ministers of Lorrain bashed.
for preaching against the superstition of the B. of Rome. Sleid. l. 25. At the
same time also, the ministers of Lorrain were banished by the v. popish Pages,
whom the Tigurins did receive. Panc.

An. 1562. Frances Warbut, and Alexander Daiken, 1562 F. Warlut, A. Daiken.
were beheaded at Dornick for the profession of the truth, and yet their
bodies committed to sepulture: they singing Psalms when they went to
execution, Ex Eud. Rab.

Gillotus Viuer, Gil. Viuer.
James Fabers father in law, Michaell Faber, son to James Faber; Anna, wife
to Gillotus, and daughter of James, were burned at Valence, for the testimony
of the truth. Persecutors Earl Lalaine.

Anno 1550. At Valence, was Michella, 1550 Michella,
wife to James Clerk, who suffered before, burned also with Gillotus. Crisp.

An. 1552. Godfrey Hamel 1552 G. Hamell.
a tailor, was burned at Dornick, or Turney: and when (to diminish his pain)
the hangman would first have strangled him, he refused it, saying, he would
abide the Judges sentence. Ex eod.

Beside these martirs, a number suffered in the higher, and lower Germany:
some secretly made away, some burned, and some drowned.

Anno Domini 1555. At Bergis, suffered John Malo, 1555 John Malo
Damian Wittrock, Weldrew Calier, John Porceaw, burned quick.

An. 1541. Suffered one Julian, and Adrian Lopphen, 1555

At Bruxels, 1559. was one Baldwine beheaded: another also called Gillekin
Tilman burnt.

An. 1541. William Swole, burnt at Mechlin.

An. 1529. Nicholas Paul beheaded at Gaunt.

Robert Orginer, and Jane his wife, with Bandicon, and Martin Orginer, their
children, suffered at Lisle, in the year 1556. Parents and children martired
together, 1556


Master Nicholas, and James Fosdaw, burnte at Mous, Cornelius Volcart, at
Brugis, anno 1553. Habert the printer, and Philip Iopner, at Bruges, anno 1553.
A woman buried with thorns under her. Peter le Ronp at Bruges, anno 1552. At
Mechline suffered Frances, and Nicholas Thijs, two brethren, anno 1555. At
Antwerpe were burned Adrian a painter, and Henry, a Tailor, an. 1555. Also
Cornelius Halewine, Locksmith, and Herman Johnson, ye same year. M. John Champ,
Scholemaster, anno 1557. With a number mo, which are to be seen in a dutch
book of Adrian.

Anno 1525. A certain Monk, because he forsook his abominable order, and
married, was burnt at Prage. A godly preacher was poisoned by ye priests at
Erford. Ex Pantal.

Thus far the Duch martyrs.

These which follow are French martyrs.
ANno 1524. James Pauan 1524 James Pauan.
schoolemaister was persecuted by D. Martial of Paris, and there burned: he
had once before been compelled to recant. Ex Crisp.

Anno 1528. Dionisius Rieux. 1528 Dionisius Rieux.
was burnt with a slow fire at Melda, and did abide much torment: he much
meditated upon the saying of Christ: He that denies me before men. etc. Ex
Crisp.

Ann. 1533. Johan. de Caduceo 1533 Johan. Caduceo. Five burned at Paris.
batcheler of the civil law, was burned at Limosin.

The same year, these 5. were burned at Paris, for casting abroad certain
bills, which sounded against the mass. Bartholomew Mylen, a lame creeple, Ioh.
Burges, mercha^t, the receiver of Nantz, Henry Poole of Courbellin, Cantella a
Schoolemistres, Stephen de la Forge, merchant. Henry Poylle had his tongue
boared thorough, and with a wyre tied to one of his cheeks: they were atached
by the Promoters of Paris. Crisp.

Anno 1534. Alexander Canus 1534 Alexander Canus.
Priest, otherwise called Laurentius Crucenc, was burned at Paris with slow
fire, Pantal.

Anno 1533. John Pointer, 1533 I, Pointer.
a Surgeon, was first condemned to be strangled, and then burned: but afterward
(because he would not do homage to an Idol at the commandment of a Friar who
came to confess him) his sentence was altered, to have his tongue cut out, and
so to be burned. The persecutors were the Graye Friars of Paris, and the
Garbonish doctors, Crisp.

The same year, Peter Gandet, P. Gandet.
sometime knight of the Rhodes, was trained out of Geneua by his uncle, and
after long torments, was burned, Crisp.

Anno 1534. Quoquillard 1534 Quoquillard.
was burned at Bezanson. Crispin.

The same year Nicholas a scriuener, John de Phoyx, Stephen Burlet, were
burned at Arcas. Also Mary Becandella, for reproving false doctrine preached by
a Friar, was accused by a Grayfrier at Rochell, and burned at Fountanis. Crisp.

Anno 1535. John Coruon 1535 John Coruon.
of Moscon, was burned for the testimony of the truth: a man unlettered, yet
to whom God had given such wisdom, that the Judges were amassed. Crisp.

Anno 1526. Martin Gouin 1526 Martin Gouin.
being taken with letters of master Farell, and Peter Viret, and forced by the
Inquisitour, to make confession of his faith, was drowned. Crisp.

Anno 1540. Claudius Painter, 1540 Claud. Painter.
a goldsmith, was accused by his kinsfolks, whom he attempted to convert, and
was committed to Morinus, a chief captain: who condemned him to be burned: but
the high Court of Parliament of Paris, gave judgment, that his tongue should
be first cut out. Crisp.

The same year, Stephen Brune Steph. Brune.
a husbandman, was persecuted by Gasper Angerius, the Bishops renter, and
Donucellus, a Franciscane, and Inquisitour: he was judged to be burned. At the
place of his burning, called Planuoll, the wind blewe the flame of the fire so
from him, that he stood exhorting the people that continued there, about the
space of an hour, scarce harmed, or touched with any flame. So that all the
wood being wasted, they were feign to begin a new fire again: yet stood he
constant, neither could he yet be burned.

Then the Hangman took a stake and let fly at his head: to whom the blessed
man (being yet alive) said, when I am judged to the fire to be burnt, do you
beat me with stones, like a dog? With that the hangman, with a pike thruste
him through the belly and guts, and so burned him to ashes, scattering his
ashes afterward with the wind. Ex Crisp.

Anno 1542. Constantinus 1542 Constantinus.
a citizen of Roan, with three other, were burned for the testimony of the
truth. Crisp.

The next year John du Beck John du Beck.
priest, abode the torment of the fire for the truth, in the chief city of
Champaine.

The same year Aymond de lay voy Aymond de lay voy.
a preacher, being accused by the parish priest of S. Faith in Angeow, and
other priests, was taken (when he might have fled, and was also by his friends
exhorted thereunto) and having been tormented three hours, that he sounded
therewith, being a man of a weak nature, he was condemned to be burned at
Bourdeaux. After sentence given he converted a Carmelite friar, who was his
co^fessor. He was burned for denying purgatory, with other points of popish
superstition: when he was brought to the place of execution, he sang the
psalm, When Israel came out of Egypt, etc. and as he was often repeting, O Lord
my God I commend my soul, the hangman haled him upon the steps, in such sort
that he strangled him, and after his body was consumed with fire. Before his
death, A notable saying.
my flesh (says he) strives maruelously against the spirit, but shortly I
shall cast it off.

Anno 1544. Frauncis Bribard 1544 Francis Bribard. Will. Russen.
the chief secretary to the Cardinal of Bellay, his tongue first cut out,
was after consumed with fire.

The same year W. Russen an Apothecarie, was burned at Roan, for scattring
books against popery. First, because he would not do reverence to the Image
of our Lady, his tongue was cut out. The manner of the execution was, he had
his hands and feet bound behind his back, and with a pully was lifted up into
the air, and when the fire was kindled, he was let down into the flame, where
the blessed martyr with a smiling and cheerful countenance looked up to
heaven, never moving nor stirring till he gave up his spirit: some said, he
had a devil, others said nay, for then he would have fallen into despair. The
Carmelite, who moved him, going to execution, to do homage to the idol, was
called De Lauda: De Lauda.
he was afterward converted, and preached the gospel. Crisp. lib. 2.

Anno 1545. James Cobard 1545 James Cobard.
a schoolemaister, was burned in the city of S. Michaell, in the dukedom of
Barens in Lorraine, for disputing with three popish Priests, and mainteyning
that the Sacraments do not avail without faith: and for other his
confessio^s, which he sent of his own accord to the judges, by his mother.
Crispinus.

An. 1546. Peter Clerk, Peter Clerk.
brother to John Clerk, burnt before: Stephanus Mangius, James Bomplack, John
Brisebar, Henry Hutmotes, Thomas Honorate, John Bardoninus, John Flesch, John
Pitquer, John Mattheston, Phillip Little, Michaell Chailow, Frauncis Clerk,
Couberon a weauer, were burned at Melda or Meaux, 10. miles from Paris, were
William Briconetus W. Briconetus.
B. of the place did much good, and reformed the Church, but being straightly
examined, relented, and there enterteined a private congregation in Mangius
house, and chose Peter Clerk to their minister. The congregation grew shortly
to 400. and complaint being made thereof to the Senate of Paris, three score
and two, men and women, were brought bound to Paris, singing Psalms by the
way, 14 Christian martyrs.
especially the 79. psalm: of these 62. fourteen were steadfast and constant,
and endured first racking, to bewray other of their brethren, but uttered none:
ye rest were scourged and banished, the other persisting still in the
profession of the truth, were sent in a cart from Paris to Melda, to be
executed. In the way three miles from Paris, a certain weauer meeting them,
cried alowde: bidding them to be of good cheer, and to cleave fast to the
Lord, who also was taken and tied fast to the cart. Coming to the place of
execution, which was before Mangius house, it was told them that they which
would be confessed should save their tongues: so 7. (to obtain to speak) were
confessed the other 7. would not As they were in burning the people song
psalms. The priests also seeing that, song, O Salutaris hostia, and Salve
Regina, while the sacrifice of these holy martirs was finished. The priests
sing at ye death of martyrs.
Their wives being compelled to see their husbands in torments, were after put
in prison, from whence they being promised to be let go, if they would say,
their husbands were damned, they refused to say so. The accusers were, Fra^cisc.
friars.

Anno 1546. Peter Chapet 1546 Peter Chapet.
was first strangled, and then burnt at Paris, for scattering books of
religion, and farther confession of his faith. His accuser was John Andre,
promoter to Liset the President. Going to execution, he prayed, O L. Jesus, son
of David have mercy upon me. Then said D. Malliard, who was one yt disputed
with him before, and was appointed to be present at execution: say Jesus Maria,
or else (says he) thou shall be burned quick: which he refused to do, and
afterward being strugled withal, to utter ye same, did let escape out of his
mouth, Jesus Maria unawares: but he by and by, repressing himself: O God (says
he) what have I done, pardon me O Lord, to the truth I have sinned. Then was he
strangled, yet so, that somewhat he felt the pains of the fire. After this,
Malliard full of anger, went to the judgment house, and much blamed the
judges, for suffering the heretics to have their tongues: whereupon, a decree
was made, that all that went to be burned, unless they would recant at the fire,
should have their tongues cut out: Their tongues cut out.
which law was afterward diligently observed. Crisp. lib. 6.

Anno 1546. Sauitinus Sauitinus.
Niuet a lame creeple of the town of Meaux, as they were examining him of
certain points of religion, asked him, whether he would stand to that he had
said or no? to whom he answered again: and I ask you Lord Judges, dare you be
so bold, to deny that which is so plain, and manifest by the open words of the
scripture. At last, he suffered death, with cruel torments, through ye means of
Peter Liset, a great persecutor. Henric. Pantal. and Gallic. hist.

The same year, Stephen Polliot Steph. Polliot.
was apprehended at Fera, and burned at Paris, having his books hanged about
his neck: Pantal.
after he had a long space been kept in a foul and dark dungeon.

Anno 1547. John English 1547 Ioh. English.
was condemned by the high Court of Paris, for the profession of the truth.
Crisp. and Adrian.

The same year Michael Michelot Michael Michelot.
was burned at We^den by Turney: who being asked, whether he would recant, and
be beheaded, or persist, and be burned. He answered: that he trusted, he which
gave him grace not to deny the truth, would also give him patience to abide
the fire.

The same year, Leonardus de Prato Leonardus de Prato.
going to Bar, a town in Burgondie, from Dyion, with two false brethren: with
whom, he talked of religion, was bewraied of them, and burned.

Ioh. Taffingnon.
Also, the same year, John Taffingnon, Ioane his wife, Simon Mareschall, Joan
his wife, William Michliot, James Bonleraw, and James Bretany, of the city of
Langeres, were committed to the fire, and suffered with great constancy:
especially, Joan, Simons wife, reserved to the last place, because she was the
younger, confirmed her husband, and all the rest: declaring that they should the
same day be married to the Lord Jesus Pantal. Crisp. and alii.

Michael Marshall, etc.
The same year, about the same time, were Michael Mareschall, John Came, great
John Camus, and John Seraphin condemned by the Senate of Paris, and there
burned. Ex eisdem.

Anno 1548. Octauian Blonds, 1548 Octauia^ Blo^ds
a merchant of precious stones, was first apprehended at Lions, and there after
a while, confessing, and standing to the maintenance of the truth, at length
through importunity of his parents, and friends, gave over his confession:
notwithstanding, Gabriel of Sacconer, presentener, his persecutor, not leaving
him so, appealed him up to the high court of Paris, where, being asked touching
his faith, which of the two confessions he would stand to, (he being
admonished before of his fall and offense given) said, he would live and die in
his first confession: and so was he condemned to be burned, Crisp. l. 6.

Anno 1549. Hubert Cherrer, 1549 H. Cherrer.
Tailor, a young man, of 19 years, constantly suffered at Dyion, for the
testimony of the truth: notwithstanding all threatenings of persecutors, or
allurements of parents.

The same year. M. Florence Venot, F. Venot.
after he had endured 4. years imprisonment at Paris, where he suffered
grievous torments: and (among other) had been put in a brake, like an Hipocras
bag, that he could neither stand nor lie seven weeks together. At length,
when there was a great show in Paris, the king coming to the city, and
diverse other martirs in sundry parts of the City put to death, he (with his
tongue cut out) was brought to the execution of the^ all. And last of all, in
the place of Maulbert, was burned, the 9. of July in the afternoon. Crisp.

The same year also, Anne Andebert, A. Andebert.
an Apothecaries wife and a widow, was burned at Orleance, and condemned by the
council of Paris. When the rope was put about her, she called it her wedding
girdle, wherewith she should be married to Christ: Notable constancy and
courage in a woman.
and being appointed to be burned upon a Saturday, she said: On a Saturday was
I first married, and on a saturday shall I be married again, Ex Crisp.

The same year, when diverse were burned at Paris, for a spectacle, not long
after the coronation of Henry 2, among them was a poor tailor, dwelling not
far of the king palace, in S. Anthonies street, A poor tailor.
who (for that he wrought upon an holy day) was clapped in prison: and the
matter being brought to the Court, the poor tailor was presented even before
the king, into the Palace: where he so courageously behaved himself against
Petrus Castellanus, B. of Masco^, whom the king willed to talk with this poor
Tailor in his presence, that the king seemed to muse with himself (as one
amazed) so yt (least his behavior should be any means to work in the kings
mind) he was commanded again to the hands of the Officer, and within few
days condemned by the high steward of the kings house, to be burned alive. And
so his execution was sharp and cruel, before ye church of Saint Marie, the
king himself being present: where it pleased God to give such strength to his
servant, in suffering, that the beholding thereof did more astonish the king,
then all the other did before. Io. Crisp. Pantal. li. 7.

The same year was one Claudius Claudius.
burned at Orleance, (coming from Geneua to his Country,) for the Gospel.
Crisp.

The same year the Council of Paris condemned Leonard Galimard, L. Galimard.
to be burned, the same time that Leonard Venate suffered at Paris. Also, at
Troys suffered Macaeus Morreow M. Morreow.
for the testimony of the truth. Ex eod.

An. 1550. Ione Godean, 1550 I. Godean.
and Gabriel Berardinus, were burned: being apprehended for rebuking a priest
of swearing. Gabriel began to shrink for fear of torment: yet being confirmed
by the constant death of Ione, recovered again: and (having first his tongue
cut out) was burned, Eod.

An. 1551. Thomas Spaa^ulinus, 1551 T. Sanpaulinus a notable martyr.
of 18. years of age, for rebuking one that did swear, at Paris, was suspected
of Lutheranisme, and so miserably racked in prison, yt he should either
forsake his opinion, or confess other of his religion: through the setting on
of one Mallard, and other Sorbonists, that the sight thereof, made Aubertus,
one of the Council, to turn his back, and weep.

The young man (when he had made the Tormentors weary with racking, and yet
would confess none) at last was had to Maulbers place in Paris, to be burned:
where he (being in the fire) was plucked up again upon the gibet, and asked
whether he would turn: Marvelous constancy.
To whom he said, that he was in the way toward God, and desired them to let
him go. And so he ended his life. Ibid.

Anno 1551. Mauricius Secenate was burned in Prouence, for the testimony of
the truth: who first answered in such sort that they had no great advantage
against him: for which he was so troubled in conscience, that being afterward
called before the judge, answered so directly that he burned for the same. Ex
eodem.

The same year was Johannes Put or de Puteo, Johannes Put.
surnamed Medicus, burned at Vzez in Prouence, for the Sacrament of the Lords
body. Ibidem.

The same year, at Lions was Claudius Mouerius, Claudius Mouerius.
after much dangerous afflictions and prisonments, burned for the profession of
the truth. He was noted to be of so mild conditions, and so constant, and
learned withal, that certain of the judges could not forbear weeping at his
death.

Anno 1552, Renat Poyet, 1552 Renat Poyet.
the son of William Poyet, which was chauncellor of France, for the constant
witnessing of the truth, was burned at Salmure.

The same year, John Loyer John Loyer.
and his servant a young man, coming from Geneua, were taken by the way, and
had to Toulouse, where they were both condemned. When they were brought to the
stake, the young man first going up, began to weep, the Master fearing least
he should give over, ran and comforted him: so they began to sing as they
were in the fire: the Master standing upright to the stake, shifted the fire
from himself to his servant, Piety and christian charity.
being more careful of him then of himself: and when he saw him dead, he
bowed himself down into the fire, into the flame, and so died. Crispin. and
alij.

The same year, Hugonius Grauier Hugonius Grauier.
minister of Cortillon, was taken at Mascon, where he went to visit his wives
friends, and was burned at Burg. Crisp.

Anno 1533. 1533 Five students burned.
Martial Alba, Petrus Scriba, Bernard Segonie, Charles Faber, Peter Nauihew,
coming from Geneua, and going to Lions, where they sitting at the table of one
that met them by the way, and bad them home to his house, were apprehended and
led to prison: where after they had continued a year, and disputed with the
Friars, and had exhibited a learned confession of their faith, afterward were
burned at Lions. They were examined sunderly of the sacrament of the Lords
body, of purgatory, of confession, invocation, free will, and of the
supremacy. etc. Being set on the cart, they began to sing Psalms: at the
place of execution Martial Alba being the eldest, Christian charity.
was the last that went to the stake, who desired he might go about his
fellows tied at the stake and kiss them, which being granted, he went and
kissed every one of them, saying: farewell my brother, likewise each one bad
farewell my brother. The hangman thought first to have strangled them, but
their faces being smeared with fat and brimstone, the rope was burnt before
they were strangled: so the blessed martyrs in the midst of the fire, spoke
one to another to be of good cheer, and so departed Crisp. Pantal.

Shortly, after the five students before mentioned, Petrus Bergerius Petrus
Bergerius.
made the like confession, and was burned at Lions: he converted in the dungeon
a certain thief, who for pain and torment in the prison cried out of God,
and cursed his parents that begat him, being almost eaten with life, miserably
handled, and fed with such bread, as dogs, and horses had refused: he by
the prayers and teaching of this Bergerius was converted: his name was John
Chanbone. John Chanbone.
Touching his conversion he wrote a sweet letter to those five students,
wherein he praised God for them. Crisp. and Pantal.

Anno 1553. Dionisius Pelloquine, 1553 Dionisius Pelloquine.
a moonke sometime, was burned at Ville Franch, sir miles from Lions, after
long imprisonment, his articles were the Mass, the Sacrament, auricular
confession, Purgatory, the virgin Marie, the Popes supremacy: He died the 11.
of September. Stephanus Peloquinus his brother was taken with Anne Andebert
above mentioned, and martyred at the same time, at a small fire. Crisp.

The same year Ludouicus Marsacus, who had bin of the order of the
Dimilaunces, that had served the king: Michael Gerard his cousin, Stephen
Granot carpenter, were burned at Lions, by sentence of the kings Lieutenant. As
they should be brought out to to the stake, by the hangman, he titied the rope
about the neck of the other two, Marsacke seeing himself to be spared, for
his order and degrees sake, called by the way to the Lieutenant, A worthy
cha^pion of Christ.
that he might have also one of the precious chains tied about his neck, in
honor of his Lord: the which being granted unto, they were so led to the fire
Crisp. Pantal.

The same year, Mathaeus Dymonetus a merchant, Matheus Dymonetus.
who before his conversion, had led a vicious life: was burned at Lions, by the
Lieutenant, Primacius, and Bnatherius official, and Orus inquisitour. He
suffered the 15. of July. Crisp.

The same year, William Neele, William Neele.
an Augustine Friar, was burned at Eureux in France, for rebuking the vicious
life of Priests, and the Deane named Legoux Pantal. lib. 6.

The same year also, Simon Laloe Simon Laloe
coming from Geneua, was taken: and after much racking, and torments, was
burned at Dyion: the 21. of November. The executioner named James Siluester,
James Siluest.
seeing the constancy of the martyr, was so touched in conscience, that he fell
into such a despair, that he could hardly receive any comfort of all the
promises of the Gospel: at length he was strengthened, and converted: and so
with all his family removed to Geneua. Crisp.

Also the same year at Paris, Nicholas Nail Nichol. Nail.
shoemaker, coming thither, with certain fardels of books, was apprehended:
and after diverse torments, so that his body was almost dissolved one joint
from another (to utter his fellows) was last of all burned Crisp.

The same year also, Peter Serre Peter Serre.
about Toulouse, (who first was a priest, and then went to Geneua: where he
learned the shoomakers craft, and so lived) was burned, being bewraied by his
brothers wife: to whom he came of kindness from Geneua, to do his brother good.
The judge asking him what trade he was, said, of late he had been a shoemaker:
The name of a priest, a name of shame to a Christian.
the Judge asking what trade he had before used, said: he was ashamed to
rehearse, or to remember, it being the vilest, and wickedest estate in the
world. The Judge and the people hearing him say so, thought he had been some
thief, or cutpurse, and were desirous to hear the same of him: but he very
loath, and with shame refused to utter the same: nevertheless, at length,
through importunity, was constrained to declare the truth: and said, he was a
priest. His tongue being cut out, and so put to the fire, he stood so
quiet, looking up to heaven all the time of his burning, as though he had felt
nothing: bringing such admiration to the people, that one of the Parliament
said: that way was not the safest, and best, which they used in bringing the
Lutherans to the fire: for it would do more hurt than good. Crisp.

The same year Stephen King, Steph King, etc
and Petrus Denocheus, one King a Notary, and Petrus his Clearke, were after
long imprisonment, burned at Chartris.

Anno 1554. Anthonius Magneus 1554 Antonius Magneus.
being taken at Burges, by certain priests, was sent to Paris, where, after
great rebukes, and torments, he was judged to have his tongue cut out, and to
be burned at ye place, of Maulbert in Paris. He was sent from the 5. students
at Lions, and other in captivity at Paris, unto Geneua, to commend the^ to
their prayers unto God: from whence having returned; within 3. hours after he
was taken at Bruges. Crisp.

The same year, William Alencon William Alencon.
book-binder, was burned at Mount-pelliers, ye 7. of January. There was ye same
time at Mount pelliers, a certain clothworker, who for fear revolted: to whom
it was enjoined by the judges, to make recantation publicly, and to be
present at the burning of Alencon: at the beholding of whose constancy he
gathered such boldness, that he desired the judges, either that he might burn
with Alencon, or else to be carried back again to prison, saying: that he would
make no other recantation: Repentance.
wherefore within three days after was burned. Crispin.

The same year, at Dola was beheaded a godly lawier, named Paris Pamer, Paris
Pamer.
for the gospel of Christ. Pantal.

The same year, Peter du Val shoemaker, Peter du Val.
after most grievous torments, was burned at Nismes. Crispin.

Also the same year, Johannes Filiolus carpenter, John Filiose.
and Iulianus le Ville pointmaker, were burned at Sansare: they were
apprehended by Gilles le Pers. After sentence of fire being given, they
appealed to ye court of Paris, where they being presented, Gilles le pers was
suddenly stricken mad, and so died. After this, the officer tormented the^ from
after dinner, til 3. of the clock, to make them recant: which, when they
constantly endured, they were brought to the place of execution, where the
officer put into their hands, being bound, a wodden cross, which they took
with their teeth, and cast away. Wherefore, their tongues were cut out: which
not withstanding, they spoke at their death, saying: We bid sin, the world,
and the Devil, farewell for ever, Notable constancy.
with whom we shall never have to do hereafter. At last, when the torme^tor
came to smeare them with brimstone, and gunpowder, go to (said Filiolus) salt
the stinking flesh, salt it. Finally, as the flame burst up to their faces,
they constantly finished their martyrdom, Pantal.

The same year also, Dionisius Vair was burned at Roan, D. Vair.
his judgment being given, thrice to be taken up with the engine, and so to be
let down again. He was first a popish priest: left that, and became a
bookebinder at Geneua. Afterward, in the time of king Edward, was minister at
Gersey till Queen Marie came in. He was apprehended at Roan, with I. Langoise,
his brother: by one William, who stayed his books, and him yt had ye custody of
the^: whereof Denis hearing, to redeem the keeper of his books, offered
himself, and so after many terrible torments, he was executed with fire,
where the flame went so high, that the hangman being not able to come near
him, cried to the people standing by to help, but never a man would stir. So
he finished his course and martyrdom. Pantal. lib. 10.

There was a rich man in Paris, that said in jest to the Friars of S. Frauncis
order, you wear a rope about your bodies, because S. Frauncis should once have
been hanged, but the Pope redeemed him, upon condition that ever after he
should wear a rope. Upon this the Franciscans caused him to be apprehended,
and so judgment passed he should be hanged, but he contented to recant,
thought thereby to save his life. The Friars hearing of his recantation,
commended him, saying: if he continued so, he should be saved: and so called
on the Officers, that he might be hanged, while he was in a good way: and so,
notwithstanding his recantation, Cruelty of the Friars.
he was hanged for jesting against the friars. Pantal.

Anno 1554. Tho. Galbergne 1554 Th. Galbergne
a Couerlet-maker, was burned at Turney, cheerfully singing psalms, at the
time of his execution. Crisp. lib, 4.

About which time also, Nicholas Paul Nicholas Paul.
was beheaded at Gaunt.

Anno 1551. Richard Feurus, 1551 R. Feurus.
a Goldsmith, was condemned at Lions, he appealing to the high Court of Paris:
In the way as he was led to Paris, he was met by certain whom he knew not,
and by them taken from his keepers, and set at liberty. And anno 1554. finding
fault in an Inn in Daulphin, with grace said in latin, he was detected, and
taken by the under Marshall, and brought to Lions, where he was condemned,
first to have his tongue cut out, and then to be burned, ( Dignatius being
Judge:) which he received willingly, the 7. of Iulie, Crisp. and alijs.

The same year, Nicholas de Chesne, as he went from Bezamon, to the Town of
Grie, did not homage to a certain cross. Whereupon, he was detected by a
Monk, and condemned by the Judge to be burned. Being carried to the place of
martyrdom, by the way he was promised, that if he would kneel down and hear
a mass, he should be let go as a passenger. Which Nicholas refusing to do,
took his death patiently, Crisp. lib. 6.

Anno 1556. John Bertrand, 1556 I Bertrand.
a keeper of the Forest of March Noyce, was burned at Bloys, for the
testimony of the truth, being condemned by Denis Barles, Counceller of Bloys:
As he was tied to the post he sang the 25. Psalm. Of age he was young, and of
countenance, amiable. Seeing the place where he should suffer, O happy journey
(says he) and fair place, that is prepared for me. O Lord (says he) give
thy hand to thy servant, I commend my soul unto thee, and so yielded up his
spirit. Crisp. li. 6.

The same year, Peter Ronsean, P. Ronsean.
whilst he required his inheritance of his brother in law, was betrayed by
him. He was put to the rack 3. times, which he suffered constantly with great
torments. Afterward he had his tongue cut out, and a ball of Iron put into his
mouth. He was drawn on a hurdle, all broken and maimed, to the fire: where he
was drawn up into the air, and let down 3. times: and when he was half
burned, the ball of Iron fell out of his mouth, and he with a loud voice cried
out: saying, Jesus Christ assist me, and so gave up the ghost, Crisp.

The same year suffered also at Bordeaux, Arnold Mouier, A. Mouier.
and John de Cases, who went to comfort Arnold. After many examinations,
sentence was given they should be burned, by Anthony Lescure, the kings
Attorney. They were drawn through the dirt upon hurdles; to the place of
execution, with a number of bills, glaiues, and gunnes, and trumpetters. The
Magistrates commanded also the gates to be shut, and guarded with keepers.

Mouier was first strangled. Cases was set on fire before the hangman came, who
chanced to fall from the top of the post, to the pauement, and so brake his
head, that the blood followed in great quantity. When these two mild Martyrs
were almost consumed to ashes, suddenly there fell such a fear among them,
without any cause, notwithstanding their gates were guarded, their furniture of
gunnes, and other weapons, that they all fled, and ran over one another.
The Prior of S. Anthonies fell down, so that a great number went over him. The
Judge Pontake, on his Mule, with his red robe, flying as other did, was
overthrown in the prease, in the street called Peterni, in such sort, that he
was feign to be carried to a widows house, and there cried within: hide me,
save me, I am dead, my friends: hide my Mule, that no man see her, etc. But no
man knew any cause of all this fear, Crisp. li. 6.

The same year, Bartholmew Hector, B. Hector.
a Bookeseller of Geneua, as he came into the vale of Angrogn in Piedmont, was
arrested by a gentleman called Perrere, and sent to Thurin, and was burned. At
the stake he was offered his pardon, if he would recant, which he refused. At
his death many wept, saying, why does this man die, that speaks of nothing
but of God? Crisp. lib. 6. He was condemned by Balthelmew Emie, President.

Anno 1557. Philip Ceur, 1557 P. Ceur.
Apothecarie of Geneua, and James his fellow, were burned at Dyion, the most
part of the people wept bitterly, saying, be of good cheer, brethren, etc.
whereat the adversaries were greatly offended, saying to the Magistrates, do
you not see, how almost half part of the people is on their side, and
comforts them, Crisp. libro. 6.

The same year, Archambant Seraphoni, Archambant.
and M. Nicholas de Russeaw, constantly suffered at Dyion. The same Archambant
had been condemned 3. years before, at Tule, and as he was led to Bordeaux,
escaped. Ibid.

The same year, Philbert Hambis, sometimes a Priest, then a painter, afterward
the minister of Albenart in Santong, was apprehended at Saints Ville, and with
him his host, a priest whom he had converted to the Gospel, and so carried to
Bordeaux before the president. As he was in prison, on a Sunday a Priest came
in with all his furniture, to say Mass, whom Philbert seeing invested, came and
plucked his garments from him, with such zeal, that the masse-garments, with
chalice, and candlestickes fell down and were broken, saying unto him: is it
not enough for you to blaspheme God in Churches, but you must pollute also the
prison with your Idolatry? The jailer having first beaten him, upon this laid
him in a low pit, laden with yrons, that his legs were swollen withal, and
there continued 8. days. A little before, perceiving the priest his host to
have fallen, and to have flatly renounted his profession, after certain
instruction, and warning to repent, he told him, his life should be never the
longer, for he should die before him, and not for Gods cause: and that he
should be an ensample to all apostataes: he had no sooner ended his talk, Gods
vengeance.
but the priest going out of prison, was slain by two gentlemen which had a
quarrel to him. At the place of his execution, the trumpets blew to hinder the
people from hearing his exhortation: so first being strangled, he was consumed
with fire. Crisp. lib. 6.

The same year, Nicholas Startorius N. Startorius.
was attached by Ripet, a Secretary, and burned at Ost, by Piedmount: being
first tried with the rack. He was afterward burned: being of the age of 26. He
was apprehended for blaming a friar that preached false doctrine, Crisp. li. 6.

An. 1558. George Tardife 1558 G. Tardil.
was burned at Senes. Another at Tours, a broiderer of that place. Nic. a
shomaker, at Ienuile. Nicholas was young: who, when he was condemned, and set in
the Cart, his father (coming with a staff) would have beaten him: The father
against ye son.
but ye officers (not suffering yt) would have stricken the old man. The son
seeing that, cried out, saying, he had authority over him, and therefore
desired them to suffer him: finally having a ball of iron put in his mouth, he
was consumed with fire. Crisp. lib. 6.

An assembly of three or four hundred of the faithful at Paris.
Anno 1558. the fourth of September, a company of the faithful to the number
of three or four hundred were assembled at Paris in a certain house, having
before it the college of Plessis, in the street of S. James, and behind it
the college of Sorbone, who there assembled in the beginning of the night, to
communicate the Lords supper, were discovered by the Priests of Plessis, who
made outcry upon them, that the whole city almost was in armor. The
governors of the congregation exhorted the people to constancy, and fell to
prayer. That done, (through the council of some, which knew the cowardly hearts
of the multitude) order was taken, that the men which had weapons, should
venture through the press, only the women and children, remained in the
house, and a few men with them, which were less bold, to the number of six
or seven score: where appeared the wonderful work of God, in the^ yt went out
with weapons: which (notwithstanding, that the lanes and passages were stopped,
A marvelous deliverance.
and fires made) did all escape, save only one, who was beaten down with
stones, and so destroyed. Certain that remained in the house, afterward lept
into gardens: where they were stayed till the magistrates came. The women, who
were all of great wealth, only six or seven excepted, perceiving the fury of
the people, went up to the windows, crying mercy, showing their innocent
intent required justice ordinary.

Thus as they were enclosed six or seven hours, came Martin, the kings
Attorney, with force of Commissaries, and Sergeants, who entering the house, and
viewing of the furniture, the women and children, for pity could not refrain
from tears. Notwithstanding, proceeding in his office, he had them all to
prison, in the little Castle. In the mean time, all manner of slanderous
reports were raised of them, as incest, conspiracy, killing of children, etc.
which rumor the Cardinal of Lorrain The cardinal of Lorraine a slanderer of
the faithful.
did greatly confirm. The brethren which escaped, hearing this, consulted,
first to humble themselves with prayer before God in their private families.
Secondly, to stop the brutes running of their assemblies, to write Apologies,
one to the king, An Apology to the king.
another to the people. The Apology to the king nothing prevailed: who was
persuaded that all was but pretenced excuses. The other to the people did great
good, in satisfying the rumors and defending the good cause of the Gospel:
against which Apologies, and persons, diverse Sorbonists began to write, one
called Doctor Demochares, the other Cualis Bishop of Auranches: besides these,
yet a third Sorbonist. And finally the 17. of September, diverse of the poor
afflicted Christians were brought forth to their martyrdom, a great part of
them being delivered by the intercession of the Germans, who were then in a
certain colloquie at Worms, albeit certain of the company were executed
before the coming of the Germane Ambassadors, whose names do here ensue:
Nicholas Clynet Nicholas Clynet and other martyrs.
one of the Elders of the congregation at Paris, before schoolemaister at
Santong where he was borne, was there pursued, and had his image burned: he
did so overthrow Maillardone one of the chief Sorbonistes, and a notorious
Sodomite, the Lieutenant, that he confessed, he never heard a man better
learned, and of more intelligence. With him suffered also Taurin Gravel an
elder also of the same congregation, first a student of the law in Toulouse,
then an advocate in the court of Paris: the third a gentlewoman of three and
twenty years of age, named Phillip de Luns, widow of the Lord of Graueron:
they had al their toongues first cut out, and then suffered the fire with great
constancy, specially Gravel, and the widow, who ever before since the death
of her husband used to go in mourning apparel: A notable widow.
but the same day going to burning, she put on her French hood, and decked her
self in her best apparel, as going to a new marriage. Gravel and Clinet were
burned alive: Philip was strangled after she had a little tasted the flame with
her feet, and visage. At the time of execution, she neither changed color nor
countenance, being of an excellent beauty. Crisp. lib. 6.

Of the same company were Nicholas Cene a Physician, brother to Phillip Cene
above mentioned, and Peter Gabart a sollicitour of processes, about the age of
thirty years: the time of execution being come, they had their tongues cut
out, and were drawn to the Suburbs of Saint Germane, where they endured great
torment: for they were holden long in the air over a small fire, and their
lower parts burnt of, before their higher parts were much burned,
notwithstanding they endured constant to the end. Bibles and testame^ts burnt.
At the same time many Bibles, and Testamentes, were burnt.

Of the same number also Frederick Danuile, and Frauncis Rebizies Frederick
Danuile, and Frauncis Rebizies.
scholars, and neither of them past twenty years of age, were burned at
Paris, the same year of our Lord, 1558.

About the two and twenty day of October, they were brought up to a chamber in
the castle to be racked, that they might utter the rest of the congregation.
Rebizies being drawn and stretched in the air, cried: come Lord and show thy
strength, that man do not prevail, etc. After him they racked also his
companion, and then burnt them both, at the place Maulbert in Paris, one of
them comforting another, Worthy martyrs.
saying: be strong my brother, be strong. Satan away from us.

Of the same company were also Rene Seaw, Rene Seaw.
and John Almericke, I. Almericke.
who were almost racked to death, that Almericke could not go when he was
called to the court to be judged: both of them died in prison, constantly
standing to the truth, Ibidem.

About this time 1558. Villegaignon Villegaignon.
Lieutenant for the french K. after yt he had a while professed the truth,
revolted: and in the land of Bresil (where he had taken an Island) he murdered
and drowned in the Sea John Bordell, John Bordel.
and Matthew Vermeille, and Peter Hurdon for the profession of the truth. There
was a fourth Andrew de Feaw, who^ by allurements, and threatninges, he drew
from the truth.

The same year Geffrey Varagle Geffrey varagle.
(who before had said mass 17. years and was afterward a preacher in the
valley of Angrogn) was first strangled, and then burned at Thuris in Piedmont
by the kings lieftenant. He was questioned with about works of
supererogation, justification, freewill, predestination, confession,
satisfaction, indulgences, images, purgatory, the Pope, etc. It is said that
at the time of his burning a Dove was seen (as is credibly reported of many)
flying and fluttering diverse times about the fire. Crisp. lib. 6.

The same year also Benet Roman Benet Roman.
a mercer, first being pitifully racked, was hanged in the Air, and so burned
at Draguinian in Prouence. The fame of his constancy being known in the town,
Judge Barbose a man blind and ignorant, and no less deformed, came to see him,
and asked, what do they believe (says he) in any God at Geneua? Roman loking
upon him said, what art thou, that so wretchedly do blaspheme? I am (said he)
the ordinary judge of this place.

And who has put thee (said Roman) so gross and deformed a person in such an
office? Think thou we be infidels: and no Christians? And if the Devils
themselves do confess a God, suppose you that they of Geneua do deny their
God? no, no, we believe in God, we invoke his name, and put all our trust in
him.

Whereof Barbose took such indignation, that he pursued him to the death.

There was great disputation after his death: some said, if good men had been
about him, it had gone better with him: and that those priests and monks,
which were about him, were whoremaisters, and infamous. Other went away,
maruelling and disputing of his death, and doctrine, etc. Crispine.

Anno 1558. Frauncis Viuax Francis Viuax.
was strangled and burned at Dyion, being betrayed by a Priest, whose Sermon he
reprehended, and who prete^ding friendship, required farther conference: which
being appointed in the covent of the Iacobins, there was he apprehended, and
witnessed the truth by martyrdom.

Anno 1559. Peter Arondeaw 1559 Peter Arondeaw.
being taken by the priests at Rochel, was conveyed to Paris, and the 15 day
of Noue^ber, was there burned quick at the place, called S. John in Grieve. His
chief accuser, was one Monroy, who was not long after stryken with an
Apoplexy, and died. The Lieutenant also, for causes of extortion, was deposed
within a while after. Crisp. lib. 6.

The same year was Thomas Montard, Tho. Montard.
being converted from a vicious life, burned quick for the testimony of Jesus,
at Valencius: because he said the God of the host was abominable, Crisp. lib,
6.

The residue of the French martyrs.
Ann du Burg.
ANn du Burg Counselor of Paris, Andrew Coiffyer, John Isabew, John Iudet,
martyrs of Paris: Gefferey Guerneis, John Morell, John Berbeuill, Peter Cheuet,
Marin Marie, Margaret Rich, Adrian Daniffe, Giles de court, Phillip
Parmentier, Marin Rosseaw, Peter Milot, John Berfoy, besides the tumult of
Amboise, The tumult of Amboise. Marlorate.
the persecution of Vassay, Austen Marlorat, master Mutonis.

The residue of Dutch Martyrs.
James de Lo, of the I Will of Flaunders, John de Binsons, at Antwerp, Peter
Pettit, John Denis, Simon Guilmyn, Simeon Herme, of the I Will of Flanders, John
de Lannoy, at Tourney, Alexander Dayken, of Brainchastell, William Cornu at
Henalt, Anthony Carou, of Cambray, Renandine de Franckvile. Certain suffered
at Tourney, Michel Robibert of Arras, Nichaif de la Tomb, at Tourney. Roger du
Mont.

A note of Spanish Martirs.
Anno 1540. Frances Sauromanus, 1540 F. Sauromanus
a Spanishe Merchant, so profited in one month by hearing of M. Iacobus,
sometime Prior of the Augustine Friars in Antwerp, and afterward Preacher at
Breame, that he exhorted diverse of his friends at Antwerpe by letters,
bewayling their ignorance.

He wrote also to Charles the Emperor, requiring him, that he would reform the
miserable corruption of religion in Spain. And besides this, he wrote a
Catechism, and diverse other Treatises in the Spanish tongue.

This Frances coming to Antwerp, and purposing there to confer of matters of
religion, and to instruct his Countrymen: was by them betrayed, and boldly
confessed his faith, and religion: and reasoned with the Friars, with such
zeal, that the Spaniards (thinking he had not been well in his wits,)
conveyed him into a Tower six miles from Antwerpe: where he was deteyned in a
deep Dungeon, with much misery, the space of 8. months. But afterward, the
Spaniards thinking him better come to himself, discharged him out of prison.
Which was about the time yt the Emperor was at the Council of Ratisbon, 1541:
whether Frances went, and there having time and opportunity to speak unto the
Emperor, he stepped boldly unto him: beseeching him to deliver his Country,
and Subjects of Spain, from false religion, The Emperor three times admonished
by Sanromanus.
and to restore again the sincerity of Christ's doctrine. This did he three
times, the Emperor giving gentle audience. But attempting the fourth time, he
was repulsed by certain Spaniards about the Emperor: who incontinently would
have thrown him into the river Danubius, had not the Emperor stayed them, and
willed he should be judged according to the laws of the Empire. By which
commandment, he was detained with other malefactors in bands, till the
Emperor took his voyage into Aphrike, and when the Emperor came into Spain,
he was there delivered to the Inquisitors, by whom he was laid in a dark
prison under the ground, and at length after many examinatio^s and much
affliction, they perceiving him not to be reclaimed, proceeded to his
condemnation, and pronounced sentence of burning against him. His articles
were, that we are saved only by the free mercy of God in Christ: that the
Mass is an horrible blasphemy: that auricular confession, satisfaction,
purgatory, invocation of Saints, Image worshipping, be mere blasphemies
against God, etc.

As he was laid on the heap of wood, and the fire kindled about him, he
began a little at the feeling of the fire, to lift up his head toward
Heaven: which the Inquisitours perceiving, thinking he would have recanted,
caused him to be taken of the fire: but when they perceived him constant, they
threw him in again, and so was he immediately dispatched. Francisc. Encenas.

Anno 1545. Rochus 1545 Rochus.
was burned at Saint Lucas in Spain. He was an Image maker, and as soon as
he had received the light of the Gospel, he gave it over. and lived by
making of seals, saving only he kept the Image of the virgin Mary
artificially graven, for a sign of his occupation.

It fell so that an Inquisitor passing by, asked Rochus the price of the Image,
which when Rochus did set (belike not minding to sell the Image) the
Inquisitour bad him scarce half the money: which when he heard, he said, he
would rather break it, then to sell it otherwise then he might afford it:
yea (said the Inquisitour) break it? let me see thee: with that Rochus took
up a cheesill and dashed it on the face of the Image, wherewith some part of
the face was blemished: the Inquisitour seeing that, crying out as he were
mad, commanded him to prison, and within three days after he was burned,
for blemishing his own work. Pantal. lib. 5.

The execrable Inquisition of Spain.
IT first began by Ferdinandus and Elizabeth his wife, Of the execrable
Inquisitio^ of Spain.
and was instituted against the Jews, which after their Baptism, professed
their own ceremonies: but now it is practiced against the professors of the
Gospel. The Spaniardes, especially the great divines, do hold, that the holy
Inquisition can not err: and that the Fathers of the Inquisition can not be
deceived. By the order of the Inquisition, the party called in question, if any
thing be suspected or pretended, is incontinent commanded to a horrible
prison, and there they find out crimes against him at leisure. In the mean
time no man living so hardy (not the father for the child) as to speak for
him: for if he do, he is also taken, and cast into prison: neither is it
permitted for any one to enter into the prison, but there he endures alone,
where he can not see so much as the ground, and where he sustaineth moreover
whippings, rackings, irons, tortures, etc. Sometimes they are brought forth,
and showed in some high place, for an open spectacle of rebuke and shame: and
thus are some of them detained many years, and murdered by long torments
whole days together: Torments whole days together.
during all the time what is done in the prison no man knows, but only ye
holy Fathers and the tormentors: all is done in secret: the accuser secret,
the crime secret, the witness secret, neither is the poor prisoner ever
advertised of any thing: if he can guess who accused him, wherefore and
whereof, he may be pardoned peradventure of his life, but this is very
seldom, and yet is he not set at liberty, before he has endured long time
infinite torments: and this is called their Penitence: and so he is let go, yet
not but that he must wear a garment with yellow colors, for a note of
public infamy to him and his whole race. And if he can not guess right,
showing to the judge by whom he was accused, and whereof, incontinent the
horrible sentence of condemnation is pronounced against him, to be burned for
an obstinate heretic: yet so the sentence is not executed till he has endured
imprisonment, in some heinous prison.

Three sorts of men, most principally be in danger of these Inquisitours.
Three sorts of men in danger of the Inquisition.
1. They that be greatly rich, for the spoil of their goods. 2. They that be
learned, because they will not have their secret abuses espied. 3. They that
begin to increase in honor, and dignity, least being in honor they should
work them some shame. This Inquisition the King and Princes are bound by oath
to maintain with all their power.

1559 28. martyrs in the town of Validoly.
Anno one thousand, five hundred, and fifty and nine. The 25. day of May, in
the town of Validoly, where commonly the council of the Inquisition is wont
to be kept, there were eight and twenty godly Christians (saving one Jew) that
did suffer for the testimony of the truth, whereof 14. were burned, and the
rest had their goods confiscate, and a note of dishonor laid upon them, for
the name of Jesus. They which were burnt, and their goods confiscate, were D.
Cacalla, Cacalla M.
sometime an Augustine friar, priest of the town of Validoly, and sometime
preacher to Charles the fifth, a man of great learning, A Christian stock.
John de Biuero priest of Validoly, and brother to Cacalla, Dame Blaunch,
sister unto them, Frauncis de Biuero, brother unto the Dame, Constance de
Biuero, an other Sister, Dame Leoner de Biuero, her cousin: being already dead
long before at Validoly, ye mother to the five aforesaid, above her coffine,
was her picture laid, which was condemned with her dead corpse, to be burned
for an heritike. Moreover, her goods being confiscate, her house, was adjudged
utterly to be rased, and cast down to the ground: and for memorial thereof,
a marble stone to be set up in the place: wherein the cause of her burning
should be engraued. After these, were condemned M. Alfonz Perez, priest of
Valence, Christoph. Del citizen of Samora, Christopher de Padilla, Anthony de
Huizuelo, Katherine Roman, Frauncis Erreni, Katherin Ortega, Isabel Strada,
Jane Valesques, and a certain Smith. They were all first strangled, saving
Anthony Huizuelo: who was burned alive, because he did with more vehemence,
detest the Pope, then the rest. They which had their goods confiscate, were
these: Don Petro Sarmiento, knight of the order of Alcantara, dwelling at
Valence, and son of the marquis de Poza, was judged to bear a Sanbenita
Sanbenita.
all his life, and condemned to perpetual prison, with loss of his order, and
all his goods: to who^ it was moreover enjoined, never to wear any more gold,
silver, precious stones, etc. Dame Mencia his wife was adjudged to the same
punishment. Don Louis de Ropas, son and heir of the the marquis of Poza,
through great suit made for him, was condemned only to wear a Sanbenita unto
the townhouse, and his goods to be confiscat. The same judgment was also
given of dame Anne Henriques, daughter of the marquis Alcauses, and mother to
ye marquis de Peza, and wife to Lord Alphonsus de Fonseca.

Dame Jane de Silua, wife to John de Biuero, brother to Doctor Cacalla, was
enjoined to bear a mantle all her life, for penance: and her goods confiscate.
The like did Leonard de Lisuers, wife to Huizuelo, Doct. of divinity suffer.
Item, Marina de Saiauera, wife of Cisneras de Sareglio. Ite^, Daniel Quadra,
born at Pedrosa: al which 3. were condemned to perpetual prison with their
mantels, and co^fiscation of al their goods: dame Mary de Roias was judged to
bear her mantel to the town house, and her goods confiscate. Anthony Dominicke
de Pedrosa was condemned to three years imprisonment, clothed with a
Sanbenita, and his goods co^fiscate. Anthony Basor an Englishman, was enjoined
to bear his mantell to the Town house, and was thrust into a cloister for one
year, there to be instructed. There was a Jew likewise burned at that time for
reuolting from his christendom to Iudaisme.

It is reported, besides these aforesaid 37. other prisoners yet remained at
Validolie, reserved to another tragedy of that bloody Inquisition.

Besides Spain, Naples also, and Cicill are subject to to this barbarous
Inquisition: in which kingdom of Cicill, it is credibly reported, that every
third year a certain number are brought out to martyrdom: Sometime twelve,
sometime six, sometime more or less: among who^ an. 1559.

A note of Italian Martirs.
Anno 1546. N. Encenas, 1546 N. Encenas.
otherwise Dryander a Spaniard, brother to Franciscus Encenas, a man of great
learning; he was also instructour to Diazius the Godly Martyr above mentioned:
this man was first offered the Sanbenita made in form of a mantell before and
behind him, with signs of ye red cross: which when he refused, he was
adjudged to be burnt: and so was, at Rome, in sight of the Cardinals, and face
of the Apostolical sea. Pantal. lib. 6. Crispin. etc.

Franciscus Encenas Franciscus Encenas.
brother to this Nicholas, being in the Emperors court at Bruxels, offered
unto Charles the fifth the New testament translated into Spanish: for the which
cause he was cast into prison, where he endured sorrowful captivity and
calamity, the space of 15. months, looking for no other but death. At last,
thorough the marvelous providence of almighty God, the first day of February,
Anno 1545.

Anno 1550. Fauinus 1550 Fauinus.
borne in Fauentia, was burned at Ferraria: by the earnest persuasions of his
wife, and friends, he did first relent: whereof he conceived such sorrow of mind,
yt he could not be quiet, till he had fixed his mind to venture his life for
the testimony of the truth: whereupon, he went about all the country of
Romaigna, publicly preaching the doctrine of Christ. So anno 1547. an. 1549.
an. 1550.

When the imprisonment of this Fauinus was known to his parents and kinsfolk,
his wife and friends came to him with weeping persuasions: to whom he answered,
that it was enough for them that he had once for their sake fallen into that
cowardlinesse they knew, A constant martyr.
wherefore he desired them to depart in peace, and solicit him no more therein.

About the same time died Pope Paulus the 3. and after him succeeded Julius the
3. Pope Paulus the 3. died. Pope Julius 3.
which then sent letters that Fauinus should be executed: the news whereof
being brought him, he gave the messenger thanks. So early in the morning,
after he had prayed most earnestly unto God, he was strangled three hours
before day in the city of Ferraria, to the intent the people should not see
him, nor hear him speak. Afterward about dinner time, his body in the same
place was burned: at the burning whereof came such a fragrant smell to all them
there present. and so stroke their senses, that they were therewith
maruellously refreshed. Pant. lib, 7. and Crisp.

Anno 1550. Dominicus de Basuna, 1550 Dominicus de Basuna.
was hanged at Placentia, after certain months imprisonment, for preaching
of true confession, against Purgatory, Pardons, etc. He was offered pardon,
if he would recant: but he refused so to do, and received martyrdom.
Pantal. lib. 7.

Anno 1551. Galeazius Trecius, 1551 Galeazius.
a Gentleman of good calling, was burned at Laus Pompeia in Italy. A little
before he should be burned, there was a controversy betwixt the mayor of the
city, and the Bishops Clergy, for the expenses of wood which should go to
his burning. He hearing thereof, sent word to both parties to agree, for he
himself of his own goods, would see the cost of that matter discharged. But
at the suite of his friends, and by persuasions, (after three several
examinations, and testimonies given to the truth) he relented. Whereupon, he
fell into such grief of mind, that he could not be quiet, till he had
occasion offered to recover himself: which afterward he did, denying to the
Judges again that which before he had yielded unto them. This Galleazius was
first instructed in the truth by an Augustine Friar, named Maniardus, and
afterward more thoroughly confirmed by Celius Secundus, Ex Celio.

Anno 1538. Did one Johannes Mollins, 1558 I. Mollins.
a Gray Friar, secretly expound the Epistle of S. Paul to the Romans, to a
few. Which being known, his auditors increased, so that he was compelled to
read openly in the Temple.

At the same time was one Cornelius at Bononie, a vain babbler: him did
Cardinal Campeius require to interpret the same Epistle also, to disgrace
Mollins. But Mollins excelled him, and drew to him his auditors. Which when
Cornelius perceived, he persuaded the Cardinal to dispatch Mollins. So, a
disputation was appointed betwixt them, which endured till three of the clock
after midnight. From which disputation Johannes departing, was taken, coming
down at the lowest steps, and carried to prison. In the mean season,
Laurentius Spatha, L. Spatha.
general of his order, in most speedy wise posted up to Rome, and so
prevailed in Mollins behalf, that the P. wrote down his letters to Ca^peius,
that Johannes should be delivered out of prison: so yt within 3. months
after, he should personally appear at Rome. Thus, the 30. day of his
imprisonment, he was delivered: who, but for the coming of the Popes letters,
had been burned within 3. days after. When he came to Rome, he was not
permitted (as he desired) to dispute openly, but enioined to write his mind in
articles, and to bring his proofs: which he diligently performed, entreating
of original sin, justification by faith, free will, purgatory, etc. Upon
this, certain Cardinals and Bishops were assigned to have the cause in
hearing: who disputed with him. 3. days, and could not refell that which he
had proved: At ye last, answer was made him, that it was truth which he
affirmed, nevertheless, the same was not meet for this present time: for that
it could not be taught nor published, without the detriment of the Apostolic
sea: wherefore he should abstain hereafter from the epistles of S. Paul, and so
again return safe to Bononie, and there profess philosophy. Thus being
returned home, he declares all the matter in the pulpit: wherewith Campeius
more offended then before, obtained of the pope, that the general of the
order, should remove Molins from Bononia, and place him elsewhere. So, from
thence he was sent to Naples, and there was appointed preacher in ye Monastery
of S. Laurence. But Petrus the viceroy there, could not abide his doctrine, and
so nearly sought his life, that he departed, and went wandering into Italy
from place to place, preaching Christ. Not long after this, Campeius being
dead, he returned again to Bononia, being called thither by a good Abbot, named
de Crassis, an. 1543. De Crassis. 1543
where he renewed again the reading of Paul's Epistles, after a secret forte:
but that could not long be undiscovered. Whereupon, by means of Cardinal de
Capo, and by Bonauentora the General he was apprehended the second time, and
brought to Fauentia, and there laid in a filthy stinking prison: where he
continued 4. years, no man having leave once to come to him. During which time,
he wrote a Commentary upon ye books of Moses: which labor was suppressed by
the adversaries. At length, through the intercession of the Earl Petilianus,
and the good Abbot de Cassis, he was again delivered, and sent to Rauenna,
where he made his abode a while with the Abbot, after at Vitalem: and there
again taught the gospel of Christ, as before. And whenever he spoke of the
name of Jesus, his eyes dropped tears, he was so fraught with a mighty
feruentnes of Gods spirit. In process of time, when ye abbot was dead, The
zeal of Molins.
his sureties began to be weary of their bond, and so was he again the third
time imprisoned by the Popes Legates. There were then 4. men of great authority,
who bayled him out of prison again: of whom, one took him home to instruct his
children: at whose fame, such a concourse came to see him, that the adversaries
consulted with themselves to kill him: whereupon commandment was sent to the
Popes Legates, to lay hands upon him, and to send him up fast bound to Rome,
where again the fourth time he was imprisoned in the castle of Nouie, and
there continued eighteen months, and at last the 5. of September, anno 1553.
there sat upon him 6. Cardinals, beside the judge, and condemned him with a
weauer of Perusium, in the temple of S. Mary, called De Minerua: first to be
hanged and then burned: which sentence being pronounced against him, he cited
them up to the tribunal seat of Christ: and so they were both had to the place
of execution, and suffered meekely for the testimony of the truth. Pantal. lib.
19.

Anno 1554 Manlius in dictis P. Melanct.

The same year, Franciscus Ganiba Franciscus Ganiba.
was first strangled, and then burned at the city of Canum, in the dioces of
Millain, for the testimony of the truth: having his tongue first boared, that
he might not speak. Pantal. lib. 10.

Anno 1555. Pomponius Algerius 1555 Pomponius Algerius.
was burned alive at Rome, after he had bin long detained in prison at Venice:
where being in prison, he wrote a notable Epistle to the afflicted Saints, full
of consolation.

An. 1559. Johannes Aloisius 1559 I. Aloisius.
suffered at Rome. And the same year Iacobus Bouellus I. Bouellus.
at Messina. They were both sent down from Geneua, to the parties of Calabria,
there to minister, Ex Epist. Sim. Flo.

After Pope Julius 3. 1560 Julius 3.
came Marcellus 2. Marcellus 2.
After him Paulus 4. Paulus 4.
After whom, Pius 4. Who raised such sharp persecution in the kingdom of
Naples, that many Noble men, with their wives, and others, were reported there
to be slain. Pantal. lib. 11.

The same year, 1560. 88. 88. Martirs together.
persons put together into one house, both young and old, one after another,
were taken out of the house: and so being laid upon the butchers stall, with
one blouddy knife were all killed in order in Calabria. Pantal. lib. 11.

The Pope promises.
It is to be noted, that the Pope did promise Marquis Buccianus governor of the
province of Calabria, to make his son a Cardinal of Rome, if all the
Lutheranes of that province were rooted out: which might be the cause of this
butcherly cruelty.

The persecution of Merindole and Cabriers.
ABout 200. years ago, this people is said to come out of the country of
Piedmount, to inhabit in Prouence, in certain villages destroyed by wars,
and other desert places, wherein they used such labor, and diligence, that
they had abundance of corn, wine, oil, almondes, with other fruits. They had
of long time refused the Bishop of Romes authority, and observed ever a more
perfect kind of doctrine, then others, (delivered unto them from the Father to
the son) ever since the year 1200. In the year 1530. Georgius Maurellus,
Georgius Maurellus.
borne in Delph, and Petrus Latomus, P. Latomus.
a Burgundian, to confer with the learned ministers in the doctrine of the
Gospel. Which done, as they returned through Burgundy, Petrus Latomus was
taken at Dyion, and cast into prison: Maurellus escaped, and returned to
Merindoll, with books and letters, which he brought with him from the churches
of Germany: Whereby they being instructed, sent for the most ancient
brethren, and cheifest in knowledge in all Calabria, and Apulia, to consult
with them, touching the reformation of the Church. Whereby the Bishops were so
moved, that they raged greatly against them. Among other, there was one John
de Roma, a Monk, who was most cruel: A cruel monk.
and among other his cruelties, he used to examine them thus: he filled boots
with boiling grease, and put the boots upon their legs, tying them backward
to a form, with their legs hanging down over a small fire, and so examined
them: thus he tormented very many, and in the end most cruelly put them to
death. The first whom he thus tormented, were Michellotus Serra, Michellotus
Serra.
and William Melius, Will. Melius. The vengeance of God.
with a number mo. But Gods vengeance fell heavily upon him, for first he was
condemned for this cruelty, by the high court of parliament of Prouence: and
avoiding that sentence by flying to Auinion, he was stricken with such a
horrible disease, that no man durst come nigh him, alive or dead. He did so
horribly stink when he was dead, there was none would come near him to bury
him, but a young nouice newly come to his order, caught hold with an hook upon
his stinking carrion, and drew him into a hole, which was made for him hard
by. While he was in torments and anguish, he cried out oftentimes in great
rage, oh, Despair.
who will deliver me? who will kill me, and rid me out of these intolerable
pains, which I know I suffer for the evils and oppressions I have done to the
poor men? etc.

After the death of this monster, the B. of Aix, by his official Perionet
continued the persecution by the hands of the ordinary judge called Meiranus a
cruel tyrant: who without form of law, such as the judge had pronounced to be
heretics, he put to death with most cruel torments.

In the time of Bartholmew Cassanus president of the parliament of Aix, a most
cruel tyrant: they of Merindoll in the person of 10. were cited personally to
appear before ye kings attorney. But they hearing that the court had
determined to burn them, without order of law; durst not appear at the day
appointed, A cruel sentence against the people of Merindoll.
for which cause the court awarded a most cruel sentence against Merindoll,
and condemned all the inhabitants to be burnt, both men and women, sparing
none, no not the little children, and infants: the town to be rased, and their
houses beaten down to the ground: also the trees to be cut down, as well
Olive, as other, and nothing to be left, to the end it should never be
inhabited, but remain as a wilderness. This sentence against the
Merindolians, The harlot of the B. of Aix, labors against Merindoll.
the concubine of the Bishop of Aix, labored greatly to have executed,
especially because (as the Bishop of Aix told her) they held, that all Bishops,
pastors and, priests, ought either to be married or gelded: for which she said,
she hated them to the very death, and would employ goods, and friends, to work
their destruction.

The Archbishop of Arles, the Bishop of Aix, and diverse Abbots, and Priors,
consulted how to execute the arrest with all speed, and by the advice of the
Bishop of Aix they went to Auinion, there with other Prelates to entreat of the
matter: in which assembly they made a general composition, confirmed with an
oath, that every man should endeavor himself, that the arrest of Merindoll
should be executed with all expedition, every man offering to furnish out men of
war according to his ability, the charge whereof was given to the B. of Aix.
After this council holden, the next day they banketted at the house of the
Bishop of Rieux: to which banquet all the fairest women of Auinion were called,
to solace these good Prelates: after they had dined, they fell to dancing,
dicing, and such other pastimes: which being ended, they walked abroad to
solace themselves till supper: as they passed the street, every one leading
his minion upon his arm, they saw a man which sold bawdy pictures, and
ballades, all which the Bishops bought up, being as many as a mule could well
carry: and if any sentence were obscure in the rhyme, the Bishops did expound
it, with great delight and laughter. In the same place walking along, they
found one that sold certain bibles in French, and Latin, which when ye
prelates perceived, they greatly raged against the man, who answered the^, is
not the bible as good as these goodly pictures which you have bought for these
ge^tlewomen? He had scarce spoken these words, when ye B. of Aix said, I
renounce my part of paradise, if this man be not a Lutheran: so he was laid
hold on, and on the next morrow after, brought before the judges, The martyr
burned with 2. bibles about his neck.
in presence of the Bishops, and condemned immediately to be burned, with two
bibles hanging about his neck: the one before, and the other behind. This
sentence was executed the same day: and thereupon, proclamation made against al
books in the french tongue entreating of the scriptures, under pain of death,
to all them that would not bring them in.

After this, the B. of Aix goes to the president Cassaneus, and labors him
to put the arrest in execution: who being persuaded thereto, the drum was
sounded up through out al Prouence, the captains were prepared with their
ensigns displaied, and a great number of footmen, and horsemen, began to set
forward, and marched out of the town of Aix, in order of battle, well horsed
and furnished against Merindoll, to execute the arrest. The inhabitants of
Merindol hearing thereof, commended themselves, and their cause to God by
prayers, The manner of of Gods children in affliction.
making themselves ready to the slaughter, In this while the Lord of Alence, a
man, wise and learned in the Scriptures, and in the civil law, altered again
the presidents mind: and so the commission was called bark, and the army
retired, which was come within a mile and a half, of the town of Merindol, to
do the execution. God hears their prayers.
The Merindolians hearing thereof, gave thanks to God, and determined to
subject themselves unto Gods will, and to endure whatsoever affliction should
be laid upon them. The fame of them, and also of the arrest, came to the king
Francis ears; who gave commandment to the noble and virtuous Lord monsieur de
Langeay: at that time his Lieutenant in Thurim, a city of Piedmount diligently
to enquire the truth of the matter: who sent 2. deputies to enquire: the which
deputies made report of ye virtue, and diligence of ye poor Merindolia^s, in
such sort that they had by their labor fructified Merindol; yt whereas before
it was taxed but at 4. crowns, before the destruction and oppression which it
suffered, paid yearly to the Lord 350. crowns, besides other charges: they
declared also the great oppression, which they had suffered. Besides they had
good testimony given of their neighbors of Prouence, what they held also:
also, against the popes religion, was truly reported, and the copye of the
arrest brought whereof the king was advertised by monsieur de Langeay: who
understanding these things, King Frauncis pardons the Merindolia^s.
sent letters to them of grace and pardon, not to those only which were
condemned for lack of appearance, but also for all the rest of the country of
Prouence, which were accused and suspected in like case: commanding the
Parliament, that they should not hereafter so proceed: but if there were any
that could be proved by sufficient information to have swerued from christian
religion, that then he should have demonstration made unto him by the word of
God, out of the old, and new testament: and so by gentleness be reduced to the
church of God: commanding also, that those which were convicted of heresy,
should abjure, and that all prisoners should be set at liberty: which either
were accused, or suspected of Lutheranisme. By virtue of which commandment,
and letters of the king, they were permitted to declare their cause, Whereupon,
A confession of the Merindolians faith.
they made a confession of their faith,, which was presented first to the court
of parliament, and afterward more at large, with articles thereunto annexed: it
was delivered to the B. of Cabillon, and to Cardinal Sadolet.

About this time, the year 1542. the vicelegate of Auinion assembled a great
number of men of war, at the request of the B. of Cauailon, to destroy
Cabriers: 1542 Cabriers.
when the army was come within a mile of Cabriers, the Cardinal Sadolet went
with speed unto the Vicelegate, and showed the articles of the confession of
Cabriers, Sadolet helped Cabriers.
and how they offered to be informed, wherein they had erred, by the word of
God: whervppon, at that time, the army retired.

Afterward, it was ordained by the court of Parliament, that according to the
kings letters, Ioh. Durand, counselor of the court of parliament, with a
secretary, and the Bish. of Cauaillon, with a Doctor of divinity, should go
unto Merindoll, and there declare unto the Inhabitants, the heresies which they
knew to be contained in their confession: and to make them apparent by good and
sufficient information. And having so convicted them by the word of god, they
should make them renounce, and abjure the said heresies, etc.

Whereupon, Durandus signified the day that he would be present at Merindol,
that none of the Inhabitants might be absent. At the day appointed, the parties
above mentioned came unto Merindoll, whereas also were present diverse
Gentlemen, and men of understanding of all sorts. There was called forth
Anthony Mailard, Examination of the Merindolians.
Bailiffe of the town of Merindoll, Ienon Roman, and Michelin Maynard,
Sindiques, John Cabrie, and John Palenc, Ancients of Merindoll, and John
Brunerol, vnder-bayliffe: who requiring that they might (because they were
unlearned) answer by Advocate, were denied either to answer by Advocate, or
by writing, but only in their own persons: who notwithstanding, did (by Gods
assistance) so answer, that the adversaries were ashamed, and durst put in no
information of heresy against their articles. But the B. spoke a long tale in
ye Commisioners day, and would declare nothing: and the Doctor made a long
tale in latin, and would give no otherwise any information against them. Many
that came thither to hear this disputation, were much touched, and moved to
require copies of their confession, and answers. Whereupon, many were
converted to the faith: and namely, 3. doctors, who went about to dissuade the
Merindolians from the truth: whose ministry God used afterward in the
preaching of the Gospel. Of whom, one was D. Comband, Prior of S. Maximinie,
afterward Preacher in the territory of the Lords of Bern: another was D.
Semanti, who was also a preacher in the Bayliwike of Touon: the other was D.
Herandi, pastor, and minister in the County of Newcastle.

After this, the Inhabitants of Merindoll were in quiet for a time, until
John Miniers, an exceeding bloody tirant, began a new persecution.

This Miniers, being Lord of Opedie, near to Merindol, first began to vex the
poor Christians, by polling and extortion, getting from them what he could, to
enlarge his own Lordshippe, which before was very base. For this cause, he put
5. or 6. of his own Tenants into a Cistern under the ground and cloasing it
up, there kept them till they died for hunger, (prete^ding that they were
Lutherans) to have their goods and possessions.

By this, and such other practices, this wretch was adua^ced in a short space
to great wealth and dignity: and at length became the Kings Lieutenant
general in the Country of Prouence, in the absence of the L. Grigitane, then
being at the Council of Worms in Germany: this wretch, impudently, and
falsely, gives the king to understand, yt they of Merindoll and Snatre, about
the number of twelve or fifteen thousand, were in the field in armor, with
Ensign displayde, entending to take the town of Marcelle, and to make it one
of the Cantons of the Suitzers. By which lie he obtained the kings letters
patentes, and through the help of the Cardinal of Tournon, commanded the
sentence of the former arrest to be executed against the Merindolia^s.

After this, he gathered all the Kings army, which was then in Prouence, ready
to go against the Englishmen: and took up all (besides) that were ready to
bear armor in the chief towns of Prouence: and joined them with the army
which the popes Legate had levied for that purpose in Auinion, and all the
Country of Venice, and employed ye same to the destruction of Merindoll and
Cabriers, and of other Towns and Villages, to the number of 22. giving
commission to his Soldiers, to spoil, ransacke, burn, and destroy al
together, and to kill man, woman, and child, without al pity, sparing none.
Before he came to Merind. he ra^sakt and burnt certain towns, namely, La
Roche, S. Stephens, ville Laure Lormarin, la motte, Cabrieretter S. Martin,
Pipu, The cruelty of Antichrist.
and other places mo, notwithstanding the arrest only extended to Merindole,
where the most of the inhabitants were murdered, and slain, without any
resistance: women, and maidens ravished, women with child, and little infants
most cruelly murdered, the paps of many women which gave suck to their
children cut of, and the children staruing at the breasts of there dead
mothers: such cruelty, as was never before seen.

The Merindolians seeing all on a flaming fire about them, left their houses,
with women and children, and other few, and with them certain ministers of
their Churches. Miniers in the mean time, had divided his army into two parts,
marching with the one party himself toward Merindoll: and having knowledge
by espiall, whether the Merindolians were fled, he sent the other part of
his army to set upon them on a sudden: who came and found them assembled at
prayers, and spoiled them of all that they, had pulling their garments from
their backs: Popish cruelty.
some they ravished, some they whipped and scourged, some they sold away like
cattle, etc. The women were in number about five hundred.

In the mean time, Miniers came to Merindoll, where he found none but a young
man, named Maurice Blanc, Maurice Blanc.
who had yielded himself to a Soldier, promising him for his ransom 2.
French crowns. Miniers would have had him away by force, but it was answered:
the soldier ought not to loose his prisoner. Miniers therefore paying the two
crowns, himself took the young man, and caused him to be tied to an Olive
tree, and shot through with harquebushes, and so cruelly martired the young
man, still calling on God: so he razed Merindoll, and laid it even with the
ground. Merindoll razed, and laid even with the ground.
When he had so done, he laid siege to Cabriers: which when he could not
overcome by force, he promised the^ fairly, if they would let him enter in,
swearing he would harm none of them, whereupon the people let him in: who
when he was once entered, Miniers breaks his oath with Cabriers
falsified his oath, and first picked out about thirty men, caused them to be
carried to a certain meadow, bound, and there to be miserably cut and hewn in
pieces of his Soldiers: he exercised also great cruelty over the women, and
caused forty of them to be taken, of whom many were with child, and put them
into a barn full of hey and straw, and caused it to be set on fire at four
corners, keeping them that would break out, with pikes and halberts: there was
a Soldier which being moved with pity at the lamentation of the women,
opened a door to let them out, but as they were coming forth, the cruel
tyrant caused them to be slain, and cut in pieces, opening their bellies,
Marvelous cruelty.
that their children might fall out, whom they trod under their feet: many
were fled into the wineseller of the Castle, and many hid themselves in
caves, whereof some were carried into the meadow, and there stripped naked, were
slain, other some were bound two and two together, and carried into the hall of
the Castle, where they were slain by the Captains, rejoicing in their
buchery. That done, this tyrant commanded captain John de Guy, with a band of
ruffians to go into the church (where was a great number of women, children, and
young infants) to kill all that he found there: he although at first refusing,
yet being threatened, performed the same. The number of them which were slain,
1000. slain.
was a thousand persons, men, women, and children: the infants which escaped
their fury, were baptized again of their enemies.

In token of this ioly victory, the Popes officers caused a pillar to be
erected in the place of Cabriers, in which was engraven the year and day of
sackyng the town by John Miniers Lord of Oped, and chief president of the
Parliament of Prouence. In this mean season, they of Merindoll and Cabriers
which had fled to the mountains, being in great necessity of victuals,
procured certain men, which were in favor with Miniers, to entreat him, they
might depart safely, only with their lives: although they had no more but
their shirts to cover their nakedness. Whereunto he answered, not one of them
shall escape my hands, I will send them to dwell in hell among the devils.

After this, there was a power sent unto Cossa, Cossa destroyed.
which likewise they ouerran, and committed there great slaughter. Many of the
inhabitants fled away, and went into an Orchard, where the soldiers ravished
the women, and maidens: and when they had kept them there a day and a night,
they handled them so beastly, that they died shortly after. They which escaped
to the woods, and went wandering by mountains, were taken, and set in galleys,
or else were slain outright: many which hid themselves in rocks and dark caves:
some were famished, some smoothered with fire and smoke put to the^. And this
was the destruction of Merindol and Cabriers.

This cause was afterward in the time of Henry the second, fifty times pleaded
to and fro, by one called Aubrius, Aubrius.
against Minerius, and another named Robertus, the defendant: but it could not
be determined, and Minerius was let out of prison, and restored to his
possessions, and liberty again: upon condition made to Charles, Cardinal of
Loraine, that he should expel the true professors out of al provinces: which
he after his restoring, practiced accordingly, Gods judgment upon Minerius and
other persecutors.
till being stricken of God, he died of a rotting in his guts, his entrals
being eaten with worms, yelding a horrible ste^ch. Lewis de Vanie, brother in
law to ye president, and the brother, and son in law to Peter Durand, master
Butcher of the town of Aix, flew one another, upon a strife that fell betwixt
them: and on them the same day, the judge of Aix, who accompanied Minerius in
the same persecution, as he returned home, going over the river of Durance,
fell of his horse, and was drowned Pantal.

The histories of the persecutions and wars against the Waldenses, in the
valleies of Angroigne, Lucern, S. Martin Perouse, and other in the country of
Piedmount from the year 1555. till the year 1561.
ALbeit these people had before this time, certain to preach the word of God,
and minister the sacraments unto them privately: yet in the year of our Lord
1555. Ioh. Martin of Griqueras, a mile from Angroign, which vaunted every
where, that he would slitte the ministers nose of Angroign, was assaulted with
a wolf, which bit of his nose, that he thereof fell mad.

The year 1556. Martin, took a good man ( Bartholomew a bookbinder) prisoner,
as he passed by the valley, who they sent by and by to Turim, and there, with a
marvelous co^stancy, after he had made a good confession of his faith, he
suffered death. And moreover, they of the Parliament of Turim, sent one named
the President of S. Julian, associating unto him one named de Ecclesia, and
others, to hinder their enterprise, admonishing them in the Kings name, and
the Parliament of Turim, to return to the obedience of the Pope, upon pain of
loss of goods, and life, and utter destruction of their town: and withal he
recited unto the^ ye pitiful destruction of Merindoll, and Cabriers, and other
Towns near about, in the Country of Prouence. To whom they answered, that if
it were showed in any point by the word of God, wherein they erred, they were
ready to be reformed, and so remained constant, notwithstanding, they received
great vexatio^s from ye president: insomuch, that they with one accord
presented a brief confession of their faith, with an answer to certain
interrogations, made by the president touching the Mass, Auricular confession,
Purgatory, Councels, etc. requiring that seeing it is permitted to Turks,
Saracens, and Jews, to dwell quietly in the fairest cities of Christendom,
they might be suffered to inhabit the desolate mountains and valleis, having
their whole religion founded upon the true word and Gospel of Jesus Christ.
These articles returned to the Kings court, where they remained a whole year
without any answer made: during which time they of the valleys lived in great
quietness: whereby the number of the faithful so increased, that throughout
the valleies, Gods word was truly preached, and his sacraments duly
administered, and no mass said in Angroign, nor in diverse places.

The year following, the president of S. Julian returned with his associates,
to Pigneroll, and sent for thither the chief rulers of Angroign, and of the
valley of Lucerne: that is, for 6. of Angroign, and for two of every parish
beside: saying unto them, that their confession was found to be heretical: and
that therefore the K. commanded them to return to ye obedience of the church of
Rome, under pain of loss, both of life, and goods: enioyning them moreover,
to give him answer within 3. days: from thence he went to the vallie of
Lucern, and threatened them greatly. But this notwithstanding, they persisted
constant, and desired that their confession might be amended by the word of
God, if any fault were, and they would yield thereunto. With which answer the
President was not content. Now, at the same season, the princes of Germany,
and certain of the Switzers, Suitzers sue for the valley.
sent unto the French K. desiring him to have pity of those churches: so that
from that time, for 3. years after, the people were not molested by any of the
K. officers: but yet they were sore vexed by ye monks of Pigneroll, and the
gentlemen of the valley of S. Martin.

At the same time, a Minister of Angroign, named Geffrey Variala, Geffrey
Variala.
was taken at Berge, going to visit those churches, and from thence carried to
Turin, and there put to death.

A few days after, a minister of the valley of Luserne was taken prisoner at
Suse, and soon after sent to Turin, where he was condemned to be burnt, but
the hangman at the time of the execution, fained himself sick, and conveyed
himself away, and so did another serve them, whereupon the minister was
committed again to prison, where after long and painful endurance, seeing the
prison door open, he escaped and returned to his cure.

Now four years being past, Anno 1559. Persecution.
that is to say, one Mathurine and his wife, and John de Carquignan, dwelling
in the Valley of Lucern, taken prisoner as he went to the market of Pigneroll.
Many at that time fled away: others fearing the cruelty, returned to the
church of Rome.

Within few days after, the Churches of Lelarch Meroun, Mean, and Suse, were
woonderfully assaulted. The minister of Suse, and Mean, among others were
taken, who was put to death in the fire. Of Larch and Meroun, some were sent to
the galleyes, other some yealded, Those that yielded, more cruelly handled then
those that were constant.
and some fled away. It is certainly known, that such as yielded were more
cruelly handled than they that continued constant.

The beginning of this horrible persecution, rose of Proclamations made in all
places, that none should resort to the sermons of the Lutherans, but should
live after the custom of Rome, upon pain of the forfeyture of their goods,
and to be condemned to the Galleys for ever, or to lose their lives. Three of
the most cruel persons that could be found, were appointed to execute this
commission.

The first, was one Thomas Iaconel, a Sodomite, and a monster against God and
nature. He was a Monk, an Inquisitor of the Romish faith, and a false Apostata.

The second was Collateral Corbis, who (after their refusals of going to
mass) used to burn them within 3. days. But it is certainly reported, that
seeing the constancy, and hearing the confession of the poor martirs (feeling
a remorse and torment in his conscience) he gave over, and protested he would
meddle no more. The 3. was the Provost de la Justice, a cruel, and crafty
wretch.

In that season, one named Charles de Comptes, of the Valley of Luserne, and
one of the Lords of Angroigne, did write unto the Commissioners, that they
should use some lenity toward them of the Valley of Luserne: by reason
whereof, they were a while more gently entreated then the rest: but the Monks
of Pigneroll, with certain ruffians about them, did torment, and burn, and
sent to the galleys, such as were of the churches near unto them.

The gentlemen of the Valley of S. Martin, entreated their tenants very
roughly, commanding them to return to the mass: and above the rest, two
specially, Charles Truchet, and Boniface his brother: who the 2. of April
before day, (with a number of Ruffians) spoiled a village of their Subjects,
called Reuclaret, and certain of the retinue took a Minister of the same
valley prisoner, which was come out of Calabria, and was going to visit the
poor people of Reuclaret, and led him prisoner to the Abbey, where, not long
after, he was burnt, with another of the Valley of S. Martin. The 3. night
after, they of Pragella, sent about 400 to discomfite the company of the
Trouchettes, and to restore those that were fled, to their houses: which they
did, putting them to flight, with the only loss of one man.

This Charles Trouchet and his brother, did so incense the Duke against the
poor people, with false reports, that they persuaded the Duke to build
fortresses in the Mountains, and to place garrisons. The people withstood the
Commissioners, and sent certain to the Duke: and immediately after, the
Commissioners sent also to the D. Court, being at Nice, to inflame his anger
more against them. But God otherwise ordained: for, the Trouchets being at
Nice, went to sea with diverse noble men: and immediately were taken prisoners by
the Turks, put into the galleys, sore beaten with ropes: and long time after
(denying their nobility) were sent home having paid 400. crowns for their
ransom. Some say, that the D. himself was almost taken, but sure it is, that
he fell sick soon after.

In April next following, by means of the L. of Raconis, who was present at a
sermon near Angroign, they put up 3 supplications, one to the D. another to the
duches, the 3. to D. council: wherein were debated the points of their religion:
they offering to reform what was the wed by Gods word to be amiss. After
this, the persecution seemed to be stayed for a little while. In June next
following, the L. Raconis, and the L. of Trinity, came to Angroign, to persuade
the people to put away their preachers, and to receive the mass: which if they
would do, they promised to pacify the D. and to be a means to stay the
persecution? but the people refused so to do. Whereupon, exclamations were made,
and persecution began to be more furious on every side: amongst others the
monks of Pigneroll were most cruel, Cruel Monks.
who sent out a company of hired Ruffians, that spoiled all they could lay hold
on, and led away men, women, and children, captives to the Abbey, where they
were most pitifully tormented.

At the same time, also they sent a band of the fame Ruffians by night to the
ministers house of S. German, in the valley of Perouse, where they took him,
and sore wounded him, and pricked him behind with their halbards, to make him
hasten his pace: at that time also many they slew, many they hurt, and many
they brought to the Abbey, and there kept them in prison, and cruelly handled
them. The minister, after long imprisonment, they roasted at a small fire: The
minister roasted.
when half his body was burnt, he confessed, and cried on the Lord Jesus with a
loud voice. Now, forasmuch as the misery was great, and these ruffians, to the
number of 300. had made great spoil, that no man could dwell there in
safety: it was demanded of ye ministers, whether it were lawful for men to
defend themselves against these ruffians, or no: the ministers answered, it was
lawful: warning the^ in any case, to take heed of bloodshedding. This question
being once dissolved, they of the valley of Luserne, and Angroign, sent
certain men to them of S Germane to aid them against the supports of these
monks.

In the month of July, they of Angroign being in a morning at harvest, upon
the hill side of S. Germain, perceived a company of soldiers spoiling them of
S. Germain, and doubting they would go to Angroign, made an outcry. The people
of Angroign assembled themselves upon the hill and some ran to S. Germain, over
the hill, and some by the valley. They yt went by the valley met the ruffians
coming from S. Germ. laden with the spoil which they had gotten: and being but
50. set upon 20. well appointed, and gave the^ ye overthrow. Then passing over
ye bridge, being stopped, ye enemies were feign to take the river of Cluzon,
where diverse were slain: many drowned, and some escaped very hardly, and such
a slaughter was made of them, that the river was died with the blood of them
that were wounded and slain, but none of the Angrognians were once hurt: if
the river had been as great as it was wont commonly to be, there had not one
man escaped alive.

The next day following, the commander of S. Anthony de Fosseaw came to
Angroigne, accompanied with diverse gentlemen, saying: he was sent by the duke,
commanding them to put away their ministers: which they refused to do. From
thence he went to the abbay of Pignorell, where he and Iaconiell caused a
number of the poor inhabitants of Campillon: and of Feuill, which be of the
valley of Lusern, to be taken prisoners: spoiling them of their goods; driving
away their cattle, and forcing them to swear, etc. Therevppon, they wrote unto
the Lord of Ranconis, declaring unto him the proceedings of the commander.

After this, there were many commandments, and injunctions, given to banish ye
poor Valdois, with the doctrine of the Gospel: and in the end of October,
next following, a rumor went, that an army was levied to destroy them. And
there were indeed certain hands levied ready to march at an hours warning,
and those malefactors which heretofore were fled, or banished for any offense
were now again called home, and pardoned: so that they would take the^ to their
weapons, and go to destroy the Waldois. They in ye mean time, by the council
of their Ministers, fell to fasting, and prayer, and carried all that they
could, of their substance, up to the mountains, praising God, and singing
Psalms unto him.

The first day of November, Angroign (by proclamations and writings set up in
every place) was exposed to fire and sword. The second of November, the army
approached to the borders of the Valley of Lusern, and certain horsemen came to
a place called S. John, a little beneath Angroign: then the people returned into
the mountains: certain of S. John's perceiving that the horsemen not only
spoiled their goods, but also carried their fellows away prisoners, set upon
them: so they retired to Bubian, where their camp then was, and not one of
them of S. John's slain or hurt.

It happened at the same time, that two of the foresaid horsemen, being sore
amazed, galloped before ye rest toward the army, being ready to march toward
Angroign, crying: The wicked fly where none persecuteth.
they come, they come: at whose cry the whole army was so astonished, that
every man fled his way: and they were all so scattered, that the captains that
day were not able to bring them into order again, and yet no creature followed
them.

On the saturday morning the army mustered in the meadow ground near to
Angroign: they of Angroigne had sent certain to keep the passages, and stop
the army that they should not enter, if it were possible: the number was but
few, who perceiving their enemies prepared to fight, prayed first of all to God
to assist them. When they perceived their enemies coming toward them, the
combat began and endured a long time in the passages of Angroigne. At length
the Waldois perceiving themselves oppressed with the multitude of their
enemies, retired to the top of the mountains, where they defended themselves
till night. When they had found a place where they might withstand their
enemies, still pursuing them, they turned themselves and slew diverse of them,
and hurt many.

When the evening came, the enemies rested, and went about to enca^p
themselves, there to rest al night. Which things when the Angroignia^s
perceived, they fell to prayer, but the enemies flouted them: then the people
devised a policy, to send a drum into ye valleis hard by: and as they were
making their prayer unto God, and the drum sounded in the valley, the Lord of
Trinity caused his soldiers, which were about to enca^pe themselves, to
remove thence: which was a great refreshing to the poor people. Many of the
enemies that day were slain, and many hurt, of the which very few escaped: of
the Angroignians that day were but three slain, and one hurt, who was after
healed well again. The L. of Trinity, after ward, placed garrisons there, and
much molested ye Angroigmans: and after they had commended themselves to god by
prayer, they sent unto them of Perouse, and of S. Martin, and of Pragella for
aid, sent them all the help that they were able.

The next day after, there came letters to Angroigne from the L. of Trinity,
in which he excused the outrage that was done: and required them to show
themselves obedient to the Duke. They again co^plaining of their wrongs,
offered themselves with all obedience to be reformed by ye word of God, where
they had erred, beseeching him, and all the Lords of Piedmont, to be their
intercessors to the duke in this behalf.

Upon Monday being 4. of November, the L. of Trinity sent his army to Villers,
and Tailleret: the lesser company ascended toward Villers: the people seeing
their enemies approach, after they had with prayer co^me^ded themselves to God,
strongly withstood them, and slew many: many also were hurt, and some fled. The
other company ascended toward Tailleret, and although they of ye place were but
few in number, and that part of ye army greater, yet making their prayers, and
commending their cause to God, they likewise defended themselves valia^tly. In
the mean season, they of Villers emboldned by their late victory, came to
assist their neighbors, and being assembled together, courageously pursued
their enemies, and put them to flight. In this pursuit, it chanced that this
poor people by an ambush of their enemies, which came another way, were
suddenly enclosed, and like to be destroyed: but yet by Gods help they all
escaped, and only three hurt, which were soon cured again: on the enemies
side there were so many slain, that they lay together by cartlodes. The same
day also 17. of Roccapiata put to flight a great number of the inhabitants of
Sanson, near to Roccapiata, that went thither, and spoiled a rich man there,
of all that he had.

After that the L of Trinity had received the request, and letters of the
Angroignians, he sent his secretary Gastant, to move the people, to prosecute a
supplication to the Duke, promising that he would return with his army. In
which, while they of Angroign perceived, that a part of the army, ascended the
hill of Tailleret, and the other part had already gotten the way, which led to
the meadow of Tower (by which means, they of Angroign might easily be enclosed)
they sent certain to keep the way: who encountering with their enemies,
obtained the victory, not one of them being so much as hurt that day. This
treachery, the Lord of Trinity excused, putting the fault in them of Tailleret,
who had slain certain of his men in the high way.

The 9. of November he used the like communication, as before, touching an
agreement: sending for certain of Angroign, to that intent, as he pretended:
whom he persuaded, in token of obedience, to lay down their armor, etc.
Which when they had done, he falsified his promise, his soldiers in the mean
time spoiling their armor.

A few days after, he sent his secretary Gasta^t, to Angroign, to make a full
resolution of ye agreement, yt the people of Angroign should sue for grace to ye
Duke, in yt they had taken up armor for their defense, and yt they should
humbly beseech him to give the^ liberty to continue in their religion they
professed, etc. Whereunto they of S. Ioh, of Roccapiata, of S. Bartholomew of
Perouse, with other of the valley of Perouse, agreed. Now while they were
treating of this agreement, the L. of Trinity vexed cruelly them of Tailleret,
pretending the cause, for that they came not to this agreement: for which
cause, his soldiers spoiled and sacked most lamentably diverse days together.
Al which being done, the L. of Trinity caused the chief of the people to
assemble together, and demanded 20000. crowns toward the charges of the Dukes
maintenance of his army, against the^ in time past. But by the means of his
secretary Gastant, who was promised an 100 for a bribe, 4000. were cut of: so
they granted 16. thousand, whereof the Duke released the one half.

The poor people being required to pay the 8000. presently, were feign to sell
that they had for a little to make a sum: and although the money were paid,
yet the army retired not but demanded anew, and forced them to promise the
payment of 8000. crowns: which the Duke released. This done, he went about to
slay their ministers, but chiefly the minister of Angroign, whom, when they
could not get, they spoiled his house and burnt his books, and spoiled 40.
houses in Angroign, broke their milles, and carried away the corn and meal,
which they found there: and, to be short, the practices of cruelty showed upon
the poor people continually, was very strange: as for example, they took at
Tailleret, Odul Gemet, Odull Gemer.
a man of sixty years of age, and put him to a cruel death: for when they had
bound him, they took a kind of thing, called in French Escarboth, and put them
to his navel, covering them with a dishe, which within short space pierced
into his belly, and killed him.

The messengers which were sent to the Duke, after they had been detained
there 6. weeks, and cruelly handled, notwithstanding the miseries sustained
before, brought a new commandment, that al must go to mass: whereupon, they
sent, and declared their distress to them of ye same profession in Daulphin:
who hearing thereof, joined themselves together in league, for maintenance of
the truth: for which cause, certain of the ministers, and elders of the
Church of Daulphin, were sent to the valley of Lusern: who arriving there at
eue^, at the village of Boly, word was brought, that such as would not go to
mass, should be condemned to be burnt, or sent to ye galleys, which when they
heard, they exhorted one another, saying: let us now make solemn protestation,
yt we will utterly forsake ye false religion of the pope, and that we will live
and die in the constant profession of Gods holy word, and truth. Let us go
tomorowe to the temple to hear the word of God: and after this, let us cast
down all the Altars and Idols to the ground. To this every man agreeed: and
in the very same hour in which they were appointed to answer the
commandment, they performed their agreement, both at Bobie, and at Villiers:
whether as they went, they encountered a band of soldiers, and put them to
flight, the 7. of Feb. In the mean time, the L. of Trinity (after he had
committed diverse outrages) being sore beaten of the Angrognians, and diverse of
his men slain, especially one of great authority in the D. court) blewe a
retrait, and descended to Angroign, and there (ye people being fled to the
meadow of Tower) burnt 1000. houses, and made great spoil. Where, although they
oftentimes assayed to set fire on the two temples, and the Ministers house, yet
could they not fire them.

Afterward, the Lord of Trinity burnt Rosa, Rosa destroyed
and destroyed it with fire and sword. But the Angroignians had afterward such
a hand of the adversaries, that they put them to flight, with great slaughter.
There was one of 18. years of age, and but small of stature, which alone slew
the Lord of Monteil, Master of the Camp, as it was told to the K. Another
simple man threw down Charles Truchet, with the stroke of a stone, and a young
man leapt upon him, and slew him with his own sword, which was four fingers
broad, and claue his head in sunder. This Truchet was one of the principal
authors of this war, and their chief enemy. The Angroignians pursued them
more tha^ a mile, and made great slaughter.

The 18. of February, the L. of Trinity not satisfied with burning, and
destroying the greatest part of towns and cities, endeavored to burn and
spoil all the little Villages round about, pertaining to the same: where his,
were again by a few, discomfited, through the power of God. And when the
enemies at any time rested them, the Angroignians prayed to God, which feared
the enemies more, then any thing else.

The 18. of March, the L. of Trinity, with an army of six or seven thousand,
assailed them again, with the gentlemen of the country: but God gave them
victory, after they had cried 3. or 4 times, help us O Lord. The captain of
this band was named Bastian, of Vergil, a man very expert in feats of war.
He, at the taking of his journey threatened to do great things that day: his
hosts hearing that, said, Mo^sieur, if our religion be better then theirs, we
shall have the victory, else you shall not prevail. Shortly after, the Captain
was brought again into his Inn, so wounded, and so feeble, that he was not
like to live: then said his hosts unto him, Monsieur, it is now well seen that
their religion is better than ours. After that, being assailed again, they
manfully defended themselves, and had almost stricken the L. of Trinity with
an harquebush, for the shot brake the wand which he bare in his hand, who
seeing his Soldiers in such great numbers slain, he wept bitterly. The next
day, one of the principal captains of the army, surrendered his charge to the
L. of Trinity, saying unto him, that he would never fight against this people
any more, and so departed.

In that combat there were but 2. of the Waldois slain, and 2. hurt. Through
the whole country of Piedmount, every man said, God fights for them: and the
Soldiers themselves confessed, God fights for his people.
they were so astonished, that they could not strike. Moreover, they said, that
this people never shot, but they killed, or hurt. Some others said, that the
ministers (by their prayers) coniured, or bewitched them, yt they could not
fight. And in truth, such was the success of this people, that only 14. of
them were slain in all these conflictes.

The 19. of March, there was a hot skirmish at Angroign: for 3. companies of
soldiers went thither to burn all that remained: but they were manfully
resisted, so yt they, seeing the loss of their men, retired. After yt, the L.
of Trin. endeavored by all falsehood to destroy the poor people. It fell out, yt
the L. of Raconis, seming to be sorry for this war, sent an honest man, named
Fran. Gilles, to the meadow of Tower, to take advise how he might best further
the agreement, who having consulted with the ministers and rulers, and
returning home was murdered by two of Angroigne: which greatly grieved the
Waldois, who wrote to the Lord of Raconis, excusing themselves, and declaring
how it grieved them: promising that they would execute upon them such Justice
as was meet in such a case. The L of Raconis writ unto them again, requiring
that the offenders might be delivered unto him: whereunto they answered: that
upon 3. conditions they should be delivered. 1. That they should not be
compelled to do any thing against their consciences, Conditions.
and as touching religion nothing should be spoken to the^, but out of ye word
of God. 2. That spedy justice should be done on the^, and thereafter, this should
be no prejudice to ye liberties and privileges of Angroign. 3. That the
execution should be upon the borders of Angroign, for example: this was
accepted, and the offenders delivered, which did redound greatly to the
commendation of the Angroignians.

After yt the L. of Trinity had greatly vexed them, and yet could not prevail,
the rulers of the Waldois requested earnestly the Lord of Raconis, to present
a supplication, Supplication to the Duches of Sauoy.
which they had made to the Duches of Sauoy: wherein they declared ye equity of
their cause, protesting al due obedience to ye Duke, their soueraign Lord: and
if it might be proved by the word of god, that they had held any error, they
would (with humble submission) receive correction, and be reformed: Humbly
beseeching her grace, to appease the displeasure that the D. had conceived
against them, by the untrue surmises of their adversaries: and if in any thing
they had offended, they craved his most gracious pardon. About this time, the
L. of Trinity was in danger of death by sickness. Soon after the supplication
was delivered, the duches sent an answer to ye Valdois, by the L. of Raconis,
of hard conditions: as, that they should banish their ministers, receive the
mass, and suffer no more preaching: and yt the D. would at his pleasure make
fortresses all the country over: which when they understood they made request
unto her again, that these conditions might be moderated with certain other
demands for their liberty: and above all, they beseeched her to take pity
on them, and that they might not be compelled to do any thing against their
conscience, etc. After which supplication viewed and read of the Duches,
Liberty granted to the Waldois.
she so persuaded the Duke, that answer was made according to their mind,
preaching permitted with free liberty, their goods restored, and freedoms,
liberties, general and particular restored. Yet so, that Mass should be said
in all the parishes of these Valleis, and no man compelled to come to the same:
the captives were also restored, that were sent to the galleys, and reasonable
ransom taken for the prisoners of the Waldois: and so, through the means of
the Duchess, the poor Waldois have been quiet until this day.

Anno 1526.

The end of the seventh Book.
The Abridgement of the second volume of the Ecclesiastical history of the
Acts and monuments of Martyrs from the time of King Henry the eight, to
Queen Elizabeth, our gracious Lady now reigning.
ANno 1519. Mistress Smith widow, Robert Harchets shoemaker, Archer
Shoemaker, Thomas Bond Shoemaker, Wrigsham a Glouer, Lansedall a hosier, were
on Ashwednesday taken and put in prison, and the week next before Easter were
condemned for relapse, (because most of them had borne fagottes in the same
City before) to be burned at Couentrie: Burned at Couentrie.
the principal cause of their apprehension was, that they taught their family
the Lords prayer, and ten commandments in English; Mistress Smith only
was dismissed for that present, and sent away, but as Mourton the Somner was
leading her home, (because it was somewhat dark in the evening) by the arm,
hearing the rattling of a scrol within her sleeue, yea said he, what have you
here? and finding that it was the Lords prayer, the belief, and the ten
commandments in English, Ah syrah (said he) as good now, Mistress Smith.
as another time, come, and so he brought her back again to the Bishop, where
she was immediately condemned, and so burned with the six before mentioned, the
fourth day of April in a place thereby called the little Park.

Anno 1521. Robert Sylkes 1521 Robert Sylkes.
who was one of the former company, and by flight escaped, was brought to
Couentrie two years after, and burned the morrow after he came thither, which
was about the 13. day of January These Martyrs being thus dispatched, the
Shiriffes took their goods and cattle to their own use, their wives and
children being left destitute.

Anno 1527. Patricke Hamleton 1527 Patricke Hamleton.
a Scotchman borne of a noble house, the first day of March was condemned for
the testimony of the truth, and burned at Saint Andrews in Scotland, he (at
the University of Marpurge in Germany, by conference with Franciscus
Lambertus) did so grow in knowledge and zeal, that he first there set up
conclusions to be disputed of concerning faith and works, Patrickes articles.
The articles wherefore he was condemned, were these: 1. Man has no free
will. 2. Man is justified by faith in Christ. 3. A man so long as he lives is
not without sin. 4. He is unworthy to be called a Christian which
believes not that he is in grace. 5. Good works do not make a good man,
though a good man does good works. 6. An evil man brings forth evil
works, which being repented of, do not make an evil man. 7. Faith, hope and
charity cannot be severed in one man in this life. For the condemnation and
burning of this man, the divines of Louane, by letters gave thanks unto the
Archbishop of Saint Andrews, and the Divines of Scotland,

This Patricke Hamleton cited the black Friar called Cambell who accused him,
to appear before God, to answer the innocence of his death, and named a
certain day when, before which time the Friar died without remorse of
conscience. Patricke Hamelton wrote a Treatise of divinity called Patrickes
places: Patrickes places.
and they were translated out of Latin (wherein he wrote them) into English
by John Frith.

A few years after, the Archbishop of S. Andrews burned Henry Forest
Henry Forest.
(who had taken orders of Bennet and Collet) for saying, Master Patricke was a
martyr, and his opinion good. He was betrayed by Walter Long a Friar: to whom
he confessed himself. He suffered death at the North Church style of S.
Andrews.

Within a year after the martyrdom of Henry Forest, or there about, James
Hamleton, James Hamleton.
the brother of Patrick Hamleton the martyr, was called in question for
mainteining the opinions of his brother: but the king, James the 5. gave him
counsel to depart, and not appear: which if he did, he could not help him;
for the Bishops had persuaded him, that the cause of heresy did not appertain
unto the king. So he fled and was condemned as an heretic, and all his goods
confiscate.

Catherine Hamleton his sister, and Aunt to the king, Recant.
recanted her opinion touching justification without respect of works, being
thereto persuaded by the king: and so escaped.

At the same time also an honest woman of Lies, for crying in her travel;
Christ help me, when the mydwife bad her say, Our Lady help me, was caused to
recant. Recant.


About the same time Master Norman Gurley, Norman Gurley.
because he denied purgatory, and said the Pope was Antichrist, and would not
recant, was condemned by James Hay Bishop of Rose, and commissioner of James
Beton Archbishop of S. Andrews, and burned upon the greenes side betwixt Lies
and Edinburgh. With him was burned David Straton, David Straton
for saying there was no purgatory, but the passion of Christ, and tribulations
of this world he was also falsely accused to have said, no tithes were to be
paid, for that he casting his fishes to the Vicar of Eglisgrige, some fell into
the Sea.

Anno 1532. Thomas Harding, Harding.
who with his wife, before had abiured, after long penance was burned (as a
relapse, being condemned by John Longland Bishop of Lincoln) at the North
end of the town of Chesham in the Dell going to Botley; when they had set
fire on him, there was one that dashed out his brayns with a billet. It was
supposed of them, that they might have forty days of pardon that should
carry wood to his burning, on hope whereof many people caused their children
to bear billets and fagottes to the burning of Martyrs. He was burned on the
even of Corpus Christi day, being of the age of threescore years and above.

About the same time, diverse others suffered trouble for the doctrine of the
truth, as under Doctor London, Maistresse Alice Dolie being accused of her
maid Elizabeth Wighthill, for holding against Purgatory, against Images, for
the articles of the Creed in English: this was about 1520.

Anno 1525.

Anno 1525 Also Robert West priest of S. Andrewe under shaft, for commending
Martin Luther etc. for which he was abiured, ibid.

Father, wife and sisters against the Christians.
Anno 1530. John Ribourne was accused by both his sisters, his own wife, and
of his own father; (who were compelled by John Longland Bishop of Lincoln, to
depose against him concerning meats, Purgatory, pilgrimage, prayer in the
English tongue, etc.

John Eaton and Cecill his wife of the parish of Spure were detected by
Richard Ryburne, for holding down their heads at the sacring time, and when
the belles did ring at the feast of exaltation of the holy cross, between
Mattines and Euensong, for saying What a clampering of belles is here?

Tho. Lounde
Thomas Lounde priest who had been with Luther two years, being afterward
cast in the Fleet at London was a great instructor of John Ribourne before
mentioned.

At the same time under John Longland Bishop of Lincoln, John Simonds, was
molested for denying Purgatory, for denying singlenes of priests, it was also
testified against him, that he converted eight priests, and had helped two or
three friars out of their orders.

Under the same Bishop about that time, Abiured.
were these persons following examined, excommunicated, and abiured, for being
together in John Tailors house of Hichenden, and there hearing Nicholas Field
of London, to read a parcel of Scripture in English to them, and expound to
them many things against images offerings, prayer in the Latin tongue,
against the Sacraments of the Altar, purgatory, etc. Their names were these:
William Wingraue, Thomas Hawks of Hichenden, Robert Hawes of West Wickam, John
Tailor, John Hawks, Thomas Herne of Colshill, Nicholas Field, Richard Deane,
Thomas Clarke the younger, William Hawks of Chesham.

Under John Longland Bishop of Lincoln, Simon Wisdom of Burford was molested
for the Gospel, the Psalter, the sum of holy Scripture in English, so James
Alger, or Aliger, because he said every Christian man living after the laws
of God is a Priest, he would no dole for his soul, and denied Purgatory
etc. He had not of long time been confessed, and for denying the Priests
power of absolution, with the other before was compelled, to seek
reconcilement in the Church and to abjure the truth.

Anno 1526. Clement the seventh absolueth the oath made of the French king to
the Emperor, and joins together a confederacy of the Venetians and other
Princes against the Emperor, whereof the Duke of Burbone and other of the
Emperors Captains having intelligence, gathered their armies together, and
after much fighting and bloodshed about Millan, Hawde and Cremona at length
they approached, and bent their siege against Rome, and after three sharp
assaults obtained the City with the whole spoil thereof. Rome spoiled and
the Pope taken prisoner.
Where he besieged the foresaied Pope with his Cardinals in the mount of
Adrian, and took him prisoner.

Anno 1527. Rimes made of the Pope.
sometime they had one riding like the Pope with a whore behind him, sometimes
he blessed, and sometime he cursed, and sometime they would with one voice
call him Antechrist, etc.

When the Cardinal Wolsey here in England heard how his father of Rome was
taken prisoner, he labored to the King to fight against the Emperor for the
delivery of the Pope, which the King refused by his own person or his
people to do: but yielded to the Cardinal of his treasure, to take what
himself thought convenient: who thereupon made out of the Kings treasure,
twelve score thousand pounds, 220000. li. out of ye kings tresure to fight
against the Emperor.
and carried it over the sea with him: which when he came to the kings court
at Amiens, he converted to the hiring of Soldiers, and furnishing out the
French kings army, appointing also certain English Captains in the king of
Englands name, to go against the Emperor to restore the Pope: all which
army was paid with the king of Englandes money. The cause why the Cardinal
bare the Emperor this malice, after some writers, appears to be this: At
what time as Pope Clement was taken prisoner, the Cardinal wrote unto the
Emperor, that he should make him Pope, but when he had received an answer
that pleased him not, he waxed furious mad, and wrote many menacing letters
unto the Emperor, that if he would not make him Pope, he would make such a
ruffeling between Christian princes as was not this hundred years before,
Proud Prelates.
yea though it should cost the whole Realm of England. Whose ambitious
endeavor the king himself did also favor, as it appears by instructions
given of the King to his Ambassadors at Rome, to that effect that Wolsey might
be placed in the papacy after the death of Pope Clement: to the end, he
might compass his cause of divorce. To the end the king might compass his
cause of divorce.


While the Ambassadors were traveling at Rome for the advancement of the
Cardinal to be Pope, if Clement were dead; he played here the Persecutour
at home: First, he caused Friar Barnes an Augustine Friar, to bear a fagotte,
for certain points which he called heresy: he caused two merchants of
the Still yeard to bear fagottes, for eating flesh on Friday. This was about,
Anno 1526.

Anno 1528. Arthur Bilney, Geffery Lound, and Garret to be abiured for speaking
against the Popes authority and his pompous pride.

Anno 1529. The Cardinal was cast in a Praemunire 1529 The proud Cardinal cast
in a Praemunire.
and execution performed upon him, he forfeited all his Lands, Tenementes,
goods and cattle, and should have been put out of the Kings protection: The
K. gracious to the Cardinal.
but the king sent him a sufficient protection, and of his gentleness left to
him the Bishoprics of York and Winchester, and gave unto him plate and
stuff convenient for his degree.

Anno 1530. 1530. A Parliament.
In the month of November was summoned a general parliament to be holden at
Westminster, in which, Sir Thomas Moore succeeds in the Lord Chauncelourship
unto the Cardinal. The Commons in this Parliament propounded their griefs
against the spirituality, Grief of the communalty against the spirituality.
which were especially six. First, the excessive fynes that the Ordinaries
took for probate of Testaments: as, a thousand marks paid for the will of
Sir William Compton knight, as Sir Henry Guilforde knight, one of the
executors, declared in open Parliament. The second Articles against the
Cardinal.
2. In all writings that he wrote to Rome, he wrote I and my King. 3. That
he slaundered the Church of England to the Court of Rome, I and my king.
which he said was facta in reprobum sensum. 4. He without the Kings
assent, carried the great seal with him into Flaunders, when he was sent
Ambassador to the Emperor. 5. Without the kings consent, he sent commission
to John Gregory de Cassalis Knight, to conclude a league between the king and
the Duke of Ferrarie. 6. That he having the Frenchpockes, presumed to come and
breath on the king. The Cardinal had the Fre^chpocks. The Cardinal confesses
the Articles.
7. That he caused the Cardinals hatte to be put on the kings coin. 8. That
he had sent innumerable substance to Rome for the obtaining of his dignities,
to the impouerishing of the Realm. These Articles were confessed all, of the
Cardinal, and assigned with his hand.

Anno. 1531. him, the Cardinal being in his Dioces, The Cardinal unthankful
to the king.
wrote to the Court of Rome, and to diverse other Princes, letters in reproach
of the king, and endeavored to win favor of the people with pomp, and great
gifts to the Gentlemen; which the king (although he knew his doings) dissembled
all that year, till he saw his heart so lift up with pride, that he thought
it not convenient to suffer him any longer; so he directed his letters to the
Earl of Northumberland, The Cardinal arrested and prisoned.
willing him with all diligence to arrest him, and to deliver him to the Earl
of Shrewsburie; which was accordingly done, and the vi. day of November he was
conveyed from Cawood to Sheffielde Castle, and there delivered to the Earl of
Shrewesburies keeping.

When the Cardinal was thus arrested, the king sent Sir William Kingstone,
knight, Captain of the Guard, and Constable of the Tower of London, to fetch
the Cardinal to the Tower; when the Cardinal saw the Captain of the Guard, he
was so sore astonished, that shortly after he became sick; men said he
willingly took such quantity of a strong purgation, that his nature was not
able to bear it, and the matter that came from him was so black, that the
stayning thereof could not be gotten out of the Blankettes by any means. By
easy iourneies he was brought to the Abbey of Leicester, the xxvij. day of
November, where (for very feebleness of nature, The Cardinal dies.
caused by purgations and vomits) he died, the second night following, and
there lies buried.

It is testified by one yet living, in whose arms the Cardinal died, that his
body being dead, was black as pitche, and was so heavy that six could
scarce bear him: and furthermore, did so stincke above the ground, The
Cardinals body did stink above ground.
that they were constrained to hasten the burial thereof in the night season,
before it was day. At the which burial, such a tempeste, with such a stink
there arose, that all the Torches went out, and so he was thrown into the
Tomb.

This Cardinal founded a new College in Oxford: for the furniture whereof he
had gathered together all the best learned he could hear of: amongst which
number were these, Clarke, Tyndall, Summer, Frith, and Tauerner, with other mo.
Which holding assembly together in the College, were counted to be Heretics,
and thereupon were cast into a prison of the College where was kept Saltfish,
through the stink whereof the most part of them were infected, and Clarke
thereof died, being young and tender, and a man of singular learning among them
all. And other in other places in the Town also, of the same infection
deceassed. In the time of the Cardinal, Master Humfrey, M. Humfrey.
who was a right godly and sincere Alderman of London, was troubled and put in
the Tower for the Gospel of Christ, and for the mainteyning of them that
favored the same: but at length he was forced to abjure, Abjure.
and after was made knight by the king, and Sheriff of London.

Anno 1530. Thomas Hitten 1530. Tho. Hitten Martyr.
a Preacher at Maidstone, after long torments and sundry imprisonments, by Will.
Warham Bishop of Caunterburie, and Fisher Bishop of Rochester, was burned at
Maidston for the testimony of ye truth.

Anno 1531. Thomas Bilney 1531. Tho. Bilney.
of Cambridge, professor of both Laws, converted Thomas Arthur, and M. Hugh
Latimer, then Crossebearer at Cambridge on procession days, and preached
against the intolerable pride of the Clergy, and the authority of the
Bishop of Rome, being associate with Arthur; whereof the Cardinal hearing,
cast him into prison, and anno 1527. accompanied with a great number of
Bishops, as Caunterburie, Cutbert of London, John of Rochester, etc. came into
the chapterhouse at Westminster, where Bilney and Arthur were brought before
them. Where the Cardinal demanded, whether Bilney had preached any of the
opinions of Luther, contrary to the Catholic Church Whereto Bilney answered
negatiuely, and being asked again of the Cardinal, whether he had not taken
an oath not to preach, or defend any of the opinions of Luther, he granted he
had so sworn, but not lawfully. Which Interrogatories so ministered, and
answer made, the Cardinal caused him to swear to answer plainly to the
Articles and errors, preached and set forth by him. Who having been thus
sworn and examined, the Cardinal proceeded to the examination of M. Arthur
there present, causing him to take the like oath. Then the Cardinal and the
Bishops by their authority, ex officio, did call for witnesses against M.
Bilney, John Huggen, chief Provincial of the Friars Preachers throughout all
England, Geffrey Iulles, and Richard Iugwoorth, Professors of divinity of the
same order. Also W. Ierkett Gentleman, William Nelson, and Thomas Willia^s: and
so the Cardinal (because he was otherwise occupied in the affairs of the
realm) committed the matter to the hearing of the Bishop of London, and two
other Bishops there present, or to three of them.

The xxvij. of November, in the year aforesaid, the B. of London, with the B.
of Ely and Rochester, came into the B. of Norwiches house, whereas likewise ex
officio, they did swear certain witnesses against M T. Arthur, in like sort as
before against M. Bilney, and warned him on his oath, he should not reveal his
examinatio^s, nor answers, nor any part of the^.

The second day of December, the B. of London with other Bishops, assembling in
the place aforesaid, after that Bilney had denied utterly to return to the
church of Rome, the B. of London did exhibit into the Notaries, in the
presence of M. Bilney, v. Epistles, with one schedule in one of the Epistles,
containing his articles and answers, folded therein, and another epistle
folded in manner of a book with vj. leaves, which al he commanded to be
registered, and the originals to be delivered unto him again, and bound the
Notaries with an oath for the safe keeping of the copies. The Interrogatories
were concerning Ecclesiastical constitutions; Luthers doctrine; the church
Images; a third place; Images; fasting days; prayer to Saints, faith without
woorks, prayer in an unknown tongue, etc. to the number of 34. Whereto Bilney
34. Articles against Bilney.
made such answer as the Prelates were nothing satisfied,

The iiij. day of December, the Bishop of London with other Bishops his
assistants, assembled again at the Chapter house of Westminster, whither
Master Bilney was also brought, who being often, and earnestly required to
submit himself, answered diverse times, Fiat iustitia and iudicium in nomine
Domini. Then the Bishop after deliberation, putting off his cappe, said: In
nomine patris, etc. And making a cross on his forhead and on his breast, gave
sentence against M. Bilney there present, in this manner.

I by the consent and counsel of my brethren here present, do pronounce thee
Thomas Bilney, Sentence of condemnation against Bilney.
who have been accused of diverse articles, to be convict of heresy, and for
the rest of the sentence, we take deliberation till to morrow.

The v. day of December, the Bishops assembled there again, and exhorted
Bilney diverse times to return to their Church, and permitted him to go into
some secret place, there to consult with his friends, till one of the clock at
after noone of the same day. At after noone, the Bishop of London again asked
him whether he would return, and acknowledge his heresies. But Bilney required
to bring in witnesses to clear him, which would not be granted him. And when
they urged him again, he said he would give no other answer than he had. If
they should prove that he was sufficiently convict, he would submit
himself, and desired again to have time and space to bring in his refused
witnesses.

After great instancie on the Bishops part with Bilney to recant, or else the
sentence must be read, he required the Bishop to give him license till the
next morrow, to deliberate with himself, whether he might abjure the heresies,
wherewith he was defamed, or no: Whereto the Bishop at the last granted, and
gave him two nights respite to deliberate, that is, till Saturday at nine of
the Clock in the forenoone.

The vij. day of December, in the year and place aforesaid, the Bishop of
London, with the other Bishops, being assembled, Bilney also personally
appeared, and being demanded whether he would now recant, Bilney recanteth.
he answered, he was persuaded by Master Dankaster and other of his friends so
to do, and so there openly read his abiuration, and subscribed to it, and
delivered it to the Bishop, who then did absolve him, and enjoined him
penance, that he should abide in prison appointed by the Cardinal, till he
were by him released. And moreover, the next day he should go before the
Procession in the Cathedral Church of Saint Paul bare headed, with a fagotte
on his shoulder, and should stand before the Preacher at Paul's Cross, all the
sermon time.

The space of two years after his abiuration, that is, from the year 1529. to
the year 1531. Bilney lived in great anguish of mind, Bilney in great anguish
of mind for his recantation.
and half in despair for his grievous fact, and at length, by Gods grace,
and good counsel, he came to some quiet of mind and conscience, and fully
resolved to give over his life for the confession of that truth which he
before had renounced And thus being fully determined, he took his leave at
ten of the clock at night, of certain of his friends, and said that he
would go to Jerusalem, alluding to the words of Christ, what time he was
appointed to suffer his passion. So from thence he departed into Norfolk,
where he preached in private housholdes, and confirmed an Anchres, whom he had
converted to Christ. Then preached he openly in the fields, confessing his
fact, Bilney repents.
and preached publicly the doctrine which he before abiured. And at Norwich
he was apprehended, and carried to prison, there to remain, til blind Bishop
Nixe sent up for a wryt to burn him. Who after his examination and
condemnation before Doctor Pells, Doctor of law and Chancellor, first was
degraded by Suffragane Underwood, according to their popish manner, by the
assistaunce of all the Friars and Doctors of the same suite. Which done, he
was immediately committed to the lay power, and to the two Shiriffes, of whom
Thomas Necton was one, Bilneys especial good friend.

After this the Friday following at night, which was before the day of
execution, he bare himself very cheerfully among his friends, to their
great comfort. The Saturday next following, he was brought forth to execution
without the city gate, called Bishops gate, in a low valley, called the
Lollards pit, under Saint Leonards hill, accompanied with Doctor Warner his old
acquaintance, parson of Winterton. Going to execution, he was comforted
secreetly by one of his acquaintance, that willed him to stand sure and
constant: to whom he answered, that whatsoever storms he passed in this
venture, yet shortly after said he, my ship shall be in haven: and desired him
to help him with his prayer. Before his going to the stake, he confessed his
faith, and after that, went to it, and prayed: which done, he stood upon the
ledge of the stake made for him, to the end he might be the better seen, and
the chain was cast about him: and standing thereon, Doctor Warner came to him
to bid him farewell: which spoke but few words for weeping: upon whom
Thomas Bilney did gently smile, Bilney smileth at the stake.
and inclined his body to speak with him a few words of thanks, and the
last were these: O Master doctor feed your flock, Feed your flock: that
when the Lord comes, he may find you so doing: and farewell good master
Doctor, and pray for me. While he stood thus upon the ledge of the stake,
certain Friars, Doctors and Priors, being present at his examination and
degradation, prayed him to clear them to the people, least they should
withdraw their alms from them: which he did according to their request. Then
by reason of the great wind, the fire thrice departed, and had recourse before
it could be sharp enough to consume him. In the which (til he gave up the
Ghost) he knocked his breast, sometime crying, Jesus, sometime Credo, and so
gave witness to the truth, and slept in the Lord.

About Anno 1527. Simon Fish, who fled over the seas, as Tindall, for fear of
the Cardinal, whom he had offended, in playing a part against the Cardinal in
a play, made the book of the Supplication of the beggars: The Supplication of
beggars.
and the next year sent it to the Lady Anne Bulleine, which book her brother
seeing in her hand, took and read it, and gave it her again, willing her to
give it to the King: which thing she so did.

About Anno 1528. Fishes wife understanding, and having encouragement of
certain about the King, that signified tokens of the kings good liking, she
made suite to the king for the safe return of her husband: whereto he most
graciously granted. Whereupon after two years and an half of absence he
returned, and was of his wife brought unto the king, about the year 1530. who
embraced him with most loving countenance: and after iij. or iiij. hours
talk, as they were riding on hunting, dismissed him, and gave him his
protection. The king gives Fish his protection.


About the same time also, M. Moddis the kings footman, being in talk with the
king, of religion, and of new books that were come from beyond seas, said: if
his grace would pardon him, and such as he would bring to his grace, he should
see such a book as was marvelous to hear of. The king demanded who they were:
he said ij. of your merchaunts, George Eliot, and George Robinson. The king
appointed a time to speak with them, and so did: and caused one of them, G
Eliot to read the book unto him. Which being read, the king made along pawse,
and then said, if a man should pull down an old stone wall, and begin at the
lower part, the upper part thereof might chance to fall on his head. And then he
took the book and put it into his deske, and commanded them upon their
allegiance, not to tell to any that he had seen the book. Against the
supplication of the beggars, sir Thomas Moore wrote, under the title of poor
seely souls pewling out of purgatory, Poor seely souls pewling out of
Purgatory.
to which John Fryth made a pithie and effectual reply.

When the Cardinal and Prelates understood of the supplication of beggars, and
other English books, they gave out a commission against reading of English
books, A Commission against English books.
and namely the book of Beggars, and the new Testament of Tindals translation,
which was done out of hand by Cutbert Tunstall bishop of London, and a short
time after, they had procured an inhibition by the kings proclamation, Anno
1529. Thomas Bilney aforesaid.

Anno 1529. came forth the New testament of Tindals translation, The testament
of Tindals translation.
which Tunstall and Moore devised to suppress (through the counsel of
Augustine Packington Augustine Packington.
a Mercer and Tindals friend) by buying all the copies, for which he gave very
largely, and so furnished Tindall with money, that he corrected them and set
them forth again in greater plenty then before, being relieved with the
Bishops money, wherewith the bishop being grieved, declared unto Packington, how
they swarmed more then before, to whom said he: my Lord, you were best to buie
the stampes too, and so shall you be sure: at which answer the bishop smiled,
and so the matter ended.

The same year that Bilney suffered Anno 1531. the month of November, Richard
Bayfield Richard Bayfield.
suffered for the testimony of the truth, and was burned in Smithfield, he was
sometime a moonke of Surrie, and converted by Doctor Barnes, and two godly men
of London brickmakers, Master Maxwell and Master Stacie Wardens of their
company. He so profited in the doctrine of Christ in two years, that by the
Moonkes of this house; he was cast into prison, and there endured sore
whipping with a gagge in his mouth, and then stocked, and so continued in the
same torments three quarters of a year, before Doctor Barnes could get him
out; which at length he did by the means of one doctor Ruffani of the same
house. From thence Doctor Barnes carried him to Cambridge, where he greatly
profited in good letters, and never returned to his Abbie, but went to London
to Maxwell and Stacie, who kept him secreetly a while, and after carried him
beyond the seas, (Doctor Barnes being then in the Fleet for Gods word) where
he was beneficial unto Tindall and Fryth, and at the last returning to London
to Masters Smiths house in Bucklers bury, there was he bewrayed, and dogged
to his bookebinders in Markelane, where he was taken and carried to Lollards
tower, and from thence to the Colehouse, by reason that one parson Patmore
parson of much Haddaine in Essex, that lying in Lollards tower was confirmed by
him in the doctrine of Christ, who after abiured, and was condemned to
perpetual prison, but delivered again by the kings pardon. But Richard
Bayfield continued constant, and in the Colehouse was worse handled then before
in Lollardes tower: for there he was tied both by neck, middle and legs,
and standing upright by the walls, diverse times manicled, to accuse others
that had bought his books. He was thrice in the Consistory at Paul's put to
his trial whether he would abjure or no: but he standing to his trial by
disputation, to the confounding of his adversaries, Bayfield condemned.
by Stokesly then his judge, with the assistaunce of Winchester and other
Bishops, he continuing constant in the cause of Christ, was condemned the
twenty day of November, Anno 1531 in the queere of Paul's and disgraded.
After which the Bishop took his Crosier staff, Cruelty.
and smoote him on the breast that he threw him down backwardes, and brake his
head that he souned. When he came to himself again, he thanked God that he
was delivered from the malignant church of Antechrist. Anon after he was led
through the quire to Newgate, and there rested about an hour in prayer; and
so went to the fire in his apparel joyfully; and there for lack of a speedy
fire, was half an hour alive: and when the left arm was in the fire and
burned, he rubbed it with his right hand, and it fell from his body, but he
continuyng in prayer without moving.

On Wednesday the xxj. of April the year 1529. John Tewksburie (who was
converted by reading of Tindals testament, and the wicked Mammon, he had also
the bible written) was brought into the co^sistorie at London, before Cutbert
bishop of London and his assistants, Henry bishop of S. Ass, and John abbot of
Westminster, and was examined of diverse errors (as they called them) in the
book of ye wicked Mammon: The book of the wicked Mammon.
Which John Teuksbury justified for truth: three sessions he appeered, and
manfully stood to the truth: being examined of articles touching Antechrist,
justification by works, saints, alms, other men's prayers for us etc. The
examination of which articles being done, the B. of London did exhort him
again to recant, and appointed him to determine with himself against the next
session: in which session he submitted himself and abiured, John Teuksbury
recanteth.
and was appointed penance the eight of May, Anno 1529.

Two years after, having received more grace and strength at Gods hands, moved
by the example of Bayfield that had before done the like, he returned to the
constant profession of the truth: John Teuksbury repents.
and being apprehended, was brought before sir T. Moore and the B. of London,
where certain articles were objected against him, touching faith, keeping of
forbidden books, purgatory, sacraments of the altar etc. and confessing his
articles, the bishop pronounced sentence, and delivered him to the Shiriffes of
London, Richard Gresham, and Edward Altam, Teuksbury burnt.
who burned him in Smithfield upon S. Thomas even, the xx. of December.

This year Edward Frese, Edward Frese.
first apprentice to a painter in the city of York, who for his pregnancie of
wit, his yers were redeemed by the Abbot of Bersie Abbey, and became a nouice;
but after long space, not liking that trade, he ran away, and came to
Colchester in Essex, where he followed his vocation, married a wife, and lived
honestly. After he had been there a good time, he was hired to paint certain
clothes for the new Inn, which is in the middle of the market place: in the
border of which clothes, he wrote certain sentences of scripture: for which
he was apprehended in the same Inn, and brought to Fulham to the B. house
where he was cruelly imprisoned, with one Johnson and his wife of Colchester,
Wyly with his wife and son, Bread made of sawdust.
and father Bate of Rowshedge: they were fed with manchet, made with the
greater part of sawdust, and were so straightly kept, that their wives and
friends might not come at them.

After the painter had been there a long space, by much suit he was removed to
Lollards tower: his wife in the mean time of his suit, whiles he was yet at
Fulham, being desirous to see her husband, and pressing to come in at the
gate, then big with child, the porter lift up his foot, Cruelty
and stroke her on the belly, that at length she died of the same, but the
child was destroyed immediately.

After that they were al stocked for a long time, afterward they were let loose
in their prisons again. This paynter, because he would always be writing on the
walls with chalk to their coffeehouse, was manacled by the wrists, til the
flesh of his arms was grown higher the^ his yrons: whereby he could not keame
his head, that his hair was folded together. After the death of his wife, by
suit of his brethren to the king, he was brought out into the consistory of
Paul's, and as his brethren reported, they kept him iij. days without meat,
before he came to his answer: so that with imprisonment and hunger, the man
grew out of his wits: which when they had procured by cruelty, they sent him
again to Bersie Abbie, but he would not tarry among them, and so continued
out of his wits till his dying day. His brother Valentine Freese and his wife,
Valentine Freese and his wife.
gave their lives at one stake in York, for the testimony of the truth.

Father Bate gate out of the prison in a dark night, and was caught no more,
but died shortly after.

In this year Friar Roice Friar Roice.
was burned in Portingall for the truth. In the beginning of this year, the
Bishops, who had burned Tindals testaments, The Bishops commanded to make a
translation of the Bible.
were enjoined by the King to cause a new Translation to be made;
notwithstanding which commandment they did nothing at all. But contrary in
the month of May, the Bishop of London caused all the translations of
Tindall, and many other Books which he had bought, to be burned in Paul's
Churchyard.

James Baynam James Bayna^.
who married the wife of Simon Fish, a Gentleman of the middle Temple, was
accused to sir Thomas Moore lord Chancellor, and arested of a sergeant at
arms, and carried to the Chancellours house at Chelsey, where he continued in
free prison, until sir Thomas Moore perceived he could do no good of him.
Then he put him in prison in his own house, and whipped him at a tree in his
garden, called the tree of Truth: and after sent him to the Tower to be
racked, and so he was; Sir Thomas being present himself, till in a manner he
had lamed him, because he would not accuse the Gentlemen of the Temple of his
acquaintance, nor show where his books lay. And because his wife denied them
to be in his house, she was sent to the Fleet, and their goods confiscate.
After they had thus practiced against him by torments, then was be brought
before I. Stokesley B. of London, the xv. of December. An. 1531. in the town
of Chelsey, and there examined touching purgatory, Intercession of Saints,
Confession, vows, concerning Luthers marriage, the Sacrament of anneyling, of
Baptism, whether matrimony were a Sacrament, for his books of Scripture, and
what he judged of Tindall etc. to which articles he subscribed according to the
truth.

The next day following, he appeared in the same place as before, James Baynam
submits.
and after much persuasion he submitted himself the B. notwithstanding
committed him to one of the Counters for further trial. And the year 1532.
James Bayna^ repents.
And so the 17. of February he was dismissed home, where he had scarce abode a
month, but he bewailed his fact, and was never quiet in conscience, til he had
asked God and the world forgiveness, before the congregation in those days,
in a warehouse in Bow lane. And immediately the next Sunday after, he came to
S. Austines, with the new Testament in his hand, in English, and the obedience
of a Christian man in his bosom, and stood up there before the people in his
pewe, and there declared wc weeping tears, that he had denied God, and prayed
the people to forgive, and to beware of his weakness. Besides, he wrote
certain letters to the Bishop, to his brother, and to others: so that shortly
after he was apprehended, and committed to the Tower of London, and after three
appearanrances, the 19. of April, the 20. and the 26. of the same month,
before Master John Foxforde. Vicar general of the Bishop of London, in the
presence of Matthew Grifton, Register, Nicholas Wilson, and William Phillips,
etc, he was condemned to be burned, and so was he delivered to sir R. Gresham
shiriffe then being present, who caused him by his officers to be carried to
Newgate, James Bayna^ burned.
and was burned in Smithfield the last day of April at iij. of the clock in
the afternoon. After he had endured great torments, stocks and irons in
prison before, as he was in the midst of the flaming fire, and his arms and
legs half consumed therewith, The courage of a worthy martyr.
he spoke these words: Oh, ye papists behold, ye look for miracles, here now
may ye see a miracle, for in this fire, I feel no more pain, then if I were
in a bed of down, but it is as sweet to me as a bed of roses. About this
present time or not long before, John Benet John Benet.
a tailor, dwelling in a village called Vrchuant, was burned in the town of
Deuies, within the County of Wiltshire, for the denying of the Sacrament of
the Altar. And much about the same time was one Traxnell burned, in a town
called Brodford within the same County.

The same year 1532. Robert King, Nicholas Marsh, and Robert Garner men of
Dedham, Robert Debnam of Estbergholt, had overthrown and burned the roode of
Douercourt, The Idol of Douercourt.
ten miles of Dedha^, of which Idol a brute was blown that no man had power
to shut the door where he stood, wherefore the door was always kept open:
for which fact half a year after they were hanged in chains, King in Dedham
at Burchet, Debnam at Cattawaie Cawsie, Marshe at Douercourt: Gardener escaped
and fled.

The same year, and year before, many Images were cast down and destroyed
in many places, Many images cast down.
as the Crucifixe by Cogshall in the highwaie: Saint Petronell in the Church of
great Horksleigh: S. Christopher by Sudbury, S. Petronell in a Chapel by
Ipswich: also John Seward of Dedham, overthrew a cross in Stoke park, and
took two Images out of a chapel in the same park, and cast them into the
water.

An. 1533. John Frith was first a student in Cambridge and after, one of those
whom Cardinal Wolsey gathered together, of the choice learned men, to furnish
his College, which he gave the name of Saint Frideswide, now called Christ's
College. He that year, the xx. day of June, Christ's College in Oxford.
was condemned by the Bishop of London, to be burned, and the sentence read, he
was delivered to Sir Steeuen Peacock, Mayor of London, and the Sheriffs of the
same City, and the fourth day of Iulie was burned in Smithfield: who at the
stake, chearefully embraced the Fagottes, and fire which was put unto him, and
seemed to rejoice for his fellow, that was burned with him, John Frith burned.
rather than to be careful for himself, though (by reason the wind bare
away the flame from him) he was somewhat long in burning.

After the death of certain whom the Cardinal had before imprisoned in the
cave of his College, where Saltfish was used to be laid, Frith, with other,
were dismissed, upon condition, not to pass above ten miles out of Oxforde.
But Frith, after the hearing of the examination of Dalaber, and Garret, which
bare the fagottes, went over Sea, and after two years came again for
exhibition of the Prior of Reading, as is thought, and had the Prior over with
him.

Being at Reading, he was there taken for a vagabonde, and was set in the
stocks, and through the means of one Leonarde Coxe, Scholemaster of the
Town, who woondered at his excellent learning, was again set at liberty: but
his safety continued not long. Sir Thomas Moore Sir T. Moore pursues Frith.
then Lord Chancellor, did so deadly pursue him, both by Land and Sea: And
at last, being traiterouslie taken, he was sent to the Tower of London. Where
he had many conflictes with the Bishops, but especially in writing with Sir T.
Moore. The occasion whereof, was a Treatise which he made, and communicated it
with W. Holte, a Tailor of London, that carried it to Moore ye cha^cellor, who
endeavored to confute it: The points of Frithes treatise Frithes treatise.
were, First, that the controversy of the Sacrament is no necessary Article
of faith under pain of damnation. 2. That Christ is not in two places at once.
3. that Christ's words in the institution of the Sacrament, are to be
understood according to the phrase of speech, comparing phrase with phrase,
according to the analogy of Scripture. 4. That the order and institution of
Christ is to be retained, although the order of the priests do never so much
differ from it. The copy of which answer Frith got by means of friends, and
answered.
A treatise of these points Frith did write, and it was carried by Holt unto
Moore, which he answered him again out of prison: omitting nothing, belonging
to the perfect handling of the matter. He wrote also a Treatise of Purgatory,
in which quarrel he withstood the violence of the most obstinate enemies,
Rochester, Moore, and Rastall: and converted Rastall to his part, who was
Moors son in law.

After he had sufficiently contended in writing with those men, he was at last
carried to Lambith, first before the Bishop of Canterbury, and after unto
Croydon before Winchester, and last of all, before a common assembly of
Bishops at London, where continuing constant in his righteous cause, was
condemned.

With Frith Frith condemned.
was Andrewe Hewet Andrew Hewet.
burned, he was borne at Feuersham, in the County of Kent, of the age of
four and twenty years, and was apprentice with one Master Warren, Tailor in
Watlingstreet: he was betrayed by the false Judas William Holt, and cast into
prison in the Bishops house: from whence having fyled off his yrons, he
escaped; but was bewrayed again by one Withers, a false hypocrite as Holt was:
and with him were taken John Tibauld, who was banished from his own house by
an iniunction, and had been four times in prison for Christ's sake, and John
Chapman in whose house they were, who al were carried to the Bishops house: but
Hewet they sent to Lollardes Tower, and kept Chapman and Tibauld asunder,
watched with two priests servants.

The next day Bishop Stokesley came from Fulham, and committed Chapman to the
stocks, and shut up Tibauld in a close chamber, but by Gods providence he
was delivered out of prison, albeit he could not enjoy house nor land,
because of the Bishops iniunction, but was feign to sell all that he had in
Essex. Chapman after five weeks imprisonment, whereof three he sat in the
stocks, by much suite made to the L. Audley, who was then Chancellor, was
delivered: but Andrew Hewet after long and cruel imprisonment was condemned to
the fire with Frith, after that he had given testimony to the truth.

Anno 1531. Thomas Benet a Schoolemaister of fifty years of age, borne in
Cambridge, was delivered unto Sir Thomas Dennis knight, to be burned in
Exceter. He hid himself six years in Devonshire: but kindeled with zeal, he
resolved to adventure his life for the testimony of Jesus: and in the month
of October, he did set upon the Cathedral church door of Exceter scrolles,
in which were written: The Pope is Antichrist, and we ought to worship God
only and no Saints: the Author of which bills could not be found. At
the last, the priests fell to curse with book, bell and candle, the Author
of the same, Bennet being by: who fell into a laughter within himself for a
great space, and could not forbear: Whereby some say he was bewrayed and
taken: other, that his enemies being uncertain whether it were he or not,
suffered him to depart home. And, not being able to digest the lies which were
preached, sent his boy with other scrolles, as before he had done, who being
examined, confessed whose boy he was, and so Bennet was known, and taken,
and committed to ward, and being called to examination before the heads and
cannons of the City, confessed the fact, and after much disputing with the
Friars, especially, one Gregory Basset, who had lien in prison at Bristow for
the truth, and revolted (being threatened, he should have his hands burned
off with a pan of coals, which was brought ready at his examination, Thomas
Bennet martyr.
) he was condemned to death, and burned. At whose burning, John Barnehouse
Esquier being present, took a fyrre bush upon a pyke being set on fire, and
thrust it unto his face, because he would not say: Sancta Maria, ora pro
nobis. But he answered, Pater ignosce eis: and so fire being put to him,
patiently he ended his life.

By reason of the rigorous proclamation above specified, procured by the
Bishops, great persecution ensued, so that a great number were troubled, and
either burned, or constrained to abjure.

Thomas Cornwell or Austy, Anno 1530. for not keeping his faggot upon his
shoulder after his abiuration, was condemned to perpetual prison in the house
of S. Bartholomew: from whence he afterward fled and escaped.

Anno 1530. Thomas Philips made his appeal from the B. to the king, and would
no otherwise abjure, then generally all heresies: for which the B. did
excommunicate him, and denounced him contumax: and what after became of him, it
is uncertain.

A little before this time, William Tracie William Tracie.
a woorshipfull Gentleman of Glocestershyre, and then dwelling at Toddington;
made in his will, that he would have no funeral pomp at his burial, neither
passed he upon Mass: and said he trusted in GOD only, and hoped by him
to be saved, and not by any Saint. This Gentleman dyed, and his son his
executour brought the Will to the Bishop of Canterbury to prove, which, he
showed to the Convocation, and then most cruelly they judged that he should
be taken out of the ground, and be burnt as an heretic. Anno 1532. was feign
to fine three hundredth pounds to have his pardon of the king.

Anno 1531. Henry Tomson tailor, notwithstanding he submitted himself to the
Bishop, yet therewith sentence condemned him to perpetual prison. His cause
was the denying of the host to be God.

The same year was Thomas Patmore parson of Hadham in Hartfordshire, a godly
man and painful teacher, persecuted by Richard FitzIames bishop of London,
who was desirous to prefer another to the good man's benefice: and so hardly
was he dealt withal, that in the end he submitted himself and abiured, and
was notwithstanding committed to perpetual prison. Howbeit, one of his
brethren made such suite unto the king (by the means of the Queen) that after
three years imprisonment, he was both released out of prison, and also of the
King obtained a Commission unto the Lord Audley, then Lord Chancellor, and to
Cranmer Archbishop of Canterbury, and to Cromwell then Secretary, with
others, to enquire of the unjust dealinges of the Bishop and his Chancellor
against Patmore: but what was the end thereof, it is uncertain.

Anno 1531. Christopher a Dutch man of Antwerp was put in prison at
Westminster, for selling new Testaments in English, and there died.

The same yer, a boy of Colchester, or of Norfolk, for delivering a buget of
books to Richard Bayfield, was laid in the prison of Master Moore,
Chancellor, and there dyed.

From the year 1533. during the time of Queen Anne, During the time of Queen
Anne, no great persecution.
no great persecution, nor abiuration was in the Church of England: saving that
x. Anabaptists were put to death in sundry places of the Realm. And anno
1535. ten other repented, and were saved: whereof two were pardoned after
sentence given, which was contrary to the popes law.

After the Clergy had with great cruelty vexed Christ's flock, anno. 1534.
1534. Commons against the Clergy.
a parliament was called by the king, about the 15. day of January, in which
the Commons renewed their old greefes, complaining against the Prelates, and
Ordinaries, for calling men before them ex officio. Answer to which requests
the king at that present did delay.

After the Cardinal had been cast into a praemunire, anno 1530, about the year
1532 the king made a restraint, that nothing should be purchased from Rome;
Nothing to be purchased from Rome,
and proceeded further against all the Prelates, for supporting the Cardinal:
by reason whereof, they also were entangled with praemunire. For the releasement
whereof, they offered the king 118840. pounds, which was accepted with much
ado. In this submission the king was called of the Clergy, Supreme head.
Supreme head.

The motion of the Commons to the king, touching their greeuances from the
Clergy, in the prorogation of the parliament took good success. Wherein the
king provided remedies, and enacted in the same Parliament, that no man should
be troubled for speaking any thing against the usurped power of the Bishop of
Rome, or his laws, not grounded on the law of God. The usurped power of the
Pope put down in England.
In this Parliament also, the decrees and provincial constitutions were
committed to be examined of 32. persons, chosen by the king out of the higher
and lower house, and at their discretions to be abrogated, or to stand in
strength.

Also it was decreed, that the Clergy of this Realm, submitting themselves
to the king, should and did promise, in verbo Sacerdotij, never to assemble
their Conuocations without the kings writ, No Conuocations without the kings
writ
nor to enact, or to execute such constitutions without his Royal assent.

Moreover, that no person should appeal, provoke, or sue to the Court of Rome,
under pain of prouisures, prouisure, or praemunire. Item that no Annuales, and
first fruits of Bishops, and Archbishops, should be paid to Rome, for any
Bulls, Breeues, Palles, etc. Item that the king should nominate the person to
be elected into any Ecclesiastical dignity, and so the Prior and Covent,
Deanrie, Chapter of those Cathedral Churches, where the Seat was vacant, by
the virtue of the kings letters missiues, should within 12. days, choose that
person nominated by the king, etc.

Moreover, it was decreed against all intolerable exactions of the Bishop of
Rome, in pensions, Peterpence, procurations, fruits, etc. And finally, in this
Parliament it was consulted, concerning the lawful succession of the Crown, in
ratifying it to the heirs of the kings body and Q. Anne. In which Parliament
also, the degrees of marriage were plainly set out, according to the word of
God. Not long after, the king required an oath of the Spiritualty, to be made
unto him, and abolished that which they were wont to make to the Pope: In
which only they acknowledged the king to be Supreme head. Which oath Sir Thomas
Moore misliking, was enforced to resign up his Chauncellorship, The oath of
the Clergy to ye Pope abolished. Moore resignth the Chauncellourship.
and to deliver up the great Seal of England, into the K. hands. After whom
succeeded Sir Th. Awdley knight, who favorably inclined to the doctrine of the
Gospel.

Not long after, the king proceeded to marry the Lady Anne Bulleine, who was
a special favorer of the gospel, The K. renou^ceth the Pope.
and so was divorced both from the Lady Dowager, and the Pope together. The
Princess Dowager, after the divorce, procured from the Pope an interdictment
of the king, and the whole Realm.

Anno 1533. 1533. Lady Elizabeth borne.
Queen Anne was crowned: and not long after her coronation, the 7 of September
she was brought a bed, and delivered of a fair Lady, named at the Font
Elizabeth; the Archbishop of Caunterburie being Godfather, and the old Duchess
of Norfolk, and the old Marchioness of Dorcet, widows, Godmothers.

After this, the Monks and Friars, and other evil disposed persons, feigned
that God had reueyled to a Nun, Elizabeth Barton, whom they called the holy
maid of Kent: The holy maid of Kent.
that if the king proceeded in that divorce, he should not be K. of this Realm
one month after: and in the reputation of God, not one day, nor hour. This
dissimulation was found out by the diligence of the Archbishop of
Caunterburie, the Lord Cromwell, and Master Hugh Latimer: and she condemned,
and put to death, with certain of her counsel, in the month of April, anno
1533. as, Henry Gold, Bacheler of divinity; Richard Master, Parson of
Aldington; Edward Bocking, Monk of Caunterburie; John Dearing, Monk of
Caunterburie; Hugh Rich, Friar, Warden of the Graye friars of Caunterburie;
Richard Risbie, attaint of treason by act of Parliament, and so put to death.
Others of the same conspiracy, as, Fisher, bishop of Rochester; Thomas Gold,
Thomas Laurence, Edward Thwates, John Adeson, and Thomas Abell, being conuicte
and attainted of mesprision, were condemned to prison, and forfeyted their
goods and possessions to the king.

This year, 1533. Pauier, or Pauie, Towneclarke of the City of London, a
notorious enemy of Gods truth, and a very busy fellow about the burning of
Rich. Bayneham, hanged himself: Gods judgment.
he said, rather than he would see ye scripture in English, to be read of the
people, he would cut his own throat; but he made his choice rather of an
halter.

About this time also died Doctor Foxforde, Chancellor to the B. of London, a
common butcher of Gods saints, who was the condemner of all those, which were
put to death, troubled, or abiured, under Stokesley, throughout all the Dioces
of London. He died sitting in his chair, suddenly, his belly being burst, and
his guts falling out before him.

About the same time also died Will. Warham, Archbishop of Canterbury, whom
succeeded Th. Cranmer. Tho. Cranmer Archbishop of Canterbury.


This year, at Dunkirke in Flaunders, a writ of Excommunication was set up
against the king, for the divorce: which being known unto the king, he
caused to be discharged a great sort of the princess Dowagers servant, and
they that remained still were sworn to serve her as a Princess only, and not
as Queen: and because she refused to be served of such, she remained with a
very few, living after this sort the space of two years.

An. 1534. Preaching against ye popes supremacy.
During this parliament time, every Sunday preached at Paul's cross a bishop,
which declared the pope not to be head of the Church.

John Fisher bishop of Rochester, sir Thomas Moore, and Doctor Nicholas Wilson
parson of S. Thomas Apostles in London, refused the oath to the Act of
succession made then: wherefore they were sent to the Tower. In the end, the
Doctor was content to dissemble the matter, and so escaped: but the other two
remained obstinate.

The third of November, this parliament was again assembled, in which the Pope
and Cardinals, with his pardons and indulgences were wholly abolished: The
Popes pardons wholly abolished.
to the abolishing whereof, and to the ratifying of the kings title of supreme
head, Stephen Gardener gave his oath, so did John Stokesley, B. of London,
likewise Edward Lee Archbishop of York, Cuthbert, B. of Duresme, and all the
rest of the Bishops in like sort, to this title agreed also the sentence of the
University of Cambridge.

Also, Ed. Bonner then Archdeacon of Leicester, Gardiners book de obedientia,
with Bonners notes.
was of the same judgment, and prefixed his preface to Steven Winchesters
book, de obedientia, of the same argument. To this also agreed the whole
Clergy of the Church of England, and subscribed with the hands of the
Bishops, and other learned men, to the number of 46. doctors of divinity,
and of both laws.

Anno 1535. Fisher the Bishop of Rochester, Thomas Moore, were executed, for
refusing the oath of supremacy, which all the other Bishops and Clergy
yielded unto: one was executed the xxij. of June, the other the vj. of Iulie.

The ruin of Religious houses.
Shortly after the overthrow of the Pope, by little and little began the ruin
of the Abbeys and Religious houses: and the same year in the month of
October, the king having then Thomas Cromwell of his counsel, sent Doctor Lee
to visit the Abbeies, Priories and Nunneries in all England, and to set at
liberty all such religious persons as desired to be free, and all other that
were under the age of xxiiij. years: providing withal that such Moonkes,
Chanons and Friars as were dismissed, should have given them by the Abbot or
Prior in steed of their habit, a secular priests gown, and xl shillings of
money, and likewise the Nuns to have such apparel as secular women did then
commonly use, and suffered to go where they would. At which time also, from
the said Abbeies and monasteries were taken the chief Jewels and and
relics. Chief jewels and relics taken from the Abeies.


After these things done of the king against the Pope, he endeavored by all
means to entertain the favor and friendship of other princes, as the
Emperor, the king of France, the king of Scotts, to whom he purges himself
concerning his divorce and lawfulness of his marriage with the Lady Anne, and
declares the manifold injuries which the Pope had done unto him, and how he
deferred the cause of his divorce and second marriage: which he did, fearing
the malice of the Pope and prelates, least they should stir them up to war
against him, which they labored by all means to bring to pass, especially
Cardinal Poole played his part therein.

Anno 1536. Will. Tindall, 1536 Will. Tindall burned.
who translated the new Testament in English, and the five books of Moses,
with many other godly works, was burned at the town of Filforde in
Flaunders, by virtue of the Emperors decree, made in the assembly at Auspurgh.
He was first strangled, and after consumed with fire. At the stake he cried
with a fervent zeal and loud voice: Lord open the king of Englands eyes.

Tindall was borne about the borders of Wales, and brought up from a child in
the University of Oxford, where he increased in knowledge of arts and
tongues. From thence he went to the University of Cambridge, where having
abode a while, he departed, and resorted to one Master Welsh a knight of
Glocestershire, and was there Schoolemaister to his children, where he so
behaved himself boldly in disputing with Abbots, Deanes and Archdeacons, etc.
that he was feign to depart that country. Such was the grudge of the priests
against him, especially after they perceived, by his means, that they were not
so welcome to M. Welches house as in times past. From master Welche, Tindall
comes up to London, and sought to serve Tunstall B. of London, but being
refused of him, he abode notwithstanding in London the space almost of a year:
and finding no place in England to translate the New testament, having some aid
and provision ministered unto him of Humfrey Monmouth, and certain other godly
men, Tindall takes in hand the translation of the New testament.
he departed into Germany, and there took in hand the translation of the New
testament, which he finished first Anno 1527.

After he had continued a while in Germany, as in Saxony, where he had
conference with Luther and other learned men, he came down into the Low
countries, and had his most abiding in the town of Antwerpe, until the time
of his apprehension: which was about one whole year; in the house of Thomas
Poynes an Englishman, who kept an house of English merchants. About which
time came thither one out of England, whose name was Henry Phillips, his Father
being customer of Poole. This Phillips grew into acquaintance with Tindall,
and pretended much favor unto him. After this, Phillips goes from Antwerpe to
the court of Bruxels: which is from thence xxiiij. English miles (the King
having then no Ambassador there), and procured to bring from thence with him
to Antwerpe, that procurour general, which is the Emperors attorney, with
other certain officers. Within a while after ( Poynes siting at his door)
Phillips man came unto him, and asked whether M. Tindall were there, and said
his master would come to him, and so departed: Poines within iij. or iiij.
days being departed out of the town to Barrow xviij. miles from Antwerp,
Phillips comes again to Poines wife, and asks for M. Tindall, and what good
cheer there was in the house, and whether he would dine with him: that done,
he goes out to provide and set the officers which he had brought from Bruxels
in the street, and about the door. Then about noone he came again, and went
to M. Tindall, and said, he had lost his purse; and prayed him to lend him xl.
s^, which M. Tindall did. Then said Phillips to M. Tindall, you shall be my
guest here this day. No said M. Tindall; I go forth this day: you shall go
with me and be my guest, where you shall be welcome. So when it was dinner
time, M. Tindall went out with Phillips, and at the going forth of Poines
house, Master Tindall would have put Phillips before him, but Phillips would
in no wise, pretending a show of great humanity: so M. Tindall went before
him. He had set officers on either side the door upon seats, to whom
Phillips pointed, with his finger over M. Tindals head that the officers might
see it was he, and so should apprehend him. Who there took him, and brought
him to the Emperors attorney, the procuror general; where he dined: From
whence he was had to the castle of Filford, xviij, miles from Antwerpe, where
he remained til he was put to death; Poines laboring for the release of M.
Tindall, with letters directed out of England by the Lord Cromwell and other,
to the court of Bruxels. Then the Lord of Barowe was also clapped in prison, and
after long imprisonment, was feign to escape by flight. But good Master
Tindall could not escape, but was put to death for the testimony of the
truth. Of whom the Emperors Attorney left this testimony, that he was a
learned, good, Tindals protestation touching his translation.
and godly man. Concerning his translation of the new testament, thus himself
protested: I call God to record, against the day in which I shall appear before
ye Lord Jesus, to give a reckoning of my doings, that I never altered one
syllable of Gods word against my conscience, nor would do this day, if all that
is in earth, whether it be honor, riches, or pleasure, might be given me.

The same year that Tindall was burned, Anno 1536. In the beginning of the
year, first, died Lady Katherine, Princess dowager, in the month of
January, after whom the same year, in the month of May next following, Queen
Anne, who had now been married to the king, the space of three years, was
put to death; Queen Anne put to death.
very likely by the practices of the prelates against her, who was an earnest
favorer of Gods people: and incontinent after the suffering of Queen Anne:
the king within iij. days after, married Lady Jane Seimer. About this time,
Paul iij. Bishop of Rome appointed a general counsel at Mantua in Italy,
requiring all kings and princes to be there present in person, or to send
their Ambassadors: pretending to suppress heresies, to reform the Church,
and to war against the Turk. To this Council the king refused either to
come, The king refuses the general counsel at Mantua.
or to send Ambassador: and made his protestation against the sea of Rome.

A little before the death of Queen Anne, there was a parliament at Westminster,
wherein was given to the king, by general consent of the Abbots, all such
houses of religion, as were under iij. hundred marks: Certain houses of
religion given to the king.
which did prognosticate what would befall the rest.

Shortly after the marriage of the king, with the Lady Jane Seimer, in the
month of June, during the continuance of the Parliament, by the consent of the
Clergy in the Convocation house in Paul's Church, a book was set out,
containing certain Articles of religion necessary to be taught to the people:
Articles of religion to be taught the people.
wherein they treated specially, but of three sacraments, baptism, penance,
and the Lords supper: where (also diverse things were published, concerning
alteration of certain points of religion; and certain holy days forbidden:
and many Abbeies agreed on to be suppressed. For the which cause a Monk, named
Doct. Mackrell, naming himself Captain Cobbler, stirred up to rebel the number
of xxvi. thousand in Lincoln shire: Rebellion suppressed.
which was quietly suppressed. Also, he raised an other of xl. thousand
Yorkshire men, by stirring up of Monks and priests. They called their
rebellion, an holy pilgrimage: which was also by the great providence of God
quieted without bloodshed. At that time, diverse priests, which were stirrers up
of the people, were executed.

Anno 1537. 1537 Prince Edward borne. Queen Jane dies.
The month of October, was borne Prince Edward, shortly after whose birth,
Queen Jane his mother, the second day after, died in childbed, and left the
king a widower: who so continued the space of two years together.

By reason of the kings departure from the pope, the Emperor, the French king,
and Scotts began to ruffle against him: but hearing of the birth of Prince
Edward, and understanding of the death of Queen Jane, whereby the king was a
widower: Ruffelings against the K. easily calmed.
and the brute being that he would match with the Germans, they began to
be calm again.

Anno 1536 The king began with a little book of articles, The K. articles
for the instruction of the people, bearing this title: Articles devised by the
kings highness to stablish christian quietness and unity among the people. It
contained the Creed, iij. sacraments, how images might safely be worshipped,
and how saints departed ought to be reuere^ced: that the parsons should teach
their people, that Christ is their only mediator, and how the ceremonies of
holy water, holy bread, candles, etc. should without superstition be used. It
took away also the abuses which rose upon the imagination of Purgatory, as,
Masses for souls departed, pardons, etc. Not long after these Articles,
certain other Injunctions were also given out, about the same year. Whereby a
number of holidayes were abrogated, A number of Holidaies abrogated.
and especially such as fell in harvest time.

After these Injunctions, other mo followed afterward, given out by the king,
concerning Images, Relics, and blind miracles. For, abrogating of
Pilgrimages, devised by superstition, and maintained for lucres sake. Scripture
in English.
Also for the Lords prayer, belief, and ten commandments, and the Bible to
be had in English.

Anno 1538. A Register book in every Church.
against Beckets day; knelling, Auies; Suffrages of Saints, etc.

This year was Friar Forest burned quick, hanging in chains, in Smithfield.
He denied the kings supremacy, and was convict of diverse other damnable
articles. He was an obseruant Friar. With this Forest, was Daruell Gatheren,
an abominable Idol of wales, burned: and it fulfilled a blind prophecy,
that it should set a Forest on fire. He took his death very impatiently.

In the months of October, and November, the same year, the religious houses,
by the special motion of the L. Cromwell, were from the very foundations
rooted up. Religious houses from the foundation rooted up.


Immediately after the ruin and destruction of Monasteries, the same year in
the month of November, followed the condemnation of John Lambert, the
faithful servant of Jesus Christ.

This Lambert Ioh. Lambert.
being borne and brought up in Norfolk, was first converted by Bilney, and
studied in the University of Cambridge, from whence, through the violence of
the time, he departed to the parts beyond the Seas, to Tindall, and Frith,
and there remained the space of a year and more, being Preacher to the English
house at Antwerpe, till he was disturbed by Sir Thomas Moore, and through the
examination of one Barlowe, was carried from Antwerpe to London, where he was
brought to be examined. First at Lambeth, then at the Bishops house at
Oxforde, before Warham, Archbishop of Caunterbury, and other adversaries,
having 45. Articles laid against him, 45. Articles against La^bert.
concerning the Sacraments, of orders; of penance; of confession; concerning
unwritten verities; purgatory; prayer to Saints; pilgrimage, lent fast;
Images; praying for souls departed; preaching without license of Bishops; the
Popes excommunication; Scripture in the mother tongue; justification by faith
only; concerning the Council of Constance; the number of Sacraments; the
power of Peter; the power of ye pope, etc.

Whereto John Lambert made a large and learned answer, and constantly
testified the truth of the same points agreeable to the Scriptures. He was
moreover required to bewray his fellows, which he refused to do with great
boldness. These answers of Lambert were delivered to Doctor Warham,
Archbishop of Canterbury, about the year 1532. at what time he was in
custody, in the Bishops house at Oxford: from whence the next year, through
the death of the Archbishop, he was delivered. After Warha^, succeeded D.
Cra^mer, Lambert in the mean time being delivered, returned to Land. and
taught children about ye Stocks.

Anno. 1538. Lambert was present at a Sermon in Saint Peter's Church in London,
preached by Doctor Tailor, who after was a Confessor of Jesus Christ: with
whom (after the Sermon) Lambert went and talked, and uttered his diverse
arguments, where he desired to be satisfied. The matter was concerning the
Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ. Tailor desired him to defer the
matter till another time, and to write his mind: which he did, and at last
it brake out to be a public matter; so that he was sent for by the
Archbishop of Canturbury, and was forced to defend his cause openly. In that
disputation it is said, that Lambert did appeal from the Bishops to the king:
and the rumor of the disputation was spread to the court. Now at this time
Stephen Gardener then bishop of Winchester, A wicked persuasion.
was in authority among the kings Counselors, and persuaded the king by
the burning of Lambert to quiet the people, who grudged at diverse of his
dooinges, both touching his divorce, and pullinge down the Popes pride, and
thereby to declare how stoutly he would resist Heretics, whereby the people
might take some contentment. So by these persuasions a day was set and Lambert
brought forth, where besides he had ye kings fierce countenance against him,
Lambert disputes.
he had x. disputers against him from xij of the clock, till v. at night,
among which were, the archbishop, Stephen Gardener, Tunstall B. of Durham, and
Stokesley bishop of London. In fine, through Winchesters persuasion, to
gratify the people, the king himself condemned Lambert, and commanded
Cromwell the chief friend of the gospellers to read the sentence. The king
condemns Lambert. Cromwell reads the sentence against Lambert. Cromwell
craves pardon of Lambert.
Upon ye day that was appointed for this holy martyr to suffer, he was brought
out of the prison, at viij. of the clock in the morning unto the house of the
L. Cromwell, and so carried into his inner chamber, where as it is reported of
many, Cromwell desired him of forgiveness for that he had done: from thence he
was brought into the hall, and so into Smithfield, where he suffered most
terrible torments: for after his legs were burned up to the stumps, and that
the wretched tormentors had withdrawe^ the fire from him, so that but a small
fire was left under him, two that stood on each side of him, with their
halbards pitched him upon their pikes, as far as the chain would reach, then
he lifting up such hands as he had, and his fingers ever flaming with fire,
cried unto the people in these words: Lambert a worthy martyr.
None but Christ, none but Christ, and so being let down again from their
Halbards, he fell into the fire, and yielded up the ghost.

Lamberts treatice of the Sacrament.
During the time that he was in the Archbishops house, he wrote a treatise to
the king touching the Sacrament, wherein he proved that the body could be but
in one place, and that the Sacrament was a mystical matter.

The same year 1538. Robert Packington Mercer, brother of Austen above
mentioned, because he little favored the clergy, being a man of courage, and
a burges of the parliament house for the City, and was thought to have had
some conference with the king, to the disaduauntage of the clergy, at five of
the clock in the morning as he was wont, going from his house in Cheapside,
to prayers at a church called S. Thomas of Acres, but now Mercers chapel, he
was slain with a gun by an Italian, Robert Packington slain going to prayers.
whom D. Incent Deane of Paul's had hired for lx. crowns to do that feat, as
he himself afterward on his death bed confessed.

The same year was Collins a mad man and his dog burned, Collins and his
dog burned together.
because as the priest lifted his God, so Collins in the Church at the same
time, lifted his dog over his head: his dog was burnt also with him.

Likewise another mad man called Cowbridge Cowbridge.
was burned at Oxford the same year: who, what ever his madness was before,
yet in the mids of the flame, he lifting up his hand to heaven, soberly and
discreetly called upon the name of the Lord Jesus, and so departed.

About the same time and year Putdewe Putdewe.
was put to death for saying merrily to a priest; after he had drunk the wine,
he blessed the hungry people with the empty Chalice.

At the same time also was condemned W. Letton William Letton.
a moonke of Aye in the County of Suffolk, and was burned at Norwich: for
speaking against an idol, that was used to be carried in procession at Aye;
and for holding that the Sacrament ought to be ministered in both kinds.

Somewhat before the burning of these men, Nich. Peke Nicholas Peke.
was burned at Ipswich: and when (the firres were set on fire) he was so
scorched, that he was as black as pitch, Doctor Reading standing there before
him, with Doctor Heirre and Doctor Springwell, having a long white wande in his
hand, did knock him upon the right shoulder, and said, Peke, recant, and
believe in the Sacrament: The notable courage of the martyr.
to whom Peke answered: I defy thee and it also, and with great violence,
he spatte from him blood: which came by reason the veins brake in his body
for extreme anguish. Which when he said, Doctor Reading granted, by the
authority of the Bishop of Norwich forty days of pardon, to so many as
should cast a stick to burn the heretic: whereupon Baron Curson, Sir John
Audley knight, and others were moved so to do; and cut down boughs, and
threw them into the fire.

This year the king was again required by the Emperor, and other States to
be a sender to the general Counsel at Vincence. For the Duke of Mantua would
suffer none there, The king again refuses the Counsel.
except the pope would with a sufficient army guard this city. The king again
refused, and sends his protestation in way of defense for himself to the
Emperor, and other Christian princes: which he concludes with this farewell.
Thus mighty Emperor, fare ye most heartely well, and you Christian princes,
The kings farewell to the princes. Anno Reg.
the pillars and stay of Christendom, fare ye heartily well: also you, what
people soever you are, which do desire, that the Gospel and glory of God may
flourish, fare ye heartily well.

As Thomas Cromwell favored the Gospel, so Stephan Gardener, B. of Winchester,
practiced all he could against the same, and wrought so with the king, that
the year 1539. against English scripture books, without examination: against
translations, Search injunctions.
without the authors name were put to it: against sacramentaries, that no man
should dispute of the sacrament, and with the rest the canon of Becket rased
etc. and in fine, so was he nusled by Winchester, that Anno 1540. 1540. The
king nusled by Winchester. The whippe with vi. strings The vi. Articles.
He summoned a parliament to be holden at Westminster the xxviij. of April:
also a synod of prelates, in which the six articles were concluded, touching
matters of religion: which were commonly called the whippe with six strings.

The first article was concerning transubstantiation. 2, Against the
communicating in both kinds. 3. That priests might not marry, after ye order
of priesthood received. 4. that the vows of chastity made above 21. years of
age, and of widowhood, advisedly made, should be observed. 5. The establishing
of private masses. 6. Auricular confession to be expedient. The punishment for
breach of the first article, was burning without any abiuration, with loss of
all goods and lands, as in case of treason: Treason. Felony.
the default against the other five articles was felony, without any benefit
of clergy, etc.

Against these articles, only D. Cranmer Cranmer disputes against the vi.
articles.
Archbishop of Canterbury, stood up, and three days disputed against them,
with such strength of reason, that the king (who ever bare especall favor unto
him) well liking his zealous defense, only willed him to depart out of the
parliament house, unto the Counsel chamber for a time, (for safegarde of his
conscience) till the Act should pass, and be granted: which he
notwithstanding with humble protestation, refused to do.

After the parliament was finished, the king sent the Lord Cromwell, (who in few
days after was apprehended) the two Dukes of Norfolk and Suffolk, and all
the Lords of the parliament house to dyne with the Archbishop at Lambith, and
to comfort him: and within few days also upon the same, required, that he
would give a note of all his doings and reasons in the said parliament, which
Cranmer eftsoons accomplished accordingly, and sent the copy thereof to the
king.

Besides these six Articles, in the same parliament was ordained, that if
Priests were taken in Adultery or Fornication, and duly convict, for their
not Cast nor Caute, at first time they should forfaite their goods, Against
adultery and fornication of priests.
and for the second fault, be taken and executed as fellons: this was brought
in by the Lord Cromwels advise: Who if he might have had his will, the first
crime of these concubinarie Priests, as well as the second, no doubt had been
punished with death: but so Gardener did bar that article with his shifts,
that the first was loss of goods, and the second death: and the next year he
so provided, that the pain of death, by Act of parliament was clean repealed:
So that by this statute it was provided, Death for adultery repeated.
for all such votaries as lived in whordome and adultery: For the first
offense, to lose his goods, and all his spiritual promotions, except one. For
the second, to forfeite all that he had to the king. For the third conviction,
to sustain continual imprisonment.

Anno 1541. The eight and twentieth day of July, the noble lord Cromwell, the
maule of the Pope and Papists in this land, and the great favorer of the
gospel was put to death at Tower hill. 1541. Cromwell the maule of the P. put
to death.
The crimes objected against him, were, first heresy, and that he was a
supporter of Barnes, Clarke, and many other, whom by his authority and
letters, written to Sheriffs and Justices, in diverse Shires, he had discharged
out of prison. Also, that he did disperse books of heresies among the kings
Subjects. Item, that he caused to be translated into English diverse books,
that contained matter against the Sacrament, etc. Besides all this, there were
brought in certain witnesses, which charged him with words that he should
speak against the king in the Church of S. Peter the poor in the xxx. year of
the kings reign.

In the month of July during the Parliament being in the Counsel chamber, he
was suddenly attainted, and carried to the Tower, the xix. of the month of
Iulie, and the xxviij. day put to death. He was borne of a simple parentage, at
Putney or there abouts, being a Smiths son, his mother married after to a
Sherman. Cromwell The life of L. Cromwell.
being ripe of years was at Antwerp retained to be secretary to the merchants
there: From whence being procured by Geffery Chambers with another companion,
(whom the men of Boston sent to Rome for the renewing of their privileges,) to
go to Rome and aid them in their suite, he departed and accompanied the Boston
men's Ambassadors to Rome: where he advised with himself, how he might have
best access unto the pope, and best dispatch of his business: and having
knowledge how that the popes holy tooth greatly delighted in new fangled
strange delicates, it came into his mind to prepare certain fine dishes of
gelly made after our country manner here in England, which to them of Rome was
not known, nor seen before. This done, Cromwell observing his time, as the
pope was newly come from hunting into his pauilio^, he with his companions
approached with his English presents, brought in with a threemans song (as we
call it) in the English tongue, and all after the English fashion.

The pope suddenly marueiling at the strangenes of the song, and understanding
that they were Englishmen, and that they came not empty handed: willed them to
be called in. Cromwell there showing his obedience, and offering this iolie
Iunkets: such as kings and Princes only used (said he) in the Realm of
England to feed on: desired that to be accepted in good part, which he and
his companions, as poor Suitors unto his Holiness, had there brought, and
presented, as Novelties meet for his recreation. Pope Julius so liked their
Iunkets, that he desired to know the making of their daynties: And
understanding their suites, without any more ado, stamped both their pardons,
both the greater and the (...) England: the king also wrote in like manner to
Boner his Ambassador, to assist the doers thereof in all their reasonable
suites: whereto the king of France gave license, and Boner showed himself
very diligent about the work. The Bible in English printed at Paris.
So the book was printed even to the last part, and then was quarrels picked
to the printer, who was sent for to the inquisitors of the faith, and there
charged with certain articles of heresy. Then were sent for the Englishmen
that were at the cost and charge thereof, Richard Grafton and Whitchurch, and
the corrector Miles Couerdale, but having warning what would follow, the
Englishmen posted away, leaving behind them their Bibles to the number of 2500.
called the Bibles of the great volume, and never recovered any of them, saving
the Lieuetenant criminal sold four great dryfats of them to an Haberdasher, to
lap in caps, and those were brought again: but the rest were burnt at the place
called Maulbert in Paris. But notwithstanding the loss, after they had
recovered some part of the foresaid books, and were comforted, and encouraged
by the L. Cromwell, the same men went again to Paris, and there got the
presses, letters, and servants of the foresaid printer, and brought them to
London, and there they became printers themselves, (which before they never
intended) and imprinted out the said Bible in London, and after that printed
sundry impressions of them, but yet not without great trouble and loss,
through the hatred of Steeuen Gardener, and his fellows. Steeuen Gardener
always an enemy to the Gospel.


In those days there were two sundry Bibles in English, printed and set
forth, bearing diverse titles, and printed in diverse places.

The first was called Thomas Mathewes Bible, Th. Mathewes bible.
printed at Hamborough, about the year 1532. The Corrector of which Printe was
John Rogers, the Printers were Richard Grafton and Whitchurch. In the
translation of this Bible, the greatest doer, was William Tindall, who with the
help of Miles Couerdale, had translated all the books thereof, except only
the Apocrypha and certain notes in the Margent, which were added after. But
because William Tindall in the mean time was apprehended before his book was
fully perfected, it was thought good to them that had the doing thereof to
change the name of William Tindall, because that name was then odious, and to
further it by a strange name of Thomas Matthew (John Rogers being the same
time corrector to the print): who had then translated the residue of the
Apocrypha, and added also certain notes thereto in the Margent: and thereof
came it to be called Thomas Matthewes bible. Which bible of Thomas Matthewes,
after it was imprinted and presented to the Lord Cromwell, and the Lord Cranmer
Archbishop of Canterbury, who liked very well of it, Cromwell presented it to
the king, The Bible in English presented to the king.
and obtained, that it might freely pass to be read of subjects, with his
graces license: So that there was printed on the same book, one line in red
letters, with these words: Set forth with the Kings most gracious license.
This book did greatly offend the Bishops, both for the prologues, and
especially, for a table, called, of the common places of the Bible, and the
scriptures, for the approbation of the same, and chiefly, about the supper of
the Lord, and priests marriages, and the mass, which there was said not to be
found in the Scripture.

After the restraint of this bible of Matthew, another came to be printed at
Paris, anno 1540. which was called the bible of the large volume. The Bible of
the large volume.
The Printed that printed it, was the former, and the ouerseer was Miles
Couerdale, who conferred Tindalles Translation with the Hebrewe, and mended
diverse places there.

In this Bible, although the former notes of Thomas Matthew were omitted, yet
sundry marks, and hands were annexed in the margent; which meant that in those
places should be made certain notes; wherewith also the Clergy was offfended:
and Cromwell being dead, complaints were made to the king, of the translation
of the Bible, and of the Preface of the same, and then was the sale of the
Bible commanded to be stayed, the B. promising to amend and correct it, but
never performed it. The Bishops promise to amend the Bible, but performed it
not.
Then Grafton was called for, and troubled and cast in the Fleet, where he
remained six weeks, and before he came out was bound in 300.l, neither to
print, to sell, nor cause to be printed any mo books till the king and the
clergy should agree on the translation; and thus was the Bible stayed from
that time, during the reign of king Henry the eight.

Anno 1541. D. Cutbert Barnes, Doctor Barnes
Thomas Garret, and William Hierome were burned in Smithfield for the
testimony of Jesus Christ, after the death of the lord Cromwell, who whiles he
lived was a great defense unto diverse that professed the truth, but he being
taken away, many godly christians in diverse places went to wrack.

Doctor Barnes after that he came from the university of Louaine, went to
Cambridge, where he was made Prior and Master of the house of Augustines, at
which time the knowledge of good letters was very scant in the University:
which Barnes thinking to redress, read in his house Terence, Plautus, and
Cicero, so that what with his labor and help of Thomas Parnell his scholar
whom he brought from Louaine with him, reading Copia verborum and rerum, he
caused the house shortly to flourish with good letters, and made a great part of
his house learned: as M. Cambridge, M. Field, M. Coleman, M. Burley, M.
Couerdall, etc. After these foundations laid, he did openly read in the house,
S. Paul's Epistles, and put by Duns and Dorbell, Duns and Dorbell put out of
Cambridge.
and (yet though he were a questionarie himself) in short space made he
diverse good divines, observing disputations of necessary points of faith in
his house, Disputations of points of faith, rare in Ca^bridge in those days.
and also in the schools when he should dispute with any man. The first man,
that answered Doctor Barnes in the Scriptures was M. Stafford, for his form to
be batchellour of divinity; Which disputation was marvelous in the sight of
the great blind Doctors: notwithstanding all this, till he was converted by
Bylney; D. Barnes converted by Bylney.
he remained in his superstition still. The first Sermon that ever he preached
according to the truth of the Gospel, was the Sunday before Christmas day at
S. Edwards church belonging to Trinitrie hall in Cambridge, by the pease
market: whose theme was the Epistle of the same Sunday, Gaudete in Domino etc.
For which Sermon he was immediately accused of heresy by two fellows of kings
hall. Then the godly me^ flocked, and conferred together: the house that they
most commonly resorted unto, was the white horse, which for dispite of them, to
bring Gods word into contempt was called Germany. The Whitehorse in Cambridge
called Germany.
This house was especially chosen, because they of S. John's, Kings and Queens
Colleges might come on the backeside thither.

Doctor Barnes was accused in the regent house, and constantly continued, with
much preaching of diverse parties one against another, in trying out Gods
truth, till within six days before Shrouetide, then was there sent down a
Sergeant at arms called master Gibson, dwelling in Saint Thomas Apostle in
London, who suddenly arrested Doctor Barnes D. Barnes arrested.
in the Regent house: and privily they had determined to make search for
Luthers books, and all the Germans works suddenly: but by Doctor Farmans
warning of Queens College the books were conveyed away: thirty persons they
had in special suspicion. Doctor Barnes was carried to Cardinal Wolsey, and
after he had a while stood constant (by the persuasion of Doctor Gardener his
secretary, and Fox) he relented and submitted himself: Barnes submits
himself,
and with five Stylliard men he bare his faggot at Paul's: the bishop of
Rochester there preaching against Luther, and Doctor Barnes. Notwithstanding
his submission the Bishop commanded he should be had to the Fleet again,
and be permitted to have such liberty as other prisoners had: where Doctor
Barnes continued half a year: at length was delivered, and committed to be
free prisoner at the Austen friars in London. Where being undermined and
complained of: it was determined he should be removed to the Austine friars in
Northampton, there to be burned, he himself knowing nothing thereof: but by
the advice of Master Horn, who brought him up, he made escape, came to
London, and by long Seas went to Antwerpe, and so to Luther, D. Barnes escapes
out of prison.
and there fell to study till he had made answer to all the bishops of the
Realm, and had made a Book entitled, Acta Romanorum Pontificum, Acta
Romanorum pontificum.
and another Book, with a supplication to King Henry. And such favor God
gave him in fight of the Duke of Saxony, and the King of Demarke, that the
king of Denmark sent him with the Lubeckes as Ambassador to King Henry the
eight, and was lodged with the Lubeckes Chancellor at the Stillyarde.

Sir Thomas Moore the Chancellor would feign have entrapped him, but the king
would not suffer him: For Cromwell was his great friend, and ere he went, the
Lubeckes and he disputed with the Bishops of this Realm in defense of the
truth, and so departed with them again without resistaunce: and afterward
having set forward in Germany his works in print that he had begun: he
returned again in the beginning of the reign of Queen Anne: and after that
was sent Ambassador by king Henry the eight to the Duke of Cleue, for the
marriage of the Lady Anne of Cleue, between the King and her: and was well
accepted therefore, until the time that Stephen Gardener came out of France:
after which time, neither religion prospered, nor the Queen, nor Cromwell, nor
the Preachers: for not long after, Doctor Barnes with his brethren were
apprehended, and carried before the Kings majesty at Hampton Court, and there
was examined. Where, the Kings majesty seeking the means of his safety: and
desirous that Winchester and he might agree, granted him leave to go home to
confer with the Bishop: but they not agreeing, through certain complaints,
Barnes and his fellows were inioined to make three sermons the next Easter
following, at the spittle. In which, not satisfying the Prelates, they were
sent for to Hampton Court again, D. Barnes sent to the tower.
and from thence to the Tower by Sir John Gostwicke, from whence they came not
out til they came to their death. And thus much concerning Doctor Barnes.

About the year 1526. Master Garret Curate of Honey lane in London came to
Oxforde, and dispersed there certain Books in Latin, not agreeable to the
Romish superstition, with Tindalles Testament: and had not long been there,
but he was searched for in London to be apprehended for an Heretic: and
afterward a privy search was made in Oxforde: whereof Garret being warned
by Master Cole of Magdalene College, who after was cross bearer to Cardinal
Wolsey: he departed out of Oxforde in the morning before Shrouetide, toward
Dorcetshyre, where he would have for a time hid himself. But altering his
mind, on the Friday night next, he returned to Oxforde, and lay in Radlies
house, where, by the privy search the same night he was taken, and kept
prisoner in Doctor Cotfords chamber, master of Lincoln College, then being
Commissary of the University: from whence, (when the Commissary and his
company was at Euensong,) Garret putting back the lock of his door with his
finger, escaped again, and (changing his apparel by the help of Anthony
Delaber scholar of Alborne hall) departed: but afterward was again taken by
master: Cole or his men, going Westward, at a place called Hincksey, a little
beyond Oxeford, and so being brought back again, was committed to ward: that
done, he was conuented before the Commissarie, Doctor London, and doctor
Higden Deane of Frisewides, now called Christ's College, into Saint Mary's
Church, where they compelled him to carry a Faggot in open Procession, and
Delaber with him, and after were sent to Osney, there to be kept in prison,
till further order was taken. Yet again after this, M. Garret flying from
place to place, Barnes, Garret and Hierom, burned together.
escaped till the time he was apprehended, and burned with Doctor Barnes: with
whom also W. Hierome, sometime Vicar of Stepney, was likewise drawn into
Smithfield, and together with them endured constantly martyrdom in the fire.

This Hierome, for preaching at Paul's the 4. Sundays in Lent, and saying that
all that were of the Freewoman Sara, were freely justified; for preaching that
we are not bound to princes laws, further than according to the word of God;
and that works are no part of our salvation; was committed to the Tower, and
the xxx. of Iulie, two days after the death of the Lord Cromwell, An unjust
proceeding.
not coming to any answer, nor yet knowing any cause of their condemnation
without any public hearing, (process being made out against them by the kings
Counsel, in the Parliament time) Barnes, Hierome, and Garret were brought
together from the Tower into Smithfield, and by constant suffering the rage of
the fire, they gave testimony to the truth. After they had made confession of
their faith, and prayed, there was one asked Doctor Barnes if the Saints
prayed for us, he said he would refer that unto God: and if they did, then I
trust (said he) to pray for you within this half hour, M. Sheriff: and asked
the Sheriff if he had any Articles against him, for which he was condemned.
The Sheriff answered, no: Then (said he) is there any man else that knows
wherefore I die, or yt by my preaching has taken any error, let them now
speak, and I will make them answer. And no man answered: So praying
earnestly for his persecutors, he gave himself to suffer, and required master
Sheriff to have him commended unto the king, and to show him that he required
of his grace four requests. First, Doctor Barnes his 4. requests to the king.
that he would bestow part of the Abbey possessions on the relief of the
poor. Secondly, that he would see matrimone to be had in more reverence.
Thirdly, that swearers might be punished. Fourthly, that he would set up
Christ's true religion.

The same year and day, and in the same place, were four Papists executed for
denying the kings Supremacy, Four papists executed for denying the knigs
supremacy.
which brought the people to a marvelous admiration. Their names were Powell,
Fetherstone, and Abel. All 3. drawn, hanged, and quartered. It fell out thus,
by reason the kings Counsel was divided in Religion: the one side hastening
the execution of the Papists, and the other of the Protestants.

The favorers of the truth in king Henry's days. The patrones of popery in
those days.
The favorers of the truth were these, Caunterburie, Suffolk, Vicount
Beauchampe, Vicount Lisle, Russell Treasourer, Paget, Sadler, Awdeley. The
favorers of the Papists, Winchester, Duresme, Norfolk, Southhampton,
Anthony Brown, William Paulet, John Baker, Rich, Chancellor of the
Augmentation, Winckfielde Vice-chauncellour.

There suffered besides those traitors, in the time of king Henry, for the
cause of Supremacy, to the number of four and twenty in all.

Such was the furious prosecuting of the commission for the vi. Articles, that
in London a great number came into question, and great trouble, to the number
almost of two hundredth persons: and out of other quarters, such a number were
apprehended through this Inquisition, that all the prisons in London were too
little to hold them: All prisons in London too little to hold the persecuted.
in so much that they were feign to lay them in Halles. At the last, through
the means of the Lord Awdeley, such pardon was obtained of the king, that the
Lord Awdeley, then Lord Chancellor, being content that one should be bound
for another, they were all discharged.

Edmund Boner Boner turns his opinion, and becomes a persecutor.
who had before been advanced by Cromwell, and preferred before another way,
being now B. of London, showed himself a most cruel executor of the
commission, in such sort that he burned Richard Mekins being but of xv. years
of age, for chauncing to speak against the Sacrament of the Altar, as he had
heard other say; and other were caused to recant, as Towling parson of S.
Anthonies, and Alexander Seaton a Scottish man, and a worthy preacher: this was
Anno 1541.

An. 1541. John Porter a young man, was by Boner cast into prison in Newgate,
for reading the Bible in Paul's: yet the king had commanded it should be read:
and Boner himself in the days of Cromwell appointed that vj. bibles of the
great volume should be set up in the church of Saint Paul's in London for the
people to read. Six Bibles set up in Paul's to be read of the people.
Whereupon great multitudes would resort thither to hear this Porter read.
Hereat Boner being grieved, caused him to be put in the dungeon of Newgate:
where he was fettered in irons both legs and arms, with a collar of iron
about his neck, fastened to the wall in the dungeon. From this torment, by
suite of his brother and many other he was released, to be among the other
prisoners, fellons and murderers: whose blasphemy and wickedness he being
not able to bear, and therewith finding fault, and giving them instructions,
he was complained of and carried down again, and laid in the lower dungeon of
all, and oppressed with boltes and irons. It is thought that he was fettered
with one Ingine in the prison, called, The Devil in the neck, The devil in
the neck.
which is so devised that within three or four hours, it breaks and
crusheth a man's back or body in pieces, John Porter killed in prison.
so that within six or eight days after, being heard pitifully crying and
groaning he was found dead.

In the time of the Cardinal, Thomas Summers an honest Merchant was in prison
in the Tower for having of Luthers books, and penance being enjoined, that
he should with three other Merchaunts, ride with books into Cheapeside hanged
about their necks, with a basin tinged on before them, and there cast their
Testamentes in the fire. Now because he cast his book over or through the
fire, and would not cast it into it, Thomas Summers dies in the Tower.
he was complained of and cast again into the Tower by the Cardinal, where
he died.

In the diocese of Lincoln, under John Longland, and Doctor Dracot his
Chancellor, great persecution was about Buckingham, and Amersham for the six
Articles, and the same time the Bishop burned two in one day: the one named
Thomas Barnarde, Thomas Barnard, James Morton martyrs.
and the other James Morton, the one for teaching the Lords prayer in English,
and the other for keeping the Epistle of saint James translated into English.

In Oxford also the same time or much there about, recanted one master Barber,
a master of arts of that University, a man excellently learned. His cause was
the matter of the Sacrament.

Not long before his recantation there was one master Malarie, master of arts
of Cambridge of Christ's College, who for like opinions contrary to the Romish
faith, was conuented before the Bishops, and in the end sent to Oxford there
openly to recant, and to bear his faggot, to the terror of the students of
that University, at whose recantation while Doctor Smith preached, and treated
of the Sacrament, there rose a false imagination of firs that should be over
their heads; and such impression it took in Doctor Smith, that in manner he
first of all cried out in the pulpet: A popish fear.
these are the traynes and subtilties of Heretics against me. Lord have
mercy upon me, Lord have mercy upon me, etc. Claymunde with other of the
aged sort, that could not run and make shift for themselves, kneeled down
before the high Altar, committing themselves and their lives unto the
sacrament, all full of terror. While the rest thronged and thrust to get out of
the Church; among them there was a boy, that seeing the doors so stopped with
press, that he could not get out, climed up upon the door, and among them gate
out over men's heads: being upon the door, he saw a Monk coming toward him,
which had a great wide cowle hanging at his back: which the boy perceiving,
leapes down into the Monks cowle: the Monk at the first perceiving nothing,
but after a while, feeling his cowle heavy, and hearing the voice of the boy;
thought it had been a devil: and began to conjure him, in the name of God and
all saints; I command thee to declare what thou art, that art behind my back?
to whom the boy answered: I am Bartrams boy. Bartrams boy. The devil in the
Monks cowle.
But I (said the Monk) adjure thee in the name of the inseperable trinity,
that thou wicked spirit, do tell me who thou art, from whence thou came,
and that thou get thee hence: I am Bartrams boy, said he, good master let
me go: and with that, his cowle began to crack upon his shoulders: the
monk, when he perceived the matter, took the boy out and discharged his
cowle, the boy took his legs and ran away as fast as he could, and this was
the perplexity of the good Catholics in that assembly: which rose upon the
crying of fire in the streets, by one Hewster, who saw a chimney on fire: and
according to the custom, cried: Fire, fire, as he passed by Saint Mary's
Church. Now as touching the Heretic, because he had not done his sufficient
penance there, by occasion of this hurliburly: therefore the next day he was
reclaymed into the Church of Saint Frisewide, where he supplied the rest of
his penance that lacked.

An. 1541. By the sentence of ye co^uocation house, the Lady Anne of Cleue was
divorced, Lady Anne of Cleue divorced.
and the king permitted to mary with ye L. Katherine Hawarde, and within a
while, she also was put to death for incontinency with Tho. Culpeper.

The same year, in the month of August 1541 six were executed at Tiborne for
the matter of supremacy: Six put to death for the supremacy.
The Prior of Dancaster, Giles Horn a monk of the Charterhouse of London,
Thomas Epsame a monk of Westminster, who was the last in king Henry's days
that ware a monks weed: the fourth, one Philpot, the fifth, one Carew, the sixth
was a Friar.

The king after the death of his first wife, now more and more he missed his
old Counselor Cromwell, The king misseth Cromwell.
and partly smelling the ways of Winchester, began a little to set his foot
in the cause of religion: and now the want of Cromwell, did more mightily knit
his affection to Cranmer, who^ he always before loved well. And in the same
year, the month of October, after the execution of this Queen: the king
understanding some abuses, yet to remain unreformed, namely, about pilgrimages
and idolatry, etc. directed his letters to the Archb. of Canterbury for
speedy redress of the same: this was Anno 1542.

The year 1543. 1543. Whitemeates permitted in Lent.
in the month of February, followed another Proclamation given out by the
Kings authority, whereby whitemeates were permitted to be eaten in Lent.

Anno 1544. Anthony Parson priest, Henry Filmer. John Marbeck, were sent from
London to Windsor by the Sheriffs men, the Saturday before S. James day: and
laid fast in the town jail, Robert Testwood, (who had kept his bed) was
brought out of his house upon crowches and laid with them. Robert Bennet was
the fourth apprehended with them, and being sick of the pestilence, and a
great sore running upon him, he was left behind in the Bishop of Londons jail,
whereby he escaped the fire.

Now these being brought to Windsor, there was a session specially procured to
be holden the Thursday after, which was S. Agnes day. Against which sessions by
the counsel of Doctor London and Simons a cruel Persecutour, were all the
Farmers belonging to the College of Windsor warned to appear to be the
iurers. The Judges were these: Doctor Capon bishop of Salisbury, sir William
Essex knight, sir Thomas Bridges knight, sir Humfrey Foster knight, Franckelen
Deane of Windsore, and Fachell of Readyng: Robert Ockam occupied the clarke of
peaces room: who called Anthony Parson and read his indictement: which was,
preaching against the real presence: Thomas Testwood, whom they alleged
against, that he mocked the Priest at the lifting etc. Next, Filmer, whom his
own brother accused, for the matter of the real presence: there being none
but his own brother to witness against him, whom Doctor London flattered and
entertained in his own house to that end. Lastly, John Marbecke being
called, was charged to have resembled the lifting up of the Sacrament, to the
setting up of Ieroboams calves, and for speaking against the Mass: In which
Articles they were found guiltye by the Quest: one Hyde, dwelling beside
Abington in a Lordeshippe belonging to the College of Windsor, spoke in the
mouth of the rest. Then the Judges beholding the prisoners a good while, (some
with waterie eyes) made courtesy who should give judgment: which when Fachell
that was the lowest in the benche perceived: if no man will do it, then will I
(said Fachell) and so gave judgment. So were they had away, who with
comforting one another, prepared themselves to die the next day. All the night,
till dead sleep took them, they continued still calling on the name of the
Lord, and praying for their persecutors.

On the next morrow, which was Friday, as the prisoners were all preparing
themselves to suffer, the Bishop of Sarum and others, had sent a letter by one
of the Sherifes Gentlemen, called master Frost, to the bishop of Winchester,
(the Court being then at Oking) in the favor of Marbecke, Marbecke pardoned.
at the sight of which letter the Bishop straight way went to the king and
obtained his pardon: which was to the end he might betray others. On the
Saturday morning the other three were had to suffer, and all three being bound
to the post, a certain young man of Filmers acquaintance brought him a pot of
drink: asking him if he would drink? Yea quoth Filmer I thank you, and so
they encouraging themselves, drancke one to another. Filmer rejoicing in the
Lord, said: be merry my brethren and lift up your hearts to God: for after this
sharp breakefast I trust we shall have a good dinner in the kingdom of Christ
our Lord and redeemer: Filmer, Testwood, and Porson burned.
at which words Testwood lifting up his hands and eyes to heaven, desired the
Lord above to receive his spirit. And Anthony Parson pulling the straw unto
him, laid a good deal thereof upon the top of his head, saying: This is
Gods hatte: now am I dressed like a true soldier of Christ, by whose merits
only I trust this day to enter into his joy: Notable martyrs.
and so they yielded up their souls unto the Lord with such patience, as it
was marvelous to the beholders.

The meaning of Gardener was after this to have dealt with great personages,
had not the Lord prevented his cruel practices.

On the Monday after the men were burnt: it was determined by the Bishop of
Salisburie, that Robert Ockam should go to the Bishop of Winchester with the
whole process done at the Sessions the thursday before. And also, had writings
of those that were privily endicted: whereof one of the Queens men (named
Fulke) having knowledge, gat to the Court before, and told Sir Thomas Cardine,
and other of the privy Chamber, how all the matter stood. Whereupon, Ockam
was laid for, and passing the streets by the Earl of Bedfordes lodging, was
pulled in by ye sleeue, and kept secret at my Lord privy Seals, till
certain of the privy Counsel had perused all his writings: Among which, they
found certain of the privy Chamber endicted, with other the kings Officers,
and their wives. That is to say, Sir Thomas Cardine, Sir Philip Hobbie, with
both their Ladies. Master Edmund Harmon, Master Th. Weldowe, with Snowball and
his wife. All these they had endicted by the force of the vi. articles, as
ayders, helpers, and mainteyners of Anthony Parson. And besides them, they had
endicted of heresy, a great number mo of the kings true and faithful
Subjects. Whereof the kings Majesty being certified, gave unto them his
gracious pardon. The king pardons.
And so had Benet a discharge withal: and being certified of the sheriff and
Sir Humfrey Foster, of the death of the poor men at Windsor, the king turning
from them, to depart, said, Alas poor Innocents. And after this withdrew his
favor from Winchester, caused Doctor London, Winchester cast out of favor.
and Simons the Lawier, and a fierce persecutor of them, to be apprehended, and
brought before the Counsel: and examined upon their oath, of alleigeance, who
for denying their wicked fact, were found perjured, and were judged as perjured
persons, to wear papers in Windsor, and Ockam to stand upon the Pillorie at
Newberie, where he was borne. False Judges and accusers punished.
The judgment of the three was, to ride about Windsor, Reading, and Newberie,
with papers on their heads, and their faces turned to the horsetailes, and so
to stand upon the Pillorie in every of those Towns, for false accusation of
the forenamed Martyrs, and for perjury.

Anno 1539. Adam Damlip, alias George Bucker, who there for xx. days or more,
preached every day at vii. of the clock. He preached very godly sermons
against Transubstantiation, and adoration of the sacrament. Damlip by this
Commission was cited, and appeared before the Archb. of Canterbury, Winchester,
Chichester, and diverse others: before whom constantly he maintained the truth
of the sacrament, and being dismissed for that time, and enjoined to appear
the next day, Adam Damlip.
by the secret warning of the archb. of Cant. he stepped aside into the West
country, while great trouble was kindled against Gods people in Calice,
namely, against sir W. Smith, curate, and a zealous preacher, T. Brook R. Hare,
sir I. Butler, then Commissarie, James Cock, alias Coppe^, Persecution in
Calice.
D. Lane, I, Barber, and others. Of the which persons T. Brook, R. Hare,
Coppen, D. Lane, and I. Barber, were apprehended, and sent over, and committed
to prison in Westminster gate: and then commanded to appear before the Archb.
Winchester, Chichester, and ten other, appointed by the kings majesty. Sir W.
Smith preacher, and I. Butler, by commandment were apprehended in Calice, and
bound by surety, not to pass the bounds of Calice.

Sir William Smith was accused to preach against our lady, and praying to
saints, good works, etc. Brook, for speaking against the sacrament, Rafe, Hare
for speaking against holy bread and holy water, Butler was charged to have
maintained Adam Damlippe: for which he was dismissed of his Commissariship. And
it was determined, that sir W. Smith, Rafe Hare, James Cock, and James Barber,
should be sent to Calice, and there to abjure, and do penance: where sir
William Smith was enjoined to make the sermon, R. Hare, I. Cock, and James
Barber, there standing with fagots upon their shoulders: saving because he
dwelled there, Barber was enjoined to bear his faggot iiij. miles of Calice, on
the market day: where sir. W. Smith preached also, as before, and so ordered
the matter in his sermon, that in effect he denied nothing he had taught
before. His accuser was one R. Long, a man at arms in Calice, who falsely swore
that he had eaten flesh in Lent, at Brooks house: after which oath, he having
taken displeasure some way, ran out of his house, and in the eyes of a number
of people, went and drowned himself.

After this commission, which was executed by M. Greenfield, sir I. Butler, the
K. mason, and others (through the rage of the enemy, and complaint to the king,
that the commons were in peril through dissension of opinions,) there were
sent over new commissioners, the earl of Sussex, lord great Chamberlain, the
lord S. John, sir John Gage knight, sir John Baker knight, M. Layton clerk of
the closet, and D. Currin with special instructions, besides signed with the
kings own hand: so that if God had not taken compassion, there had an hundredth
been burnt or hanged shortly after: but it happened far otherwise: for of the
number of those accusors, iiij. were by the commisioners sent over into
England: to wit, Clement Philpot servant to the L. Lisle, sir Edmund curate of
our Ladies church, Thomas Towchet a postmaister, Peter Requet: Gods judgment
and deliverance of his people.
of the which Philpot and the Curat were drawn, hanged and quartered at
London: and contrarily, of them that were accused, not one lost an hair of his
head. Inquisition being made, Thomas Brook aforementioned, was committed to
ward: and so were Anthony Pickering Gent. Henry Turney gentleman, Sir George
Darby priest, John Shepherd, William Pellam, William Reuerdall, John
Whitewood, John Boot, Robert Clodder, Copen de Lane, and Matthew de Lound, sent
to close prison: William Stephens likewise, who was Adam Damlips host, The L.
Lisle dies in the Tower.
was sent into England and clapped in the Tower: and after him the L. Lisle
deputy, who died in the Tower.

The second day after Easter, Thomas Brook was sent for, and committed to
close prison in the majors jail: and George Brodway was suborned by the
Counsel of Calice: who threatened him greatly, if he would not burden Brook
with some concealementes (which he at length by strait imprisonment and
threats, did, and set to his hand, that Brook had for a long time concealed
four groates every day, for his Clerks wages:) for which after a while
Brodway being grieved in his conscience, with a knife went about to cut his
own throat, had not the jailer prevented him; who heard him groan with the pain
he felt of ye wou^d: after, through guilt of conscience and shame he fell out
of his wits. Gods judgment upon a false accuser.
Of this dealing with Brook, his wife gave intelligence to the lord Cromwell;
wherein she desired the lord Cromwell to be a means to the king that the
afflicted, and their causes might be heard in England, which he with speed did
accomplish, and wrote to the Commissioners in the kings name, that Brook, and
xij. or xx. of his accomplices should be sent over into England with their
accusers.

Now by the time that the Commissioners had received these letters, they had
made out precepts for viij. or ix. score honest men more to be cast in prison;
but these Letters appalled and stayed them: notwithstanding they banished the
men before named, out of the town for an hundredth years: and sent them back to
prison, staying them there upon hope, that the Lord Cromwell should sooner come
into captivity then he did: but at last they sent xiij. prisoners with Brook,
who within xxiiij. hours, were at anchor before the Tower wharfe: whom when the
Lord Cromwell understood to be come, he commanded their yrons to be smote off
at the tower wharfe, and the prisoners to be brought unto him, whom he greatly
comforted. After that, they were sent to the Fleet, and whiles they were in
the Fleet, and William Steuens in the tower, the xix. day of July Anno 1541,
the Lord Cromwell their great favorer was beheaded at Tower hill, so that all
hope seemed to them to have been utterly lost of any deliverance: but the Lord
had them in remembrance, and stirred up the Lord Awdley, L. Awdley a friend to
the afflicted.
Lord Chancellor of England, without further examination, to deliver them.
And at length, two years after, he delivered William Steeuens also, by the
kings own motion. The unjust Cou^sellers, who charged the Town with sedition
and heresy, fell afterward into the kings displeasure, and the L. Graie, Sir
George Carew, and Sir Richard Greenfield, who purged the town of the slander,
although for a time they were in displeasure, yet wtin a while after, they came
into greater favor then before; and were rewarded with xx. l. a year a piece
at the least: Rockwood one of the fearcest persecutors fell into despair:
Rockwood a persecutor despaireth. Gods judgments.
and at the last breath cried, he was utterly damned, for that he said,
maliciously he sought the death of such good men. The Vndermarshall also
(another persecutor) suddenly fell down in the counsel chamber and never
spoke word: and the rest of the persecutors had the revenging hand of God
following after them.

Adam Damlip Adam Damlip taken again.
who before escaped and lay hid in the Westcountry, teaching a school about a
year or two: by the miserable inquisition of the six articles, was again
taken and brought up to London, where he was by St. Gardener commanded to the
Marshalsea, and there lay the space of other two years, where thinking he had
been forgotten; he in the Latin tongue wrote an epistle to the B. of
Winchester, wherein he said he would write his obedience and submission: for
said he, I had rather die then here to remain, and not to be suffered to use
my talent to Gods glory: This he said to M. Marbecke then prisoner in the
Marshalsea. This epistle he delivered to his keeper about Saturday in ye
morning, which was about the ij. week before Whitsontide, desiring him to
deliver it at the court to the B. of Winchester, which he did. The B. made such
quick dispatch, that ye keeper came home at night very late, and brought with
him a precept for the execution of Adam Damlip. So upon monday early in the
morning, the keeper and other of the knight Marshals men, co^ueied Adam unto
Calice upon the Ascension even, and there committed him to the Majors prison:
and because they could not burden him with any thing, within a sufficient
compass of time, to condemn him: they laid to his charge he had received a
French crown of cardinal Poole at Rome; where before his first coming to
Calice, he was requested to read three lectures a week in Cardinal Pooles
house: and therefore they condemned him and executed him for treason: Adam
Damlip put to death.
which death he most meekely and heartily took: John Butler and sir Daniell the
curate before mentioned, after ix. months imprisonment were with much labor
permitted to return to Calice again: William Steuens above mentioned, who had
remained all this time in the Tower, was condemned also of treason with his
guest Adam Damlip, and pardoned by the king. Adam Damlip had sometimes been a
great papist and chaplain to Fisher B. of Rochester: and after the death of
his master, traveled France, Dutchland, and Italy, and came to Rome: where
he would not for the wickedness of the place abide to remain, though cardinal
Poole offered him maintenance to read iij. lectures a week in his house; which
he refused: and for receiving only a French crown, he was condemned and
executed for treason: he received it at the Cardinals hand to drink, and bear
some charge of expense.

By the preaching of Adam Damlip in Calice, among others, there was a poor man
whose name is not yet certainly known: who was converted to the truth and
therefore condemned by one Haruey there, being co^missarie: whom this Haruey in
time of his judgment called Heretic, and said he should die a vile death:
the poor man answered again, and said that he was no heretic, but was in
the faith of Christ: and whereas thou saidest, said he, that I shall die a vile
death, thou thy self shall die a viler death, and that shortly. And so it came
to pass, for within half a year after Haruey was hanged, Gods judgment.
drawn and quartered for treason in the same town of Calice.

After the burning of this poor man, there was also a certain other schooler
counted to be a dutchman named Dodde, who coming out of Germany, was there
taken with certain Germane books about him: and being examined and standing
stoutly to the doctrine of the gospel, he was burned.

A little before this time, Will. Bolton, alias Crosbowmaker, for saying the
Pope wanted Charity: if he could, and would not release souls out of
Purgatory, by Doctor Darlie parson of our Ladies Church in Calice, then
Commissarie for Archbishop Warham, was made to bear a fagotte, and lost his
wages, which was vi, pence a day: who complaining thereof to the king, and
declaring unto his majesty the cause, sent him to Calice again: and after
that gave him viij. pence a day.

As for the vi. articles, many good men were put to death, so for the Popes
supremacy diverse suffered. And about this time, Lark a priest of Chelsey for
the supremacy, and Germine Gardener, near kinseman to Stephen Gardener, and
his secretary, for practicing for the Pope against the King, were put to death.

By an act of parliament holden An. 1544. 1544. The rigor of vi. articles
mitigated.
the rigor of the vi. articles was assuaged a little: and at the first time it
was permitted, that they which offended against them might recant: which if
they refused to do, and offended again, they should bear a faggot, and should
be admitted to abjure: if the third time they offended, then they should
sustain punishment according to law. Notwithstanding this Parliament had thus
mittigated the rigor, yet remained the poison: and all manner of books bearing
the name of Willia^m Tindall, or what other book soever contained any thing
against the vi. articles, were debarred. In this Parliament also, it was
permitted only to noblemen and gentlemen, Noblemen and Gentlemen permitted to
read the scripture.
to read the scriptures to their edifying: so they did it without discussing
or urging thereupon.

In this Parliament also it was permitted to the party detected, to try his
cause by witnesses: as many (or more) in number as the other which deposed
against him,

Anno 1545. 1545. Six articles more qualified.
the vi. articles were yet much more qualified by Act of Parliament: whereby it
was also decreed, that the king should have full power to appoint 32. persons:
to wit, sixeteene of the Clergy, and sixeteene of the temporaltie, to peruse
and ouersee, and examine the Canons, constitutions and ordinances of the canon
law, as well provincial, as synodall: and so according to their discretions to
establish an order of ecclesiastical laws, such as should be thought by the
king most convenient.

This year 1544. John Heywood recanted the Popes supremacy, and John Ath the
truth of the sacrament.

About the year 1546. 1546 Saxy hanged.
one Saixe a priest, was hanged in the porters lodge of Stephen Gardener, not
without the consent of the Bishop, as it is supposed: there was also a servant
in Colchester, named, Henry, burned for the testimony of the truth. Henry
burned.


This year 1546. One Kerby Kerby.
was burned in Ipswich for the testimony of the truth: and the matter of the
real presence: at whose death, the Lord Wentworth (who gave sentence against
him) with others, wept bitterly: He was burnt the Saturday before Gang monday,
and at the same bar also was condemned one Roper, Roper.
Clearke of Mendesham: and was burned at S. Edmundsbury, the Gang monday after.
He suffered great pains and torments in his burning, for ye wood was green, so
that he was choked with smoke: and moreover being set in a pitch barrel, was
therewith sore payned at length one standing by, took a faggot stick, and
striking at the ring about his neck, stroke him belike upon the head, and so he
sunk down and was dissolved. The other, Kerby, being dissuaded by master
Robert Wingfield, A notable speech of the constant servant of Christ.
that declared unto him the painfulnes of the death, said unto him. Ah Master
Wingfield, be at my death, and you shall say: there stands a Christian
soldier in the fire.

At the later end of this year 1545. in the month of November, was granted
unto the king (besides other subsidies of money,) al Colleges, Chauntries,
Free chapels, hospitals, Fraternities, brotherhoods, guildes, and perpetuities
of stipendarie priests, to be disposed at his pleasure.

The next Lent following, D. Crome D. Crome recanteth.
made a dilemma against private masses: but the Prelates did so handle the
matter that on Easter next, they made him to recant.

Anno 1546. About the month of June, Anne Askewe, John Lacels, gentleman, of
the Court, John Adams a Tailor, Nicholas Belleman a priest of Shropshire, were
burned at one fire in Smithfield. Anne Askew 1545. Anne Askewe.
in the month of March, was first examined by C. Dare, Inquisitor, at sadlers
hall, touching the Sacrament of the Altar, Masses, confession, the kings book:
and afterward committed by him to be examined of a Priest, who propounded also
concerning the sacrament: to whom she would make no answer, neither unto the
Inquisitor, touching that matter.

He enquired also concerning private Masses, which she said was idolatrous.
From thence they had her to my Lord Mayor, who examined her as they had done
before: to whom she made such answer as she did to the quest before, which was
in some things directly, in other some, by question. Again, because she said
she would not cast Pearls among swine. From thence the L. Mayor commanded her
to ward without bail: so she remained in the Counter xi. days, and no friend
admitted to speak with her, saving a priest was sent unto her by ye B. to examine
her of his points of superstition.

The xxiii. of March, her Cosen master Britain, went to my Lord Mayor,
desiring of him she might be bayled: who said he would not do it without the
consent of the Spiritual Officer. Whereupon he went to the Chancellor: but
the matter was so heinous, that he durst not do it without the B. of London
were made privy to it. So from him he went to Bonner, who said to master
Britain, that he was well contented that she should come forth to a
communication: and appointed her to appear the next day at iij. of the clock
at after noone: but sent for her at one of the clock, and by flattering words
endeavored to persuade her to declare her whole mind without fear: and
promised her that no vauntage should be taken of any word she should there
speak: but she would declare nothing. Wherewith the bishop being offended,
charged her with words she should be reported to speak against the sacrament
of the altar, against the mass, with other such like questions, some true,
some false: whereto she made such answer as was not to the B. contentme^t: yet
subtly he drew out a circumstance, as it were a recantation, and required her
to subscribe to it: which she said she would do so far forth as the holy
scripture does agree unto. From thence she was carried again to prison, until
ye next morrow, at which time she was commanded to appear at ye guild hal: from
whence again she was committed to prison: neither could she yet be bayled. The^
were her sureties commanded to come before the^ the next morrow in Paul's
church: where with much a do they took a bond of them of recognisaunce for her
forth coming, and so she was delivered.

Anno. 1546. she was examined again before the kings counsel at Green which: to
who^ she answered in many things parabolically: Anne Askew answers
parabolically.
and when the B. of Winchester bad her make a direct answer, she said she
would not sing a new song of ye Lord in a strange land. The next day she was
again brought before the Counsel, and (as before) was questioned with touching
the Sacrament of the altar: to whom she boldly and roundly (with some check
unto the adversaries) made answer in such sort, A. Askew answers boldly and
roundly.
as they could take no direct vauntage against her. On the sunday after she fell
sore sick, and desired to speak with M. Latimer, which might not be permitted.
After that she was sent to Newgate, in her extremity of sickness, Anne Askew
condemned.
and from thence they brought her to the guild hall: where she was condemned
for ye article of ye real presence in ye sacrament.

After her condemnation, on Tuesday, she was sent from Newgate to the sign of
the Crown, where M. Rich, the Bishop of London, and N. Shaxton, labored to
persuade her to recant by fair words, but it would not prevail: then M. Rich
sent her to the tower, where she remained till 3. of the clock: then came M.
Rich and one of the counsel, and charged her upon her obedience, to show unto
them, if she knew any man or woman of her Sect, and asked of the Lady of
Suffolk, of Sussex, of Hertforde, my Lady Dennie, and my Lady Fitzwilliams:
which she would not disclose, nor any other. Then they put her on the rack,
Anne Askew racked till she was nigh dead
because she confessed no Ladies nor Gentlewomen to be of her opinion, and
thereon they kept her a long time: and because she lay still and did not cry,
my Lord Chancellor and Master Rich took pains to rack her with their own
hands, till she was nigh dead, then the Liefetenant caused her to be loosed
from the rack: which done, incontinently she souned. Then they recovered her
again: and after that, she sat two long hours reasoning with the lord
Chancellor upon the bare floor: who with flattering words persuaded her to
leave her opinion. Then was she brought to an house, and laid upon a bed with
painful bones: after which the lord Chancellor sent her word, that if she
would leave her opinion, she should want nothing: if she would not, she should
to Newgate, and thence to the fire. To whom she sent word again, that she
would rather die, then break her faith. The king understanding by the
Liefetenaunt of her cruel racking, The king displeased with the racking of
Anne Askew.
was greatly displeased therewith.

The day of her execution being appointed, she was brought into Smithfield in a
chair, because she could not go on her feet, by reason of her racking, and
was girded by the middle with a chain that might hold up her body, and so was
she with her fellows a witness of the truth, and sealer of the same with her
blood. Anne Askew having letters of pardon offered her at the stake by Wrisley
lord Chancellor, if she would recant, she refused so much as to look on
them. They were there also offered to the rest, The martyrs had pardon at the
stake.
but they by her example were confirmed, and likewise refused the same.

About the same time and year, Doctor Ripse bishop of Norwich did incite the
old duke of Northfolke against Rogers in the county of Northfolke: who was
condemned, and suffered for the cause of the six Articles.

An. 1546. Winchester practiced against Q. Catherine Parre the last wife to
king Henry, who was very zealous toward the Gospel, Winchester practices
against the life of the Queen.
and had persuaded with the king to make a perfect reformation, and so far he
prevailed with the king, persuading him of the factious disposition of the
gospellers, and of the dangerous example of the Queen his wife; that, before
that he and the L. Chancellor, and others (who conspired together against her)
departed, the king had given out commandment, with warrant to certain of them
made for that purpose, to consult together about drawing of certain articles
against the Queen, wherein her life might be touched: which ye king by their
persuasions pretended not to spare, having any rigor or color of law to
countenance the matter. With which commission they departed that time from the
king; resolved to put their pernicious practice in execution: and first
determined to deal with those who^ they knew were great about her, as the Lady
Harbert, afterward the Countess of Penbrooke, and sister to the Queen, and
chief of her privy chamber: the lady Lane being of her privy chamber, and
also her cousin Germane; the lady Terwit being of her privy chamber. It was
devised that these three should first of all have been accused, and brought to
answer to the six articles: and upon their apprehension in the court, their
closets and coffers should have been searched, that somewhat might have been
found whereby the Queen might be charged, which being found, she her self
presently should have been taken, and likewise carried by barge in the night to
the Tower. To all this the king seemed to give his assent, and afterward opened
all the matter to D. Wendy his Physicion, charging him withal upon peril of
his life, not to utter it to any person. Now the time drawing nigh when they
minded to put their mischeefes in practice, the bill of articles drawn out
against the Queen, and subscribed with the Kings own hand, falling from the
bosom of one of those wicked counselors, was found, and taken up of some
godly person, and brought immediately to the Queen: who seeing the same fell
into a marvelous perplexity, almost to the peril and danger of her life:
whereof the king hearing, he sent his Physician Wendie, and came also himself
to comfort her: to whom she delared her grief; but the king gave her most
comfortable words: and so when he had tarried an hour with her, he departed.
She afterward being recovered, came to the King, and found such favor
with him, and had so satisfied him in those things, The king much altered
concerning their practices against the Queen.
for which the Prelates conspired against her, that his mind was fully
altered, and detested in his heart the bloody conspiracy of those Traitors:
who yet notwithstanding the next day determined to have carried the Queen to
the Tower: and at the hour appointed, the Lord Chancellor, with forty of
the guard at his heels, comes into the garden where the Queen was with the
King, and those three Ladies, in pleasant communication, fully determining
from thence to have taken the Queen and those three Ladies, and to have
carried them to the Tower: whom the King stearnely beholding, and breaking of
his mirth with the Queen, stepped aside and called him knave, arrant knave,
beast and fool, The Queen delivered from her danger.
and commanded him presently to avoid out of his presence. So departed the
Chancellor with his train, and all his devises brought to naught, and the
subtletie of Gardener discovered, who was always a cruel enemy against the
Gospel, and professors of the same. Gardener not only practiced in England
against reformation, but also when the King was minded to reform in England,
he being Ambassador beyond the seas, for the agreement of a league between
England, France, and the Emperor: he wrote unto the king, and persuaded him,
that if he proceeded to alter any whit in England in matters of religion, the
league would not go forward: whereby the Kings determinate purpose for that
time was altered, although before he had commanded the Archb. Cranmer to cause
two letters in his name to be drawn for the abolishing of Roodlofts, and
ringing on allhallow night.

After this, Anno 1546. The matter of reformation began to be revived: and
the French king, and the king of England did agree to make a perfect
reformation: The kings of England, and France, agree to make a perfect
reformation of religion.
and were so fully resolved therein, that they meant also to exhort the
Emperor to do the same in Flaunders, and other his countries, or else to
break off from him. And herein the king commanded the Archbishop Cranmer to
pen a form thereof, to be sent to the French king to consider of: but by
the death of these Princes, that purpose was cut off.

About this time, Sir Hugh Cauerley knight, and master Litleton, falsely
accused Sir George Blage, one of the kings privy chamber, the sunday before
Anne Askew suffered, before Wriseley Lord Chancellor: Sir George Blage
condemned to be burned.
the next day he was carried to Newgate, and from thence to the guild hall:
where he was condemned the same day, and appointed to be burned the wednesday
after. They laid to him, that he should say, that if a mouse did eat the bread,
they should by his consent hang up the mouse: with other such light matters.
When the King understood hereof, he was sore offended with their doings, and
sent him his pardon: and so was he set at liberberty. Who coming after to the
kings presence, ah my pig said the king to him, (for so he was wont to call
him.) Yea (said he) if your majesty had not been befter unto me, then your
Bishops were, your pigge had been roasted ere this time.

After the death of Anne Askew, the Prelates made out straight proclamation
against English books of scripture, and whatsoever might give any light to the
word: and drew out a number of heresies (as they call them) out of those
books, and condemned them.

Within four months after, this proclamation coming out in August, the king
deceassed in the beginning of January, in the 38. year of his reign, Anno
1547. 1547 The king dies.
leaving behind him, king Edward, Queen Marie, and Queen Elizabeth.
Persecution in Scotland.
Not only in England but also in Scotland there was great persecution for the
truth: And anno 1540. was Sir John Brothwicke knight, called captain
Brothwicke cited for heresy: and not appearing, but escaping out of their
hands, was condemned for the same (though he were absent) by the sentence of
David Beaton Archbishop of S. Andrews and other prelates of Scotland: Ten
articles against Sir John Brothwicke.
They objected, against him x. Articles, 1. That the Pope has no more
authority then another Bishop. 2. That the Popes indulgences and pardons are
of no force. 3. That the Pope is an open vser of Symonie, sellyng the gifts of
spirituality. 4. That he persuaded many to embrace heresies in England. 5. That
he said, that the Clergy of Scotland was blind. 6. He condemned the
counsel of Constance. 7. He persuaded the king to appropriate unto himself
the goods of the Church. 8. He desired that the Church of Scotland were in
the same estate, that the Church of England. 9. That the canons were of no
force. 10. He persuaded against the religion of Scotland, etc. To all which
articles, he made a learned and large answer: the Papists condemned him being
absent, and openly burned his picture in token of his condemnation, without all
hope of pardon.

Not long after the burning of David Stratton, and master Gurley: in the days
of David Beaton, B. and Cardinal of Saint Andrews: and George Treighton
Bishop of Dunkelden, a Chanon of Saint Colines, and Vicar of Dolone, called
Deane Thomas Ferret Tho. Ferret
was condemned to death, without any place of recantation, for preaching every
Sundaye to his Parishioners, and with him two black Friars, one called John
Relowe, the other called Beuerage, a priest of Striueling, called Duncan
Simons, and one Gentleman called Robert Foster, in Striueling, with other three
or four of the same Town of Striueling, because they were chief Heretics:
and especially, because many of them were at the Bridal and marriage of a
priest, who was vicar of Twilodie beside Striueling, and did eat flesh in the
Lent at the same brydall. And so they were altogether burnt upon the Castle
hill of Edinburgh, where constantly they endured to the end, one comforting
another.

Anno 1543. Robert Lamb, William Anderson, James Hunter, James Raueleson, James
Founteson, and Helen Stirke his wife, were put to death for the testimony of
the truth against the romish church. William Anderson, and Robert with James
Raueleson were accused for hanging up the Image of S. Frauncis in a cord, S.
Francis homely used.
nayling of rams horns to his head, and a Cowes rumpe to his tail, and for
eating of a goose on alhallow eve. James Hunter because he used the suspect
company of the rest: the woman for that in her childebed she was not
accustomed to call on the Virgin Marie, and that she said no merit of the
Virgin, but Gods free mercy, procured her the honor to be made the mother of
Christ. James Raueleson for building an house, and setting upon the round of
his fourth staire, the three crowned diadem of Peter with the Cardinals
book, as done in mockage of his Cardinals hat. These persons on the morrow
after Saint Paul's day were condemned, upon the Act against conferring, and
reasoning of the Scriptures.

The woman aforesaid, Helen Stirke Helen Stirke a notable martyr
desired to die with her husband, and greatly encouraged him, and parting with
him at the stake with a kiss, said, this was the ioyfullest day that ever she
had; and said she would not bid him good night: for (said she) we shall
sodeinly meet with joy in the kingdom of heaven: and so she was taken away, and
drowned, although she had a child sucking on her. David Beaton Bishop, and
Cardinal of S. Andrews, was the chief doer in this persecution.

In this year 1543. John Chartnons, being Provost of S. Iohnston, alias
Pereth, was deposed for favoring of the truth.

Anno 1546. The first of March, master George Wiseheart 1533. George Wiseheart.
suffered martyrdom for the faith of Jesus Christ, at Saint Andrews in
Scotland, anno 1543. He was a Student in Cambridge in Bennet College, where he
was a special pattern of godliness and learning. Afterward in Scotland he was
apprehended, and charged to have preached, notwithstanding he were forbidden:
and to have spoken against the mass, and the five odd Sacraments, against
auricular confession, against the sacrament of the altar, against unction,
holiwater, against the power of the Pope, free will, distinction of meats,
against prayer to Saints, purgatory, against vows, and the use of popish
superstitions: to which, (as they would for fury give him leave) George
Wisehart The meek death of George Wiseheart.
made a sufficient and Christian answer. When he came to the place of
execution, and the Executioner prayed him of pardon, he said, come hither, and
kissed him: and said, lo here a token that I forgive thee: My heart, do thine
office: and so meekely he ended, and constantly gave testimony to ye truth of
Jesus: the people piteously mourning for his death.

It was not long after, but the Cardinal was slain by the hands of one Lech,
and other Gentlemen, who sodeinly brake in upon him, and slew him: Gods
judgment.
after which he lay seven months unburied at the least: and at last, like
carrion, was buried in a dunghill,

After Beaton, succeeded John Hambleton, Archbishop of saint Andrews, 1549.
who the next year following, burned Adam Wallace, for the matter of the
Sacrament. He was burned on the Castle hill of Edinburgh. Before his execution
they had taken from him all his books, which might serve for his comfort; but
that he had learned by heart all David's Psalter, Adam Wallace had learned all
David's psalter by heart.
and supplied comfort that way. When the fire was prepared, he himself asked
one of the Officers that stood by, if the fire were making ready: who told him
it was He answered, as it pleases God, I am ready, soon or late, as it
pleases him: and so brought to the stake, he ended with constancy and
patience, and gave testimony to the truth: first exhorting the people not to
be offended at his suffering for the trueths sake.

Anno 1551. After that Richard Marshall doctor of Divinity, and prior of the
black Friars at Newcastle in England, had declared in his preachings at Saint
Andrews in Scotland, that the Lords prayer, commonly called the Pater noster,
should be said only to God, and not to Saints, neither to any other creature.
The Doctors of divinity of S. Andrews, together with the black Friars, who
had long ago taught the people to say the Pater noster to Saints, had great
indignation that their old doctrine should be impugned: and stirred up a Gray
friar, called Friar Toyttes, to teach the people to pray yet to Saints. A
controversy in Scotland whether the Lords prayer should be said to Saints, or
not.
Whereupon fell such a schism, that not only the Clergy, but also the people
were divided among themselves for the matter: in so much yt there rose a
proverb: to whom say you your Pater noster? And the clergy for to decide the
same controversy, and to put ye people out of doubt, assembled themselves: yet
notwithstanding it so depended, yt it was thought good to call a principal
counsel to decide ye matter: which being assembled at Ede^burgh, the papists
wanting reason, brast out into unseemly speech: as friar Toyt being asked to
whom he should say his pater noster, The Friar bids say the pater noster to
the devil.
answered: say it to the devil, knave. In ye end, they that were called
churchme^, were divided: for some of ye bishops and divines consented yt it
should be said to saints: but ye B. of S. Andrews, Caitenes and Athenies,
refused utterly to subscribe to the same. Finally, it was declared unto the
people, that it should be said unto God, with certain restrictions: and so by
little and little the brute ceased.

Anno 1558. W, Mill 1539. Walter Mill.
was the last yt was burned in Scotland for the doctrine of the gospel, the xx.
day of April, before the B. of S. Andrews, Murray, Brechin, and a number of
other prelates. He was brought to the metropolitan church, where he was put in
a pulpet before ye bishops to be accused: his weakness partly of age and ill
usage being such, as it was thought, he should not be able to be heard speak.
But when he began to speak, he made the church ring and sound again, to the
confusion of the adversaries and comfort of the godly. And being long in his
prayers sir Andrew Oliphant one of the Bishops priests called him: sir Walter
Mill arise, and answer to the Articles, for you hold my Lord here over long:
In deed (said he) I have been over long one of the Popes knights: (for he had
been before a Papist) but I am called Walter and not Sir. When neither
threats nor allurements could prevail, they condemned him, for the article of
Priests marriages, the seven Sacraments, the sacrament of the Altar,
pilgrimage. Before sentence was pronounced, Oliphant asked him: will thou not
recant thine erroneous opinions: and if thou will not, I will pronounce
sentence against thee. I am accused of my life (said he) again I know I
must die once, friend therefore, (as Christ said to Judas) do it quickly: ye
shall know that I will not recant the truth: for I am corn: I am no chafe. I
will not be blown away with the wind, nor burst with the flaile, but I will abide
both. A notable speech of the martyr.
Such was his marvelous boldness and constancy, which did so move the hearts
of many, that the B. steward of his regaltie, provost of the town, called
Patrike Learmend, refused to be his temporal Judge: to whom it appertained.
Also the Bishops Chamberlain being therewith charged, would in no wise take
upon him so ungodly an office. Yea, the whole town was so offended with his
unjust condemnation, that the bishops servants could not get for their money,
so much as one cord to tie him to the stake, or Tar barrel to burn him,
but were constrained to cut ye cords of their masters own Pauilion, to serve
their turn. So being tied to the stake, and having exhorted ye people, and
prayed, fire being put unto him, he ended in the Lord, with such cheerfulnes and
constancy enduring his martyrdom, that he was the last martyr in Scotland:
this was in the time of Mary Longawale Queen regent of Scotland, and John
Hamelton bishop of Saint Andrews and primate of Scotland.

Anno 1511. Under William Warrham Archb. of Canturburie, certain martyrs that
were omitted which suffered at that time with him, because they are not to be
forgotten, are to be referred to that year. They suffered for deniyng the
Sacrament of the Altar, etc for auricular confession, the extreme unction,
images, pilgrimages, prayer to saints, holy bread, holy water, etc. They deny
all that they had uttered any thing against those popish points: yet
witnesses, who had partly abiured before, and others against nature, as the
husband against the wife, and children against the mother: being brought forth,
they were condemned, and put to death. Their names were: William Carder of
Tenderden, Weauer, Agnes Grebill of the same town of threescore year old,
Robert Lawson of Halden, of the age 60. John Brown of Ashford, Edward Walker
of Maidston, Cutler: who all notwithstanding they promised to submit
themselves, yet were they condemned. The cause why the good woman so stood (as
she did) to the denial of those articles, objected against her was, for that
she never thought that her husband and her own children, (who only were privy
of her religion) would have testified against her: which when she perceived,
she repented the time that ever she bare those children of her body. So,
notwithstanding that she offered conformity, she was condemned and put to
death. Her husbands name was John Grebill: her sons, Christopher and John.
Besides these, which were put to death, a number under Warren were forced to
abjure the truth against the real presence, confession, sacrament of
matrimony, unction, pilgrimages, Images, Saints, holy water, holy bread, etc.

Also omitted before, anno 1539. John a Painter, and Giles German, who were
accused and condemned for heresy at London before the Bishop and other Judges,
where, by chance coming in one of the kings servant named Lancelot, a very
tall man, and seeming by his countenance and gesture to favor the cause of the
poor men, was also examined and condemned with them and the next day at five a
clock in the morning, was carried with them into Saint Giles fields, and
there burned.

Also about the latter end of Tonstals time bishop of London, one Style was
burned in Smithfield with the Apocalips (whereon he used to read,) about his
neck. Style burned with the Apocalips about his neck.
Which book when he saw fastened to the stake with him: he lifted up his
voice, and said: O blessed Apocalips, how happy am I, that I shall be burned
with thee: and so with the book was he consumed with fire.

Also ouerpassed before, about the second year of the reign of king Henry the
eight, John Brown of Ashford after xl. days imprisonment, when the Archbishop
and Doctor Fisher had burned his feet with hot coals to the stumps to make
him recant. On Friday before Whitsunday he was sent to Ashford where he dwelt,
the next day to be burned: and a young maid of his house espying him in the
stocks, told her mistress, who ran and sat by him also all night: to whom
he gave exhortation, and declared how he had been tossed to make him deny
his Master, which he would not do for all their torments. The cause of his
death, was because he said to a Priest, bragging he was a soul Priest: where
find you the soul when you go to Mass, and where do you leave it when you
go from Mass? when the Priest said, he could not tell, how can you then save
the soul said he. For this he was complained of to William Warham Archbishop
of Canturburie, and suddenly was taken in his own house the same day when
his wife was churched, as he was bringing in a mess of pottage to the board,
serving in his guestes: and his feet bound under his own horses belly was
carried away to Canterbury, neither he nor any of his friends knowing whether
he went: where after he had continued in prison forty days, from Low-sunday
till Friday before Whitsontide he was sent to Ashford, and there put to death
(as has been declared) comfortably and cheerfully giving testimony to the
truth.

The end of the eight Book.
The ninth Book.
AFter the death of king Henry, succeeded king Edward King Edward reigns.
his son: being of the age of 9. years. He began his reign ye 28. day of
January, a most happy patron of the Gospel. In his days Carolus the Emperor
made request to the king and his counsel, to permit Lady Mary to have mass in
her house, without prejudice of the law. Whereto the king being required by his
counsel to give his consent, would in no case yield to it: The K. refused the
Emperors suite to permit Lady Mary to have mass.
notwithstanding they laid before him what danger might ensue to him by breach
of amity with ye Emperor: and they being more urgent upon him: the King seeing
their importunate suit, in the end his tender heart bursting out into bitter
weeping and sobbing, desired them to be content, and so refused to yield unto
the Emperors request in that behalf. Because he was young, and of tender age,
he was committed to xvi. Governors: amongst whom especially, the L. Edward
Seimer, the Duke of Somerset his uncle was assigned unto him protector: by
whose endeavor the vi. articles were abolished: Six articles abolished.
whereby the practices of Winchester began to decay.

This king restored the holy Scriptures in the mother tongue, masses he
abolished, Religion restored.
and such as were banished were received home: he changed the most part of
Bishops of dioces and Churches: and compelled the dumb dogs to give place to
those that would preach. Besides, other also out of foreign countries were sent
for, and entertained: Peter Martyr at Oxford. Bucer and Paulus Phagius at
Cambridge.
as Peter Martyr, who taught at Oxford: Martin Bucer, and Paulus Phagius at
Cambridge. The old Bishops who were obstinate were committed toward: Boner to
the Marshalsea, Gardener and Tonstal to the tower, where they remained three
years together. In this kings time, all persecution ceased, and the
professors of the Gospel were in all places relieved: Only one Thomas Dobbe,
Tho. Dobbe.
a student, and master of arts of Cambridge of S. John's College, in the
beginning of this kings reign was cast in prison, for speaking against the
mass: and died in the Counter in London, being thither committed by the
Archbishop of Canterbury: whose pardon notwithstanding was obtained by the
Lord protector, and should have been brought him, if he had continued.

The king, until such time as by consent of the whole estate of parliament, he
might establish a more perfect order of religion, purposed by the advice of his
counsel of his own authority, somewhat to prosecute his godly purpose.
Whereupon he chose out certain wise and learned men to be his commissioners
Commissioners.
in that behalf: and so dividing them into several dioces to be visited,
appointing likewise unto every company, one or two godly learned preachers:
who all every session should instruct the people in the true doctrine of the
Gospel. To those Commissioners were delivered certain Injunctions, and
Ecclesiastical laws: the which they should both inquire of, and also command
in his majesty's name or behalf: all tending to the abolishing of popish
superstition, and establishing of the truth of the Gospel: besides which
general Injunctions, for the estate of the whole Realm, there were also
certain others particularly appointed for the Bishops only: whereby they were
enjoined to see the other put in due execution: besides others, which did more
particularly confirm them. During the time that those Commissioners were
occupied abroad, the king desiring a farther reformation, appointed a parliament
the 4. of November, in the first year of his reign, Ann. 1547. 1547. A
Parliament.
which continued unto the 24. day of December next following: wherein al Acts
made before, that tended against the Professors of the Gospel, were abrogated.

In the same parliament also, it was decreed: that the Sacrament should be
ministered to all under both kinds: then also were candles on Candlemas day
forbidden, and ashes on Ashwednesday. About the same time also al Images were
utterly taken away: and anno 1548. one uniform order of prayer was instituted,
in the second year of his reign, at a Parliament holden the fourth of November,
that lasted till the fourteenth of March next ensuing. At the same parlame^t
was it lawful also for priests to have wives. To all these at the first Bonner
seemed to yield, but at length, bewraied himself, by suffering daily to be
song, the Apostles mass, and our Ladies mass, etc. in diverse of his chapels
in Paul's, cloking them with the names of the apostles, and our ladies
communions: whereof the Counsel being enfourmed, caused him to reform the
abuse.

To al these good orders, diverse priests, and popish Justices, showed
themselves untoward, so that the common prayer book was (long after the
publishing of it) either not known at all, or else very irreverently used
throughout ye realm: for which, the king with his Counsel provided redress.
Bonner yet seeming not to dislike openly of these godly proceedings, yet his
mind appeared, by his negligent putting in execution of those Injunctions, in
his own Dioces. Whereupon, the xj. day of August, anno 1549. he was called for
before the Counsel, and rebuked according to his offense, and enjoined to
preach at Paul's Cross, on the Sunday three weeks ensuing.

There were delivered also unto him Articles, whereon he should entreat, as
they thought most meet, with private Injunctions for himself to observe: as,
to preach once a quarter at the Cross, and to be present himself at all the
Sermons made there: to celebrate himself the Communion, and to administer the
same, etc. About this time, (through the setting on of the popish Priests)
diverse quarters of the Land rebelled, as in Cornwall, and Devonshire, Rebellion.
and Yorkshire, for their popish religion: which were all suppressed. The Scots
also, and French king, attempted against ye land, and were also overthrown.
The Scots at Muskelborough field, and the Frenchmen at the Isles of Iersey and
Garnesey. Bishop Boner, who the first year of the kings reign, anno 1547. had
submitted himself, hearing of the death of the Lord Admiral, the L.
Protectors brother: and after that, the rising of the kings Subjects, began to
draw backer, and to neglect his duty. Whereupon (as has been said) he was
called before the Counsel, and enjoined to preach, that such as rebel against
their Prince, resist Gods ordinance: and to set forth in his Sermon, that the
authority of the king, was no less in his young age, than was of any of his
Predecessors, etc. Boenr, at his time appointed, preached at Paul's cross:
Muskleborow field. Scots and French overthrown.
and in stead of declaring such things, as were enjoined him, he spent his
Sermon in the maintenance of the papisticall Transubstantiation: and altogether
left out the article touching the lawful authority of the K. during his
nonage. For which so doing, I. Hooper afterward B of Worcester and Gloucester,
and M. W. Latimer, Bachelour of Divinity, did exhibit unto the kings highness,
under both their names, a bill of complaint against him. Whereupon, the king
did immediately direct forth his Commission under his broad Seal, unto the
Archb. of Canterbury, the B. of Rochester, and other Counselors, giving them
authority to call Boner before them, and to deal with him according as they
should find cause.

The tenth day of september, Bishop Boner was summoned to appear at Lambeth,
before the Commissioners: before whom he behaved himself most undiscreetly,
and irreverently: defacing the authority of the Commissioners, and shifting of
the point he was accused of: and in the end pulled out a Protestation out of
his bosom, ready written, and exhibited it unto the Commissioners. Under
which protestation, he requested to have a copy both of the Commission, and
accusation: with time to answer theru^to. Which was granted him: and he
assigned to appear again before the^ upon friday at 8. of the clock before
noone, the next following, and then to answer. Upon Friday the xiij. of
September, Boner appears again at Lambeth before the Commissioners: and
because Secretary Smith sat there who was not there the former day, Boner
shifteth and caueleth.
Boner cauils thereat, and makes delays of answer: and in the end took
exceptions against his accusers, because said he, they were heretics, and
justly excommunicated: and especially he inueighed against them for the matter
of the Sacrament of the Altar, and withal denied their accusations to be true:
and colored and glosed forth his manner of handling the points enjoined him,
and accounted the injunctions of the book forged, because they were not sealed
nor signed with the kings own hand. And when he had finished reading of his
answers: Latimer delivered up a writing unto the commisioners, containing
Articles against him: whereof certain were touching his own fact: as whether
he wrote his sermon or not, to which he answered: that only he penned certain
notes: then, what advise and whose he had: to which he answered his own only
with help of his books. And this he answered, an oath being ministered unto him
Ex officio mero. These words ended, the Commissioners assigned him Monday the
xvj. of September then next, to appear before them, and to make his full
answers to all the Articles ministered unto him by them that day.

On Mundaie the sixtenth of September he appears again before the
Commissioners, and exhibiteth unto them answers unto the last Articles: but
before the same were read, the Archbishop declared unto him that his answer
made against his accusers denunciation contained matter of slander against
them: and so signified that they desired there to purge themselves; which they
both did, first Latimer and next Hooper. And after much unseemly behavior of
Boner, the Commissioners willed him to make answer to the articles objected
the last day against him: which he did, reading it and answering to every point
very slenderly: as to the point of the kings authority, that he had gathered
a note out of Histories and Scriptures of diverse young Kings, who
notwithstanding their minority were faithfully obeyed, and reputed for very
lawful kings, all which with many other, he had purposed to declare, if they
had come unto his memory, which they did not: partly for lack of use of
preaching, and partly by reason of a bill which was delivered him from the
Kings counsel, to declare the victory he had against the rebels, which
confounded his memory: and partly for that his book fell (in his Sermon
time) from him, wherein were diverse of his notes which he had collected for
that purpose. Which answer pleased not the Commissioners, who required him to
make it more direct, whether he had done as he was enjoined or not: whereto
when he would no otherwise answer, the commisioners did admit presently for
witnesses upon articles against him: M. John Cheek, Henry Markham, John
Joseph, John Douglas, and Richard Chambers: upon whom they laid a corporal
oath, truly to answer. Boner against this, under his former protestation,
protested of the nullitie of the receiving and admitting, and swearing of those
witnesses, with protestation also to object against the persons and sayings of
these witnesses: demanding a lawful and competent time to minister
interrogatories against them. Wherewith the Commissioners were contented: so
that day he objected against M. Cheek, and the next day before noone he
objected against the rest.

After this the Commissioners assigned to the Bishop to appear again before
them upon Wednesday the next ensuyng, between the hours of seven and eight
before noone, at Lambeth: there to show the cause why he should not be
declared Pro confesso upon all the Articles: whereunto he had not then fully
answered: but Boner still protesting the nullitie and inualiditie of al their
proceedings, they did for that time depart.

In the mean while, the Commissioners certified the K. and his counsel of the
B. behavior, and cauillations. Whereupon the king the 17. of September did send
unto the Commissioners, a full declaration of his own will, giving them full
authority to proceed at their own discretions. The 8. of September, Boner
appears again, and offers matter unto the Commissioners, why he ought not
to be judged pro confesso, full of cauillations and vain quiddities of their
law, and inordinat contempt. In the end they ministered unto him new articles,
and received witnesses against him: but Boner still stood upon the nullitie of
their Commission, and the whole process, desiring a copy of the Articles:
which was granted, and time, til the next day at viij. of the clock. Also the
same time he exhibited a cauillation against William Latimer. Boner exhibiteth
a cauillation against William Latimer.
So the Commissioners appointed him a new time to appear on monday next,
between 6. and 9. in the morning: then to show a final cause why he should
not be judged pro confesso. And they delivered him a copy of the Articles.

At the time appointed, the Bishop sent Robert Johnson his register to the
Commissioners, sitting at Lambith, and attending his appearaunce, to signify
to them he was sick, and so could not come. The twentieth of September he
appeared now the fifth time: and having made a slender and doubtful answer,
refused Sir Thomas Smithes judgment, because he saw him sharper bent against
him then the rest: and made also his appeal to the King: and withal very
irreverently behaved himself toward the Commissioners. For which cause
Master Secretary Smith commanded the Marshalles deputy, to take Boner
Prisoner, and to keep him that no man might come unto him, and assigned him to
be brought before them again on Mundaye next before noone, between seven and
nine of the clock. At which time he appears, and makes a general refusal
of all the commissioners, and sticks to his former prouocations, and
protestations. Then the Commissioners seeing his pertinacie, pronounced him
Contumax, and declared him pro confesso upon all the articles which he had not
answered: Boner pronounced contumax and pro confesso.
and determined to continue this case, in state as it was until Friday then
next following, between eight and nine before noone: assigning Boner to be
there before them at Lambith, to hear a final decree of that matter. Upon
which Friday, for diverse urgent causes, the Commissioners could not sit, but
deferred it till Tuesday, the first of October next ensuing. Upon which day
they offered yet favor to Boner, if he would make more direct answer: but
he persisting in his contumacie, with evil speeches, the Archbishop, with
the consent of the rest of the Commissioners, read the sentence of deprivation,
Boner deprived.
and committed him again to his keeper: where he remained prisoner till the
death of the King. Now being prisoner in the Marshallsea: he writes unto the
Lord Chancellor, and to the rest of the Counsel, that through the enmity
that the Duke of Somerset, and Sir Thomas Smith bare him, he could not have
hearing of his suites to the King and Counsel. He directs also a supplication
to the kings majesty, and desired his Graces letters of supersideas against
the Commissioners: and that the matter might be heard before the Counsel.
Whereupon the the K. commits the examination of the whole process unto
certain noble personages, and skillful in the law: as the Lord Rich, Lord
Chancellor: the Lord Treasurer, the Lord Marquis Dorset, the Bishop of Eli,
the Lord Wentworth: etc. which found Boner in great fault of contumacy: the
proceedings being al just, and the sentence rightly given.

With the deprivation of Boner, fell out the trouble of the Lord Protector: L.
protector.
whereupon the people thinking the abrogating of popery was his only doing,
bruted abroad that now they should have their old Latin service again, with
other superstitious trumperie. Which caused the king and his Counsel to direct
letters to all Bishops, to take away all Massals, Grailes, Processionals,
Manuals, Legendes, Portuases, Iournals, etc. which might be any let to the
English prayer Book. Also the Bishops were enjoined to punish all those that
refused to give to the charge of Bread and Wine for the Communion. This was
ahout the latter end of December 1549.

In the next year following Altars were taken down Altars taken down.
by the kings commandment, and the Communion table placed in steed thereof,
in form of a table, and not of an altar, as most agreeable to the institution
of Christ.

About this time certain of Lady Mary's Chaplains had said mass contrary
to the laws: for which she being admonished of the Counsel, took the matter
very hardly, and writes to the Counsel sharp letters: tending to blame them,
as taking too much upon them in the kings authority, and justifying her own
popish causes. Lady Mary's popish practices restrained.
Diverse letters passed to and fro, from her and the Counsel, as also from and
to the king. And in fine, such order was taken: that she was restrained of her
practices of popish religion, and the offenders punished.

As Bonner behaved himself stubbornly againg the K. proceedings, so Steeuen
Gardener B. of Winchester, was not behind in all disobedience, and practices
against the same: for which he was imprisoned before the deprivation of Boner,
but was not deposed till anno 1551. again the second time a conformation, and
was left at liberty in his own house in London: where he yet again began to
ruffle against the kings godly proceedinges, and to meddle in matters, wherein
he neither had commission nor authority, part whereof touched the kings
majesty. Whereof being yet once again admonished by the king, and of the
counsel, not only promised to conform himself with like of the kings
proceedings, but also offered to declare unto the world his conformation in an
open sermon, on such articles as should be thought good to that end: in which
sermon clean contrary to his promise, he did not only neglect that that was
enjoined him, but also very seditiously behaved himself. Gardener behaueth
himself seditiously.
Wherefore he was committed to the Tower, and carried thither by sir Anthony
Wingfield, Gardener sent to the Tower.
certain doors of his house (as was thought meet) being also sealed up. At
the tower certain of the Counsel, by the kings appointment, had access unto
him to persuade with him: as the Duke of Somerset, the L. Treasurer, the Lord
privy seal, the L. great Chamberlain, and Secretary Peter. Who repairing to
him the tenth day of June, Anno 1550. he desired to see the kings book of
proceedings: upon the sight whereof he would make a full answer: whereas
indeed before his answers were but delays and cauilles, seeming to be willing
in all things to conform himself thereunto: and promising if any thing
offended his conscience, he would open it to none but to the Counsel. But
Winchester having perused the book, said, he could make no direct answer,
unless he were at liberty. In the end, the Lords seeing his answers always
doubtful, it was determined that he should be directly examined, whether he
would conform himself to the kings proceedinges, or not: and articles drawn
to that end. To the which Winchester in a manner subscribed, saving the Article
of submission: which he said, because he had never offended the K. he would not
subscribe unto. To the kings Supremacy, his authority of appointing holy
days, and fasting days, to his book of proceedings, his authority in his
tender years, the abrogating of the six articles, to his jurisdiction, and
authority in correcting of Ecclesiastical persons, he subscribed: only he
would make no submission to the king. And in the end being found perverse and
stubborn, and not able to justify himself or his doings: after he had taken
exceptions, and cauilled against the witnesses, he was deprived of his
Bishopric, by the authority of the king, and sentence given by the
Archbishop of Canterbury, Winchester deprived.
among other bishops and Judges appointed for the cause. From this sentence,
Gardener appealeth to the king, but all in vain.

As S. Gardener was the professed enemy of the Gospel, so was Doctor Redman
Doctor Redman a favorer of the gospel.
in those days, for his learning famous, a favorer of the same: and at his
death, which was anno 1551. made profession thereof in the presence of M. Young,
and others.

Anno 1552. W. Gardener, a Merchants servant of Bristow, the first day of
September, in the very solemnization of a marriage betwixt the son of the
king of Portingall, and the Spanish kings daughter, in the presence of the
princes, and Cardinals, and Bishops, determined to have stepped to the
Cardinal at the Altar, and to have wroong ye chalice out of his hands, and to
have defaced their popish God, but that the prease of people did hinder him. So
the next sunday, where like pomp was used, and no less Idolatry than before,
W. Gardener, W. Gardener.
in the presence of the king, and all his Nobles, and Citizens, with the one
hand snatched away the cake from the priest, and trod it under his feet: and
with ye other overthrew the chalice, which made them all amazed Then one
drawing out his dagger, gave him a great wound in the shoulder: and as he was
about to have stricken him again, to have slain him: the king twice
commanded to have him saved. So by that means they abstained from murder.

After the tumult was ceased, he was brought to the K. by whom he was demanded
of his Country, and how he durst do such a deed. To whom he declared that
he was an Englishman, and that for grief to see such Idolatry, he could not
abstain. When they heard that he was an Englishman, they were more earnest to
know the Procurour. The Idolatry (he answered) wherewith they profaned the
Lords Supper, only procured him. They not content therewith, urged him with
torments, and caused a linen cloth to be sowed round like a ball, the which
they with violence put down his throat, unto the bottom of his stomach, tied
with a small string, which they held in their hands, and when it was down,
they pulled it up again with violence, so plucking it up and down. They cast
also into prison all the rest of the Englishmen, amongst whom one Pe^degrace,
Pendegrace.
because he was his bedfellowe, was grievously tormented, and examined more
then the residue, and scarcely was delivered after two years imprisonment: the
other were much sooner set at liberty, by the intercession of a certain Duke.

At the last, when al torments, and tormentors were weried, they asked him,
whether he did not repent his deed. He answered: as touching the deed, if it
were to do, he should do it again. But he was sorry it was done in the Kings
presence, to the disquiet of his mind. After they had used al kind of
torments, and saw there could be nothing more gathered of him, and also, that
through his wound, and pains, he could not long live, they brought him three
days after, to execution. And first of all, bringing him unto the Vestrie, cut
of his right hand: which he taking up with his left hand, kissed. Execution
done upon W. Gardener with all manner of cruelty.
Then he was brought into the Market place, where his other hand was cut of:
which he (kneeling down upon the ground) also kissed. These things thus done,
his arms being bound behind him, and his feet under the horse belly, he was
carried to the place of execution, where there was a certain engine, from the
which, a great rope coming down by a Pulley, was fastened about the middle of
the Christian martyr, which first pulled him up: then was there a great pile of
wood set on fire underneath him, into the which he was by little and little let
down, not with his whole body, but so that his feet only felt the fire: in
which fire the more terribly he burned, the more fervently he prayed: At last
when his feet were consumed, the tormentors asked him if he did not repent,
exhorting him to call upon our Lady and the Saints: whereto he answered, that
he had done nothing to repent of, and that when Christ did cease to be our
Advocate, then he would pray to our Lady, The marvelous constancy of William
Gardener.
and said: Eternal God, father of all mercies, I beseech thee look down upon
thy servant etc. And when they sought by all means to stop his praying, he
cried out with a loud voice: rehearsing ye 34. Psalm. Judge me O Lord, and
defend my cause against the unmerciful people: He was not come to the latter
end of the Psalm, when the rope being burnt asunder, he fell into the fire,
and so gave over.

The very same night one of the kings ships was burned in the haven, being set
on fire by a spark of Gardiners fire driven thither with the wind: and the
kings son, who then was married, died within half a year after the death of
William Gardener.

Anno 1552. 1552 Protector put to death for fellonie.
the 22. of January, in the sixth year of the reign of Edward: the Duke of
Somersette, Lord Protector, was executed on Tower hill for felony: being
accused, and quitte of treason. And the next year after deceassed the king him
self, about the month of June, Anno 1553. A Prince of such towardness, as
the world never had the like before: by whom the remnants of Popish Idolatry,
and superstition, were abolished: and the church restored to her sincerity:
which died again with him, and popery restored in the time of Mary, who
succeeded him.

The end of the ninth Book.
The tenth Book.
WHat time King Edward began to appear more feeble and weak, during the time
of his sickness, a marriage was concluded, and also shortly also upon the same
solemnized in the month of May, between the lord Gilford, son to the duke
of Northumberland, and the Lady Jane, L. Gilford and Lady Jane married together.
the duke of Suffolkes daughter: whose mother then being alive, was daughter to
Marie, king Henry's second sister. And when no hope seemed of recovery of the
King, it was brought to pass by the consent, not only of the nobility; but
also of the chief Lawyers of the Realm: that the King by this Testament, did
appoint the aforesaid Lady Jane to be Inheritrice to the crown of England:
passing over his two sisters, Marie and Elizabeth. To this order, subscribed
all the Kings Counsel and chief of the nobility: the Mayor of the city of
London, and almost all the judges and chief Lawyers of this Realm, saving
only Justice Hales of Kent, Justice Hales of Kent.
a man who both favored religion, and was an upright judge, would in no case
subscribe to the Lady Jane.

When king Edward was dead, the xvj. year of his age, Jane was established in
the kingdom, by the Nobles consent, and so published in London, and in other
cities. In the mean time, while these things were a working at London, Marie
(who had knowledge of her brothers death) writes to the Lords of the
Counsel, Queen Marie writes to the Counsel.
a letter of challenge for their doing, and claim to the Crown. To whom ye
Counsel writes again, as to a Subject: requiring her to hold her so
contented. Whereby she perceiving the nobles minds bent against her, flies
into the parts of Suffolk, and keeps her close for a time, within
Fremingham castle: where first of all resorted the Suffolk men for her aid,
promising her aid, if that she would not attempt the alteration of religion,
which king Edward before had established. Q. Mary promises to maintain
religion.
Unto which condition she eftsoons agreed, promising no innovation should be
made in religion. So being guarded with the power of the Gospellers, she did
vanquish the Duke and all that came against her. Ridley who before by the
Counsels commandment had preached at Paul's cross against her, after she
was proclaimed Queen, sped him to Fremingham, to salute her Queen: and being
dispoiled of all his dignities, Ridley sent to the Tower.
was sent back again on a lame horse to the Tower.

Now being Queen, she released Stephen Gardener, Q. Mary breaks her
promise. Popish bishops restored, and the other put down.
and made him lord Chancellor of England, and B. of Winchester; Doctor Poynet
being put out. She restored Boner to his Bishopric, and displaced Doctor
Ridley: Doctor Day to the Bishop of Chichester, John Scorie being put out:
Tunstall to Duresme: Doctor Heath to Worcester, and John Hooper committed to
the Fleet: Hooper committed to the Fleet.
Doctor Vesey to Exceter, and Miles Couerdall put out. And moreover summoneth a
parliament against the x. day of October next ensuing, and in the mean time
directs forth an inhibition by proclamation, Proclamation against the word
of God.
that no man should preach or read in the Churches openly the word of God, etc.
About this time Boner being restored, he appoints one Bourne a Canon in
Paul's to preach at the Cross: where he so behaved himself in his preaching
against King Edward; that one hurled a dagger at the preacher, A dagger hurled
at the preacher.
(who it was, it could not be known) and such was the stir, that master
Bradford (at the request of the preachers brother) was feign to appease the
tumult, and himself with M. Rogers to conduct the preacher betwixt them to the
Grammar school door.

By reason of the tumult, it was ordained that every householder should keep
his servants and children at their own parish Churches: and that every
Alderman in his ward should forthwith send for the Curates of every Parish to
warn them, both to forbear preaching themselves, and also not to suffer any
other to preach, or make any solemn reading in the Church, unless they were
severally licensed by the Queen.

The next day at the sermon the Queens guard was present to guard the
preacher, and when men withdrew themselves from the sermon, order was taken by
the Mayor, that the ancients of all companies should be present, least the
preacher should be discouraged by his small audience.

Anno 1553. William Ruther committed to the Marshalsea, for uttering certain
words against M. Bourne preacher, for his sermon made at Paul's cross on
Sunday last before.

The xvj. of August was Humfrey Pelden committed to the counter, for words
against the said Bournes sermon at Paul's cross: and a letter was sent to the
Shiriffes of Buckingham and Bedford, for the apprehending of one Fisher parson
of Amersham a preacher: and another was sent to the B. of Norwich, not to
suffer any preacher or other to preach or expound openly the Scriptures,
without special license from the Queen. The same day was M. Bradford,
Bradford to the Tower.
M. Vernon, and M. Beacon preachers, committed to the charge of the Lieftenant
of the Tower.

The same day also was M. John Rogers M. John Rogers prisoner.
preacher commanded to keep himself prisoner in his own house at Paul's,
without having conference with any others, but those of his own house.

The xxij. of August there were two letters directed, one to M. Couerdall B. of
Exceter, and the other to M. Hooper B. of Gloucester, for their repair to the
Court, and there to attend the Counsels pleasure. The same day, Fisher parson
of Amersham made his appearance before the counsel, according to the letter
the xvj. of August, and was appointed the next day to bring in a note of his
Sermon.

The 24. of August, one John Meluin a Scot, and a preacher was sent to Newgate
by the Counsel.

The 26. of Aug. there was a letter sent to ye Mayor of Couentrie and his
brethren, for the apprehension of one Simons of Worcester, and the Vicar of S.
Michaels in Couentrie: with a commission to them, to punish all such, as had
(by means of his preaching) used any talk against the Queens proceedings.

The 29. of August, Master Hooper Hooper appears.
B. of Worcester, made his personal appearance before the Counsel, according to
their letters the 22. of August.

The 31. of August, M. Couerdale Couerdale appears.
B. of Exceter, made his appearance before the Counsel, according to their
letters made the 22. of August.

Anno 1553. Hooper and M. Couerdale appeared again before the Counsel: whence
master Hooper was committed to the Fleet, Hooper to the Fleet.
and maistsr Couerdale to attend the Lords pleasures.

The 2. of Sept. Hugh Sanders, Vicar of S. Michaels in Couentry, was before the
Counsel for a sermon, and commanded to appear again upon monday next
following.

The 4. of Sept. a letter was directed for master Hugh Latimer, to appear
before them.

About the fifth day of Sept. the same year, Peter Martyr came to London from
Oxford: where for a time he had been commanded to keep his house, and found
there the Archb. of Canterbury. Who offered to defend the doctrine of the
book of common prayer both by the scriptures and doctors, assisted by Peter
Martyr and a few other. But whilst they were in hope to come to disputations,
the Archb. and others were imprisoned: but Peter Martyr was suffered to return
whence he came. Peter Martyr returns home whence he came.
The same day there was a letter sent to the Mayor of Couentry to set Hugh
Simons at liberty, if he would recant his sermon, or else to stay him: and to
signify so much to the Counsel.

The 13. of September, M. Hugh Latimer appeared Latimer appears.
before the Counsel according to their letter the 4. of September, and was
committed to the tower, close prisoner, having his servant Austine to attend
upon him.

The same day the Archbishop of Canterbury appearing before the Counsel, was
commanded to appear again the next day at after noone in the star chamber:
where having charged him with treason, and spreading abroad seditious libels,
Cranmer to the Tower.
he was committed from thence to the tower, there to remain till farther
justice, at the Queens pleasure.

The 15. of September there was a letter sent to master Horn, Deane of Durham
for his appearance: and another the 7. of October for his speedy appearance,

The 16. of Septem. there were letters sent to the majors of Dover and Rye, to
suffer all French protestants to pass out of this Realm: French protestants
suffered to pass hence.
except such whose names should be signified to them by the French Ambassador.

The first day of October, Queen Marie Mary crowned.
was crowned at Westminster, and the tenth day of the same month began the
Parliament, A parliament.
with a solemn mass of the holy Ghost, in the palace of Westminster. To the
which among other Lords, should come the Bishops which yet remained vndeposed:
which were, the Archbishop of York, Doctor Tailor of Lincoln, John Harley
Bishop of Hereford: of the Bishops, Doctor Tailor, and master Harley,
presenting themselves according to their duty, and taking their place
amongst the Lords, after they saw the mass begin, not abiding the sight
thereof, withdrew themselves from the company: for the which cause the Bishop
of Lincoln being examined, and protesting his faith: was upon the same
commanded to attend. Who not long after, at Anchor wicke by sickness departed:
Master Harley, because he was married, was excluded both from the Parliament,
and from his Bishopric.

This statute repealed Statutes repealed.
all the statutes made in the time king Henry the viij. for Praemunire, and
statutes made in king Edward the vj. time, for the administration of common
bread, and the Sacraments in the English tongue. In this mean while, many men
were forward in erecting of Altars, and Masses in Churches: and such as would
stick to the Laws made in K. Edwards time, till other were established, some
of them were marked, and some presently apprehended. Among whom, sir James
Hales, Sir I, Hales of kent, apprehended and imprisoned.
a knight in kent, and Justice in the common place, was one. Who
notwithstanding he had ventured his life in Q. Mary's cause, yet, for that he
did at a Quarter Sessions, give charge upon the statutes made in king Edwards
time, and Henry the eight, for the supremacy, and religion, he was imprisoned
in the Marshalsea, Counter, and Fleet, and so cruelly handled, and put in fear
by talk, that he thought to rid himself out of his life, by wounding him
self with a knife: and afterward was contented to say what they willed him.
Whereupon, he was discharged: but after that he never rested, The lamentable
end of Sir James Hales.
till he had drowned him self in a River, half a mile from his house in Kent.

During the time of the parliament, the Clergy had also their Convocation,
with a disputation appointed by the Q. commandment, at Paul's, about the 18.
of October. In which Convocation, Harpsfield preached, and D. Weston, Deane of
Westminster, was chosen Prolocutor.

The disputation continued vj. days Disputation of vi. days.
about the matter of the Sacrament: wherein D. Weston was chief on ye popes
part. The first day D. Weston inueyeth against the Catechism, and book of
Common prayer of king Edward: and signified, that on Friday next, the xx. of
October, it should be lawful for all men freely to speak their consciences in
matters of Religion.

The Friday being come, in stead of disputation, the Prolocutor exhibited two
several Bills unto the House: the one, of the natural presence of Christ in
the sacrament, and the other, that the Catechism was not set out by the houses
consent: requiring all to subscribe to these Bills, as he himself had done.
To which motion all did assent, saving the Deane of Rochester, the Dean of
Exceter, the Archdeacon of Winchester, the Archdeacon of Hertforde, and the
Archdeacon of Stow, and one other. And while the rest were subscribing, John
Philpot stood up, and declared that the Catechism was set out by the assent
of the house: and as touching the point of natural presence, that it was
against reason, that men should subscribe before the matter were discussed: and
withal, desired the Prolocutor, that he would be a mean to the Counsel, that
some of those that were the setters out of ye same catechism, might be brought
into the house, to show their learning that moved them to set forth the same:
and that D. Ridley, and M. Rogers, with two or three more, might be licensed to
be present at this disputation, and to be associated with them. The bishops
made answer, it was not for them to call such persons unto ye house, since some
of them were prisoners: but they would be Petitioners in this behalf to the
Counsel: and in case that any were absent, that ought to be of the house, they
willed them to be taken in unto them if they listed.

After this, they minding to have entered into disputation, word was given,
that the Lord great Master, and the Earl of Devonshire would be present at
the Disputation: and therefore the Prolocutor deferred the same till the next
Mundaye at one of the Clock at after Noone. At which time, (many Nobles being
assembled to hear the Disputation,) the Prolocutor said: that they of the
house had appointed this Disputation, not to call the truth in doubt, the
which they had all subscribed, saving five or six: but that those gainesayers
might be resolved.

Then he demanded of Master Haddon, whether he would reason against the
questions proposed. To whom he answered, he would; seeing the request for
those learned men to assist would not be granted: and so answered M. Elmer,
and said, that little or nothing it might avail for the truth, since now all
they were determined to the contrary. After this he demanded of Master
Cheney, who allowed of the presence, but denied the transubstantiation. Master
Cheney answered, he would gladly have his doubts resolved on that point: and so
propounding his doubts, the Prolocutor assigned M. Mooreman to answer. By
this means Master Elmer was driven to stand up, and so M. Philpot, who
reasoned against M. Mooreman and grauelled him. Then stood up the deane of
Rochester, M. Philpot, who disputed of the real presence: whom Weston answered,
and Watson took his part. Upon whom Philpot replieth again, and in the end
the disputation grew to be confused, The disputation confused.
by reason many would take upon them to answer.

On Wednesday the xxv. of October, John Philpot, according to the appointment,
was ready to dispute about the real presence, and was ready to enter into a
Latin oration, made to interpret the question: this ye Prolocutor would not
suffer: and besides, contrary to their order, compelled him to make his
arguments in English, which he did, and was so interrupted by the Prolocutor,
that he fell down on his knees before the Earls and Lords, desiring them that
he might have liberty to prosecute his argument: but the Prolocutor still
interrupted. The Prolocutor always interrupteth Philpot.
Doctor Chadsey being the respondent in the end, he having scarce spent one
argument of a doozen, in the matter of the presence in the Sacrament, was
threatened of the Prolocutor to be sent to prison, except he gave over. So
Philpot seeing himself and the good cause so oppressed, ended, saying thus: A
sort of you here, which hitherto have lurked in corners, and dissembled with
God and the world, are now gathered together to suppress the sincere truth
of Gods word, and to set forth every false devise, which by the
Catholic doctrine of the Scripture you are not able to maintain.

Then stepped forth M. Elmer M. Elmer.
Chaplain to the duke of Suffolk, whom M. Mooreman took upon him to answer,
and after him the prolocutor called M. Haddon Deane of Exceter, to confirm M.
Elmers argument, to whom Doctor Watson took upon him to answer. Then stepped
forth M. Perne, and in argument made declaration of his mind against
Transubstantiation, and confirmed the sayings of of M. Elmer and M. Haddon:
whom the prolocutor blamed, because the Friday before, he had subscribed to
the contrary: and so for that the night did approach, and the time was spent,
the Prolocutor giving them praises for their learning, The Romish church
against reason or scripture,
did yet notwithstanding conclude, that all reason set apart, the order of the
holy church must be received, and all things must be ordered thereby.

On Friday the xxvij. of October M. Haddon Deane of Exceter did enter dispute
against Watson, Morgan, and Harpsfield: and when Watson was driven to a pinch,
and to deny Theodoret, for that he said, he was a Nestorian, he desired he
might answer master Chenie: and after much dispute with Watson and his
fellows, then asked the Prolocutor of master Haddon and his fellows, whether
they would answer them other three days, Haddon, Chenie, and Elmer said no:
but the Archdeacon of Winchester, M. Philpot a hearty man.
master Philpot stood up, and said: that although all other did refuse to
answer, yet he would not, but offered to answer them all one after another.
With whose proffer the Prolocutor being not contented, railed on him, and said
he should go to Bedlem. To whom the Archdeacon answered, that he was more
worthy to be sent thither. Who used himself so ragingly in that disputation,
without any indifferent equality. Then rose Doctor Weston up and said: all the
company has subscribed to our Articles, saving only these men which you
see: we have answered them three days, upon promise that they should
answer us again as long: and if they be able to defend their doctrine, let
them so do. Then Elmer affirmed, that they never promised to dispute: but only
to testify their consciences, neither now (said he) do we mean to answer,
til our arguments which we have propounded, be soluted according as it was
appointed: for we should profit nothing, seeing the matter is already decreed
upon.

On monday following being the thirty of October, the Prolocutor demanded of
master Philpot, whether he would answer: who said he would so do, if they
would according to their former determination, first answer sufficiently some
of his arguments, yea even but one, although he had a dozen. So he was
permitted to propound. His arguments was, Christ is ascended into heaven,
therefore he is not present on the earth corporally. This argument Morgan,
Philpots argument.
Weston, Harpesfield were grauelled with. And when Philpot denied that the
Church was before the Scripture, and denied a frivolous reason which he brought
to prove the same: Morgan said fie fie, he has no learning. With whom when
Philpot compared himself, the Prolocutor commanded him that he should come
no more into the house. To whom Philpot said, he might think himself happy
to be out of their company. Then after Morgan had rounded the Prolocutor in
the ear, he said unto him: we are content, you should come into the house,
so ye be apparrelled in a long gown and a tippet as we be, and that you
shall not speak but when I command you. Then quoth Philpot, I had rather be
absent altogether. At length the thirteenth of December, Queen Marie
commands Boner to break up the Convocation. The Convocation breaks up.


During the time of this disputation, the twentieth day of November, the Mayor
of Couentry sent up to the Lords of the Counsel, Baldwine clearke, John
Careless, Thomas Wilcockes, and Richard Estlin, for their behavior on on
alhallow day last before. Whereupon. Careless and Wilcocks were committed to the
gatehouse, and Clarke and Estline to the Marshalsea.

The 3. of December, John Huntington preacher: who had made a rhyme against D.
Stokes, and the sacrament, appeared before the Counsel: and upon his
submission was suffered to depart.

In the month of December, the Parliament brake up: in which, there was a
communication of marriage betwixt the Emperors son Philippe, and the Queen:
Communication of marriage betwixt Q. Mary and king Philip.
and in the mean while, Cardinal Poole was sent for by the Queen.

Anno 1554. 1554. D. Crome to the Fleet.
the 13. of January, Doctor Crome, for his preaching without license on
Christmas day, was committed to the Fleet.

The 21. of January, Master Thomas Wotton Esquier was for matters of religion
committed to the Fleet, close prisoner.

The conclusion of the marriage betwixt the Emperors son Philip and Queen
Mary, stirred up the minds of many against her. Among whom, the 3. of February,
Sir Thomas Wiat Wiat beheaded
was resisted at Temple bar, and was taken and executed at Tower hill.

The 12. of February, the Lady Jane was beheaded: to whom two days before her
death, was sent M. Fecknam, to reduce her to the Popish religion: whom she
constantly and with great power of Gods spirit resisted. With her also was
beheaded her husband, the Lord Gilford. Lady Jane, and L. Gilford beheaded.


The judgment of God upon judge Morgan.
Judge Morgan, who gave sentence against the lady Jane, shortly after he had
condemned her, fell mad: and in his rauing, cried out continually to have the
Lady Jane taken away from him, and so ended his life.

Anno 1554. the 24. of February, Boner Bishop of London sent down commissioners
to al curates and pastors of his dioces, to take the names of such as would
not come to auricular confession in Lent, and receive at Easter.

The month of March following, the fourth day of the month there was a letter
sent from the Queen to Boner with Articles thereto annexed, to be put in
speedy execution. 1. Articles.
That the Ecclesiastical laws of King Henry the viij. should be put in
practice, being not directly against the Statutes and Laws of the Realm. 2.
That no Bishop or Prelate do use the clause Regia authoritate fulcitus. 3.
That no sacramentarie be admitted to benefice. 4. That all Bishops do labor,
especially in the Clergy to suppress heresies. 5. Against books and
writings. 6. Against priests marriages, and that such as would depart from their
wives should be used more favorably, and admitted to the same function. But in
another place, and for want of priests, that one priest should serve two
places. That processions be used: that holy days and fasting days be
frequented: that the ceremonies be used, and confirmation of children be put in
practice: and the like prescript also with articles was sent from the Queen to
the Lord Mayor of London.

About the same year and time, when Doctor Boner set forth this prescript,
there came from the Queen a Proclamation against strangers, such as professed
the Gospel. Upon this Proclamation, not only the strangers in King Edwardes
time received into the Realm for religion, among whom, Peter Martyr, John
Alasco, uncle to the king of Poleland: but many Englishmen fled, some into
Frizeland, some to Cleueland, some to high Germany; well near to the number of
800. persons. Near 800. persons fly beyond the seas.


In the same month of March, the Lord Courtney (who^ the Queen at her first
entry delivered out of the Tower,) and Lady Elizabeth also, the Queens
sister, were both in suspicion to have been of Wiats conspiracy: Lady
Elizabeth, and Lord Courtney, sent to the Tower.
and for the same, this March were apprehended, and committed to the Tower.
And, although Wiat at his death cleared them both, (as unacquainted with the
matter) yet Gardener practiced to bring them both within the compass of the
same, and the Lord Shandoys joined therein with him. Not long after this, a
parliament was holden at Westminster in April, where the Queen propounded
concerning her marriage to king Phillip, and restoring the Popes supremacy.
Her marriage was agreed upon, but the supremacy would not be obtained as
then. The Popes supremacy would not be obtained.


The same time when this parliament was summoned, the Queen summoned a
convocation of Bishops, writing unto Boner, (whom she made Vicegerent in stead
of Cranmer) being in the Tower, after the manner of a new style leaving out
supreme head: Likewise Boner giving her certificate upon the same, leaves out
Authoritate illustriss. and legitime suffultus, which parcels both at the
length were taken away at that Parliament. In this Convocation Boner extolling
the office of priesthood, breaks out into such an hyperbolicall prayer,
Boners commendation of Priesthood.
that they were to be honored before all kings of the earth, Princes, and
nobles: for, said he, a Priest is higher then a king, happier then an Angel,
maker of his creator, etc. and in some sort like to the virgin Marie: for as
by speaking six words: fiat mihi secundum verbum tuum, she did conceive
Christ, so the Priest by the words of Consecration, does change the bread
into the body of Christ.

Anno. 1554. The x. of March, a letter was sent to the Leeftenant of the Tower,
to deliver the bodies of Master Doctor Cranmer, the Archbishop of Caunterburie,
Master Ridley, and M. Latimer, to Sir I. Williams, to be conveyed by them both
to Oxford.

The xxvj. of March, there was a letter sent to sir Henry Doel, and one
Foster, to attach the bodies of D. Tailor, parson of Hadley, and of Henry
Askew, and to send them up to the Counsel.

About the tenth of April, Cranmer Archbishop of Canterbury, Ridley Bishop of
London, and Hugh Latimer, sometime B. of Worcester, Cranmer, Ridley, and
Latimer, sent prisoners to Oxford
were co^ueied as prisoners from the Tower to Windsor, and from thence to the
University of Oxford, there to dispute with the Divines, and learned men of
both Universities, about the presence, substance and sacrifice of the
Sacrament. Their names were these: Disputers at Oxford.
Of Oxford, D, Weston, Prolocutor, D. Tresham, Doctor Cole, D. Oglethorpe, D.
Pie, D. Harpsfielde, M. Fecknam. Of Cambridge: Doctor Young. Vicechauncellour,
D. Glinne, D. Seaton, D. Watson, D. Sedgewick, D. Atkinson. The questions
whereon they should dispute, Questions to be disputed of.
were these. 1. Whether the natural body of Christ be really in the sacrament
after the words of consecration be spoken by the Priest. 2. Whether any
substance do remain after the words, saving the body and blood. 3 Whether
the Mass be a sacrifice propiciatorie.

On Saturday, being the xiiij. of April, after dinner, the Commissioners and
Disputers went all to Saint Mary's church in Oxford, and there (after a short
consultation in a Chapel) they came all into the quire, and sat all on seats,
before the Altar, to the number of 33. persons. 33. Commissioners. Cranmer
brought before the Commissioners. Unity with Verity.
And first they sent to the Mayor, that he should bring in D. Cranmer: who^ he
brought with a great number of rustie Bilmen. And being come, the Prolocutor
exhorted him to unity. To whom the Archb. modestly answered, he would embrace
it gladly, so it were joined with verity. And after a discourse of the same,
in few words, the Prolocutor caused the questions to be propounded unto him,
and required him to subscribe thereunto. Which the Archb. refusing, the
Prolocutor first willed him to write his mind of them that night: and said
moreover, he should dispute on them: and caused a copy of the Articles to be
delivered unto him, assigning him to answer thereunto on monday next, and so
charged the Mayor with him again, to be had to Bocardo: where he was kept
before.

Then was D. Ridley Ridley appears.
brought, who hearing the articles read unto him, answered without any delay,
and said, they were all false: and being asked whether he would dispute, he
answered, that as long as God gave him life, they should not only have his
heart, but also his mouth and Pen, to defend his truth. But he required to
have time, and books. They said, he could not. And that he should dispute on
Thursdaye: and till that time, he should have Books. Then gave they him the
Articles, and bad him write his mind of them that night: and so he did. Then
they commanded the mayor to have him from whence he came.

M. Latimer appears.
Last of all came in Master Latimer, who after his denial of the Articles, had
Wednesday appointed for disputation. He alleged, age; sickness; disease; and
lack of books: wherefore he refused to dispute, but he said, he would declare
his mind in writing, or by words: and would stand to all that they could
lay upon his back: complaining, that he was permitted neither to have pen,
nor Ink, Neither the Mass, nor maribones nor sinowes thereof in the scripture.
nor any Book, saving the new Testament in his hand: which he said he had read
over seven times deliberatelie, and yet could not find the Mass in it,
neither the maribones, nor sinowes of the same.

On Monday, the sixteenth day of April, they met in the Schools, about eight
of the Clock in the morning, and all things ready for the Disputation, Doctor
Weston the Prolocutor, began to set the disputation a work, with a brief
Oration, beginning thus.

Ye are assembled (speaking in the Latin tongue) hither brethren, this day, to
confound the detestable heresy of the Verity The detestable heresy of the
Verity.
of the body of Christ in the Sacrament. At which words diverse of the learned
men laughed. His Oration ended, D. Chadsey began first to argue, and ere he
left, the Prolocutor diverse times, Doctor Tresham, Oglethorp, Marshall,
Vicechauncellour, Pie, Cole, and Harpsfielde, did interrupte, and pressed him
with their Arguments: so that every man would say somewhat disorderly, A
disorderly disputation.
as the prolocutor would suffer him: so that three hours of the time was spent
before the Vicechancellor of Cambridge began, and so the disputation continued
almost till two of the clock, and all the arguments were written by four
appointed to that end, and delivered unto the hand of M. Day register. The
prisoner was had away by the Mayor, and the Doctors dined together at the
university College.

The next day following which was the xvij. of April, was brought forth
Doctor Ridley to dispute: D. Ridley disputes.
against whom was set Doctor Smith D. Smith a turner and returner.
to be principal opponent: a man who diverse times had turned and returned
before: besides him Doctor Weston, Doctor Tresham, Doctor Oglethorpe, Doctor
Glinne, Doctor Seaton, Doctor Cole, Master Ward, Master Harpesfield, Doctor
Watson, Master Pie, master Harding, master Curtop, master Fecknam. To al
whom he answered very learnedly: he made a preface to these questions, but they
said it was blasphemy: and would not let him go forth in it. Doctor Smith
could get no advantage at his hand: so the other did take his arguments, and
prosecuted them. Doctor Glinne beginning to reason, (notwithstanding master
Ridley had taken him for his old friend) made a very contumelious preface
against him. Whereof afterward, coming to the house where master Ridley was
kept, in the presence of Doctor Young, and D. Oglethorpe, he asked him pardon.
Weston dissoluing the Disputation, said these words against Master Ridley:
Here you see the glorious; the stubborn; the crafty; the unconstant mind of
this man. Here you see this day, Weston triumphs before the victory.
that the strength of the Truth is without foil. Wherefore, I beseech you
all to cry, Verity has the victory: Verity has the victory..

After these Disputations, upon Wednesday, M. Latimer was brought to dispute,
the xviij. day of April, at viij. of the clock in the morning, most in
English. For master Latimer M. Latimer disputes.
alleged that he was out of use for the Latin. There replied unto him M. Smith
of Oriall College D. Cartwright, M. Harpsfield, and diverse other had snatches
at him, and gave him bitter taunts. He escaped not hissinges and scornful
laughings, no more then they which went before him. He was very faint, and
desired that he might not long tarry, he durst not drink for fear of
vomiting: the disputation ended before xj. of the clock: he was not suffered
to read that he had, (as he said) painefully written, but it was exhibited up,
and the Prolocutor read part thereof, and so proceeded to the disputation.
Toward the end of the disputation, the Prolocutor exhorted father Latimer to
turn, declaring unto him, that the Queen was merciful. To whom Latimer
answered: you shall have no hope in me to return: I pray for the Queen daily,
even from the bottom of my heart: that she may turn from this religion.
During the while of these disputations, the Prolocutor had his tippling cup
standing at his elbow all the time: and when master Ridley disputed with one
of the Opponents, he took the cup, and holding it in his hands, said to the
Opponent: Urge hoc, nam hoc facit pro nobis: urge hoc, Weston cries Urge hoc.
for it makes on our side. Whereat the assembly laughed.

After the disputation of these three days were ended, M. Harpesfield the next
day after, which was the 19. of April, disputed for his form to be made
Doctor. To which disputation, the Archbishop of Canterbury was brought forth,
and permitted among the rest, to utter an argument or two in defense of his
cause,

These Disputations ended (the Friday following, which was the xx. day of
April) the Commissioners sat in Saint Mary's Church, where Doctor Weston
Prolocutor, used particular disswasions to every one of the Prisoners, and
would not suffer them to answer in any wise: but directly required them to
say, whether they would subscribe or no. Which when they all refused: in
reading the sentence against them, they were asked whether they would turn or
no: The martyrs bid read on the sentence against themselves.
and they bad read on in the name of God, for they were not minded to turn: so
were they condemned all three. After which sentence given they all appealed to
the just judgment of God, for their unjust sentence: and so were they
separated the one from the other, the Archbishop to Bocardo, Ridley to the
Shiriffes house, and Latimer to the bayliffes.

On Saturday following, they had a Mass with a general procession and great
solemnity. Doctor Cranmer was commanded to behold the procession out of
Bocardo: Doctor Ridley out of the Shiriffes house: Latimer also being brought
to see it from the Bayliffes house, thought he should have gone to burning,
Father Latimer would not look toward the procession.
and spoke to one Augustine Cooper a catchpole to make a quick fire: but when
he came to Carfoxe and saw the matter, he ran as fast as his old bones
would carry him to one Spensers shop, and would not look toward it.

Immediately after the sentence was given, Doctor Ridley writes to the
Prolocutor requiring him to keep promise with him, touching his answers:
which the Prolocutor said, he should see how they were taken, with promise
that he should have license to add unto them, to alter them as upon more
deliberation he should think best etc. The Prolocutor breaks promise with
Philpot.
Which promises the Prolocutor brake with him.

On Monday next after these things done, being the xxiij. day of April, the
Prolocutor takes his journey to London with the letters certificatorie to the
Queen, by whom the Archbishop directed his letters supplicatorie to the
counsel: the which letters after the Prolocutor had received, and had carried
them well near half the way to London, The Prolocutor opens Cranmers
letters to the Counsel.
by the way he opened the same, and seeing the contents thereof, sent them back
again refusing to carry them: Likewise Doctor Ridley desires him by letter
to carry his answers up to certain Bishops in London.

Here the Author returns to the year before 1553. Day was delivered out of
the Fleet.

The v. day Boner was delivered out of the Marshalsea, and one M. Edward
Underhill committed to Newgate. Also ye same day at night Doctor Cocks was
committed to the Marshalsea: And the same day Doctor Tonstall, and Stephen
Gardener were delivered out of the Tower, and Gardener received to the Queens
privy Counsel, and made Lord Chancellor.

The xvj. day of August, M. Bradford, M. Beacon, and M. Veron were committed to
the Tower, Bradford, Beacon, and Veron to the Tower.
with whom also M. Sampson should have been committed but was not found, being
diligently sought for at M. Elsenges house in Fleet Street, where M. Bradford
was taken.

Upon the xix. of August, a letter was sent unto sir Henry Tyrrell, Anthony
Brown, and Edmund Brown Esquires, praying them to commit to ward all such as
should contemn the Queens order of religion, and did keep themselves from
Church.

Upon Sunday the xx. of August, Doctor Watson Winchesters Chaplain preached at
Paul's, and two hundred of the guard were there with their Halbards, least the
people should make a stir against the preacher.

The xxj. of August, the Queen set forth a proclamation signifying that she
could not any longer hide the religion which she from her infancy had
professed, inhibiting in the same proclamation, printing and preaching.

Upon Sunday the xxvij of August the B. of Canterbury, Sir Thomas Smith, and
the Deane of Paul's were cited to to appear the week following, before the
Queens Commissioners in the Bishops consistory in Paul's.

In the mean time it was falsely noysed abroad, that the Archbishop, to currie
favor with the Queen, should promise to say Dirge Mass after the old
custom, for king Edward, and that he had already said mass at Canterbury. A
false rumor of the Archb.
To stop these rumors, the 7. of Sept. the Archb. set forth a letter, which was
also printed, in purgation of himself.

The 13. of September, Hugh Latimer was committed to the Tower. The next day
after that the Archb. was committed to the tower.

The first day of October, which was the day of her coronation, the Queen gave
general pardon: out of which were excepted all the prisoners in the Tower, and
in the Fleet, and 62. more: of which number master Whitchurch, and master
Grafton were two.

Upon the 4. of October, the Archbishop of York was committed to the Tower.

The fifth of October, the Bishop of Lincoln, Hereford, and Westchester, were
discharged from the Parliament and Convocation.

The 15. of October, Laurence Saunders, preacher at alhallowes in Bredstreete,
in the morning declared the abhominablenes of the mass: about noone the same
day, he was sent for by the Bishop of London, and from thence committed to the
Marshalsea.

The 26. of October, the Vicechauncellour of Cambridge displaced D. Madew of
the maistership of Clarehal: because he was married, and placed master
Swinborne.

The 28. of October, the Papists in the Kings College in Cambridge, Kings
College, Papists very forward.
(not tarrying the making of any law) had their service again in the Latin
tongue, contrary to the law then in force.

About the last of December, a priest at Canterbury said mass on the one day,
and the next day after, he came into the pulpit, and desired the people to
forgive him: for he said he had betrayed Christ: and there made a long Sermon
against the mass.

Upon Saturday being the 13. of January, D. Crome was committed to the Fleet,
and one master Addington to the Tower.

The 20. of January, the court of first fruits and tenths were dissolved.

The 26. of January, Justice Halles was committed to the marshalsea, and
master Rogers to Newgate.

About the 24. and 25. of February, such priests within the dioces of London,
as were married, were divorced from their livings, and commanded to bring in
their wives within a fortnight, that they might also be divorced from them.
This the Bishop did of his own power.

The 27. of February, certain Gentlemen of Kent were sent down to be executed:
among whom there were two of the Mantels: the elder of which, at his casting of
the ladder, brake the rope. Then they would have had him recant, and receive
the sacrament of the altar: and then they said, he should have the Queens
pardon: but he refused so to do, and chose rather to die.

Upon the 18. day of March, the Lady Elizabeth the Queens sister was brought
to the Tower.

Lady Elizabeth to the Tower.
In the month of May, it was bruted that a disputation should be holden at
Cambridge, between M. Bradford, M. Saunders, and M, Rogers, and others of that
side: and the Doctors of both universities on the other side: like as had been
in Oxforde before. This the godly Preachers that were prisoners did accept, so
that the disputation might be before the Queen, or before the Counsel, or
before the Parliament houses, or else if they might dispute by writing:
remembering the disorder at Oxford. And they directed out of prison a
declaration of their minds by writing, the seventh day of May, exhorting the
people to submit themselves with all patience and humility, etc. Anno 1554.

Their names were: Robert Menauen, alias Robert Ferrar, Rowlande Tailor, John
Philpot, John Bradforde, John Wigorne, and Gloce. Episcopus, John Hooper,
Edward Crome, John Rogers, Laurence Saunders, Edmunde Laurence, I. P. T. M.
Miles Couerdale, agreeing also with them.

The xix. of the same Month the Lady Elizabeth, Sister to the Queen, was
brought out of the Tower, and committed to the custody of sir I. Williams,
after Lord Williams of Them, who gently entreated her: Lady Elizabeth sent to
Woodstock.
and afterward she was had to Woodstocke, and there committed to the keeping
of Sir Henry Benefield, who exceeded in hard dealing with her.

About the fifth of October, and within a fortnight following, there were about
sixtye imprisoned in London, for having, and selling certain books, which were
sent over by Preachers that fled beyond the Seas: among whom was M. Brown, a
Goldsmith, M. Spark, a Draper, Randall Diuer, a Stationer, M. Beston, a
Merchant, with many other.

The ninth of November, M. Barlowe, late B. of Bathe, and M. Cardmaker, Barlowe
and Cardmaker to the Fleet.
were brought before the Counsel in the Starrechamber, and after
communication, commanded to the Fleet.

In this month, or the month before, Against writing of Scriptures on church
walls.
Boner directs his precepts against al writings of scripture on church walls.

About this time, in the University of Cambridge, and also of Oxforde, many
good wits, and learned men departed the Universities, because of the
alteration of religion. 24. places void together in S. John's college in
Cambridge
Of who^, some of their own accord gave over: some were thrust out of their
Felowships: some were miserably handled. In so much that in Cambridge, in the
College of saint John's. there were 24. places void together.

The xxj. of November, being Wednesday, Cardinal Poole landeth.
Cardinal Poole landed at Dover: and the xxviij, day he made an Oration in the
Parliament house: exhorting them to return to the Sea Apostolic, and to
abrogate such laws as had disioyned them from the same.

The next day after, the Lords and Commons exhibited a Supplication, wherein
they desired pardon, and absolution for that which had passed against the
Apostolik Sea. Upon this Supplication, Cardinal Poole (in the name of Pope
Julius the third) gives them absolution. Absolution given to ye Lords and
Commu^s.
Whereof the king and the Cardinal sent speedy report to Rome, to the great
joy of the Pope, and his etc.

About the second of December, a Post was sent from the whole Parliament to the
Pope, to desire him to confirm the sale of Abbey lands, Purchases of Abbey
lands to be confirmed by the Pope.
and Chaunterie lands: For the Lords, and the Parliament would not grant any
thing in the Popes behalf, before their Purchases were fully confirmed.

The vj. day of December, all the whole Convocation, with Bishops and other, were
sent for to Lambeth, to the Cardinal, who the same day forgave them all their
periurations, schisms, heresies, and all they kneeled down, and received his
absolution.

Upon New years day at night, certain honest men and women of the City, to
the number of thirty, and a minister with them, named Master Rose, were taken
as they were in a house in Bowchurchyarde at the Communion: and the same night
were committed to prison: and on the Thursday following, being the third of
January, M. Rose M. Rose sent to the Tower.
was before the Bishop of Winchester, being Lord Chauncellor, and thence the
same day he was by him committed to the Tower.

The Act of the Popes Supremacy. Queen Marie with child.
The same day the Act of Supremacy passed in the Parliament house.

About this time, there was a certain opinion, that the Queen was great with
child, and many prayers were made in diverse places for her, and for the
child, that it might be a male child, well favored, and witty. And the xix.
of January, the lower House of the Parliament, with the Speaker, came to White
hall to the king, and there offered unto him the government of the Realm, and
of the issue, if the in the Queen should fail: which was confirmed by act of
Parliament within ix. days after.

In this Parliament among other things, the Bishop of Rome was established, and
all such Laws as were made against him since the twentieth year of King Henry
the viij. were repealed, and also Cardinal Poole, Bishop Pates, Lilly and
other were restored to their blood.

Also in this Parliament three statutes were revived for trial of Heresy. One
made in the fifth year of Richard the second: and another in the second year
of Henry the fourth: the third in the second year of Henry the fifth. Also
the doings of Master Rose and the other that were with him was communed of in
this Parliament: and upon that occasion an act was made, that certain evil
prayers should be treason. The prayers of these men were these: Certain evil
prayers to be treason.
God turn the heart of Queen Mary from Idolatry, or else shorten her days.

The two and twentieth of January, all the preachers that were in prison, were
called before the Bishop of Winchester Lord Chancellor, and certain other at
his house in S. Mary Oueries: from whence, after they had refused to conform
themselves, they were committed to straighter prison then before, with charge
that no man should speak with them: amongst whom, one James George died in
prison, James George.
and was buried in the field.

The eight and twentieth of January, the bishop of Winchester by virtue of
Commission from the Cardinal, in S. Mary Oueries church, called before him and
certain of the Counsel, Master Hooper, Master Rogers, and Master
Cardmaker: of which, Cardmaker Cardmaker submits.
that day submitted himself, the other were returned to prison till the next
day.

The xxx. of January, Doctor Tailor, Doctor Crome, M. Bradford, M. Saunders,
and Doctor Farrar, sometime bishop of S. Dauies were before Winchester, of
which number Tailor, Saunders, and Bradford were excommunicated, and sentence
pronounced against them, Sentence pronounced against Tailor, Saunders, and
Bradford.
and so committed to the Shiriffes. Doctor Crome according to his desire had
two months respite, and M. Farrar was again committed to prison, till another
time.

After examination and condemnation of these good men, Commissioners and
Inquisitors were sent abroad into all parts of the Realm, to the afflicting
of a great number of godly persons, especially in Kent, Essex, Northfolke, and
Suffolk. The preachers before had put up a supplication to the king and
parliament, requiring indifferency in their cause: but all in vain.

The end of the tenth Book.
The eleventh Book.
THe fourth day of February, suffered master John Rogers, M. John Rogers
martyr,
he was of the University of Cambridge: from whence at length he was chosen
to be Chaplain to the marchantes at Antwerpe, in Brabant: where he fell in
company with master William Tindall, and with Miles Couerdale: by conference
with whom, he came to great knowledge in the Gospel, and cast off popery, and
joined himself with them: as in the translating of the Bible, entitled, the
translation of Thomas Matthew. After he was married, he went to Wittenberge in
Saxony: where he so profited in knowledge, and in the Duitch tongue: that the
charge of a Congregation was committed unto him. In which ministry, he
faithfully served till the time of king Edward. And being orderly called, he
returned into England again, without certayntie of any condition of living:
where he preached diligently. Then Nicholas Ridley Bishop of London gave him a
Prebend in Paul's: M. Rogers divinity reader in Paul's Church.
and the Deane and Chapter therechose him to read the divinity Lecture. In
which place, he remained till the time of Queen Marie.

After the Queen was come to the Tower of London, he being orderly called
thereunto, made a vehement sermon at Paul's cross, confirming the doctrine
taught in king Edwardes time, and exhorting the people to constancy. For which
he was called into question: and made such answer, as for that time he was
clearly dismissed. But after the proclamation, which prohibited true preaching,
the Counsel quarrelled with him concerning his doctrine, and commanded him as
prisoner to keep his own house: where he remained a long time, and might have
escaped, if he would. At length by Boners procurement, he was put among the
thieves and murderers in Newgate for a great space He was first examined the
22. of January by Winchester, Rogers condemned.
with the rest of the commisioners. Then again the 28. and 29. of the same
month: and in the end they read the sentence of condemnation against him:
mentioning there but 2. articles. First, that he affirmed ye church of Rome to
be of Antichrist: Secondly, that he denied the realtie of the Sacrament. And so
committed him unto the Sheriffs hands, sending him and master Hooper (who
with master Cardemaker was examined at the same time) to the Clinke, there to
remain till night, and from thence then to be removed to Newgate. After
sentence given, Master Rogers required of Gardener, that his wife (being a
stranger) might come and speak with him so long as he lived. Which Gardener
Cruel Gardener,
would not, though she were a stranger, and had 11. children, and one sucking
on her: whom her husband would have comforted and counseled, but Gardener
would not permit it.

In the morning the fourth of February, Anno 1555. Boner Boner would not
suffer master Rogers to talk one word with his wife before his death. Master
Rogers the first martyr of Q. Mary's days.
to be disgraded: that done, he craved of Boner, he might talk a few words
with his wife before his death. This Boner would not suffer: So was he brought
into Smithfield by master Chester, and master Woodrofe then Sheriffs of
London, and cheerfully ended his martyrdom in the fire: washing his hands in
the flame as he was in burning. His pardon was brought him at ye stake, if he
would have recanted: but he utterly refused it, and was the first martyr of
Queen Mary's days.

The Sunday before he suffered he drunk to Master Hooper being then underneath
him, and bad them commend him unto him, and tell him there was never little
fellow better would stick to a man then he would to him; thinking they should
have burned together.

In the prison he wrote a certain prophecy of the ruin of the pope here in
England, A prophecy of the ruin of the pope in England.
and restoration of the Gospel again, which accordingly came to pass by ye
blessed reign of Queen Elizabeth.

In the month of February the viij. day. Anno 1555. Laurence Saunders Laurence
Saunders.
a Gentleman of a worshipful house, was burned at Couentrie, after he had been
prisoner a year and a half in the Marshalsea. He was brought up in Eaton, and
from thence was chosen to go to Kings College in Cambridge: where he continued
scholar in the College 3. years, and profited much. From thence departing to
his parents: by their advise, he minded to become a merchant, and was bound
apprentice with Sir William Chester, who afterward was Sheriff of London. The
same year Saunders was burned at Couentrie, his master considering his
towardness in learning, and his great zeal in religion, discharged him of his
service, as one meet for an other use. Whereupon he returned to Cambridge
again, where he profited greatly in the Greek and Hebrewe tongues: and gave
himself wholly to the study of Divinity, and continued in the University
till he had proceeded Master of Arts. And a long space after, in the beginning
of King Edwardes time, he was called to read a Lecture at Fothringam, in
Divinity: where he greatly edified many. Which being dissolved, he was
placed in the Minster at Lichfielde, to read there. From whence he was called
to a Benefice in Leicester shire, called Church-lancton, whereupon he kept
residence. And from thence he was called to Ashalowes in Breadstreete in
London. Where behauing himself according to his duty, he was accused by sir
John Mordant (Counselor to Queen Mary) unto Boner: and after examination,
being commanded to prison by the B. of Winchester, he answered: that he did
give God thanks who had given him at the last a resting place, where he might
pray for the Bishops conversion. His constancy was such, that he forbad his
wife to sue for his delivery. Laurence Saunders constancy.
And when other of his friends had by suite almost obtained it, he discouraged
them. In prison he wrote diverse comfortable letters to his wife, Sanders wrote
diverse letters.
to Doctor Cranmer, Ridley and Latimer, prisoners for the like cause in Oxford:
to M. Ferrar B. of S. Dauies, Tailor, Bradford, Philpot, to mistres Lucie
Harrington, etc. After he was excommunicated and delivered to the secular
power, he was brought by the Sheriff of London to the counter, in his parish
in Bredstreet: whereat he rejoiced greatly.

The fourth day of February, the Bishop of London did come to prison, where he
was to disgrade him: which when he had done, Laurence Saunders said, I thank
God, I am not of your Church.

The day following in the morning, he was delivered to certain of the Queens
guard to be carried to Couentrie, there to be burned. The first night he lay at
S. Albones, where master Grimoalde did speak with him, a man of greater
gifts then constancy: after master Saunders had given him a lesson meet for
his lightness, he took a cup into his hands, asked him if he would pledge
him of that cup of which he would begin to him unto him: to whom Grimoald
shrugging, said: of that cup in your hand I will pledge you, Sweet sayings
of Laurence Saunders.
but of that other which you mean, I will not promise you. Well, (said
master Saunders) my dear Lord Jesus Christ has begun to me of a more
bitter cup then mine shall be, and shall I not pledge my most sweet Savior? Yes
I hope.

After they were come to Couentrie, the same night, he was put into the common
jail among other prisoners: where he spent all that night in prayer, and in
instructing others.

The next day, which was the viij. of February, he was had to the place of
execution, in the Park without the City: where coming to the stake, he took
it in his arms, and kissed it, saying: welcome the Cross of Christ, welcome
everlasting life. And being fastened to the stake, and fire put to him, full
sweetly he slept in the Lord.

Anno 1555. The ix. of February, was B. Hooper burned at Gloucester, Hooper
burned at Gloucester.
for the testimony of Jesus. He had been Graduate in the University of
Oxforde, in the time of the six Articles. Winchester conferred with him 4. or
5. days together, and not preuayling with him, dismissed him to his M. sir T.
Arundel, whose Steward he had been, when he had forsaken Oxford for fear of
the six Articles.

After the conference with Winchester, he had intelligence of danger: and being
counseled to provide for himself, went over beyond the sea, and being at
Paris, stayed not long, till he was again laid for. So he returned again
into England, and was retained of M. Sentlow. After that, he departed again
beyond seas, through France into Germany, where he was well acquainted with M.
Bullinger at Zuricke: there he married a wife, a Burgonian, and then applied
very studiously the hebrew tongue. In K. Edwards reign he returned again into
England, and taking his leave of M. Bullinger, said unto him: you shall sure
from time to time hear from me, but the last news of all, I shall not be able
to write. For (said he) you shall hear of me to be burned to ashes: and (taking
M. Bullinger by the hand) said, where I shall take most pains: and that shall
be the last news, which I shall not be able to write unto you, but you shall
hear it of me. Thus prophesying of the manner of his death. Hooper preaches
once or twice a day.
After that he had preached a while in London (for the most part twice, at the
least once every day, and never failed) he was called to preach before the K.
majesty, and soon after made Bishop Gloucester by the kings commandment: In
which office he continued two years, and after that, was made B. of Worcester:
which he had not long enjoyed, but the bishops quarrelled with him for the
apparel, which he refused to wear. And in the end they so prevailed, that
he agreed sometimes to show himself apparrelled as the other bishops were.
Afterward (king Edward being dead, and Marie being crowned Queen) this good
Bishop was one of the first that was sent for by a Pursiuant, to be at London.
He might by flight have avoided danger, but would not: saying to those that
would have persuaded him thereto: Once I did fly, and took me to my feet;
but now, because I am called to this place and vocation, I am thoroughly
persuaded to tarry, and to live and die with my sheep. And so (having made
his appearance) after much rating, he was commanded by the Counsel to ward:
it being declared unto him at his departure, that the cause of his imprisonment
was only for certain sums of money, for the which he was indebted to the
Queens majesty, and not for Religion.

The next year, being anno 1554. the nineteenth day of March, he was called
again to appear before Winchester: where, what for the B. and what for the
unruly multitude, when he could not be permitted to plead his cause, he was
deprived of his Bishopric.

Hooper deprived.
The first of September, anno 1553. he was committed to the Fleet from
Richmond, to have liberty of the prison, and within six days after he paid
for his liberty v. l. sterling, to the warden for fees: who immediately upon ye
payment hereof, complained of him to Steven Gardener, and so was he committed
to close prison one quarter of a year in ye Tower chamber of the Fleet, where
he was used very extremely. After one quarter of a year and somewhat more,
Babington the warden of the Fleet, and his wife fell out with him about the
mass: so he was put into ye wards, where he continued a long time, having
nothing appointed for his bed but a little pad of straw and a rotten covering,
and a tike with a few feathers therein: the chamber vile and stinking, Hooper
hardly used in prison.
till good people sent him a bed to lie on: On the one side of which prison was
the sink and filth of the house, and on the other side the town ditch, so
that the stinch of the house had infected him with sundry diseases.

During which time he was sick, and the doors, bars, haspes and chains
being all closed and made fast upon him, he mourned and called for help: but
the Warden, when he had known him many times ready to die, and when the poor
men of the wards have called to help him, he has commanded the doors to be
kept fast, and charged that none of his men should come at him, saying: let him
alone: it were a good riddance of him. And finally, his usage was such, that he
feared he should have died in prison through vile entreaty, before he should
come to judgment.

Again, he was examined: Anno 1555. the 22. of January, before the Bishop of
Winchester, with other bishops and commissioners of Saint Mary oueries: where,
when (being exhorted by them thereunto) he refused to return to the popish
Church, he was had to prison again, and was shifted from his former chamber
into another, near to the wardens chamber. Where he remained 6. days, till
his chamber was searched for books and writings, by D. Martin and others, but
none were found.

The xxviij. day of January, Hooper appeared again before Gardener and the
Commissioners, in the afternoon, with Master Rogers. Their examinations being
ended, the two sherifes of London were commanded to carry them to the counter
in Southwarke, Hooper and Rogers sent to the Counter
there to remain till the morrow at ix. of the clock, to see whether they
would relent. So M. Hooper went before with one of the sherifs, and M. Rogers
with the other: to whom M. Hooper (looking back) said, come brother R. must we
two take this matter first in hand, and begin to fry these faggots? Yea sir
(said M. Rogers) by Gods grace. Doubt not (said M. Hooper) but God will give
strength. They were committed to the keeper of the Counter, and appointed to
several chambers: not being suffered to speak one with the other, neither yet
any other permitted to come at them that night.

Upon the xxix. of January, they were both brought again by the Shiriffes of
London before the commissioners: and when they could not be persuaded to
forsake the truth, the Shiriffes of London were willed to carry them to the
Clincke, there to remain til night. And when it was dark, Master Hooper was
had to Newgate, there remaining six days close prisoner. During which time;
Boner, Fecknam, Chadsey, and Harpsfield, etc. resorted to him, to assay to
persuade him to forsake the truth: which when he would not do, they spread
false rumors of his relenting. Whereof when master Hooper False rumors of
Hoopers relenting.
heard, he directed a letter wherein he purges himself of that slander. Upon
monday morning, Boner came to Newgate, and there disgraded him. And the fifte
of February, about four of the clock in the morning, he was led by the
Sheriffs forth of Newgate, to a place appointed, not far from S. Dunstans
Church in Fleet street: where six of the Queens guard were appointed to carry
him to Gloucester, there to be burned. Whereat he greatly rejoiced: being glad
that he should confirm his doctrine which he had taught to his own flock, by
martyrdom before their eyes, who^ he had instructed. So being brought to
Gloucester, he was lodged all night at Robert Ingrams house, and watched by the
sheriffs there all night. His desire was, that he might go to bed betimes that
night, saying that he had many things to remember: and so did at five of the
clock, and slept one sleep sou^dly: bestowing the rest of ye night in prayer.
After, he gat up in the morning, and desired that no man should be suffered to
come into ye chamber: that he might be solitary til the hour of execution. At
nine of the clock he was willed to prepare himself, for the time was at hand.
At which time, and when he came to the place of execution, he was never known
during the time of his being amongst them, Hooper goes cheerfully to his
death.
to look with so cheerful a countenance as he did at that present. When he
came to the place where he should die, smiling he beheld the stake, and
preparation made for him, he kneelyng down made a prayer upon the whole Creed
for the space of half an hour. Now after he was somewhat entered into his
prayer, a box was brought, and laid before him upon a stool, with his pardon,
if he would turn: Hooper refuses pardon.
at the sight whereof he cried, if you love my soul, away with it: if you love
my soul, away with it. When his prayers were ended, and he stripped to his
shirte, he went up to the stake, and had delivered unto him a pound of
gunpowder, which he trussed close betwixt his legs, and as much under each
arm hole. So reeds being set about him and cast up, he received two bundels
of them in his own hands, embraced them and kissed them, and put under each
arm one of them, and showed with his hand, how the rest should be bestowed.
So fire being put to, he endured iij. quarters of an hour at least in the fire
before he died: it was so evil made, and the wind did so stand. In which
pains he prayed so long as he could, earnestly to the Lord: Hooper a worthy
martyr.
and the use of tongue being taken away, he knocked so long on his breasts
with his hands, till one of his arms fell of: and then with the other, till
his hand did cleave fast to the iron upon his breast.

Anno 1555. The ix. of February Doctor Tailor, Doctor Tailor martyr.
doctor of both the laws, was burned at Hadley the town where he was Pastor.
The cause of his trouble was one Foster a petigentleman, after the sort of a
Lawier, a keeper of courts, and one John Clerk of Hadley, because he resisted
John Aver parson of Aldam, who would have said Mass in Hadley church. For this
they complained of him to Stephen Gardener: who upon complaint sent a letter to
D. Tailor, commanding him within certain days to appear before him. Which
D. Tailor, (contrary to ye persuasions of his friends) did, who so soon as D.
Tailor appeered before him rayled upon him, and when he could not prevail any
way to seduce him: he commanded him to prison, saying: have this fellow hence,
and carry him to the Kings bench, and charge the keeper he be straightly kept:
so they carried him to prison, where he lay prisoner almost two years. Within
few days after, diverse other learned and godly men in sundry countries of
England were laid in prison for religion, All the prisons in England Christian
schools and Churches.
so that almost all the prysons in England were become right christian schools
and churches. D. Tailor when he was come to the Kings bench, there found M.
Bradford, who had great comfort one of another. After that D. Tailor had lain
in prison a while, he was cited to appear in the arches at Bow-church, there
to answer etc. and so to be deprived: who so handled the matter of his marriage
by scriptures, doctors, laws, civil and canon, that the judge could give no
sentence to divorce him: but gave sentence of deprivation because he was
married. After a year and three quarters (in which time they had gotten old
tyrannous laws put down in K. Henry the 8. time, and of K. Edward, to be
restored again) about the 22. of January D. Tailor appeered again before the
commisioners: where after persuasions and threats at Gardiners hands and the
rest, he constantly holding the truth, was had to prison again, where he
endured close till the last of January.

Upon which day he with M. Bradford, and M. Saunders were again called to
appear before Winchester, Norwich, London, Salisburie, etc. where charged with
Heresy and Schism, they were required to give determinate answer, whether
they would recant or no: who showing themselves bold and constant in the cause
of Christ, received the sentence of condemnation, with cheerfulness and
thanksgiving to God, that they were counted worthy to suffer for his name. So
Doctor Tailor Tailor, Bradford, Saunders condemned.
being condemned was committed to the Clinke, where he was bestowed till
toward night, and then he was removed to the Counter. Where after he had lain
a seuenight, Boner came to disgrade him: at which disgrading, when Boner would
have had him put on the Antichristian attire, he would not himself do it: but
it was forced upon him by others. And when he was thoroughly furnished therewith,
he set his hands by his side, M. Tailor is pleasant at antichr^^^^^^ attire
walking up and down, and said: how say you my Lord? Am I not a goodly
fool? how say you my masters? So the B. scraped his fingers, thombs, and
crown of his head: and when he should have given him a stroke on his breast with
his crosier staff, the B. Chaplen said, my Lord strike him not, for he will
sure strike again. Yea that will I (q^^^^ Doctor Tailor) the cause is
Christ's, and I were no (...) Christian, if I would not fight in my masters
quarrel. S^ (...) Bishop being afraid, laid his curse upon him. The fo^^^^^
day of February, Doctor Tailors They strike out D. Tailors brains at the fire.
wife and his son sup^^^^ with him in the Counter, and the next day by two of
the clock in the morning, the Sheriff of London with his officers came to the
Counter, and so brought forth D. Tailor without any light: leading him to the
Wolsacke, an Inn without Algate: where he was straightway put in a chamber,
and kept with 4. yomen of the guard, and the Sheriffs men. Where Doctor Tailor
fell down on his knees, and gave himself wholly to prayer. At the Wolsacke he
remained til xi. of the clock: at which time, the Sheriff of Essex was ready
to receive him. And so they set him on horseback within the Inn, the gates
being shut. At Burntwood they caused to be made for D. Tailor They mask D.
Tailor that he might not be known.
a close hood, with two holes for his eyes, and a slit for his mouth to breath
at. This they did that no man should know him, nor he speak to any man: which
practice they used with others.

All the way, he was very cheerful and merry, to the great woondering of the
company. At Chelmesford, the Sheriff of Suffolk met him, and took him to
his charge, and persuaded him to revolt, and drank to him of the same
condition. So did the guard, saying: on this condition, Master Doct. we al
drink to you. When they had all drunk to him, and the cup was come to him: he
stayed a little, as one studying what answer he might give: at the last he
said, master Sheriff, and my masters all, I heartily thank you for your
goodwil. I have hearkened to your words, and marked well your counsels: and to
be plain with you, I do perceive that I have been deceived my self, and am
like to deceive a great many in Hadley of their expectations. With that word
they all rejoiced: yea, good master Doctor (quoth (...) Sheriff) Gods
blessing on your heart, hold you there (...) it is the comfortablest word
that we heard you (...) yet: what? should you cast away your self in vain?
(...) a wise man's part, and I dare warrant you, you shall (...) favor.

Thus they rejoiced very much at the words and were ^^^^y merry. At the last,
good master Doctor (quoth the sheriff) what mean you by this? that you
think you have ^^ene deceived your self etc. Would you know my meaning
plainly (quoth he) I will tell you, I have been deceived, and (as I think) I
shall deceive a great many: I am as you see, a man that has a very great
carkas, which I thought should have been buried in Hadley Churchyard, if I
had died in my bed, as I well hoped I should have done. But herein I see I was
deceived: and there are a great number of woormes in Hadley Churchyard, which
should have had jolly feeding upon this carrion, which they have looked for
many a day. The worms deceived by D. Tailors burning.
But now I know, we be deceived, I, and they: for this carkas must be burnt
to ashes, and so shall they loose their bait and feeding. When the Sheriff
and his company heard him say so: they were amazed, maruelling at his
constancy. Departing thence, and coming within two miles of Hadley, he
desired to light of his Horse to make water. which done, he leapt, and fetched a
friske or twain, D. Tailor of a marvelous courage.
as men commonly do in daunsing. Why M. Doctor, quoth the sheriff, how do you
now? He answered, well God be praised, good M. sheriff, never better, for now
I know I am almost at home. And at the last, coming to Aldam Common, the place
assigned where he should suffer, and understanding it was the place, he said:
Thanked be God, I am even at home, and so lighted from his horse, and with both
his hands rent the hood from his head: and profering to speak to the people,
who prayed for him, and saluted him, one or other thrust a tipstaffe into his
mouth, and would in no wise permit him to speak. For he was threatened, and
so were others, that he should have his tongue cut out of his head, except he
would promise to keep silence at his death. When he had prayed, he kissed the
stake, and set himself into a pitch barrel, which they had set for him to
stand in. So praying, They strike out D. Tailors brains at the fire.
and calling on the name of God, he endured the torment, til one Soice with an
halbert struck him on the head, that the brains fell out, and the dead corpse
fell into the fire.

Within viij. or ix. days, after S. Gardener had given sentence against M.
Hooper, M. Rogers, M. Saunders, Doctor Tailor, and Master Bradford, being the
viij. of February, six other good men were brought before the bishops to be
examined for their Religion: Whose names were, William Pigot Butcher, St.
Knight Barber, Tho. Tomkins Weuer, Thomas Hawks Gentleman, John Lawrence
Priest, and William Hunter Prentice. From which day, Steeuen Gardener Gardener
puts of the butchering of the Saints to Boner.
would meddle no more in such kind of condemnations, but referred the whole
doing thereof to Boner Bishop of London. Who taking the matter in hand, in
the Consistory of Paul's, the Lord Mayor, and certain Aldermen sitting with
him, the ix. day of February, he read the sentence of condemnation against the
six persons, which were not executed before the month of March.

Upon the xiij. day of February, Master Robert Farrar Bishop of saint Dauies,
was sent toward saint Dauies, there to be condemned and executed.

The xviij. day of February, Queen Marie, after long delay, made full answer
to the king of Denmarkes letters: who had written two before to her, in the
behalf of Miles Couerdale, Miles Couerdale granted to the King of Denmark.
for his deliverance, whereunto she in the end yielded.

The xix. of February, there was a certain intimation printed in the name of
Boner: where charge was given to every man and woman within his Dioces, to
prepare them selves against Lent to receive reconciliation sent from pope
Julius 3. by Poole his Cardinal, and Legate de latere: and so to be absolved.

Of the vj. before mentioned condemned by Boner, Tho. Tomkins Thomas Tomkins
Martyr.
was the first that suffered, the xvj. of March 1555. Boner half a year, and
was of him most cruelly used; beaten about the face; and part of his bearde
pulled off by Boner. Wherefore he caused him to be shaven, pretending that then
he would look like a Catholic. After that, having with him M. Harpsfield, M.
Pendleton, Doctor Chadsey, M. Willerton, and other standing by, the Bishop
took Tomkins by the fingers, and held his hand directly over the flame of a
Taper having three or four weeks: supposing by the pain thereof to terrify
him, and cause him to leave off the profession of the truth. In the which
burning he never moved, till the veins shrunk, They burn Tomkins hand with
a Taper.
and the sinews burst, and the water did spirte in Master Harpsfieldes face.
In so much that Harpsfield moved with pity, desired the Bishop to stay;
saying, he had tried him enough. This burning was in the Bishops Hall at
Fulham. He was sundry times examined: The first time after he had been
imprisoned about half a year, the 8. of February. His Articles were touching
the Sacrament of the Altar.

The next day he appeared again at eight of the clock before noone, and
again the third time the same day at two of the clock in the after noone,
where remaining constant in the doctrine of the Gospel: the Bishop gave
sentence of death against him, and so being delivered to the Shiriffe of
London, was carried to Newgate, where he remained most joyous and constant
until the xvj. of March next after. Tomkins burned in Smithfield.
On which day in Smithfield he sealed up his faith in the flaming fire.

The same year the xvj. of March William Hunter of the age of nineteen years
was martyred for the testimony of the truth, he being a prentise in London, in
the first year of Queen Marie, was commanded at the Easter next followyng to
receive the Communion at a Mass by the Priest of the parish where he dwelt in
Colman street in London: which because he refused, he was threatened to be
brought before the B. of London. Wherefore his master one Th. Tailor a silk
man, fearing least he should come in danger for his sake, required W. Hunter to
depart from him: which he did, and came to Burntwood, where his Father dwelt,
with whom he remained about the space of half a quarter of a year, till being
suspected, for reading the vj. of John in the chapel of Burntwood. One Father
Otwell a sumner, and one Thomas Wood vicar of Southweild, with whom also he
disagreed in reasoning of points of the sacrament, he was complained of by the
vicar to justice Brown: but Hunter being afraid of the vicars threats, fled.
Brown sent for Hu^ters father with the Constable, and threatened him
punishment, except he would bring unto him his son. The father to satisfy the
expectation of Brown, road ij. or iij. days iourneis, and in the high way
William met with his Father: who after he had with many tears declared what
charge Brown had given him, the son said he would go home with him, to save
him harmeles whatsoever came of it. The father compelled against the son.
So he was brought to justice Brown, who after he had reasoned with him out of
the sixth of John, and could not pervert him, made a letter immediately, and sent
William Hunter with a Constable to the bishop of London: who not able to alter
Hunters mind, neither by threats nor flatteries, commanded his men to put
him in the stocks in his gatehouse, where he sat two days and nights, only
with a crust of brownebread, and a cup of water. After two days the B. assaied
him again, and finding him constant, sent him to the convict prison, and
commands the keeper to lay irons enough on him. So he continued in prison
three quarters of a year: in the which time he had been before the Bishop
five times, besides the time when he was condemned the ix. day of February in
the consistory of Paul's with five other mo. After sentence of condemnation of
them all, the Bishop called for William Hunter, and persuaded with him, saying:
if thou will yet recant, I will make thee a free man in the City, and give
thee forty pounds in good money to set up thine occupation withal: or I will
make thee Steward of my house, and I will prefer thee etc. Whereto after
William had said, he counted all wordly things but loss and dunge, in respect
of the love of Christ; with the rest he was led to Newgate, where they
remained about a month, and afterward were sent down, William to Burntwood,
and the other to other places in the Country.

Now when William was come down into the Country to Burntwood, which was the
Saturday before the Annunciation of the Virgin Mary that followed on the Monday
after, William remained till the Tuesday, because they would not put him to
death then, for the holiness of the day. In the mean time his father and mother
came and comforted him, Hunters mother encourages him to be constant.
and encouraged him, his mother saying: that she was glad that ever she was
so happy to bear such a son, who could find in his heart to loose his
life for Christ's names sake. Then William answered: for my little pain
which I shall suffer, which is but short, Christ has promised me (said he) a
crown of joy: may you not be glad of that mother? with other such words of joy
and comfort on both parts. Thus passing away saturday, Sunday, and monday: on
Tuesday morning, when it was morning, the Sheriff master Brocket called on to
set forward to the burning of William Hunter. Whose son yet did embrace and
comfort William. At the place of his martyrdom, there was a Popish priest that
endeavored to pervert him at the stake, and said unto him: as thou burnest
here, so shall thou burn in hell. To whom William answered: thou lie false
prophet, away thou false prophet, away. His brother being by, said unto him:
William, Hunters brother encourages him.
think on the passion of Christ, and be not afraid of death. To whom he
answered: I am not afraid: then lift he up his hands to heaven, and said:
Lord, Lord, Lord, receive my spirit. And casting down his head again into
the smothering smoke, he yielded up his life for the truth.

The eight of August, Anno 1553. William Sarton William Sarton.
weauer of Bristow, was brought before Dalbie Chancellor of Bristow, and by
him condemned, for holding against the sacrament of the altar. He was burned
the 18. of September, Anno 1556.

At Bedaile, a market town in Yorkshire, were two men persecuted for the
truth of the Gospel in the latter days of Queen Marie, the one named John
Suell, and the other Richard Suell: their imprisonment was so sore, that their
toes rotted off. In the end, the one of them at length yielded to hear mass,
and within three or four days after his liberty, he drowned himself in a
river running by Richmonde, called Swaile: the other endured to the end being
condemned by Doctor Dakins. Who after sentence given against the martyr, came
home to his house, and never ioyed after, but died.

Anno 1555. the xxvi. of March, Master Higbed, and Master Canston, Gentlemen
of Essex, were put to death for the testimony of the Gospel: the one at
Hornden of the hill, and the other at the parish of Thundrest. Boner perceiving
these two Gentlemen to be of woorshipfull estate: least any tumult should
thereby arise, came down himself, accompanied with Fecknam, and certain
other: and labored with fair promises and threatninges. Which when they saw
would not prevail, the B. carried them both with him to London, and with them
certain other prisoners also: which about the same time were in those quarters
apprehended. Not long after this, these prisoners were committed to straight
prison, and there attempted sundry ways by the B. and his chaplains to revoke
their opinions. At length, when no persuasion would serve, they were brought to
open examination at the Consistory at Paul's the 17. day of February, Anno
1555. Where being demanded whether they would recant, and they denying so to
do, were assigned the next day to appear again the 18. of February.

On which day, among many other things the Bishop read unto them several
Articles, and gave them respite till the next day to answer, and so committed
them to prison again. The articles did touch the real presence, and that the
godly martyrs who were burned, were heretics: with other to this effect. These
being given them in writing, the next day was assigned to them to give their
answer. Upon which day, being the first of March, they did exhibit their
aunsweres contrary to the determination of the Romish Church: and denying to
recant, they were again dismissed and commanded to appear the Wednesday
next after at two of the clock at after noone, there to receive definitive
sentence.

The next Friday they were called for again: and no hope being had of their
recantation, were again dismissed to prison, and commanded to appear the
next day in the consistory of Paul's, between one and three in the after
noone. At which hours they appearing, denied to recant, and exhibited in
writing a confession of their faith: and said, they would not depart there
from. After which words the Bishop began to pronounce sentence against
them. Which when he began to do: M. Canston complained for that he would
not answer to their confession, but condemn them in such sort: and so
appealed from him to the Cardinal. Then Doctor Smith said, he would answer
it: but the Bishop not suffering him to speak, willed Harpesfield to say his
mind, for the stay of the people: who took their confession in hand, but
answered no one sentence thereof. That done, the Bishop pronounced sentence:
which they cheerfully received, and were delivered to the Sheriffs, and so by
them sent to Newgate, where they remained in consultation foureteen days.
Which days expyred, the three and twentieth day of March, they were at four
of the clock in the morning delivered to the Sheriff of Essex, and so brought
to their several places of burning, M. Higbed and M. Canston burned.
which they did most constantly endure the six and twentieth of the same
month.

The same year the xxviij. day of March, William Pigot, and Steeuen Knight of
Maulden, Pigot and Knight Martyrs.
two of the six that were condemned by Boner the ninth of February, were both
(after their appearinges) burned for the testimony of the truth. Pigot at
Braintrie, and Knight at Maulden. Their Articles and aunsweres were like to
those of Tho. Tomkins and oath Martyrs, touching the Sacrament of the Altar.
etc. er

The next day, being the nine and twentieth day, I. Laurence John Laurence
a Priest, who was condemned with other, was brought to Colchester, and there
burned sitting in a Chair, for that he was through evil usage and heavy
irons, not able to go.

The next day after being the xxx. day of March, Robert Farrar B. of S. Dauies
Robert Farrar B of S. Dauies burned.
in Wales, was burned for the testimony of the truth: he was the next B. that
suffered after M. Hooper: he was called before the B. of Winchester with M.
Hooper, M. Rogers, M. Bradford, M. Saunders, and other aforesaid, the fourth of
February, on the which day he should also with them have been condemned: but
it pleased them to defer it till the xiiij. day of the same month of
February.

After he had received many checkes and taunts of Winchester, the B. of
Worcester M. Bourne etc. being found constant and resolute in the truth, he
was dimissed to prison, where he remained uncondemned, til the 14. of February:
and then was sent down into Wales, there to receive sentence of condemnation.
Who then upon the 26. of February, in the Church of Carmarthen, being brought
before Griffith Leyson Esquier, Sheriff of the County of Carmarthen, was
there personally presented before Henry Bishop of Saint Dauis, and Constantine
the public Notarie: which Henry discharged the Sheriff, and receives him to
his own custody, and committed him to the keeping of Owen Jones. And thereupon
exhorting him to recant, ministered articles unto him touching priests
marriage, and the Sacrament of the Altar: which he refused to answer unto,
till he saw his Commission. Which also he refused to do at another
examination, the last of February. Wherefore the Bishop pronounced him
contumax, and pro confesso, and committed him to his former keeper, til Monday
next, being the fourth of March, there to appear again betwixt one and two of
the clock. At which time appearing, he yielded an answer, and required a copy
of his Articles, with respite to answer. Which was granted: and the Thursday
next assigned him betwixt one and three. Where, appearing at the time, he
refused to subscribe. After that he had twice more appeared, and constantly
persisted in the defense of the truth, (notwithstanding he made his appeal
from him to the Cardinal) the Bishop pronounced sentence against him, and
after he had disgraded him, he committed him to the Secular power: who brought
him to the place of execution in the Town of Carmarthen. Where he in the
Markette place, on the South side of the Market Cross, the xxx. day of March,
most constantly gave testimony to the truth in the flaming fire.

A little before Master Farrars Farrars words to a gentleman at his death.
death, one Richard Jones a Knights son, coming to Master Farrar, seemed to
lament the painfulnes of the death he had to suffer. To whom the Bishop
answered again to this effect: saying, that if he saw him once to stir in
the pains of his burning, he should then give no credit to his doctrine:
which also fell out, for he never moved, but continued still, holding up his
stumpes burning, till the time that one Richard Gravel, with a staff dashed
him upon the head, and so stroke him down.

About the same month of March, one Rawlins White Rawlins Whit
a Fisherman, was burned at Cardiffe, for the testimony of Jesus. He being
desirous of knowledge, (him self not able to read) set his son to school,
to learn to read: and used to have him read unto him the Scriptures, and
other good books. Whereby he greatly profited in knowledge, and did instruct,
and convert diverse. In which good course Father Rawlins continued, til at last
he was taken by the officers of the Town, as a man suspected of heresy. Upon
which apprehension, he was conuented before the Bishop of Landaffe: by whom
(after diverse combats) he was committed to prison in Chepstowe, with such
liberty, as Rawlins might, (if he would) have escaped: but that
notwithstanding, he continued still, and at the last was removed to the Castle
of Cardiff, where he remained a year, passing ye time in prayer, and
exhortation to his friends, and those that came to visit him. After a year, the
Bishop caused him to be brought unto his own house by Chepstowe: where (after
many assayes) perceiving he could not prevail, gave him a day of
determination: which being expired, the Bishop calls for him again; and
after exhortation to recant, he proceeds to the sentence of condemnation:
saving before he said, he would pray for Rawlins, that God would send some
spark of grace upon him. I thank you heartily for your gentleness (says
Rawlins) and if so be that your request he godly, and lawful, and that you
pray as you should pray, without all doubt God will hear you. And therefore my
Lord, go to: do you pray to your God, Rawlins God and the bishops God.
and I will pray to my God. I know that my God will both hear my prayer, and
perform my desire.

After prayer the Bishop said, Now Rawlins, how is it with thee? etc. Surely
(said he) my Lord, Rawlins you left me, and Rawlins you find me, and by Gods
grace Rawlins I will continue. Certainly if your petitions had been good, and
lawful, God would have heard them: but you honor a false God, and pray not as
you should pray, and therefore has not God granted your desire. But I am a
poor simple man, as you see, and God has heard my complaint: and I trust he
will strengthen me in his own cause. When their prayer would not prevail,
they advised to say a mass, to see what that would work. In the mean time
Rawlins be took him to prayer in a secret place, till such time as the Priest
came to the sacring. When Rawlins heard the sacring bell ring, he rose out of
his place, and came to the quire door, and standing a while, turned himself to
the people, speaking these words: Good people, if there be at the least but
one brother among you, the same one shall bear witness at the day of
judgment, that I how not to this Idol, meaning the host that the Priest
held over his head. Mass being ended, and Rawlins persisting constant, the
Bishop proceeds to sentence, and having condemned him, dismisseth him to be
carried again to Cardiffe, there to be put into the prison of the town,
called Clockemacell, a very dark loathsome, and most vile prison: where Rawlins
passed the time in singing of Psalms.

About three or four weeks after, he having intelligence that his time of
death drew near, sends forthwith to his wife, and wills her by the
messenger, that in any wise she should make ready, Rawlins wedding garments.
and send unto him his wedding garments, meaning a shirte, which afterward he
was burned in. Which was accomplished according to his mind.

Now apparelled in his wedding garments, when ye hour was come, and he passed
to his death, in the way his poor wife and children stood weeping, and making
lamentation: which so pierced his heart, that he let fall tears from his
eyes: but soon after, as though he had misliked his infirmity, began to be
angry with himself: insomuch that striking his breast with his hand, he used
these words: Ah flesh, stayest thou me so? would thou feign prevail?
Rawlins a worthy martyr.
Well, I tell thee, do what thou can, thou shall not by Gods grace have the
victory. By this time he came to the stake, and going toward it, he fell
down upon his knees and kissed the ground: and in rising again, the earth a
little sticking on his face, he said these words: Earth unto earth and dust
unto dust: thou art my mother, and to thee shall I return. Then went he
cherefully, and very joyfully to the stake, and set his back close thereunto:
and when he had stood there a while, he cast his eye upon the Reporter of
this History, calling him unto him, and said, I feel a great fighting betwixt
the Flesh and the Spirit: and the Flesh would very feign have his swinge,
and therefore I pray you when you seem any thing tempted, hold your finger up
to me, and I trust I shall remember my self. After the Smith had made him fast
to the Stake, according as he had required him, being afraid of his
infirmity, and the Officers began to lay wood to him with straw and reed,)
he himself as far as he could reach, would caught the same, and very
cheerfully disposed it about his body. When all things were ready, then
stepped up a Priest, addressing himself to speak, and to pervert the people.
Which when Rawlins Rawlins.
perceived, he beckened with his hand to the people, and said: come hither
good people, and hear not a false prophet preach. And then said unto the
preacher: oh thou naughty hypocrite, do thou presume to prove thy false
doctrine by Scripture? Look in the text what follows: did not Christ say,
do this in remembrance of me: after which words the Priest being amazed,
held his peace. Then some that stood by, cried: put too fire, put to fire:
which being put to, he bathed his hands so long in the flame, till the sinews
shrunk, and the fat dropped away: and once he did as it were wipe his face
with one of them. All this while (which was somewhat long) he cried with a loud
voice: O Lord receive my soul, until he could not open his mouth. He was at
the same time of his death, about 60. years of age.

About this time, Anno 1555. the 28. of March, Queen Marie was fully resolved,
and declared so much to four of her Counsel, to restore the Abbey lands
again to the Church. And the month before, the 19. of February, the Bishop
of Ely, with the Lord Montague, and viij. score horse, were sent as Ambassadors
from the king and Queen, unto Rome: very likely, for the cause of Abbey
lands, as it appears by the sequel. For it was not long after, but the Pope
did set forth in print, a Bull of excommunication, for all manner such persons
without exception, that kept any of the Church lands. The P. excommunicateth
those that hold Abbey lands. Pope Julius the monster dies.
And also, all such as did not put the same Bull in execution.

About the latter end of this Month, Pope Julius dyed, a monster of nature:
who missing on a time his Porke, and answer being made that his Physician
forbad it, because of his gout: bursting out into a rage, he uttered these
words: bring me my porke flesh in the despite of God.

An other time missing his cold Peacocke, Popes Peacocke.
most horribly blasphemyng God, he brake into a rage. Whereupon when one of his
cardinals sitting by, labored to pacify him; what (said Julius ye Pope) if God
was so angry for one apple, that he cast our first parents out of Paradise
therefore: A blasphemous Pope.
why may not I being his vicar, be angry then for my Peacocke, sithence a
Peacocke is a greater matter then an apple? He confirmed the idol of
Lauretane.

Upon Shrouesunday, which was about the iij. of March, the same year a priest
in Kent, named Nightingall, parson of Crondall besides Canturbury, rejoicing at
the alteration of religion, and reading to the people the popes Bull of pardon
that was sent into England, he said, he thanked God that ever he had lived
to see that day: adding moreover, that he believed that by the virtue of that
Bull, he was as clear of sin as the night that he was borne: and immediately
upon the same fell suddenly down out of the Pulpit, Gods judgment.
and never stirred hand nor foot, but so died. Testified by Robert Austen of
Cartham, who both heard and saw the same: and it is witnessed also of the whole
country round about.

In the month of April and the second day, John Awcocke died in prison, and
was buried in the fields.

The first of April Anno 1555. a letter was sent to the Shiriffe of Kent, to
apprehend Thomas Woodgate, and William Maynard for preaching secreetly, and to
send them up to the Counsel. The vij. day of the same month was sent another
letter to the said Shiriffe, for the apprehension of one Hardwich, who went
about with a boy with him, preaching from place to place.

The fiftenth of April, a letter was directed to Sir Nicholas Hare, and sir
Thomas Cornewallis, willing them to examine Master Flower alias Branch, what
he meant to were about his neck written Deum time, Vitium fuge? Deum time,
Vitium fuge.
and whom else he knew to wear the like: praying them also to speak to Boner
B. of London, speedely to proceed against him for his Religion, according to
the Laws, and that the Justices of peace of Middlesex, should likewise
proceed against him for shedding of blood in the Church, according to the
Statute: so as if he continue in his opinion he might be executed, at the
farthest by the latter end of this week: and that his right hand the day
before his execution, or the same day might be stricken of.

The two and twentieth of April there was a letter sent to the Justices of
peace of Middlesex, with a writ for the execution of the said Flower. M. Flower.


The xxix. of April Master Robert Hornbye servant then to the Lady
Elizabeth, was conuented before the Counsel for his religion, and constantly
standing thereto, was committed to the Marshalsea.

Anno 1555. the xxiiij. of April George Marsh George Marsh
suffered most constantly at Winchester for the testimony of the truth. For a
while he was Curate to Laurence Saunders: in which condition he continued for a
space. But at length by detection of certain adversaries, he was apprehended
and kept in close prison by George Cotes then Bishop of Chester, in straight
prison in Chester in the bishops house about the space of four months, being
not permitted to have relief and comfort of his friends.

The Wednesday before Palmesunday, he voluntarily presented himself (being
sought for) before Master Barton, who sent him the next day before the Earl of
Darbie and his Counsel at Latha^. Where appearing before them, and not
answering to their contentment touching the Sacrament of the Altar, he was
committed to ward in a cold wide stone house: where he lay two nights without
any bed, saving a few canuasse tentclothes, and a pair of sheets without
woollen clothes: and so continued he till Palmesunday, being occupied in prayer
and godly meditation.

On Palmsunday at after dinner, he appeared again: and coming with the Vicar
of Prescot, the Vicar made report to the Earl, that the answer which he made,
was sufficient for a beginner, unto such time as he should learn farther.
Wherewith the Earl was very well pleased: and so after few words, commanded he
should have a bed, with fire, and liberty to go among his servants, so he would
not hurt them with his communication.

Thus he departed more troubled then before, because he had not with more
boldness confessed Christ: but in such sort as the adversaries thought they
might prevail against him. So he prayed to God for more strength. And after a
day or two, confessed more plainly, and more boldly in such sort, as the Vicar
was not well pleased.

After which, within a day or two came to him again M. Moore, bringing with
him certain articles, whereunto Doctor Crome had subscribed in the days of
king Henry the viij. requiring him also to subscribe: whereto he would in no
sort agree, and so he departed. Within a short space after, on shrouethurseday,
the Vicar sent for him again, saying: my Lord would be at a short point with
him, if he would not subscribe to 4. articles: whereof three tended to the
mass, and the fourth touching confession.

These articles he denied to subscribe unto, and was committed to the Porters
ward: where he continued till Lowsunday. On which day after dinner, his keeper
Richard Scot signified unto him, that 2. young men came to carry him to
Lancaster. And so was he carried thither by them: and appeared at the sessions
among malefactors, and was thrice arraigned among thieves, with yrons on his
feet: and with boldness confessed Christ.

Within few days after, Marsh was removed from La^caster, and coming to
Chester, was sent for of D. Cotes, the B. to appear before him in his hall, no
body being present but they twain. Where the B. communed with him, and
labored to pervert him: but all in vain. And after he had taken his pleasure
in punishing him, and reuiling him, he caused him to be brought forth into a
chapel in the Cathedral church in Chester, called our Ladies Chapel, before
him, at two of the clock in the after noone: who was there placed in a chair
for that purpose, and Fulke Dutton mayor of that city D. Wall, and other
priests assisting him. And after they had caused him to take an oath, they
ministered articles unto him. To which he answered according to the doctrine
taught in king Edwards days: which being registered, he was returned again to
his prison. Within three weeks after he appeared again: and after many vain
persuasions to recant, he received sentence of condemnation, and was carried
away, and put into a dark prison, where he had small comfort of any creature
til his death. Yet some of the citizens that feared God, would comfort him at a
hole in a wall of the city, and give him money.

When the day appointed came that he should suffer: ye sheriffs of the city,
Amry and Cooper, with their officers took him out of ye Northgate where he was
prisoner, who came with the^ most meekly with a lock on his foot, and being at
the place of his death, he refused the pardon of the Queen, which was offered
him if he would recant. Which he said he would gladly accept: but forasmuch as
it tended to pluck him from God, he would not receive it upon such condition.
So after he had prayed, he put off his clothes to his shirt, and being fastened
to the post, by reason the fire was unskillfully made, he suffered with great
patience grievous torment. So that when he had a long time bin tormented in the
fire without moving, having his flesh so broyled and puffed up, that it covered
the chain wherewith he was fastened: he therefore was supposed to be dead.
Notwithstanding suddenly he spread abroad his arms, George Marsh of great
patience.
saying: Father of heaven have mercy on me: and so yielded. Upon this ye people
said, he was a martyr. And the Bish. to quiet them, shortly after made a
sermon, affirming that he was an Heretic, etc. and a firebrand in hell. Whom
in recompense not long after, the hand of God did so strike, that he dyed (as
it was thought) burned of an Harlotte. This Martyr did write diverse and sundry
books out of prison.

The xxiiij. of April, William Flower, sometime a Monk of Ely, and a Priest,
but afterward being married, lived by teaching of children, was put to death
for the testimony of the truth, and had his hand first stricken of, for
striking a Priest saying mass. Coming from Lambeth (where he dwelt) about
ten or eleven of the clock in the forenoone, into Saint Margarets Church at
Westminster: where he finding and seeing a priest, called John Cheltam,
ministering the Sacrament of the Altar to the people, therewith being offended
in his conscience, did strike and wound him upon the head, and also upon the
arm and hand with his woodknife: W. Flower wounds a priest at mass.
the Priest having the same time in his hand a Challice, with certain
consecrated hosts therein, which were sprinkled with the blood of the same
Priest. Which act he him self after confessed to have been evil done, and
therefore would submit himself to the punishment: but as concerning his
belief in the Sacrament, he would not submit himself to the Popish
administration.

Upon this act William Flower being first apprehended, was laid in the
Gatehouse at Westminster, where he had given two groates before, the same day
to one: saying, he would shortly come to him with as many Irons as he could
bear. Afterward he was conuented before Boner his Ordinary, the xix. of April
1555. Where (after the Bishop had sworn him upon a book, according to his
ordinary manner) he ministered Articles unto him, and labored at three several
appearings, to reduce Flower to his superstition, from the truth of the
Gospel. To whom when Flower answered: do what you will, I am at a point, for
the heavens shall as soon fall, as I will forsake mine opinion, etc. The Bishop
called for depositions of certain witnesses, and pronounced sentence against
him.

Upon the xxiiij. day of April he was brought to the place of Martyrdom, which
was in Saint Margarets Churchyard at Westminster, where the fact was
committed. And there coming to the stake whereat he should be burned; first
he makes his prayer unto God, with a confession of the Christian faith. At the
striking off of his hand he did not once shrink, but once he stirred a little
his shoulders. And thus fire was set unto him, who burning there, cried with a
loud voice three times: Oh Son of God, have mercy upon me. And when his voice
failed, he held up his arms, till he died, being stricken down for want of
fire sufficient, (where his nether parts were burned) yet he being in the
fire, his tongue moved in his head.

The iij. of May, a letter was sent to George Colt, and T. Daniel, to make
search for, and to apprehend I. Bernard and I. Welsh, who used to repair to
Sudburie: and carrying about with them the bones of Pigot that was burned,
showed them to the people, persuading them to be constant in his religion. This
day St. Aps was committed to little ease in the Tower, there to remain two or
three days, until further examination.

The xij. day, Master T. Rosse Preacher, was by the Counsels letters, delivered
from the Tower, to the Sheriff of Norfolk, to be delivered to the B. of
Norwich, to reduce him to recant, or to proceed against him according to law.

The xvj. day a letter was sent to ye L. treasorer, signifying what the Lords
had done for Rosse, and that order should be given according to his Lordships
request, for letters to the Bishops. And as for Aps (whom the Lieftenant of the
Tower reported to be mad) his L. perceiving the same to be true, should commit
him to Bedlem, and there to remain until their further order.

The xxvj. a letter was sent to the L. Treasorer, to confer with the B. of
London, and the Justices of peace in that County where they were to be
executed, that were already condemned for religion, and upon agreement of
places, to give order for their execution accordingly.

The 28. a letter was sent to the L. Treasuror, Queen Mary's joyful
deliverance of child.
to cause speedy preparation to be made of such money, as was appointed for such
persons as should carry the joyful tidinges of Queen Mary's good deliverance
of child.

The 29. day was a letter directed to sir Frauncis Inglefield, to make search
for one John D. at London, and to apprehend him, and send him to the Counsel,
and to make search for such papers and books as might touch the same D. or one
Benger.

Upon the 30. day of May suffered together in Smithfield John Cardmaker
otherwise called Tailor, prebendarie of the Church of Wels, and John Warn
vpholster, of the parish of Saint John in Walbrooke. Cardmaker was an obseruant
Friar, afterward a married minister, and in King Edwardes days appointed to
be reader in Paul's. Where the Papists were so much grieved at him for his
doctrine, that in his reading they cut and mangled his gown with their knives.
He being apprehended in the beginning of Queen Mary's days, with Master
Barlow bishop of Bath was brought to London and laid in the Fleeter King
Edwards laws yet being in force till the Parliament ended, which delivered the
Bishops authority, and power over the professors of the Gospel. At which time
these two were both brought before Winchester and other commisioners, who
answered in such sort unto the^, that Winchester with his fellow commissioners
allowed them for catholic, glad to have a forged example of a shrinking
brother: which also they objected against others, commending the soberness of
them twain. This notwithstanding, Barnard was led again to the Fleet. From
whence he afterward being delivered, did by exile constantly bear witness to
the truth. Cardmaker was conveyed to the Counter in Bredstreete, the Bishop of
London procuring it to be published, that he should shortly be delivered,
after that he had subscribed to Transubstantiation, and certain other
Articles.

To the same prison where Cardmaker was, Laurence Saunders was brought, after
sentence of death was given against him, and they had great comfort one of
another. After whose departure Cardmaker remained alone, bayted of the
Papists. Against whom Doctor Martine took upon him to be a chief dooer by
writing, whom Cardmaker did substantially confute. When the Bishop perceived
no hope to pervert these constant servants of God, he pronounced sentence
against them. And upon the xxx. day of May, John Cardmaker with John Warn
were brought by the Shiriffes to ye place where they should suffer. Who being
come to the stake; first the Shiriffes called Cardmaker aside, and talked with
him secreetly, so long that in the mean time Warn had made his prayers, was
chayned to the stake, and had reed set about him, so that nothing wanted
but firing: but still abode Cardmaker with the Shiriffes. The people which
before had heard that Cardmaker would recant, and beholding this manner of
doing, were in a merueylous dumpe and sadness, thinking in deed that Cardmaker
would now recant at the burning of Warn. At length Cardmaker departed from the
Shiriffes and came toward the stake, and in his garments, as he was kneeling
down made a long prayer in silence to himself, yet the people confirmed
themselves in their fantasy of his recanting, seeing him in his garments
praying secreetly and no resemblance of any burning.

His prayers being ended, he rose up, put of his clothes unto his shirte, went
with bold courage to the stake and kissed it sweetly, he took Warn by the
hand, and comforted him heartily, Cardmaker and Warn martyrs.
and so also gave himself to be bound to the stake most gladly.

The people seeing this so suddenly done, contrary to their fearful
expectation, as men delivered out of great doubt: cried out for joy (with so
great a showte as has not lightly bin heard a greater) saying, God be praised:
The people encourage Cardmaker at his death.
the Lord strengthen thee Cardmaker, the Lord Jesus receive thy spirit: and
this continued till the executioner put fire to them. Which being done, they
both passed through the fire to their eternal rest.

The twelfth day a letter was sent to the Lord Treasurer, to cause writtes to
be made to the Sheriff of Sussex, for the burning and executing of Dericke a
Bruer at Jews, and other two: one in Stainings, and the other at Chichester.

The 23. of June, a letter was sent to Boner to examine a report, given to the
Council, of 4. parishes within the Sooken of Essex, that should still use the
English service: and to punish the offenders, if any such were.

With master Cardmaker and John Warn, upon the same day, and in the same
company, and for the same cause were also condemned John Ardeley and John
Simson, which was the 25. of May. They were both husbandmen in the parish of
Wigborow in Essex, and almost both of one age, save that Simson was of the age
of 34. and the other of 30. Valiant martyr Ioh. Ardley
John Ardley being urged by the B. to recant, said boldly unto the B. with
many other words of like constancy: If every hair of my head were a man, I
would suffer death in the faith that I am now in. So the 25. of May, they both
received sentence of condemnation, and were both in one day put to death in
Essex, the 10. of June, John Simson John Simson martyr.
at Rotchford, and John Ardley at Rayley: which they patiently endured for
Christ's sake.

About the same time, one John Tooly John Tooly.
was executed as a fellon, for railing on a Spaniard at S. James. And at the
gallows he defied the Pope and his indulgences: and said, he trusted only
on the merits of Christ: with other words against the Pope. For which, after he
had been buried, the mitered prelates caused him to be taken up out of his
grave (after they had excommunicated him for want of appearance) and committed
him to the Sheriff of London to be burned the 4. of June.

Thomas Hawks was one of the 6. men condemned in one day of Boner, the 9 of
February: and put to death the tenth of June. He was borne in Essex, and by
profession a Courtier, and servant to the Earl of Oxforde, till God took King
Edward out of this world. He had borne to him a son, whose baptism he
deferred to the third week, for that he would not have him baptized after
the Papisticall manner. For which cause, the adversaries laid hands on him, and
brought him to the Earl of Oxford. The Earl sends him up to London, with
letters to Boner. With whom Boner after much communication, and conference of
his Chaplens with master Hawks, he remained at Fulham: and the B. the next
day departed to London, and came home again at night.

Upon the monday morning very early, the B. called for him again: and there
Harpesfield Archdeacon of London, reasoned with master Hawks touching
Baptism, and the mass etc. But Hawks remained constant, and withstood him
with mighty power of the Scriptures: as also the B. himself Fecknam and
Chadsey, at four sundry times after.

The first day of July, the B. did call him himself from the Porters lodge,
and commanded him to prepare himself to prison: and so was he sent to be
kept close prisoner in the gate house, where he remained thirteen days: and
then sent Boner two men to know how he did, and whether he were the same man.
To whom he answered constantly for the truth. After which answer, he heard no
more of the bishop, till the 3. of September: on which day he was privately
examined again of Boner, and would have had his hand to a bill of articles:
to whom when Hawks had said; it should neither come into his hand, heart nor
mind, the bishop wrapped it up and put it into his bosom, and in a great anger
went his way, and took his horse and rode on visitation into Essex, and Hawks
went to prison again.

After these private conferences, persuasions, and long debatings, M. Hawks
was cited to appear in the B. consistory the viij. of February: and again the
ix. Where being exhorted by the B. with many fair words, to return again to
the bosom of the mother Church: after that he had said to the Bishop: no my
Lord, that will I not, for if I had an hundredth bodies, I would suffer them all
to be torn in pieces rather then I will abjure or recant: at the last, Boner
reads the sentence of death upon him: and so was he dismissed to prison
again, till the 10. of June. Then was he committed to the hands of the Lord
Rich: who being assisted, had him into Essex to suffer martyrdom at Coxhall.
Certain of his friends prayed him to give the^ a sign, whether the pain of
burning was so great, that a man might not there keep his patience in the
fire, which thing he promised them to do. That if the pain were tolerable,
then he would lift up his hands above his head toward heaven before he
gave up the Ghost. Which thing he performed unto them. For after he had
continued a long time in the fire, and when his speech was taken away by the
violence of the flame, his skin also drawn together, and his fingers
consumed with the fire; that now all men thought certainelye that he had been
gone: Hawks gives a sign to his friends.
then sodeinly he reached up both his hands, (burning on a light fire) over
his head to the living God, and so with great rejoicing (as it seemed) did
strike or clappe them three several times together. Hawks writ diverse
comfortable epistles.
At which sight the people gave a marvelous showte. And so the blessed Martyr
straightway sinking down into the fire, gave up the ghost. He wrote diverse
comfortable Epistles.

The xxvj. of April Thomas Wattes of Byllirica in Essex a linen draper was
apprehended and brought before the Lord Rich and other Commissioners at
Chelmesford, who after short communication had with him, sent him up to Boner,
who after four appearances and much laboring of him to recant, in the end
pronounced sentence against him, and delivered him to the Shiriffes of London:
by whom he was sent to Newgate, where he remained till the ninth of June: or
as some record, till the xxij. of May. At which time he was carried to
Chelmesford, and there was brought to Scots house, keeping an In, where they
were at meat with Hawks and the rest that came down to their burning. They
prayed together both before and and after their meat. Wats went and prayed
privately to himself, Tho. Wats martyr.
and afterward came to his wife and six children, being there (two of which
company offered to burn with him,) and comforted him: and when he had kissed
them all, was carried to the fire. Where he having kissed the stake said unto
my Lord Rich: beware my Lord, beware, for you do against your conscience, etc.
And so patiently he ended in the Lords quarrel.

In the beginning of this moneto of June, the time was thought to be nigh of
Queen Mary's Queen Mary proved not with child.
travail: but their expectation was deceived, and the Prelates and their
favorers confounded: so that they dealt with one Isabell Malt dwelling in
Aldersgate street in Horn Alley, to help the matter. Who before witnesses
made this declaration: that she being delivered of a man child, upon
Whitsunday in the morning, the xj of June, there came to her the L. North and
another Lord, to her unknown, dwelling about Old Fishstreete. Who demanded
of her, if she would part from her child, and would swear that she never had,
nor knew any such child. Which if she would, her son should (they said) be
well provided for, and she should take no care for it. With many fair offers,
if she would part with her child.

After that came other women also, of whom, one (she said) should have been
the Rocker: T. Malt should have bin Queen Mary's child.
but she would not part with her Son, who was at the writing of this History
alive, of the age of xiij. years and upward, and called Timothy Malt.

About this time came out a Book called a Caveat for England, A Caveat for
England.
giving warning to Englishmen of the practices of the Spaniardes, and restoring
of Abbey lands. Whereupon, came forth a strait Proclamation against any book
or writing, that should empaire the Popes dignity: whereby great peril grew
unto diverse people.

With Thomas Hawks were sent down three other to be burned for the testimony
of the truth. Nicholas Chamberlain Nicholas Cha^berlaine.
at Colchester, the xiiij. of June. Thomas Summer Th. Summer.
at Maningtree, the xv. of June. William Bamforde, W. Bamford.
alias Butler, at Norwich, the same xv of the Month of June. All which men
patiently and constantly endured the torment for his names sake.

Within iij. days after that Master Bradforde had saved M. Bourne, who
preached a seditious Sermon at Paul's Cross, he was sent for to the Tower,
where the Queen was then, to appear there before the Counsel. Where he was
charged with the act of saving Bourne, which act they called seditious: and
also objected against him for preaching: and so by them he was committed, first
to the Tower, and afterward to the Kings Bench: and after his condemnation,
to the Counter. He was a man of singular piety, and great learning, and a
special pattern of all virtue, where he became.

Bishop Farrar being in the kings Bench, after much laboring with, had
promised the Papists to receive the Sacrament of the Altar with them at Easter
in one kind. Then it happened (by Gods providence) on Easter even, the day
before he should do it, that M. Bradforde was brought to the kings Bench,
prisoner. Where he reclaimed M. Farrar, that he did not satisfy the Papists
in receiving, as he had purposed. When the Keepers wife had brought him word
he should on the morrow be had to newgate, and so to be burned, he put off his
cap, and lifted up his eyes to heaven, and said: Bradford rejoices at the
news of his Martyrdom.
I thank God for it, for I have looked for the same a long time, and therefore
it comes now unto me not suddenly, but as a thing waited for every day, and
every hour: and the Lord make me worthy thereof. And so (thanking her) he
departed up into his Chamber, and went secretelie him self, and prayed a long
time above: and spent the evening in prayer, and other good exercises with his
friends.

The time they carried him to Newgate, was about xi. or xij. of the clock in
the night, for fear of the people. And the next morning at nine of the clock,
he was brought into Smithfield: whither (as he went) there came to him a
brother in law of his, called R. Beswicke, and took M. Bradford by the hand.
Which when Woodrooffe (being Sheriff) did behold, he came and brake M.
Beswickes head, that the blood ran about his shoulders. Being come to the
place of execution, he fell flat to the ground, secretly making his
prayers to almighty God. Then rising up again, and putting off his clothes
unto his shirte, he went to the stake, and (holding up his hands, and casting
his countenance to heaven) said thus: O England, England repent thee of thy
sins; beware of Idolatry; beware of false Christ's; take heed they do not
deceive you. With which words the sheriff was greatly offended. So (having
comforted I. Leaf, that suffered at the same Stake with him) embracing the
Reeds, he said thus: Straight is the way, and narrow is the Gate that leads
to eternal salvation, and few there be that find it. M. Bradfords words at
the stake.
And so constantly he ended this mortal life.

He remained in the Tower of London (before his remoouing to other Prisons)
from the Month of August, in the year of our Lord, one thousand five hundred
fifty three, to the 22. of January Anno 1555. upon which day he was called out
to examination before Stephen Gardener and other commissioners: before whom he
appeared three times, and had great reasoning touching the real presence with
him, with Boner, and Worcester: and at the last was condemned by Winchester,
the last of January. Which sentence being pronounced, he fell down on his
knees, and heartily thanked God, that he counted him worthy to suffer for his
sake.

After condemnation diverse conferred with him, as Boner, Willerton, Creswell,
Harding, Harpsfielde, and other mo: as Doctor Heath archbishop of York, Day
Bishop of Chichester, Alphonso the Kings confessor, and another Spanish
Friar: Doctor Weston, Doctor Pendleton etc.

With master Bradford was burned one John Lease, John Leaf 19. year old,
burned with Bradford.
an apprentice, of the age of nineteen years. Who when two bills were sent
unto him into the Counter: the one containing a recantation, and the other his
confession, to know to which of them he would put his hand to. First hearing
the byll of recantation read unto him, (because he could not read nor write
himself,) that he refused: and when the other was read unto him, which he
well liked of: insteede of a pen, he took a pin, and so pricking his hand,
sprinkled the blood upon the same bill: willing the Reader thereof to show the
B. that he had sealed the same with his blood already. And so being condemned,
John Leaf, a notable young man, a martyr.
he suffered patiently with M. Bradford.

Within half a year after, God did so strike the forenamed sheriff, Master
Woodrooffe, which so cruelly handled M. Bradforde, Gods judgment.
that his right side being stricken with a palsy, he so remained till his
dying day, eight years together.

Master Bradford wrote a whole volume of Letters, Bradfordes Letters.
to sundry persons, out of prison. And greatly strengthened, and comforted
many: to the City of London, to Cambridge into Lankesshire, and Chesshire, to
the town of Walden, with a number other to private persons. The next day after
M. Bradford and John Leaf did suffer in Smithfeeld, William Munge priest died
in prison at Maidstone, being there in bonds for religion, and like to have
suffered if he had lived.

Upon the iij. of Iulie Anno 1555. died one James Treuisam in the parish of S.
Margaret in Lothberie, and was borne upon a table without coffin or any thing
else, into Moore-feeld and there buried. The same night the body was cast up
above the ground, and his sheet taken from him, and he left naked. After this,
the owner of the field seeing him, buried him again. The dead body summoned to
appear to answer.
And a fortnight after, the sumner came to his grave, and summoned him to
appear at Paul's before his ordinary, to answer such thing as should be
laid against him.

The 13. of July, John Bland parson of Adesham in Kent, I. Frankesh, Nicholas
Sheterden, and Humfrey Middleton were all four burned together at Canterbury
Four martyrs in Canterbury.
for one cause: whereof Frankesh and Bland were ministers and preachers. He was
twice before put in prison for the Gospel, and by suite of friends delivered:
but because he could not keep silence in his liberty, but preach unto the
people, he was the third time imprisoned.

The xiij or xiiij. of February, he was sent to Canterbury jail, where he
lay x. weeks, and then was bayled, and bound to appear at the next Sessions
at Canterbury. But the matter being exhibited to the Spiritual Court, there
it was heard. So that the xviij. of May he was examined by Harpsfielde: and
again the xxi. And from them tossed to the Sessions, at Greenewich, the xviij.
and xix. of February. And after much reasoning with the Commissarie, and other
of the Spiritual Court, he was condemned the xxv. day of June, by the S. of
Dover, R. Thornton, sometimes a Professor assisted by the Commissarie, Robert
Cellius, and the archdeacon Nicholas Harpsfield. The same day were the rest
before named condemned, and suffered joyfully together at Canturburie, the xij.
of July, at two stakes, al in one fire.

The same month of July, next after the suffering of the Kentishmen above
named, Nicholas Hall bricklayer, and Christopher Wade Nicholas Hall,
Christopher Wade martyrs
of Dartford suffered: and were condemned by Maurice B. of Rochester, about ye
last day of the month of June. Nicholas Hall was burned at Rochester, about
the xix. of July. In which month of July three other more were condemned by
Maurice: whose names were Ioane Breach widow, John Horpoll of Rochester, and
Margerie Polley.

Christopher Wade of Dartford in the County of Kent lynen draper, was
appointed to be burned at Dartford. About x. of the clock, the Shiriffe
brings Wade pinioned, and by him one Margerie Polley Margerie Polley
comfort Wade.
of Tunbridge both singing a Psalm. Which Margerie, so soon as she spied a
great multitude gathered about the place where she should suffer, waiting her
coming, she said unto Wade very loud and cheerfully: you may rejoice Wade,
to see such a company gathered to celebrate your marriage this day. Wade coming
to the stake took it in his arms embracing it, and kissed it: and being
settled thereto, his hands and eyes lift up to heaven: He spoke with a
cheerful and loud voice, the last verse of the 86. psalm: Show some good
toke^ upon me O Lord, Wades prayer.
that they which hate me, may see it, and be ashamed, because thou Lord have
helped me, and comforted me. Near unto the stake approached a Friar inte^ding
some matter, while Wade was a praying. Whom when he spied, he cried earnestly
to the people to beware of the doctrine of the whore of Babylon: with such
vehemency, that the Friar withdrew himself without speaking any word. The^
reeds being set about him he pulled and embraced them in his arms, always
with his hands making a hole against his face, that his voice might be heard:
which they perceiving that were his tormentors, always cast faggots at ye same
hole. Which he notwithstanding still (as he could) put off, his face being hurt
with ye end of a faggot cast thereat. Then fire being put to him, he cried unto
God often: Lord Jesus receive my soul. And being dead and altogether roasted,
his hands were held over his head, as though he had been stayed with a prop.

The 22. of July was burned at Jews within ye county of Sussex, one Dyrick
Caruer Dyrick Caruer
Beerebrewer, in the parish of Bright-hamsteed in the same county: and the
next day was also burned at Steining, John Lander John Lander.
late of Godstone, in the county of Surrie. Which two me^ (with others) about
ye end of the month of October were apprehended by Edw. Gage gentleman, as
they were at prayer in the house of Dyrick, and by him were sent up to London
to ye Counsel: who after examination sent them to Newgate, there to attend the
leisure of Boner. From whence they were brought the viij. of June next after,
into the B. chamber in his house at London, Where being examined and earnestly
persuaded with, and no hope to pervert the^: after diverse examinations they
were condemned the x of June, of ye B. in his co^sistorie at Paul's, and
afterward were conveyed to the places before mentioned: where they gave their
lives cheerfully and gladly for the testimony of ye truth. Dyrick was a man
blessed with te^porall riches, which notwithstanding were no clog to him during
his imprisonment: although he was well stricken in years, and as it were past
ye time of learning, yet he so spent his time, that being at his first
apprehensio^ utterly ignorant of any letter of ye book: yet could he before
his death read any printed English.

In his prayer at the stake he uttered these words: oh Lord my God thou have
written: he that will not forsake wife, children, house, and all that ever he
has, and take up thy cross and follow thee is not worthy of thee: Dyrick
Caruers words at the stake.
but thou Lord know, that I have forsaken all to come unto thee: Lord have
mercy upon me, for unto thee I commend my spirit, and my soul does rejoice in
thee. These words were the last that he spoke, till the fire was put unto
him. And after the fire came to him: he cried: Lord have mercy upon me: and so
died.

At Chichester about the same month, was burned one Tho. Iueson Tho. Iueson.
of Godstone, in the county of Surrey Carpenter: after persuasion in vain to
recant. When he had said: if there came an Angel from heaven to teach him
another doctrine, then that which he was now in, he would not believe him, he
was condemned, and committed to the secular power.

In ye latter end of this month of July, Ioh. Aleworth Ioh. Aleworth.
died in prison at Reding, being there in bo^ds for ye testimony of Jesus. About
ye end of July, James Abbes was brought before ye B. of Norwich, D. Hopton: to
who^ through his threatenings in ye end James yielded and now when he was
dismissed, and should go from the B, he calling him again, gave him a piece of
money either xx. or xl d: which when James had received and was gone from ye B:
his conscience began to rob, and immediately to accuse his fact. In which
co^bate with himself, (being piteously vexed) he went immediately to ye B.
again, and there threw him his money, and said: it repented him that ever he
gave his consent to persuasions: and that he gave his consent in taking money.
When no persuasions could avail with him, he was condemned to the fire: which
he endured patiently for the name of Christ, the 2. of August An. 1555. in the
town of Berry.

Upon the 5. of July, Ioh. Denley John Denley.
gent. Ioh. Newman, Ioh. Newman.
and Patrick Packinga^ Patrick Packingam.
were condemned in the consistory of Paul's to be burned for the testimony of
Jesus. The two first were met on the way by Edmond Tyrrel Esquier: a most
barbarous persecutor in those days, coming from the burning of certain godly
martirs: and upon suspicion he sent the^ to Boner: who after much trial and
persuasion, were condemned for the cause of Christ, and afterward suffered for
the same. M. Denley at Vxbridge the 8, of August, being set in the fire, with
the burning flame about him, sang in it a Psalm. Which D. Story being present
hearing, commanded one of the torme^tors to hurl a faggot at him: which was
done, so that ye blood ra^ down upon his face: whereat he ceased singing a
while, and clapped his hands on his face: and anon, putting his hands abroad,
The martyr sings in the fire.
sang again. At the last he yielded his soul into the hands of his redeemer.
Story in the mean while saying, that he that floong the faggot, marred a good
old song. Not long after, suffered Patrick Packingam in the same town, About
the 28. of the same month, John Newman Pewterer dwelling at Maidstone in Kent,
was burned the last of August at Saffron Walden in Essex.

About the same time, Richard Hook Rich. Hook.
gave his life for the same cause at Chichester.

The same year 1555, 6. godly martyrs together in Canterbury, Six godly
martyrs in Canterbury.
for the testimony of Jesus: being condemned by the bloody Suffraga^, M.
Collins and Faucet. Their names were William Coker, William Hopper, Henry
Laurence, Richard Collier, Rich. Wright, William Stere. Coker had given him
respite of 6. days, but refused them, and so was condemned. The xi. of July,
Hopper seemed at ye first to grant unto the^, but repented: and was afterward
condemned. The 16. of July, Laurence being required to set to his hand to ye
bil of his answers, wrote these words: You are all of Antichrist, and him
foll. And there they stayed him, and would not suffer him to proceed: and wrote
not follow. So the second of August they read sentence against him. Collier of
Ashford was condemned the 16. of August.

After sentence given against him, he sang a psalm: ye priest crying that he
was out of his wits. The same day Wright and Stere were condemned, and the day
aforesaid, they constantly suffered for the testimony of Christ.

After the burning of these 6. above named, next followed the persecution of
ten other servant of God: Elizabeth Warn, George Tankerfield, Robert Smith,
Stephen Hardwood, Thomas Fust, William Hall, Tho. Jews, George King, John
Wade, Ioane Laishford.

Elizabeth Warn Eliz. Warn.
in the month of August, was burned at Stratford-bow: she was widow, and late
wife of Ioh. Warn Vpholster and Martyr, who also was burned in the end of the
Month of May last past. She had been apprehended amongst others the first day
of January, in a house in Bow Churchyard in London, as they were gathered
together in prayer: and at that present was carried to the counter, where she
lay a prisoner til the xj. of June. At which time she was brought into Newgate,
and remained there til the ij. of Iulie. Then she was sent by the Commissioners
to Boner: who the vi. day of the same Month, caused her with diverse others to
be brought before him to his Palace. Where, after diverse vexations, and
allurements to forsake Christ, after she had said to them: (threatening her) do
what you will, for if Christ were in an error, the^ am I in an error, she was
judged to die. The chief procuror of her death was D. Story, being (as is
thought) of some alliance to her, or her late husband. G. Tankerfield George
Tankerfield.
of London Cook, borne in the city of York, about the age of xxvij. or
xxviij. years, was in king Ed. days a papist, til Q. Marie came in. In whose
days, (perceiving the great cruelty that was used) he began to doubt, and
fell to prayer, and reading of the word, which God did so bless, that he grew
in knowledge: which so kindled him with zeal, that he became an exhorter of
others. At the last he was found out, and while he went into the Temple fields
to refresh himself, having been sick before, Bearde comes home to his
house, and enquired for him: pretending to his wife, that he came to have him
dress a banquet at the L. Pagets. She thinking no less, went and told her
husband: who when he heard it, said: a banquet woman: indeed it is such a
banquet as will not be pleasant to the flesh. But Gods will be done. And when he
came home, he saw who it was. And so Tankerfield was delivered to the
Constable, and brought to Newgate about the last of February, 1555. by the
said Beard, yeoman of the Guard, and S. Ponder, peuterer, Constable of S.
Dunstans in the west. He was sent in by sir R. Cholmley knight, and D. Man, a
bloody persecuter. And being brought before Boner, and constantly maintayning
the truth, was by him condemned: and suffered at S. Albo^s the xxvi. day of
August, for the testimony of the truth. Going down to suffer, at the sign of
the cross keys where he inned, he desired the host yt he might have a good
fire: which was made according as he required. Then he (sitting on a form
before the fire) put off his shoes and hose, and stretched out his leg to the
flame: and when it had touched his foot, he quickly withdrew it, showing how
the flesh persuaded him one way, A pretty saying of the martyr.
and the spirit another. After dinner ye sheriff came to him, to carry him to
the place of execution. Who considering the shortness of time, his saying was,
that although the day were never so long, yet at the last it ringeth to
euensong etc.

About ij. of the clock he was brought to the place called Romeland, a green
near the west end of the abbey church. After he had prayed at the stake, he
said with a cheerful voice, that although he had a sharp dinner, yet he hoped to
have a joyful supper in heaven. While ye reeds were set about him, a priest
came to persuade him to believe in the sacrament. But Tankerfield cried
vehemently, I defy the whore of Babylon, fie on the abominable idol. Whereat
the mayor was sore offended, and said: though he had but one lode of fagots in
the world, he would give them to the burning of him.

There was a certain knight by, that went unto Ta^kerfielde, and took him by
the hand, and said: good brother be strong in Christ. This he spoke softly: and
Tankerfield said, Oh sir, I thank you, I am so I thank God. Fire being put to
him, The patience of the martirs caused the people to say they had the devil.
he embraced the flame, and bathed his hands therein, and so gave up his soul
into the hands of Christ. Whose patience was such, that certain superstitious
old women did say the devil was in him, and in all such Heretics, and
therefore they could not almost feel any pain.

Robert Smith Robert Smith.
was brought to Newgate the fifth of November, in the first or second year of
the Q. by I. Matthew, yoman of the guard, and by the commandment of the
Counsel. First he was servant to sir Th. Smith provost of Eaton, from whence
he was preferred to a clerkship of x.l in Eaton. He was much confirmed in the
truth, by the preachings and readings of one M. Turner of Windsor and others:
Wherefore at the coming in of Mary he was deprived of his clerkship, and not
long after their examinations, wherein boldly and wisely he behaved himself in
the cause of Christ, he was condemned in the consistory the xij. of July, and
from thence was had to Newgate, with other of the brethren. He wrote diverse
letters in prison to sundry friends. He suffered at Vxbridge the viij. of
August. Being at ye stake he comforted the people, willing them to think well
of his cause, and not to doubt but his body dying in that quarrel, should rise
again to life. And (said he) I doubt not but God will show you some tooken
thereof. At length he being well nigh half burnt and black with fire, The
martyr gives a sign.
clustered together as in a lump like a black cole, all men thinking him for
dead, suddenly rose upright before the people, lifting up the stumpes of his
arms, and clapping the same together, and so hanging over the fire slept in
the Lord.

About this time died Stephen Harwood Stephen Harwood.
at Stratford, and Thomas Fust Thomas Fust.
at Ware, both for the testimony of Jesus.

Also about the end of August William Hail William Hail.
was burned at Barnet, and constantly suffered for the truth.

George King, Thomas Jews, and John Wade sickened in Lollardes tower, died,
and were cast into the fields, and buried in the night by the brethren. So
also William Andrew died in prison, who was brought to Newgate, Anno 1555, by
Ihon Motham Constable of Maulden in Essex. The principal promoter of him was
the Lord Rich.

The xxxj. of August suffered Robert Samuel preacher and minister at Barfold
in Suffolk, his chief persecutor was M. Foster a justice of Cobdock a little
from Ipswich: where he caused M. Samuel to be apprehended and put in the goal
of Ipswich: from whence being removed to Norwich, he fell into the cruel hands
of the bishop Doctor Hopton and Dunnings his chancellor: who first caused him
to be chained bolt upright to a great post: in such sort, that standing only
on tiptoe, he was feign to stay up the whole weight of his body: besides he
so pined him with hunger and thirst, his allowance being only two or three
mouthfuls of bread, and three sponefuls of water for his daily sustenance, that
his body was so dried up that he could not make one drop of urine to relieve
his thirst. He had diverse visions during the time of his imprisonment, Samuel
has a vision.
which he for modesties sake concealed. Saving this one he declared, that after
he had been pined iij. days, he fell in a sleep or slumber, and one clad all
in white seemed to stand before him, which ministered unto him comfort in these
words: Samuel, Samuel, be of good cheer, and take a good heart unto thee,
for after this day shall thou never hunger nor thirst. Which came so to pass
accordingly. As he came to the fire a certain maid came unto him, and kissed
him: her name was Rose Nottingham. Rose Nottingham.


Next after the suffering of Robert Samuel Robert Samuel.
about the beginning of September, was burned William Allen W. Allen.
in Walsingham laboring man. At his suffering, such was his credit among the
Justices, by reason of his well tried conversation among them, that he was
suffered to go untied to his suffering: and there with patience and constancy
gave witness to the truth by shedding of his blood.

The same year in the month of September, Roger Coo Roger Coo.
of Melford in Suffolk a sheareman, and an aged father, after sundry conflicts
with his adversaries was committed to the fire at Yexford in the county of
Suffolk. He was condemned the xij. of August by the bishop of Norwich.

With the aforesaid was also condemned Thomas Cobbe Tho. Cobbe.
of Hauerhill butcher, and was burned in the town of Tetford in the month of
September.

About the vj. of September, Robert Catmer of Hith, Robert Streater of Hith,
Anthony Burward of Calete, George Brodbridge of Bromfield, James Tutley of
Bre^chley were condemned by Thornton S. of Dover.

About the mids of September, Thomas Hayword, Th. Hayword.
and John Gareway Ioh. Gareway.
suffered at the town of Lichfield, for the testimony of the truth.

About this time, there was a godly gentleman, M. John Glouer M. Ioh. Glouer.
in the dioces of Lichfield and Couentry, whom the B. by his letters charged
the mayor of Couentry to apprehend. But so soon as he had received the letters,
he sent a privy watchword to John to escape and shift for himself: who with
his brother William, was not so soon departed out of his house, but that yet in
ye sight of them, the Sheriff, and other searchers came in to take him. But
when John could not be found, one of the officers going into an upper chamber,
found there Robert the other brother: a master of art in Ca^bridge, lying
sick of a long disease: which was by him incontinent brought before the
sheriff, by whom he was committed to the jail forthwith. Not being called to
his answer, he was moved to enter in bonds, and so to be dismissed. But that
he refused to do, because they had nothing to lay to his charge. So he
remained prisoner in Couentry the space of 10. or 11 days: being never called
of the masters to answer.

The 2 day after, the B. coming to Couentrie, M. Warren came to the guildhall,
and willed the chief jailer to carry him to the B. With whom after much
disputation, when he could not agree: he was returned again to the common
jail.

On the Friday morning, being the next day after, he with other brethren was
carried to Lichfield, whither they came at 4 a clock: and were friendly
entertained at the Sun. But the same night they were put in prison by Iephcot
the Chancellors man: being destitute on the sudden of al necessaries. He put
him into a prison (where he continued til he was condemned) a place next to ye
dungeo^, narrow of room, strong of building and very cold, with small light:
where he was allowed a bu^dell of straw in steed of a bed, without any thing
else to ease himself withal: and was allowed no help neither night nor day, nor
company of any man, notwithstanding his great sickness. Within 2. days after,
the Chancellor, and one Temsey a prebendary, came to exhort him to conformity:
to who^ he gave none ear. He was also in the mean time of his imprisonment
assailed by temptations of Satan: but God vpheld his servant.

At the B. first coming to Lichfield, after his imprisonment, he was called
before him, none being present but his chaplains, and servants, saving an old
priest: with whom he had reasoning of the church and of the sacrament, etc. and
to the end he continued constant in the truth.

After that, he was condemned of the B. Austen Bernher, a minister reports of
him, that for 3. or 4. days before his death, his heart grew lumpish, so that
he feared least ye Lord should not assist: though he had earnestly prayed for
the same. This his temptation he signified to Austen his familiar friend: who
exhorted him with patience to wait the Lords leisure, and if consolation
came, he would show some sign unto him thereof: God sends the spirit of
comfort.
whereby he might also witness the same: and so he departed. The next day when
he came to ye sight of the stake, suddenly he was so mightily replenished with
heavenly comfort: that he cried out, clapping his hands to Austen, and saying
in these words: Robert Glouer.
Austen he is come, he is come, etc.

In the same fire was burned with him, Cornelius Bungey Cornelius Bungey.
a Capper of Couentry, and condemned by the B. of Couentry, and so they
joyfully suffered together about the 20. of September.

John Glouer and William died after, and were prohibited to be buried. John a
twelve month after, being condemned to be taken up, and cast over the wall, as
Doct. Dracot gave sentence. The other was prohibited to be buried by one John
Thirlme of Weme in Shropshire. Where he died, and Barnard the Curate with him.

In the same dioces also, M. Edward Bourton, who required of his friend, that
he might not be buried after the popish manner, was prohibited burial, and
was buried in his own garden.

In the same county of Salop, Olyuer Richardine Olyuer Richardine.
of the parish of Whitchurch was burned in Hartford West, Sir John Young being
Shiriffe. Which seems to have been about the latter end of king Henry the
eight.

After the martyrdom of those aforesaid, followed next the condemnation of
William Wolsey W. Wolsey.
and Robert Pygot Robert Pygot.
paynter, who were judged and condemned at Ely by John Fuller Chancellor,
Doctor Shaxton his Suffragan, Robert Steward Deane of Ely, John Chrystopherson
Deane of Norwich, etc. Anno 1555. The eleventh of October they were burned in
Wisbich.

Wolsey was a Constable at Wells, and was brought to death by one Richard
Euerard Gentleman, a Justice of peace. He might have departed if he listed:
being willed so to do by D. Fuller: but he said he would be delivered by law,
and no otherwise.

Pigot being called at ye sessions at Wisbich, would not absent himself, but
appeared, and was with the other, carried to Ely to prison: where they remained
til they suffered. During which time, there came to the^ one Peter Valentius a
French man, who had bin a remainer there about xx. years, and stre^gthened them
in the faith. Shaxton had been a professor, and became a revolt, and labored
with them, and said: good brethren remember your selves, and become new men:
for I have been of this fond opinion, etc. To whom Wolsey answered. Ah, are
you become a new man? woe be to thee thou wicked new man: God shall justly judge
thee. In the end, sentence was given against them, and they committed to the
stake: where they did sing the 106. psalm, clapping (as it was thought)
certain new Testaments to their breasts, which were thrown into the fire to
be burned with them.

The same year, month, and day in the which the foresaid martyrs were burned
at Ely, which was an 1555 the sixtenth of October, followed also at Oxford the
slaughter of M. Ridley B. of London, and M. Latimer B. sometimes of Worcester.
M. Ridley M, Ridley.
was sometimes master of Penbrooke hall in Cambridge: afterward was made
Chaplen to king Henry the eight, and promoted by him to be bishop of Rochester:
and from thence in king Edwards days translated to London. He was replenished
with singular virtues and great learning. He showed great compassion on Boners
mother in K. Edwards days: whose son now full vncourtuously requited him. He
was first converted to the truth, by reading Bertrames book of the Sacrament,
whom also the conference with Peter Martyr and bishop Cranmer did much
confirm. When Queen Marie came in first, he was committed to the tower, and
from thence with the Archb. of Canterbury, and Latimer, to Oxford: and there
enclosed in the common jail of Bocardo. Where at length being disseuered from
them, he was committed to custody in the house of one Irish: Sundry letters
and tractations of Ridley.
where he remained till his martyrdom. Which was from the year 1554. till
1555, the xvi. of October. He wrote diverse letters and sundry tractations in
time of his captivity.

Master Latimer M. Latimer.
of the University of Cambridge, was first a zealous Papist, and a railer
against those that professed the Gospel, as he did plainly declare in his
Oration against Philip Melancthon, when he proceeded Bachelour of Divinity. M.
Latimer a zealous papist sometime, and converted by Bilney.
But especially he could not abide Master Stafforde, Divinity Reader there.
But M. Bilney had compassion of his blind zeal: and after a time came to
Latimers study, and desired him to hear him make his confession. In hearing
whereof he was so touched, that thereupon he left his School divinity, and
grew in further knowledge of the truth.

After he came to the knowledge of the truth he fervently embraced the same,
and suffered with patience many conflictes therefore. He had especial enemies
in Cambridge, a black Friar, one Doctor Buckeman, Provost of the house: and
another Friar, an outlandish man, called Doctor Venetus, besides all the rabble
of the Heads and Doctors: as, Doctor Watson, Master of Christ's College,
whose Scholar Latimer had been before: D. Notaries, Master of Clare Hall:
Doctor Phili, Master of Michael house: D. Medcalfe, Master of S. John's: D.
Blithe, of the kings hal: D. Bullock Master of the Queens College: Doctor
Cliffe, of Clement house: Doctor Downs, of Jesus College: D. Palms, master
of S Nicholas Hostel, etc.

At the last came D. West, Bishop of Ely, who (preaching against Latimer at
Barnewel Abbey) forbad him to preach any more within the churches of the
University. Notwithstanding, D. Barnes, Prior of the Augustine Friars, did
license Master Latimer to preach in his Church of the Augustine Friars: and he
himself preached at the Church by, called Saint Edwardes: which was the first
Sermon of the Gospel that D. Barnes preached, being upon Christmasse even, upon
a Sunday. Whereupon, Articles were gathered out against him by M. Tirrel, Fellow
of the Kings Hall: and presented to the Cardinal. Notwithstanding the enemies
that Latimer had in Cambridge, he continued preaching there three years, and
kept conference with Master Bilney. So that the place where they used most to
walk in ye fields, was commonly called the Heretics hill.

After he had traveled in preaching three years in Cambridge, at length he was
called up to ye Cardinal for heresy, and being contented to subscribe to such
Articles as they propounded unto him, was dismissed. After this, by the means
of Doctor Buttes, a great favorer of good men, D. Buttes a favorer of good
men.
he was among the number of those that labored in the Kings Supremacy, and
went to the Court: where, after a space, he obtained a Benefice in Wiltshire,
in a town called Westkington. So he left the Court, and there kept residence.
There he also found enemies, as in the University, that drew articles against
him. As, that he should preach against our Lady; Saints; Auemaries; etc. His
chief enemies (besides the Priests of the Country) were Doctor Powel of
Salesburie: Doctor Wilson, sometime of Cambridge: Master Hubberden: and Doctor
Sherewood. By whose means he was cited up to W. Warham, Archb. of Canterbury,
and John Stokeseley B of London an. 1531. the xxix. of January: every week
for a space thrice. Being called before them, in the end he was dismissed: on
what condition it is uncertain. At length, through the procurement of D.
Buttes, and Cromwell, he was advanced by the king to be B. of Worcester. Who
(when holy bread, and holy water should be ministered) caused these verses to be
pronounced to the people in his dioces: Verses of Latimer at the giving of holy
bread and holy water.
Remember your promise in baptising; Christ his mercy and bloudsheading: By
whose most holy sprinkling; Of all your sins you have full pardoning. At the
giving of holy bread, these verses following. Of Christ's body this is a token;
which on the cross for our sins was broken. Wherefore of your sins you
must be forsakers: If of Christ's death you will be partakers.

In his Bishopric also he suffered much trouble for well doing, but the king
greatly favored him. He continued in his bishopric til the time of the vi.
articles. At which time, of his own accord he resigned it. At which time also,
Shaxto^ B. of Salisburie, resigned his bishopric. So they kept silence til the
time of K. Edward. And coming up to London, for cure of a bruise, which he
received by a fall from a Tree, he was molested, and cast into the Tower, til
the time of king Ed. In whose days he was set free, and preached again, with
great fruit and edification of the people. He being 67. years of age, preached
every sunday twice for the most part: and both winter and summer, about ij. of
the clock in ye morning he would be at his book most diligently. He ever
affirmed that the preaching of the Gospel would cost him his life: and
persuaded himself that Winchester was kept in the Tower for the same purpose:
as the Event did truly prove. For after the death of K. Edward he was sent for
by a purseuant: of whose coming he had intelligence by John Careless, and
prepared himself before to go with him. The purseuant when he had delivered his
letters to him, departed, affirming that he had commandment not to tarry for
him, whereby it should appear they would have had him fled the realm, but
he comes up to London, and passing through Smithfield, (where merely he said
that Smithfield had long groaned for him Smithfield had long groaned for M.
Latimer.
) was brought before the Counsel. Of whom he was again cast into the Tower,
where he was hardly used, yet bare it cherefully, for when the Lieftena^ts man
upon a time came to him: the aged father kept without fire in frosty weather,
and welnigh sterued for cold, he merrily had the man tell his master, that if he
did not look the better to him, perchance he would deceive him. Which when the
Lieftenant heard, fearing he should make escape, M. Latimer almost sterued for
cold in the tower.
charge him with his words. Yea M. Lieftenant, says he, so I said: for you
look I think that I should burn, but I am like here to sterue for cold.

Thus passing a long time in the tower: from thence he was transported to
Oxford with Ridley and Cranmer to dispute: as has been aforesaid. He wrote
diverse and sundry letters. Among other enemies to Latimer Latimers sundry
letters.
at Oxford, there was one Hubberden, who riding by a Church side, where the
youth of the Parish were daunsing, came into the Church, and caused the bell
to be tolled, and there made to the people a Sermon of daunsing. A Sermon of
piping and daunsing.
In which Sermon, he made the Doctors of the Church to answer to his call,
and to sing after his time, for the probation of the Sacrament of the Altar,
against Latimer, Frith, etc, and all Heretics. At the last, as he had made
them sing, so after he makes them dance also. And first he calls out Christ
and his twelve Apostles: then the ancient Doctors of the church, as in a round
ring, all to dance together, with pipe up Hubberde^. Now dance Christ, now
dance Peter, now Paul etc. And in conclusion, such a dancing kept Hubberdin,
that the pulpet fell, and down falls Hubberdine and brake his leg, and died
not long after. The people refused to repair the pulpet, saying: it was not
for dauncers.

M. Latimer to the king for restoring of the Scriptures.
M. Latimer also wrote to king Henry the viij. for the restoring of the free
reading of holy Scriptures, which was inhibited. Anno 1531. and Anno 1546. For
the which Letter, he received rather thanks then displeasure of the King: and
not long after that, he was advanced to be a Bishop.

Amongst other memorable acts of Latimer, this was one worthy to be remembered:
that being B. of Worcester, when others gave newyeeres gifts of gold and
silver etc. he presented the king with a new Testament for a new years gift,
M. Latimers newyeeres gift to the king.
and a napkin having this poesy about it. Fonicatores and adulteros iudicabit
Dominus.

Anno 1555. In the month of October, Ridley and Latimer were both brought forth
to their final examination and execution: the Commissioners whereof, were
master White, Bishop of Lincoln, master Brooks Bishop of Gloucester, with
others.

Upon the 20. of September was sent down a commission to Oxforde from
Cardinal Poole to the parties aforesaid, to proceed against Ridley in
judgment, and Latimer, except they would recant. So the last of September,
they were cited to appear before the Lords in the Divinity School at
Oxford, at viij of the clock. Where first appeared Master Ridley, and then
Latimer. M. Ridley (while the Commission was read) standing bare before, when
he heard the Popes holiness named, Ridley covers his head at the name of the
Pope.
and the Cardinal, put on his cap: and being thrice admonished, would not (by
putting it off) give sign of reverence unto the Pope or his Legate. At the
last, the Bishop of Lincoln commanded one of the Bedles to pluck his cap from
his head. Master Ridley bowing his head to the officer, gently permitted him
to take away his cappe. After that Lincoln persuaded him with a long oration
to recant: to which Rydley makes answer, confuting the usurped supremacy of
the Pope etc. In the end they objected articles, whereto presently they
required answer: but they said such as should not be prejudicial to that he
should say to morrow. So they took his answers, and appointed him again the
next morrow at eight of the clock, willing the Mayor he should have pen,
yncke, and paper, etc. So dismissing Master Rydley, they sent for master
Latimer. To whom after exhortation to recant, and other conference, they
propounded the same articles to him which they propounded to master Rydley.
Whereto he answered presently, and was assigned to appear on the morrow
again: which master Latimer was loath to do willing them to make speed in that
they would do. So ye Mayor being charged with him, they brake up for ye day
their sessio^.

The next day following, which was the first of October, master Rydley
appeared again: and because he would not reverence them, his cap was snatched
hastily off his head.

After the articles were read, and he required to answer, master Rydley
took a sheet of paper out of his bosom, and began to read that which he had
written: but ye B. of Lincoln commanded ye Beadle to take it from him. To
whom Rydley said, why my Lord, will you require my answer, and not suffer me
to publish it, I beseech you, etc. so master Rydley Ridley not suffered to
make his answer.
seeing no remedy delivered it to an officer, that immediately delivered it to
the B. of Lincoln: who after he had secretly communicated it to other two
Bishops, declared the sense, but would not read it, saying, it contained words
of blasphemy. Master Rydley on the other side would make no other answer then
was contained in his writings: which being recorded by ye register, the B. of
Gloucester fell to persuade master Rydley to recant. To who^ master Ridley
taking in hand to answer, the B. of Gloucester interrupted him. The B. of
Lincoln with his cap in his hand, desired him to return to the unity of their
Church: which intrratie, when he saw it moved not the constant servant of God.
He poceeded to sentence of condemnation against him, which being published, M.
Ridley was committed to the mayor, and M. Latimer called for: who also
constantly standing to the defense of the truth, Ridley and Latimer condemned.
received sentence of condemnation, and was committed to the mayor, and
continued in durance till the 16. day of October.

Upon the fifteenth day of October, the B. of Gloucester D. Brooks, and the
Vicechancelour of Oxford, D, Marshall came to master Irishes house, then mayor
of Oxford, where M. Ridley Ridley refuses his pardon.
lay, and offered him the Queens pardon, if he would recant. Which he
refusing to do, they proceeded to disgrade him, and would have had him put on
the surplice himself, but he would not: and while he spoke against that Romish
apparel (as he called it,) one Edridge the reader of the greek lecture, gave
counsel he should be gagged. Nether would M. Ridley hold the chalice in his
hands: but one was appointed to hold it in his hands. His degradation ended, D.
Brooks called the Bailiffes, and delivered to them master Ridley, with charge
to keep him safe from any man's speaking with him, and that he should be brought
to the place of execution, when they were commanded.

The night before he suffered, his beard was washed, and his legs. And as he
sat at supper the same night at M. Irishes (who was his keeper) he bad his
hosts and the rest at the boorde to his marriage: for to morrow (said he) I
must be married, and so showed himself as merry as at any time before. When
they arose from the table, his brother offered all night to watch with him: but
said he, no, no, that shall you not, for I mind God willing to sleep as
quietly tonight, as ever I did in my life.

When every thing was ready for their, execution in ye ditch over against
Baily College, they were brought forth by the mayor and bayliffes. Master
Ridley had a fair black gown, furred and faced with Foynes, such as he was
wont to wear being B, and a tippet of Velvet furred likewise about his neck,
a velvet nightcap upon his head, and a corner cappe upon the same, going in a
pair of slippers to the stake.

After him came Master Latimer in a poor Bristow frize frocke all worn, with
his buttened cappe, The behavior of Ridley and Latimer at the place of
execution.
and a kerchiefe on his head, a new long shroud hanging over his hose down to
the foot: which at the first sight stirred men's hearts to rue upon them.
Master Ridley looking back, espied master Latimer coming after, unto whom
he said: Oh be you there? Yea (said master Latimer) have after as fast as I
can follow. First master Ridley entering the place, marvelous earnestly,
holding up both his hands, looked toward heaven: then shortly after espying
master Latimer, with a wonderful cheerful look, ran unto him, and
embraced him, and kissed him, and as they that stood near reported, comforted
him saying: be of good heart brother, for God will either assuage the fury of
the flame, or else strengthen us to abide it.

With that, went he to the stake, kneeled down by it, kyssed it, and most
effectually prayed: and behind him kneeled Master Latimer, as earnestly
calling upon GOD as he. Doctor Smith who recanted, preached a Sermon, scant
in all a quarter of an hour, against them, in the mean while that they were a
preparing to the fire.

M. Ridley being in his shirt, stood upon a stone at the stake, and held up his
hands and said: Oh heavenly father, I give unto thee most hearty thanks, for
that thou have called me to be a professor of thee, even to the death, etc.
Then the smith took a chain of iron, and brought the same both about D.
Ridleyes and Latimers middles: and as he was knocking in the staple, master
Ridley took the chain in his hand, and shaked the same, for it did gyrd in
his belly, and looking aside to the smith, said: Good fellow, knock it in
hard, for the flesh will have his course. Then his brother brought both him and
master Latimer gunpowder: which he said he would take as sent from God: then
brought they a faggot kindeled with fire, and laid it down at Ridleyes feet.
Latimer prophecieth at the stake.
To whom master Latimer spoke in this manner: be of good comfort M. Ridley, and
play the man, we shall this day light such a candle by Gods grace in England, as
(I trust) shall never be put out. And so the fire was given unto them. When
Doctor Ridley saw the fire flaming up toward him: he cried with a
wonderful loud voice, In manus tuas Domine commendo spiritum meum, Domine
accipe spiritum meum. And after repeated often in English, Lord, Lord receive
my spirit: master Latimer crying as vehemently on the other side, Oh father
of heaven receive my my soul: who received the flame as it were embracing it,
and soon died M. Ridley, by reason of the evil making of the fire, had his
nether parts all burnt, before the upper parts were touched, and endured great
torment with much patience: so they both slept in the Lord, faithful
witnesses of his truth.

Diverse letters and treatises.
Master Ridley wrote diverse letters and treatises of exhortation.

The next month after the burning of Ridley M. Ridley.
and Latimer, which was the month of November, died Stephen Gardener, Stephen
Gardener dies, a man of an unconstant mind.
a man hated of God and all good men. He was (during the time of Queen Anne,)
an enemy to the Pope,: but after her decease the time carried him away, that
he became a Papist: till again in King Edwardes time, he began to rebate
from certain points of popery. Again, after the decay of the Duke of
Sommerset, he quite turned to popery, and became a cruel Persecutour. He
having intelligence of the death of Ridley and Latimer, deferring his dinner
til three or four of the clock at after noone, comes out (rejoicing) to the
old Duke of Norfolk, who tarried for his dinner till then, at Gardiners Gods
judgment upon Gardener.
house, and said: Now let us go to dinner. And being set down, began merely
to eat: and had eaten but a few bittes, when the sudden stroke of Gods
terrible hand fell upon him, so that immediately he was taken from the table,
and brought to his bed: where he so continued xv. days, and then died, his
tongue being black, and swollen in his head. When Doctor Day Bishop of
Chichester came to him, and began to comfort him with words of Gods promises,
and with free justification in the blood of Christ our Savior, repeating the
Scriptures unto him: Winchester Winchesters words at his death.
hearing that, what my Lord (said he) will you open that gap now? then
farewell all together. To me, and to such other in my case you may speak it:
but open this window to the people, then farewell all together.

Next after the death of Master Ridley and Master Latimer, followed three other
courageous Soldiers of Jesus Christ. John Web Gentleman, George Roper, and
Gregory Park. John Web I Web, G. Roper. G. Parker, Martirs.
was brought before the suffragan of Dover, the sixteenth day of September
before: the other two long after. Which (beside sundry other times) the the
iij. day of October, were all three together brought before the said Judge, and
by him condemned. And about the end of October, or in the latter end of
November (as it is otherwise found) they were brought out of prison to their
martyrdom: who by the way said certain Psalms mournfullie. Roper was a young
man, of a fresh color, courage and complexion. The other two were somewhat
more elderly. Roper coming to the stake, and putting off his gown, fet a
great leap. So soon as the flame was about him, he put out both his arms
from his body like a Roode, and so stood steadfast, continuing in that manner
(not plucking his arms in till the fire had consumed them, and burnt them off.
And thus these worthy Martirs at Canterbury gave witness to the truth,

The xiij. of December died William Wiseman in the lolards Tower, a
Clothwoorker of London. Some thought that through famine, or other evil
handling, he was made away. After his death he was thrown into the fields,
and charge given that none should bury him. But the brethren buried him in the
night.

In the same year, about the vij. of September, James Gore deceased in prison
at Colchester, being captive for defense of the truth.

Master John Philpot (after he had been imprisoned by the Lord Chancellor a
year and a half for his free speech in the convocation house) was the second
of October an. 1555. called for before the Queens Commissioners, M. Cholmeley,
Master Roper, Doctor Story, and one of the Scribes of the Arches, at Newgate
Sessions Hall. Where they had nothing particular to charge him with by the
Law: neither would he otherwise answer. So they sent him again to prison.
Afterward he was commanded to appear the xxiiij. day of October, which he
did. And after much railing against him, and many threatenings, they sent him
to the B. of Londons Colehouse, where he found Tho. Whittle Priest, in the
stocks: who once (through infirmity) had relented to the Papists, but
feeling remorse and torment in his conscience, went to the B. Register,
desiring to see his bill again. Which as soon as he had received, he tare in
pieces: and after that was joyful, and received comfort. When the B. heard
thereof, he beat him, and pulled a great piece of his beard from his face,
and cast him into prison. Which he endured joyfully for Christ's name.

Boner understanding of master Philpots imprisonment, sent him bread, and
meat, and drink, with fair words, and promise of favor. And within a while
after, one of his Gentlemen was sent for him, and brought him to the presence
of Boner. Who understanding by Master Philpot the cause of his trouble to have
risen by his speech in the co^uocation house, said, he would not as then
burden him with his conscience, and said moreover, that he meruailed they were
so merry in prison, singing and rejoicing. To whom M. Philpot answered, that
they sang Psalms, and that he trusted he would not be offended therewith,
since S. Paul says. If a man be of an upright mind, Me^ of upright minds.
let him sing: and we therefore (said he) to testify that we are of an upright
mind to God, though we be in misery, do sing. So he was had again to the
Colehouse, where he had other six companions of the same affliction.

He was examined in all 14. several times: the fourth time in the Archdeacons
house of London in the month of October, before the Bishops of London, Bath,
Worcester and Gloucester: with whom after dispute, of the church of Rome and
authority thereof, he was again dismissed.

The Bishops rose up and consulted together, and caused a writing to be made,
whertoo they put their hands. So he was again carried to his Colehouse M.
Philpot thought then they conspired his death.

The 5. examination was before the Bishops of London, Rochester, Couentrie,
saint Asses, with another. Doctor Story, Curtop, Doctor Sauerson, Doctor
Pendleton, with other Chaplens and gentlemen of the Queens Chamber, and others
in the Gallerie of the B. of Londons palace. Where Boner, because he said he
minded on the morrow to sit in judgment on him, exhorted him to play the wise
man's part, and to conform himself. To whom Philpot answered, he was glad
judgment was so nigh: but refused Boner, as not being his ordinary.

After much dispute of the Romish church, and reuilings of Doctor Story
against Master Philpot, he was had again to the Colehouse, the Bishop of
London promising him favor, and that he had in his hands to do him good. To
who^ Philpot answered: my Lord, the pleasure that I will require of you is to
hasten my judgment, and so to dispatch me out of this miserable world unto my
eternal rest. To hasten judgment a pleasure to the Martyr.
The B. for all his fair promises performed no kind of courtesy unto him: for
a whole fortnight after, he had neither fire, nor candell, nor good lodging.

The sixth examination was before the Lord Cha^berlaine, the vicont Hereford:
the L. Rich, the L.S. John's, the Lord Windsore the L. Shandoys, sir John
Brydges lieftenant of the Tower, with the B of London, and Doctor Chadsey. The
sixth of November, Anno 1555. Before whom he was reasoned with touching the
Romish Church, and of the Sacrament of the Altar. The Lords temporal being
half amazed at that which they heard, and not giving M. Philpot an evil word.

The vij. examination was had the xix. of November, before the B of London, and
Rochester, the Chauncellor of Litchfield, and Doctor Chadsey.

The next morning Boner sent for master Philpot to come to Mass. A sharp
answer to Boners message.
To whose messenger he answered, his stomach was too weak to digest such raw
meats of flesh, blood and bone.

The next day the B. sent again for him, and ministered false articles against
him, and could bring no witness: but would have had his prison fellows sworn
against him. Which because they refused, they were put in the stocks, and also
M. Philpot with them, where they sat from morning till night.

The Sunday after at night betwixt 8. and 9. the Bishop came to the Colehouse
himself, and caused master Philpot to be had into another place of
imprisonment, and there caused him to be searched, but the searcher missed of
his last examination which he had written: yet took two Letters from him
which were of no great importance.

The viij. examination was before the B. of London, of Saint Dauis, master
Mordant and others in the B. chapel: where the B. would have had him answered
only, yea, or nay to certain Articles. Which Philpot would not, but made his
appeal: which the Bishop said he would stay in his own hands. So was he had
again to the colehouse.

The 9. time he was examined of the B. alone with his Chaplains: the next day
after in the Wardrope. Where master Philpot would not hear so much as
Articles read against him: refusing Boner as being not his ordinary. At the
last, they fell to reason of the Sacrament of the altar, and the mass: the
Bishop and diverse of his Chaplains setting upon master Philpot. To whom he
gave no place nor cause of triumph: but sufficiently maintained the truth
therein. So for that time he was dismissed to his prison again.

And the next day the tenth time was examined of the B, his register and
others: and charged with the book of Catechism, made in king Edwards days,
and certain conclusions agreed upon both in Oxford and Cambridge, etc. But M.
Philpot refused him for ordinary, and would not answer: but appealed to him
that was in place of the Archbishopricke of Canterbury, because he knew not of
his imprisonment, who was then Archbishop.

The 11. examination was on S. Andrews day before the Bish. of Duresme, of
Chichester, of Bath, of London: the Prolocutor master Christophorson, Doctor
Chadsey, master Morgan of Oxford, master Hussy of the Arches, Doctor Weston,
Doctor Harpesfield, master Coosins, master Johnson, register to the B. of
London: these disputed against master Philpot touching the true Church, and of
the Sacrament of the Altar, and of the antiquity of the religion which master
Philpot professed. Of which company master Morgan behaved himself above all
the rest, most insolently against him: who asked master Philpot how he knew
that he had the spirit of GOD, scoffingly. To whom Philpot answered: by the
faith of Christ which is in me: Ah by faith, do you so, says Morgan? I ween
it be the spirit of the buttery, which your fellows have had, which have
been burned before you: who were drunken the night before they went to their
death: and I ween went drunk unto it. To whom Master Philpot answered: It
appears by your communication, that you are better acquaynted with the
spirit of the the butterie, M. Philpots zeal against Morgan.
then with the spirit of God. Wherefore I must needs tell thee thou painted
wall, and Hypocrite: In the name of the living GOD, whose truth I have told
thee, that God shall reign fire and brimstone upon such scorners of his
word, and Blasphemers of his truth as thou art. Morgan, What, you rage now.
Philpot. Thy foolish blasphemies have compelled the spirit of God which is in
me, to speak that which I have said unto thee thou enemy of all
righteousness. By thine own words do I judge thee, thou blind and
blasphemous Doctor, for as it is written: By thy words thou shall be
justified, and by thy words thou shall be condemned. I have spoken on Gods
behalf, and now have I done with thee Morgan. Why then, I tell thee Philpot
thou art an heretic, and shall be burned for thine heresy, and afterward
go to hell fire. Philpot: I tell thee thou hypocrite, I pass not this for thy
fire and faggot, neither (I thank GOD my Lord) stand in fear of the same: my
faith in Christ shall overcome them, etc.

In fine, Chadsey persuaded him to consider of himself, and to be well advised.
To whom M. Philpot said, he would his burning day were to morrow: for this
delay, (said he) is every day to die, and yet not to be dead. So for that time
they dismissed him.

The 12. examination was on Wednesday the fourth of December before the Bishop
of London, Worcester, and Bangor. After Mass the Bishop called him before him
into his Chapel, and recited the Articles, which often times he had done
before, with depositions of witnesses, of whom some were not examined. Philpot
again refused him for Judge.

So he was had away, and anon after he was called for to come before him, and
the Bishop of Bangor. Who being before them, they cauilled with him, where his
religion was an hundredth year ago, accusing him of singularity etc. and so
dismissed him til after noone. At which time he appeared again, and after
reasoning with him touching the real presence: they again dismissed him till
Thursday after, which was the 13. examination. On which day he appeared before
the Archb. of York, and other Bishops, as the bishop of Chichester, Bathe,
London, etc and they reasoned with him touching the true Church, and the
authority thereof, and universality. But being not able to deal or prevail
with him in strength of argument, nor verity of their cause, they departed.

The same day at night again, Boner called for him, and required him to say
directly, whether he would be conformable or not. To whom he answered, that he
required a sure proof of that Church whereto Boner called him: which when
Boner could not prove, they gave him over until the xiij. or xiiij. day of
December. On which days the Bishop sitting iudicially in his Consistory at
Paul's, caused him to be brought thither before him and others, and objected
unto him 3. articles. 1. That he refused to be reconciled to the Church. 2.
That he had blasphemed the mass, Articles against M. Philpot.
and called it Idolatry. 3. That he denied the real presence. And exhorted
him to recant, and to return to his Romish Church.

Whereto when M. Philpot had showed that he was not out of the church, and that
he had not spoken against the mass, nor sacrament of the Altar. He was once
again dismissed till the sixteenth day of the same month: on which day when
neither threatninges, nor fair allurementes could move him. The B. after he
had brought forth a certain instrument containing articles and questions,
agreed upon both in Oxforde and Cambridge: and had exhibited two books in
print: the one the Catechism made in King Edwardes days, anno. 1552. The
other concerning the true report of the disputation in the Convocation house,
which Philpot acknowledged to be his penning, without any just cause he could
pretend against him by form of law, Boner condemns Philpot.
proceeded to his tyrannical sentence of condemnation. and so committed him to
the Sheriff: whose officers led him away. And in Pater noster row, his
servant meeting him, lamented: to whom Philpot said, content thy self, I shall
do well enough, thou shall see me again. So the officers had master Philpot
to Newgate: whom Alexander the keeper used very rigorously, and would not
strike off his yrons under four pound, but put him in Limbo. Whereof the
Sheriff understanding, caused Alexander to use him more gently.

Upon Tuesday at supper, being the 17. of December, he had word from the
Sheriff to prepare himself: for the next day he should be burned. Master
Philpot answered, and said: I am ready, God grant me strength, and a joyful
resurrection. In the morning, the sherifes came about viij. of the clock, and
called for him, and he most joyfully came down unto them, When he was entered
into Smithfield, because the way was foul, two Officers took him up, to bear
him to the stake. To whom he said merrily: what? will you make me a Pope? I am
content to go unto my Iourneyes end on my feet. But first coming to
Smithfielde, M. Philpot pays his vows in Smithfield.
he there kneeled down upon his knees, saying with a loud voice these
words. I will pay my vows in thee, O Smithfield.

When he was come to the place where he should suffer, he kissed the stake, and
said: Shall I disdain to suffer at this stake, seeing my Redeemer did not
refuse to suffer most vile death on the cross for me? Then meekely he said the
10. 107. and 108. Psalms. The fire being put unto him he yielded his soul
unto God (whose truth he had witnessed) the eyghteenth day of December. He
wrote many fruitful Letters.

Anno. 1556. 1556 Seven persons burned together in Smithfield.
To begin the new year withal, about the xxvij. of January, were burned in
Smithfield these seven persons following: Thomas Whittle, Priest, Bartlet Green
Gentleman, John Tudson Artificer, John Went Artificer, Thomas Brown, Elizabeth
Foster, wife, Ioane Warren, alias Lashford, maid: all together in one fire.
The Articles objected against them: were, touching the seven Sacraments; the
Sacrifice of the Mass; the Sea of Rome; etc.

Thomas Whittle was apprehended by one Edmund Alabaster, and carried to the
Bishop of Winchester lying sick, hoping to be preferred for his diligence: but
the Bishop repulsed him. So he was had to Boner, who did beat and buffet him,
and cast him into prison. D. Harpsfielde offered him a Bill to subscribe unto,
consisting of general terms, the rather to deceive Whittle. So he
subscribed, but afterward felt such horror in his conscience, that he could
not be in quiet till he had gotten his bill again, T. Whittle repents, and
is condemned. T. Whittles Letters.
and rent away his name from it. So the Bishop condemned him, after many
persuasions to have made him recant, and committed him to the Secular power. He
wrote diverse Letters of comfort and exhortation.

The next day after was Bartlet Green condemned. He had been Student in
Oxford, and there by hearing the lectures of Peter Martyr, he came to have
knowledge of the truth. Afterward he was Student of the common laws in the
Temple.

The cause of his first trouble was an answer to a letter of Master Goodmans,
banished at that time beyond the Seas. Wherein he wrote that Queen Marie was
not dead: whereof Master Goodman desired to be satisfied. These Letters came
into the Counsels hands, and they would have made treason thereof, if the
laws would have served. But after they had long deteyned him in the tower and
elsewhere, they sent him to Bishop Boner, to be ordered after their
Ecclesiastical manner. Against whom Sir John Bourne, then Secretary to the
Queen, was a principal dooer.

The xvij. of November, at two of the clock in the after noone, he was
presented before the Bishop of London, and two other Bishops: Master Deane, M.
Roper M. Welsh, Doctor Harpsfielde, D. Dale, Master George Mordant, and Master
Dee. Before whom, after he had showed the cause of his imprisonment, to have
been his Letter written unto Master Goodman: Doctor Chadsey (being sent for)
reported, that in the presence of Master Moseley, and the Lieftenant of the
Tower, he should speak against the Real presence, and Sacrifice of the mass,
and that their Church was Antichristian. This Master Green confessed that he
had said. So after some talk with other, Master Welche desired of the
Bishop, that he might have license given him to talk with him aparte, and
then with flattering behavior, and fair words, he labored to pervert him,
and reasoned with him touching the marks of the church. Wherein Master Green
(showed himself able sufficientlye to answer that which he did object.
Afterward, he had private conference with Boner, in his bedchamber: who also
labored him all he might, but the spirit of God was of more power: and M.
Green (notwithstanding) continued constant in his holy profession.

In the end, the B. perceiving himself not able to alter his constant mind,
the xxviij. of November he examined him upon certain points of Christian
Religion: and and out of his answers drew articles, whereto Master Green set
to his hand. The fifteenth day of January, in his Consistory at Paul's,
accompanied with Fecknam, and other of his Chapleins, after he had condemned
the other six, he called for master Green, M. Green condemned.
and asked him if he would recant. Which when he denied, the Bishop proceeded
in sentence and condemned him, and committed him to the Shiriffes of London, to
be carried to Newgate, where he continued in prayer and godly meditation, till
the 28. of January. At which time he with the rest were carried to the place of
execution. Whither going by the way, as also at the stake, M. Green at the
stake.
he uttered often times Latin verses: Christ Deus, sine te spes est mihi
nulla salutis: Te duce, vera sequor: te duce, falsa nego. He confessed himself
to to one Master Cotton of the temple his friend, that he had been scourged
with rods of Boner: but else for modestye sake kept it secret. He was of
nature most mild, and gentle. He wrote diverse Letters and exhortations.

Thomas Brown borne in the parish of Byston within the dioces of Ely, came
afterward to London, Tho, Brown
where he dwelled in the parish of S. Brides in Fleetstreete, a married man of
the age of 37. Who because he came not to his parish Church, was presented to
Boner by the Constable. When Boner labored to persuade him, and seeing himself
not able to prevail by the word, to overthrow him, proceeds to his cruel
Sentence, and so commits him to the Secular power. So he abode the cruel
fire amongst the rest.

The same day also was John Tudson, John Tudson.
borne in Ipswich, condemned. Who being complained of to sir Roger Chomley, and
Doctor Story, was sent to Boner. And after much persuasion to recant,
according to his manner, he pronounced sentence against him.

John Went, borne in Langham in Essex, John Went.
within the dioces of London, of the age of 27. years, examined by Doctor
Story, upon the sacrament of the popish Mass, because they disagreed with him
in the real presence, was sent to Boner, and of him condemned for the
profession of the truth.

With the five above recited were condemned two women, Isabell Foster Isabell
Foster.
a wife, and the other a maid called Joan Warn, alias Lashford. Isabell was
married to one John Foster Cutler of the parrish of saint Brides in Fleetstreet
being of the age of 55. years. She was sent to Boner for not coming to the
church, and constantly mainteining the truth of her profession, was of him
condemned.

Joan Lashforde.
Joan Lashford borne in the parrish of little Alhallowes in Thames street, was
the daughter of one Robert Lashford Cutler, and of Elizabeth, who afterward was
married to John Warn Vpholster: who was persecuted for the Gospel of God to
the burning fire, and after him, his wife, and after her this Joan Lashford
their daughter, after she had remained prisoner in the Counter 5. weeks, and
certain months in Newgate.

After these 7. above rehearsed, shortly after in the same month, the 31. of
January, 4. women and one man were burned at Canterbury at one fire. Their
names were John Lomas a young man, Anne Albright, Joan Catmer, Agnes Snoth
widow, Joan Sole wife. Lomas was condemned the xviij. of January, Snoth, the
xxxi. Albright, alias Chamixes, the xviij. Sole, the xxxi, and at the same
time, Ioane Catmer: all five at one fire. Five martirs sing a psalm in the
flaming fire.
Who (when the fire was flaming about their ears) sang Psalms. At the sight
whereof, sir I. Norton Knight wept bitterly.

The Judges, and the other Assistantes which sat upon them, were Richard
Faucet. John Warren, John Milles, Robert Collins, and John Baker, the Mayor.

The History of Thomas Cranmer Archyshop of Canterbury, burned for the truth.
Anno, 1556.
THomas Cranmer Thomas Cra^mer Archb. of Canterbury.
was first of Jesus College in Cambridge, a Master of Arts and fellow of the
College: afterward he married and gave over his fellowship, and became reader
in Buckingham College. Whiles he was reader in that College, his wife dyed,
and he was received again to be fellow of Jesus College: where he grew in
knowledge in such sort, that he became Doctor of Divinity, and was appointed
one of the heads, to examine such as yearly were to commence Bachelors, or
Doctors of Divinity. Who never would admit any to proceed in Divinity,
unless they were substancially seen in the story of the Bible: whereby
diverse Friars and other religious persons were rejected of him. He was greatly
solicited by Doctor Capon to be one of the fellows in the foundation of
Cardinal Wolseys College in Oxford, but could not be drawn thereunto. Whiles
he continued in Cambridge, the matter of the kings divorce with the Lady
Catherin was in question now two or three years among the Canonistes: who
could not resolve upon the matter. Now by reason the plague was in Cambridge,
Doctor Cranmer removed to Waltham cross with two of his pupills to M. Cresseys
house, where Doctor Steuens secretary, and Doctor Fox Almosiner finding him,
conferred with him about that matter of the kings divorce. He gave them
counsel rather to cause it to be discussed among the Divines, M. Cranmers
advice touching the disputation for the K. divorce.
whether by the word of God a man may marry his brothers wife or not, for the
satisfying of the Kings conscience: and that done, to refer it to judgment
how lawful the divorce might be, etc. This discourse they declared unto the
king, who caused Cranmer immediately to be sent for: Cranmer sent for to the
king.
and after talk with him concerning the matter, he appointed him to be chief
doer in the dispute, and conference: and commanded him to set down his mind
fully in the case, and willed the Earl of Wiltshire to give him entertainment
in Duresme house, and to furnish him with Books, and necessaries meet for the
business: who provided for him accordingly. So doctor Cranmer wrote his mind
concerning the kings question, adding to the same, besides the authority of
Scripture, of general counsails, and ancient fathers, also his own opinion,
that the Pope could not dispense with ye word of God. Whereupon ye king sent
certain learned me^ abroad to the most part of the Universities in
Christendom to dispute the question: Embassage to Rome concerning the kings
divorce.
as also in Oxford and Cambridge, where the unlawfulness of the matrimony was
concluded: so yt the K. prepared a solemn embassage and sent to the B. of
Rome, then lying at Bononie: whither went ye Earl of Wiltshire, Doctor
Cranmer, Doctor Stokesley, Doctor Corn, Doctor Bennet, and diverse other
learned men and gentlemen: who when they came before the Pope, he sitting in
the chair of estate, offered his foot, but none would kiss it saving a great
spaniell of the Earl of Wiltshires, who ran and took the P. by the great toe,
None would kiss the Popes foot but a great spaniel of the Earl of Wiltshires,
ran to take the Pope by the toe. Cranmer goes to the Emperor. Cranmer
satisfyeth Cornelius Agryppa.
and caused him to pull it in in have. In ye end the Ambassadors were dismissed
without disputation: and D. Cranmer gratified with ye office of a
penitenciariship. Whereupon the Earl, and the other commissioners, returned
again into England: but D. Cranmer went to the Emperor (being in his journey
toward Vienna against the Turk) there to answer such men of his court as
could say any thing on ye contrary part. Where he fully satisfied Cornelius
Agrippa an high officer in the Emp. court: for which cause Cornelius fell into
such displeasure with the Emp his M. yt he was committed to prison, where for
sorrow he ended his life. From ye Emper. court he departed, and as he returned
he satisfied diverse learned men in Germany in that question.

In the mean space, while the matter thus prospered: B. Warrham the Arcb.
dies, and the Archbishopricke was bestowed immediately on Cranmer, Cranmer made
Archb.
by the kings gift. In which place, he behaved himself with great liking to
the king (who would hear no accusation against him) and all good men.

After the death of king Henry, in the reign of king Edw. his godsonne, K.
Edward godsonne to Cranmer.
his estate was more advanced. Before which time of King Edward, it seemed that
Cranmer was scarce thoroughly persuaded in the right knowledge of the Sacrament,
til being instructed by Ridley, he grew so ripe, that he took upon him the
whole defense of the cause against the popish devises. To whose book,
concerning that matter, Stephen Gardener answers, and M. Cranmer replieth
learnedly and copiously to him again.

Of this Archb. doing was also the book of the reformation, Books of Cranmer.
the Catechism, with the book of Homilies. Also there was a confutation
against 88. articles, devised by the Convocation house, of his doing, but not
received in the time of king Henry the 8.

King Edward now not like to live, bequeathed the succession of the Realm to
the Lady Jane, niece to to king Henry the 8. by his sister, with the consent of
the Counsel and Lawyers, fearing least Mary should alter religion: but Cranmer
Cranmer not brought to it against his conscience.
wald hardly be brought to assent, til he was informed by the lawyers that he
might subscribe thereunto.

King Edward being now dead, and Queen Mary in possession of the crown, she
excepted Cranmer out of all pardon, and would not so much as vouchsafe to see
him: but committed him to the tower, yet pardoned him of treason, and caused
him to be accused of heresy.

The papists had raised a slander, that the Archbishop, had promised to say
a Dyrge mass for King Edwardes funeral, to curry favor of the Queen: which
he endeavoring to stay, gave forth in writing his purgation, and was challenged
of the Queens commisioners for his bil. To who^ he said: he was sorry it passed
him so as it did, (for he granted a copy to Doctor Story who did disperse it)
for his meaning was to have made it more at large, and to have set it on Paul's
Church door, and on the doors of all the Churches in London, with his seal
set thereto. At which words, they for the time dismissed him.

At length it was determined that Cranmer should be removed from the Tower to
Oxford, there to be disputed with, for color sake: although they had
determined what to do with him before.

Forasmuch as the sentence given against Ridley and Latimer, by D. Weston was
void, because the authority of the Pope was not yet received into ye land:
there was a new commission sent from Rome, and a new process framed for the
conviction of Ridley, Latimer, and Cranmer. In the which commission, was D.
James Brooks B. of Gloucester ye popes subdelegate, with Doctor Martin and
Doctor Story commissioners in the king and Queens behalf.

These commissioners being set in place, in the Church of S. Mary in Oxford:
one of the Popes Proctors, or else his D. called, saying: Tho. archb. of
Canterbury, appear here, and make answer to that shall be laid to thy charge:
that is to say, for blasphemy, contumacie, and heresy: and make answer here
to the B. of Gloucester, representing the Popes person. He being brought nearer
the scaffold where the Bishops sat, Cranmer would do no reverence to the
Popes subdelegate.
gave reverence to the Queens proctors, but would not to the Bishop, who
represented the Pope: alleging, he had taken an oath, never to consent to his
authority again. When after many means used, the Archb. would do no reverence:
the Bishop fell to declare unto him the cause of their coming, and their
commission, exhorting him with a long Oration to return to the Popish church.
Who having finished his Oration, D, Martin begins, and declares unto him as
much. Who having also finished, doctor Cranmer (after he had kneeled down on
both his knees, toward the West, and said the Lords prayer, and rising up,
had repeated the Articles of the belief) began to make profession of his faith
unto them: and protested against the popes authority, and challenged the B. of
perjury, for admitting the Pope contrary to his oath.

After Gloucester had done, D. Story then enters to vex the servant of God,
and labors to uphold the Popes Supremacy: and required the Bishop to make
a direct answer to the Articles. After he had played his part, Doctor Martin
takes him in hand, and labors to prove his oath (made to the king against
the Pope) unlawful. In the end the Judges willed him to answer directly to
certain Articles. Whereto (after the Archbishop had answered) the Bishop
Brooks concludes his examination with an Oration, to satisfy the people:
giving the Archbishop up, (he said) as an abject, and outcast from Gods
favor. Wherein he established (as much as he could) the Supremacy of the
Pope; Service in Latin; the Sacrament in one kind; Real presence; Rites; etc.
This Oration ended, D. Story most arrogantly deals with him, and labors
to prove the insufficiency of the Archbishops oath against the Pope. And so
(seeking to break up the Session) calls for witnesses to be deposed against
the next day, whose names were: Doctor Marshall, Commissarie, and Deane of
Christ's church: Doctor Smith, Vndercommissarie: D. Tresham: D. Cook: Perjured
persons for witnesses.
M. London: M. Curtop: M. Wade: M. Searles. Against whom the Archhishop took
exception, because they had been perjured in breaking their oath made to K.
Henry the eight.

Among other communication, Doctor Martin demanded of him, who was Supreme
head of the church of England. To whom the Archbishop answered, Christ, as of
the whole body. Why (quoth D. Martin) you made K. Henry the viij. the right
Supreme head of the church. Yea (said the Archb.) of all the people of england,
as well Ecclesiastical as Temporal. And not of the church (said Marten?) No,
(said he) What (quoth Marten) you durst not tell the king so. Yes that I durst
(quod the Archbishop) and did. The meaning of Supreme head.
In the publication of his Style, wherein he was named Supreme head of the
Church, there was no other thing meant.

Thus after they had asked him many frivolous questions, they cited him to
appear before the Pope, at Rome, within forty days. Which he said he would
(if the king and Queen would permit him) be content to do. But from thence
they carried him to prison again: The Archb. condemned for not being at Rome,
when they kept him in prison in England.
where he continued, notwithstanding he was commanded to appear at Rome.

Before twenty days of the forty were spent, the popes holiness sent his
Letters executorie unto the King, and Queen, to degrade, and deprive him of
his dignity. And although (by reason of his straight imprisonment) he could
not appear at Rome, yet was he condemned to be put to death, as one wilfully
absent, and failing (of frowardness) in his appearance.

The Popes definitive Letter was dated about the first of January, and
delivered here about the midst of February. Upon the receipt of which
Letter, another Session was appointed for the Archbishop to appear, the xiiij.
of February, before D. Thurlebie, (whom the Archb. always before used as his
dear friend) chief Co^missioner, and Boner. Who upon S. Valentines day, came
to Oxford, and calling the Archbishop before them in the Queere of Christ's
Church read their Commission, full of lies: as, that witnesses were there at
Rome examined on both parties, Impudent lies.
and all things indifferently considered: (he being kept close Prisoner in
Oxforde.) And there put upon him the Robes of an Archbishop, made of canuas,
and old cloutes, in scorn: with a miter, and a pal of the same suit in
mockery, and then put they the Crosier staff in his hand. Which being all
done, Boner falls to triumph over him, making an oration to the assembly: in
which he said to the people, this is the man that has ever despised the Popes
holiness: Boner derideth the Archb.
this is the man that pulled down so many churches: this is the man that like
Lucifer sat in place of Christ etc.

And so prosecuted his oration, lying and railing on the good Archbishop: and
afterward went to his degradation. At what time the Archb. pulled an appeal
out of his sleeue, which he delivered to them, saying: I appeal to the next
general Council, and thereof took witnesses of the standers by. Which
appeal being put up to the Bishop of Ely Thurleby, he said, their Commission
was to proceed against him without admitting any appeal. To whom when the
Archbishop answered, that then they offered him wrong.

Ely said: if it may be admitted it shall, and so received it of him: but
proceeded to his degrading, The poor estate of the Archbishop.
and stripped him out of his own gown, and put upon him a poor yeoman bedels
gown very bare worn: and evil fauouredly made, and a townsemans cappe on his
head: and so delivered him to the secular power, without one penny in his purse
to help himself: so that a gentleman of Gloucester shire gave money to the
Bailiffes to bestow upon him. For which deed he was stayed by Boner, and Ely:
and if friends had not been made, he had been sent to the Council.

In this meanetime, while ye Archb. was thus remaining indurance (whom they had
kept in prison now by the space of 3 years) by all flattering persuasions and
threatenings they labored him to recant: especially Henry Sydall, and Friar
John (a Spaniard,) de Villa Garcina, Cranmer sets his hand to a recantation.
were most earnest with him, and in the end so prevailed, that he set to his
hand to a recantation that they had drawn. Which recantation was not so soon
gotten, but the prelates without delay caused the same to be imprinted.

Now all this while Cranmer was in no certayntie of his life, notwithstanding
his recantation, although it was faithfully promised him by the Doctors. In the
mean time while these things were a doing, the Queen taking counsel how to
dispatch him out of the way, (who as yet knew nothing of her secret hate
against him, Queen Mary bare special hate to Cranmer.
and looked for nothing less then death) appointed Doctor Cole, and secretly
gave him commandment, that against the 21. of March he should prepare a
funeral sermon for Cranmers burning. Soon after, the Lord Williams of Thaine,
and the Lord Shandoys, Sir Thomas Bridges, and Sir John Brown were sent for
with other Gentlemen and Justices, and were commanded to be at Oxforde with
their retinue, least Cranmers death should raise there any tumult.

On the 21. day of March Doctor Cole comes to the Archb. in the morning, the
very same day which was appointed for his execution, and asked him if he had
any money. To whom he answered that he had none: he gave unto him 15. crowns,
to give them to the poor where he would, and so went about his Sermon. By
which dealing the Archbishop began to suspect more and more what they went
about.

Afterward came to him the Spanish Friar bringing, a paper with articles, which
Cranmer should openly profess in his recantatio^ before the people, earnestly
desiring him that he would write the same instrument with the articles with his
own hand, and sign it with his name. Which when he had don, the Friar desired
yt he would write another copy thereof, which should remain with him, and that
he did also. Yet the Archb. thinking his time was at hand, wherein he could no
longer dissemble, put his prayer in his bosom with his exhortation to ye
people written in another paper, which he minded to recite to ye people before
he should make ye last profession of his faith, fearing least if they had heard
the confession of his faith first, they would not afterward have suffered him
to exhort the people.

About 9. of the clock, the L. Williams of Them, Sir Thomas Bridges, Sir John
Brown, etc. came with their retain, and Cranmer was brought out of Bocardo,
unto S. Mary's Church: where he had his standing on a scaffold of a mean
height, there waiting til master Cole made him ready to his sermon. In which,
he declared causes why justly the Queen had determined his death: for that he
was a Traitor, and an heretic, etc. And that it seemed meet according to the
law of equality, that as the death of the Duke of Northumberland made even
with Tho. Moore, Law of equality.
so there should be one that should make even with Fisher of Rochester. And
because that Ridley, Hooper, and Farrar were not able to make even with that
man, it seemed meet that Cranmer should be joined to them, to fill up this
part of equality, etc. And then turning himself to the people, bad them all
beware of this man's example. The latter part of his sermon he directed to the
Archb. whom he encouraged and comforted: and did promise in the name of all the
priests that were present, that immediately after his death, there should be
Diriges, masses, and funerals executed for him in Oxford for his souls health.

Cranmer The pitiful case of Cranmer.
all this time stood heavy, and more then twentye times the tears gushed out
of his eyes, and dropped in abundance all the time of Coals sermon. Which
being ended, he calls back the people being ready to depart, to prayers:
and prayed Cranmer to express the undoubted profession of his faith that he
might take away all suspicion from men.

I will do it (said the Archb.) and with a good will. So he first read a prayer
to the people, which he pulled out of his bosom, and gave them exhortation of
contempt of the world, of obedience, of brotherly love, and above all things
bewailed his recantation, Cranmer bewaileth his recantation.
saying: that when he came to the fire, that hand which had subscribed
thereunto, should first burn. And so defied the Pope, with his detestable
doctrine etc. The standers by that looked for other matter, were all amazed at
his words, and the filthy priests and prelates greatly deceived, who raged
against him, especially Cole: so they pulled him down from the stage, and led
him to the fire: the Spanish Friar and the other railing on him in the way.
When he came to the place of execution, he not long tarying in his prayers,
Cranmer burns first the hand wherewith he subscribed.
put of his apparel to his shirt, and prepared himself to the fire: which
being put unto him, and burning near him, he put his right hand in the flame:
which he held so steadfast, saving that once with the same hand, he wiped his
face, that all men might see his hand burned before his body was touched:
which he held immovable all the time of his burning: lifting his eyes up to
heaven, and oftentimes repeating his unworthy right hand: and so long as his
voice would suffer him, using oftentimes the words of Stephen. Lord Jesus
receive my spirit. Cranmer burned.
And in the greatness of the flame, he gave up the Ghost.

The wicked cannot discern the spirits.
The Spaniard beholding this constancy of the Archbishop ran, to the Lord
Williams of Them, crying, that Cranmer was vexed in mind, and died in
desperation. And this was the end of that worthy servant of GOD, who
suffered in the midst of Queen Mary's reign, and was almost the very middle
man of all the martyrs of her days.

Why Cranmer desired life.
It was thought he desired life, to finish certain works, and to reserve
himself for better times, for the use of the Church.

About the same time that the Archbishop was burned at Oxforde, suffered
likewise in Ipswich two women: the one named Agnes Potten, the other called
Joan Trunchfield, either in the same month of Marth, or (as some said) in the
end of February the next before. They suffered for the matter of the
Sacrament, and bare their martyrdom with great patience, and godly courage.

After these women, the same month suffered three men at one fire in
Salesburie for the testimony of the Gospel. Their names were, John Spicer,
John Spicer.
free mason, William Coberly Will. Coberley.
Tailor, John Maundrell John Maundrel.
husbandman. Upon a Sunday, they being at the Parrish church called Keuell in
Wiltshire, and seeing the parrish in procession to follow and worship the Idol
there carried, advised them to leave the same, and to turn to the living God:
namely speaking to one Robert Barkesdale headman of the parrish, but he took
no regard to their words. After this the Vicar came into the pulpet, who there
being about to read his beadroll, and to pray for the souls in purgatory,
John Maundrell speaking with an audible voice, said, that that was the popes
pinfold, the other two affirming the same. Purgatory the Popes Pinfold.
After which words (by the commandment of the priest) they were had to the
stocks, where they remained till Service was done: and then were brought
before a Justice of Peace, and the next day were carried to Salesburie, and
presented before Bishop Capon, and William Ieffrey Chaunceller of the Dyoces:
by whom they were imprisoned, and often examined privately. At the last they
were examined publicly before them, in the presence of the sheriff of the
Shire, one M. Saint-Iohns, and other popish priests, in the Church of
Fisherton-anger. Where the Chancellor objected to them, touching the
Sacrament; the Popes Supremacy; Images; etc. To which when they answered
frankly, according to the truth, they were all there condemned, an. 1556 the
xxiij. of March.

And the four and twentieth day of the same month, they were carried out of
the jail, to a place betwixt Salisburie and Milton, where they were committed
to the fire. Which they endured constantly, witnessing the truth. Of which 3.
Caberley had the painfullest death, by reason of the standing of the wind,
which notwithstanding patiently he did endure.

About the 23. of April, Anno, 1556. were burned in Smithfield at one fire,
vi. at one fire in Smithfield.
vj, constant Martyrs, suffering for the testimony of the truth, viz. Robert
Drakes Robert Drakes
minister, William Timmes Will. Timmes.
Curate, Richard Spurge Rich. Spurge.
Shereman, Thomas Spurge Tho, Spurge.
Fuller, John Cauell John Cauell.
Weauer, George Ambrose Geo. Ambrose
Fuller, all of Essex, and so of the dyoces of London, and were sent up, some
by the L. Rich, and some by others at sundry times unto Stephen Gardener B.
of Winchester about the 22. of March, Anno. 1555. who upon small examination
sent some of them unto the kings bench, others unto the marshalsea: where they
remained almost all the year, until the Bishops death, and had nothing said
unto them till Doctor Heath was chosen Chancellor: to whom four of these
prisoners made their supplication, requiring favor and deliverance. Upon the
receipt hereof, Sir Richard Read knight, one of the officers of the Court of
Chauncery, was sent the sixteeen of January unto the marshalsea to examine
those four: Richard Spurge, Thomas Spurge, George Ambrose, and John Cauell.
The effect of which was, that they were complained upon, for not coming to the
Church, by the parson of Barking, unto the L. Rich: which they confessed to be
true, and declared what moved them to absent themselves.

About the iiij. day of March next after, Robert Drakes, Parson of Thundersley
in Essex, was also examined.

In Queen Mary's days there were two sermons preached in Master Tirrels
Wooddes, the one named Plumborowe-woodde, and the other Bechers-wood: and an
hundred at once were at the Sermons. The Sermons were preached by Master
Timmes, Deacon, and Curate of Hocley in Essex. This preaching the said Master
Tirrell took for a heinous matter, and charged one Gye which was his heardman,
that frequented Sermons, and the society of the godly, to fetch M. Timmes unto
him. Who made excuse, and said he could not find him. Then stepped forth
another of his men, one Richard Shierife, that with the Constable, went and
fetched him to M. Tirrel. Who had talk with him alone three hours together,
and ended his talk with Master Timmes, A short answer of master Timmes.
in a heat, calling him traytorly knave. Why (said Timmes) in king Edwards
days you did affirm the truth as I do now. Affirm (quoth Tirrel,) Nay by
Gods body, I never thought it with my heart. Well (said Tim.) then I pray you
M. Tirrel, bear with me, for I have been a traitor but a while, but you have
been a traitor vj. years. After this he was sent to the B. of London, and
from him to the B. of Winchester, and so to the kings Bench.

When he came to the Bishop of London, there was with him the B. of Bangor,
before whom he behaved him self in such sort, as the Constables that brought
him reported, that they never heard the like. In the Kings bench he was
mightily strengthened by the good men which he found there with the other five.

The xxi. of March he was brought to public examination. First in the Bishops
Palace at London, where he enquired of him, touching the Sacrament of the
Altar: Whereunto he answered contrary to the Popish doctrine, and was reasoned
with of the B. Chaplens, with no great authority of scriptures, or fathers.

The xxiij. day of the same month next after, the Bishop sent again for
Timmes and Drakes, and ex officio objected articles. And on the xxvi. day of
the same month, he ministered also the same Articles to the other four. To
which Popish articles they answered negatiuely. And in conclusion, the xxviij.
of March, they were all brought particularly to the Consistory, before the
Bishop of London, to be condemned for heresy. Where (when he required
Timmes and the rest to recant) he replied unto him, that he himself had
written against the usurped power of the Bishop of Rome, having prefixed his
Preface to Winchesters book, De vera obedientia. After much debate, partly of
Bishop Boner, and partly of one Doctor Cook, and Doctor Pendleton, to peruerte
the constant Professor of Jesus Christ: when they could not prevail against
him, they condemned him (as an Heretic) to be burned. And proceeded against
the other v godly men, fellow Prisoners with M. Timmes. who all together the
xiiij. of April, suffered for witnessing to the truth.

About this time, or somewhat before, came down certain Commissioners, assigned
by the Queen and Counsel, into Norfolk and Suffolk, Commissioners into
Norfolk and Suff.
to enquire of matters of Religion. Unto which Commissioners there was a
Supplication put up by some well disposed men in those quarters: praying them
to have pity and compassion, and praying God to move the Queens heart,
according to the examples of Darius, Assuerus, Traianus, Theodosius, etc. to
call back those commandementes and Commissions, which had passed against the
Saints of God.

The first day of April this present year, John Harpoole, John Harpool.
of the Parish of Saint Nicholas in Rochester, and Ioane Beats Joan Beats.
widow, were condemned by Maurice, the Bishop of Rochester: and suffered death
by fire in the same Town, for the testimony of Jesus Christ, against the
Sacrifice of the Popish Altar.

Next after these ensued the death of Master John Hullier, John Hullier,
Conduct in the kings College at Cambridge: who suffered under Doctor
Thurlebie, bishop of Elie, and his Chancellor, for the sincere setting forth
of Gods Gospel, the second of April.

Not long after the death of Robert Drakes, and William Timmes, and the other
Essex martirs, vi. other blessed martirs suffered al at one fire in the town
of Colchester, whose names were these: Christopher Lister, Six martirs at one
fire in Colchester. Chr. Lyster.
of Dagneham, husbandman, John Mace John Mace.
of Colchester Apothecary, John Spe^ser John Spenser.
of Colechester weauer, John Hammon John Hammo^.
of Colchester Tanner, Symo^ Iaine Simon Iayne.
sawier, Richard Nicholas Richard Nicholas.
of Colchester weauer. With these 6. was also joined another, named Roger
Grasbrooke, but he submitted himself. Of these yt B. made a quick dispatch:
for soon after they were delivered to one John Kingstone bacheler of the
civil Law, and then commissary to the B. by the Earl of Oxf. and other
commissioners, and by him sent up to his Lord and M. The B. caused them to be
brought unto his house at Fulham, where in the open church were ministered unto
them articles touching the Romish church, the mass, transubstantiation, and
other the Popes trumperie. To which when they answered according to the verity
of the Gospel, they were of him condemned, and sent to Colchester, where the
28. of April most cheerfully, they suffered, (to the great encouragement of
others) for the testimony of Jesus.

The sixteenth day of May, Hugh Lauerock Hugh Lauore. of 68, years.
of the parish of Barking, painter, of the age of sixty eight, a lame creeple,
and John Ap Price John ap Price
a blind man were burned at Stratford Bow for the constant profession of the
Gospel, against the superstition of Antechrist, being condemned by Boner.

At their death Hugh Lauerocke, Lauerock comfort his fellow.
after he was chained, casting away his crooch, and comforting John Ap Price
his fellow Martyr, said unto him: Be of good comfort brother, for my Lord of
London is a good Physician, he will heal us both shortly: Thee of thy
blindness, and me of my lamenes. And so patiently they suffered together.

The next day after the martyrdom of these two, there suffered in the fire in
Smithfield, iiij. women: Katherin Hut of Barking, widow, Ioane Horns of
Bellerica, maid, Elizabeth Thackuis of great Burstead, maid, Margaret Ellis
of Billerica, maid: these with other mo, were persecuted, and sent up to Boner,
specially by sir I. Morda^t, and Edmund Tyrrell Esquire, and were condemned by
him the third of April, and burned the sixteenth of May.

The 5. day of May was Thomas Drewry Tho. Drewry.
a blind boy, and Thomas Croker Tho. Croker.
Bricklayer martyred in the fire at Gloucester, being condemned by D. Williams
then Chaunceller. Who when he said that the Chaunceller taught him that which
he called Heresy in the pulpit, and the Chaunceller bad him do as he had
done. No said the boy to him, though you can so easily dispense with your
self, and mock with God, the world and your conscience: yet I will not so do.
Then God have mercy upon thee (said the Chaunceller) for I will read sentence
against thee: and so did, and committed him to the secular power to be burned
with Thomas Croker.

The 21. of May Anno 1556. Three men, Thomas Spicer Tho. Spicer.
of Winstone laborer, John Denny, Ioh. Denny.
and Edmond Poole, Edm. Poole.
were burned at Beckles for witness bearing to the truth. They were persecuted
by Sir John Tyrrel Knight, of Gipping hall in Suffolk: and were condemned by
Dunning Chauncelour of Norwich, and master Monges the register, sitting at the
town of Beckles. Where the Chancellor himself burst out in tears, exhorting
them to return to the papistical Church. Which when they refused, he read the
sentence against them even with tears, and delivered them to the Secular power
(Sir John Sylliard being then high Sheriff of Norfolk and Suffolk)
notwithstanding that the writ de comburendo, was not yet come down.

After they had prayed, they (making confession of their Faith) came to, I
believe the Catholic Church. That is well said (quoth Sir John Sylliard) I am
glad to hear that. It is the best word I heard of you yet. To the which words
Edmunde Poole answered, that though they believe the Catholic Church, yet do
they not believe in their Popish Church: and therefore no part of their
belief. They (being all at the stake, and the fire burning about them, praised
God in such an audible voice, The Martyrs praise God in the flames of fire.
as it was wonderful to all those that stood by.

By the procurement of sir John Tyrrel knight, and other his fellow colleagues,
there were persecuted, out of ye town of Winson in Suffolk these persons
here, following: Anno. 1556. Mistress Ales Twaites gentlewoman, of the age of
60. years and more, and two of her servants, Humfrey Smith and his wife,
William Catchpoole and his wife, John Mawlin and his wife, Nicholas Burlingham
and his wife, and one Rought and his wife. There were also driven out of the
Town of Mendlesame in Suffolk, Simon Harlestone and Catherin his wife with
his five Children, William Whitting and Catherin his wife, Thomas Dobson and
his wife, John Deacon, his wife and his maid, William Deacon, Thomas Woodward
the elder, one Reynoldes wife a pore widow, one mother Symons maid, besides
those that were constrained to do against their consciences. The cause of their
persecution was, ye they denied the Popes supremacy, held the Queen to be
supreme, ye ministers might marry, etc. Many of these persons were of great
substance, and had possessions of their own.

The last day of the month of May John Slech being imprisoned in the kings
bench for the doctrine of the Gospel there died and was buried on the backsyde
of the same prison.

About the 6. day of June next following Thomas Harland Tho. Harland.
of Woodmancote Carpenter, John Oswald. John Oswalde.
ibid. husbandman, Thomas Auington Th. Auington.
of Ardinglye Turner, and Thomas Read, Tho. Read.
suffered at Lewis together for the testimony of the Gospel. In the same town
of Lewis and the same month suffered, Thomas Wood, Tho. Wood.
and Thomas Milles, the 20. day of the same month, for the testimony of
Jesus. John Milles.


In the which month William Adheral minister dyed in the kings bench the 24.
day of the same month, and was buried on the back side. And so also Clement
wheelwright dying there, was buried upon a dunghill the 25. of June.

A merchants servant at Lecester. Thirtene at one fire.
The xxvj. of June suffered a merchants servant at Leycester, for the testimony
of the gospel.

The xxvij. ot June, xj. men and two women were burned in one fire at Stratford
the Bow by London: whose dwellings were in sundry places in Essex. Their names
were Henry Adlington, H. Adlington.
Laurence Pernam, L. Pernam.
Henry Wye, Henry Wye.
William Halliwell, W. Hallywell.
Thomas Bowyer, Th. Bowyer.
Georges Searles, G. Searles.
Edmund Hurst, Edm. Hurst.
Lion Couch, Lion Couch.
Rafe Iackson, Rafe Iackson.
John Deryfall, John Derifall.
John Routh, John Routh.
Elizabeth Pepper, Eliz. Pepper.
Agnes George: Agnes George
unto whom the sixth of June Anno 1556. Doctor Darbyshire Boners Chancellor in
form of law ministered articles of Popery, to which they made their answers
in simplicity of good conscience. When they were condemned and the day
appointed that they should suffer, which was the xxvij. of June, they were
carried to Stratford bow, and divided in two parts into several chambers.
Afterward the Shiriffe came to each part, and told them that the other part
had recanted; and should not therefore suffer death, The subtlety of the
devil.
counsailyng them to do the like, etc. To whom they answered: as their
brethren had done before, that their faith was not builded on Man, but on
Christ and his sure word. So the Shiriffe seeing no hope to prevail, had them
to the stake, which they kissed and embraced very heartily. The two women were
loose and not tied to any stake, Two women stood loose at the stake.
and so they all gladly suffered (for the gospels sake) the extremity of the
fire.

In the company of those before said, were three more condemned to die, whose
names were: Thomas Freeman, William Stannard, and William Adams. These being in
the hands of the secular power, Cardinal Poole Cardinal Poole pardons
certain condemned for the gospel.
sent dispensation for their lives, by means whereof they escaped.

The Sunday after the condemnation of the sixteen aforesaid, Fecknam Deane of
Paul's preached at the cross, that they had as many sundry opinions, as they
were persons: whereupon they set forth a confession of their faith, and set to
their hands.

After the burning of these in Stratford, the same month died in the prison of
the kings bench in Southwarke, one Tho. Parret, and was buried in the backeside
the 27. day of June. Also Martine Hunt (as is reported) in the same prison was
famished the 20. day. At which time likewise died in the same prison John
Norice, and was buried on the backside.

After the death of the three aforesaid, Roger Bernard, Roger Bernard.
a laboring man, dwelling in Fransden in Suffolk, was taken in the night by
master Tamages men, because he would not go to Church. Adam Foster Adam
Foster.
of the age of six and twenty years, husbandman, dwelling in Mendlesham in
Suffolk, was taken at his own house by the Constables of the Town, George
Kiuert, and Thomas Mouse, and carried to Sir John Tyrrell aforesaid knight, who
sent him to Aye dungeon, and from thence to Norwich, where he was condemned of
the Bishop Hopton. Robert Lawson Rob. Lawson.
a single man of thirtye years, a linen Weauer, was apprehended in the night
by one Robert Keerich, at the commandment of Sir John Tyrrel aforesaid, and
sent to Norwich, and then was there condemned of the Bishop.

These 3. were, after they were condemned, had to Berrie where they cheerfully
and joyfully suffered for the testimony of Jesus.

Bernard being threatened at Norwich of the priests whipping, burning, stocking,
and such like, to terrify him, when flattery would not serve, said unto them:
Friends I am not better then my master Christ, and the prophets which your
fathers served after such sort, and I for his names sake, am content to suffer
the like at your hands, A worthy answer of the martyr.
if God shall so permit, trusting that he will strengthen me in the same
according to his promise, in spite of the Devil and all his ministers.

The 20. of April, the same Bishop had before him one John Fortune otherwise
called Cutler, of Hintlesham in Suffolk a black smith, a man in spirit
zealous, and ardent: in the scriptures ready, in Christ's cause stout, and
valiant: in his answers marvelous: patient in suffering, and constant in the
doctrine of the Gospel.

Him the B. of Norwich, very likely condemned also after diverse examinations.
Whether he died in the fire or otherwise was prevented by death, it is
uncertain. But his sentence of condemnation, was drawn and registered. About
this time the first of July, died one John Careless John Careless a worthy
confessor.
of Couentry, a weauer, in the Kings bench, after long imprisonment the space
of two years. In which captivity, first being in Couentry jail, he was there
in such credit with his keeper, that upon his word only, he was let out,
to play in the Pageant about the City with other his companions: and that
done, keeping truth with his keeper, returned again into prison at his hour
appointed.

After that, being brought up to London: he showed such patience, and
constant fortitude, that he longed for nothing more earnestly then to come to
the promotion to dye in the fire for the profession of his faith: but he was
prevented by death in the prison, through sickness, and was buried on a dunghill
in the fields.

In the mean time yt he was in the kings bench, he was in great perturbation of
mind and conscience: whereupon he wrote to master Philpot, then being in
the Cole-house, and received from him a comfortable letter. He had been
examined of Doctor Martin, who urged him to detect his fellows, and reasoned
with him about Predestination, cauilling and scoffingly. He was a man of a
most heavenly spirit, and wrote diverse letters to sundry afflicted then for
the Gospel, John Careless letters.
as to Philpot, to Bradford, to master Green, master Whitle, M. Timmes,
Henry Adlington, etc. a great number.

The same month of July suffered at Newbery 3. godly and constant martirs of
Christ, Julius Palmer, John Guin, Thomas Askine. Julius Palmer. John Guin. Th.
Askin.
Julius Palmer was sometime a Student and fellow of Magdalen College in Oxford,
and afterward Schoolmaster in the Town of Reding. He was borne in Couentree,
and before his calling to the knowledge of the truth, a great adversary to
the Gospel, and a contemner of the ministers of the truth. In so much as he
was expelled his College in the end of king Edwards days, for popery. Iul.
Palmer expulsed his College in K. Edwardes time for popery.
So that for his maintenance, he was feign to apply himself to teach children
in the house of Sir Fraunces Knolles. In which trade he continued til the
coming of Q. Marie. In whose days he was restored again to his place by her
Visitors. Where being placed a while, and understanding the cruel dealing of
the Papists against the servants of God: and seeing their constancy: in the
hearing of diverse of his friends, he burst out into these words, or such like:
Oh raging cruelty, O tirannie tragical, and more then barbarous.

From that day forward, he studiously sought to understand the truth, and
seriously studied P. Martires Comme^taries upon the first to the Corinthians.
And at length grew up in such ripenes of the truth, that he spared not to
declare certain sparks thereof in his outward behavior and doings.
Wherefore, being abhorred of diverse (especially of M. Cole, the President)
which were before his friends: he addressed himself to depart the house. And
being demanded by a friend of his, how he would live, answered: The earth is
the Lords, and the fulness thereof. etc.

After the giving over of his Fellowship, he was placed by Patent, Schoolmaster
at Reding, and there was accepted of those that feared God. But there he
remained not long. For certain dissembling Hipocrites, who (pretending zeal to
the Gospel) crept into familiarity with him, and in his absence, spared not to
rifle his Study, and writings. Among which was his Replication to Meruines
verses, touching Winchesters Epitaph and other Arguments both in Latin and
English, against the Popes proceedings, and especially against their brutish
tyranny toward the servants of God.

Which these companions having found, did threaten him that except he would
give up his school to a friend of theirs, ( Thomas Thackam, Th. Thackam a
false dissembling hipocrite
a false dissembling knave, and a chief woorker of his death) they would
deliver those his writings to the Counsel. Whereupon, for sauegarde of his
life, he was forced to depart upon the sudden, and took his journey toward
Euesham, where his mother dwelt, Hoping to receive of her certain Legacies, by
his Fathers will due unto him certain years before. Who so soon as he came
to his mother, and asked her blessing, she cursed him, vpbrayding him with his
forsaking of Oxforde, and his coming from Reding. She threatening him fire and
fagagotte, The mother threatens her son Julius Palmer with fire and faggot.
in stead of his Legacies. So being destitute of all worldly help, he advised
himself to go closely to Reading, there to receive his quarters stipende,
which he left vnreceiued at his departure, and to convey from thence his
stuff. Which he did not so secretly, but that he was espied, and there by
means of one Master Hampton, a false hypocrite, under pretense of
friendship, he was betrayed, and within short space was taken at the sign of
the Cardinals hatte in Reading, and was put into a vile, stinking, and blind
Dungeon. Where ten days he hanged by the hands and feet, so high, that
welneere no part of his body touched the ground.

After all this, he was brought before the Mayor of Reading, and there those
false Brethren which before had robbed his study, objected against him,
Treason, Sedition, Murder, and Adultery, etc. Which when they could not
prove, they laid unto his charge the writings that they had stolen out of his
Study.

Wherefore once again he was called out of prison, and appeared before the
Mayor, and Byrd the official, and two other Justices, to render an account of
his faith. And when they had gathered of his own mouth sufficient matter to
entrap him, they devised a byll of instructions against him, to be directed to
Doctor Geffery, who had determined to hold his visitation the next tuesday at
Newbery, being the sixteenth day of July. So he was sent to Newbery, and came
thither on the Monday at night, and with him Thomas Askins his fellow prisoner,
where they found John Grome their faithful brother in the Lord.

So the xv. of July the prisoners appeared before Doctor Geffery and other
Commissioners, where after reasoning of the authority and universality of the
church of Rome, and of the presence in the Sacrament etc. when no allurements
nor persuasions would prevail, they were all three condemned and burned
together.

Being at the place of their martyrdom, Palmer comfort his fellows with
the promises of God, and pronounced with an audible voice the xxxj. Psalm.

But the other two made their prayers secretly to almighty God, all three
falling to the ground: and as Palmer began to rise, there came behind him a
popish priest, exhorting him to recant, to whom Palmer Palmer at the stake.
answered: Away, away, tempt me no longer, away, I said, from me all ye that
work iniquity, for the Lord has heard the voice of my tears. And forthwith
they put of their raiment, went to the stake and kissed it, and when they were
bound to the post, Palmer said: good people pray for us, that we may persevere
to the end, and for Christ's sake beware of popish teachers, for they deceive
you.

Which as he spoke, a servant of one of the Bayliffes, threw a faggot at his
face, that the blood gushed out in diverse places. Thus fire being put to them
they all crying Lord Jesus strengthen us, Lord Jesus assist us, Lord Jesus receive
our souls, they ended this mortal life.

Palmer was about 24. years old when he suffered. The last time of his being
at Oxford, one Barwicke then fellow of Trinity College a rank papist began
to reason with him, and perceiving him to be earnest and zealous, said unto him
in the hearing of Master Thomas Perrey and others there present. Well Palmer,
well, now thou art stout and hardy in thine opinion, but if thou were once
brought to ye stake, I believe thou would tell me another tale. I advise
thee beware of ye fire: it is a shrewd matter to burn.

Truly said Palmer Palmer diverse times in danger of burning.
I have been in danger of burning once or twice, and hitherto I thank God I
have escaped it, but I judge verily it will be mine end at the last: welcome be
it, by the grace of God.

In deed it is an hard matter for them to burn, that have the mind and soul
linked to the body, as a thief is tied in a pair of Fetters. But if a man be
once able through the help of Gods spirit to separate and divide the soul
from the body: for him it is no more maisterie to burn, then for me to eat a
piece of bread. For whom it is easy to burn.


About the same month of July Agnes Wardal of the town of Ipswich, a virtuous
woman, and one that hated the Romish trash, was persecuted by Richard Argentine
a physician in the town, Phillip Vlmes, Edmond Leach John Steward, and Matthew
Butler, malicious enemies of Gods children. But by Gods great providence they
escaped their hands, and was delivered.

In the same month also Peter Moan a Tailer of the town of Ipswich with his
wife were called before the B. keeping visitation at Ipswich, and through
frailty yielded to the Bishop. Whereof after they fsll into great grief of
conscience, when they came home to their house: and looking when they should be
sent for again to the B. the next day, who had appointed them then to appear.
The time appointed drawing nigh, they heard the belles ring for the B.
departure out of the town. So they escaped farther trial.

Against these, was one Richard Smart a Portman of the town, an earnest member
of the Popish Church: but afterward he repented him thereof with tears.

In the Isle of Gernesey 3. women, Katherine Couches Catherine Couches.
Guillemme Gilbert. Perotine Massey. The mother and 2. daughters at Gernsey.
the mother, and one Guillemme Gilbert, and Perotine Massey her daughters, were
burned for the cause of the Gospel, and refusing to come to Church.
Notwithstanding, they protested to hold nothing against the Popish Church:
neither was there heard any information against them: neither were they
examined before of their religion at any time, yet were they condemned by Sir
James Amy Dean, and the Curates of the Isle to be burned for Heretics. Which,
when the Bayliefes and Iurates understood, how they had not examined them of
their faith, and yet condemned them for heretics: they would not sit in
judgment that day, but ordained they should first be examined of them. Which
being done, an Act and sentence was delivered against them to the former
effect, that they should be executed as heretics: no accuser having been
heard against them, Cruelty against the mother and her 2. daughters.
and the innocent parties protesting they would entirely obey the ordinances of
the Church. So sentence being given against them by Elier Gosseline Bailieffe,
(notwithstanding they had appealed from the same to the king, Queen, and
Council) yet were they the 18. of July all burned together at 3. stakes, the
mother in the midst, the eldest daughter on the right side, and the youngest
on the left.

They were first strangled, but the rope brake before they were dead: so the
poor women fell into the fire, Marvelous cruelty.
Perotine great with child, brast asunder by the vehemency of the fire, and
her infant being a fair manchild fell into the fire, and eftsoons taken out
of the fire by one W. House, was laid upon the grass, from thence it was had
to the provost, and from him to the Baylife. Whose censure was, that it should
be carried back, and cast into the fire: so was the child baptized in his own
blood to fill up the number of the saints.

Near about the same time that these 3. women with the infant were burned,
there suffered for the doctrine of the Gospel at Greensteed in Sussex two men
Thomas Dungate, Tho. Dungate.
and John Foreman, John Forman.
and one woman called mother Dree, the 18. of July.

About the 26. of June, one Tho. Moore Tho. More.
of the age of 24. servant in a man's house in Leicester, was condemned and
burned, because he said, his maker was in heaven and not in the pixe.

About the same time, the 11. of March, John Iackson was examined of Doct.
Cook, concerning the Church and Sacrament of the altar. In which quarrel, the
godly confessor behaved himself boldly and wisely against the Bishop. Who when
no other argument would serve, he commanded him to prison again: but what
became of him it is uncertain.

The first day of August Anno 1556. Joan Wast Joan Wast a blind woman.
a blind woman from her birth of the age of two and twenty, was condemned and
burned in the town of Darbie, for maintayning the doctrine in King Edwardes
days. They that sat upon her, were Sir Rafe Bayne Bishop of the dioces,
Doctor Dracot his Chauncelour, Sir John Port Knight, etc. She being pressed and
half astonished through their terrors and threats, and desirous (as it seemed)
to prolong her life, offered unto the Bishop then present, if he would
before that company take it upon his conscience that the doctrine which he
would have her to believe concerning the Sacrament, was true; and that he would
at the dreadful day of judgment, answer for her therein (as Doctor Tailor
in diverse of his Sermons did offer) she would then further answer them. Her
offer to the Judges.
Which when it would not be stood unto, the poor woman perceiving the same,
answered again: that if they refused to take of their conscience, that it was
true which they would have her to believe, she would answer no further: but
desired them to do their pleasure. And so after certain circumstances, they
pronounced sentence against her, and delivered her to the Bayliffes of the
town of Darbie, to be put to death: where cheerefullie she suffered in the
fire for the testimony of the truth which she before had professed.

This poor blind maid would hyre with money such as would not freely, do so
much, for to read certain chapters of the New Testament unto her, and would
bargayne with them, how often to read one chapter upon a price. Although she
was borne blind, yet could she without a guide go to any Church in the town,
or to any other place or person, that used to read unto her, or had any
godly exercises.

The 8. of September suffered Edward Sharp Edw. Sharp.
borne in Wiltshire, of the age of 60. years, at Bristow: where he constantly
maintained the quarrel of Christ against Antichrist, to the death.

The 24. of September suffered 4 men, John Heart, Four at Mayfield in Sussex.
Tho. Rauensdal, a Shoemaker, and a Collier, al four together at Mayfield in
Sussex, for the testimony of Jesus, etc.

The next day after was a young man put to death at Bristow for the like
testimony. A young man at Bristow.
Not long after whose death suffered the xxvij. of September, John Horn, I.
Horn, and a woman.
and a woman at Wootton Under hedge, in Glocestershire.

In the parish of Wootton Vnder-hedge, William Dangerfield, W. Dangerfield.
(after he had been a space from home for fear of the cruelty of the time)
being a professor of the Gospel, repaired to his wife lying in childbed of the
tenth child: who was not so soon come home, but was espied; and apprehended,
and had to prison by the cruel sentence of D. Brooks, bishop. In whose cruel
handling he remained so long, till his feel were almost freited off with Irons.

After the apprehension of the husband, the wife also was taken with her young
borne child (being but fourteen days old) out of her childbed, and carried
into the common jail, and there placed among thieves and murderers, Great
cruelty.
where both she and her infant could never come to fire, but she was driven to
warm the clothes that she should put about the child, in her bosom.

While they both lay thus enclosed, ye B. subtly got promise of the husband
to recant, declaring unto him that his wife had so done already. (which was
untruth) So they suffered him upon that promise to go to his wife. To whom he
declared with a sorrowful heart, how he had bin circumuented: and pulled out of
his bosom a copy of his recantation, The wife encourages her husband.
whereto he had granted his promise. At the sight whereof, his wives heart claue
asunder, saying: has Satan so prevailed, etc. So he departed from her with
tears, and prayed GOD he might not live so long as to call evil good, and
good evil: so going homeward to his house, he took his death, and shortly
after dyed, according to his prayer. After this, Ioane his wife continued in
prison with her infant: which being starued in prison with cold and famine,
(the milk of the mother failing through evil using,) was sent away when it
was past all remedy: and shortly after died. And not long after the mother
died also, besides, an old woman of 90. years, mother of her husband, being
left alone in the house comfortless.

In the Month of October next following, suffered a Shoemaker, A Shoemaker at
Northhampton.
at Northhampton, for the steadfast professing of the truth.

After whom, not long, in the same month died three godly Confessors in the
Castle of Chichester, and were buried in the fields.

In the same month was burned also one Hook Hook.
a true witness of the Lord, at Chester.

As Boner was the cruellest among the bishops, so Harpsfield among all the
archdeaco^s (except Dunning of Norw.) was the cruellest: by whose means there
were now xv. Professors of the Gospel together in prison, in Canterbury
Castle. Whereof five were famished to death, Five famished and x. burned at
Canterbury
and ten burned. The names of the famished were these: John Clarke, Dunstan
Chittenden, uncondemned: Walter Foster, of Stone, Alice Potkins, wife, of
Staplehurst, John Hurst of Cranbrock, Weauer, condemned to be burned. Alice
Potkins A witty and godly answer of Alice Potkins.
being asked of her age, said she was 49. years old, according to her old age:
and according to her young age, since she learned Christ, she was of one years
age.

In the months of September, November, and December, in the Dioces of
Couentree and Lichfield, much trouble fell to diverse persons, for the
profession of ye Gospel, through the cruelty of the Bishop, named Rafe Bane,
and a more cruel Chancellor, called Doctor Draicotte. By whose means many
persons were driven to bear fagots in those quarters.

Thus ends the fourth year of Queen Mary's Reign, In which year, the
number of the slain for the Gospel, The end of the fourth year of Q. Marie.
Eighty four persons put to death in the fourth year of Q. Marie.
came to 84. persons. Besides such as fled, and privately by practices were
made away.

About this time, Sir John Cheek, sometime Schoolmaster to King Edward the
sixth, being in Germany, out of all danger, would needs take his journey with
Sir Peter Carewe, to Bruxels, with king Philips safe conduct to pass and
repasse, by the means of the Lord Paget, and Sir John Mason, who pledged for
his safe conduct, king Philippes fidelity. But in his return, when he had
brought the Lord Paget on his way, from Bruxels toward England, he, (with Sir
Peter Carewe,) was taken by the prouost-marshall, spoiled of their horses, and
clapped into a Carte, their legs, arms, and bodies, tied with halters to the
body of the Carte: And so shipped (being blindfolded) under the hatches, and
brought to the Tower of London, Where at the length, Sir John Cheek Sir I.
Cheek.
was brought to recant, and was drawn (unawares) to sit in place where the
poor Martirs were brought before Boner, and other Bishops, to be condemned.
The remorse whereof wrought such effect in him, that not long after he left
this mortal life, repenting him greatly of his fall before his death.

The end of the eleventh Book.
The twelfth and last Book.
Cardinal Poole three years after his return into England, advised himself
of the reforming of the University of Ca^bridge. The university of Cambridge
to be reformed.
To perform which charge, were chosen Cutbert Scot, not long before
consecrated B of Chester, Nicholas Ormanet an Italian, archpriest of ye people
of Bodalon in the dioces of Veron, professed in both laws, bearing ye name of
Lord Pope his Datary, T. Watson elected B. of Lincoln, John Christophorson
elected B. of Chichester, and Henry Cole, provost of the College of Eaton.

The 9. of January. Anno 1556. Inquisitors came to Cambridge.
The inquisitors aforesaid came to Cambridge, and took up their lodgings all of
them in Trinity college with M. Christophorson master of the College. The
next day after their coming, they interdicted two Churches, namely, S. Mary's,
Q. Mary's and S. Michaels Churches were interdicted.
where Martin Bucer, and S. Michaels, where Paulus Phagius was buried, now
three or four years past. During which time unto that day, the Priests never
ceased to celebrate masses and other ceremonies in these Churches, and that
without scruple, till the coming of these Commissioners. Who commanded
hereafter, that the assemblies which should be made for executing of holy
ceremonies, should be removed to ye kings Chapel.

On the xj. day the Vicechancellor of the University, with the Masters of
houses, and the rest of the Graduates, were commanded to appear before the
Commissioners in their habites: and so did in the gatehouse of Trinity
college, which was adorned for the Commissioners. Where the vicecha^cellor
aforesaid, having on a tissue cope, sprinkeled the Commissioners with holy
water, and purposed to cense the^, but they refused it there. Which
notwithstanding afterward in the Queens College, and elsewhere they refused
not.

There M. John Stokes orator of the University welcomed them with an oration,
whereto the B. of Chichester answered, with thankful acceptance of the
courtesy of the university, and so declared the cause of their commission.
From thence they were brought to the kings College, where was song a mass
of the holy Ghost. From thence they went to the interdicted Church of saint
Mary's: where Pecocke preached against heresy and heretics, naming Bylney,
Cranmer, Latimer, Rydley, etc. That being ended, they proceeded to their
visitation, which Robert Brassey master of kings College, a worthy aged man
would not admit in his college, Kings college refuses the inquisitors.
because the visitation of his house was wholly reserved to the B. of Lincoln.
Which exception they took all in great displeasure.

The 12. of January, they resorted to kings college, for that College, (time
out of mind) had been counted never to be without an heretic or twain. The M.
of that College, master Brassey K. college never without an heretic. Robert
Brassey a good old man master of K. College.
makes his exception again to their visitaon: but it would not serve.

In that College some there were that refused to take their oath, because they
had given it to their College before: and also would not be brought thereby to
accuse themselves: yet at the length (with much a do) they were contented to
be sworn. Three days long lasted the Inquisition. There after this it was
advised, that the University should themselves first decree against Bucer and
Phagius, and after make Supplication to the Commissioners, for the confirming
of this decree. So the University authorized their Vicechancellour, to be the
common factor for the University. Which Supplication being put up to the
Commissioners the xiij. day, was of them granted: and afterward confirmed by
the whole consent of the University, and signed with the common seal the
fourteenth day, by the Vice-Chaunceller by Doctor Young Doctor Haruey,
Swineborne, Marpetide, etc. After they had all dyned together at master Bacons,
master of Gonwell hall: by and by they carried it to the Commissioners to
their Lodging. Their condemnation being openly read, then was it desired to
send out process to cite Bucer and Phagius to appear, or any other that would
take upon the^ to plead their cause against ye next mu^day. So the next day
process went out to cite the offenders.

But when neither of the parties accused would appear at the time appointed,
although they might at the first have condemned them: yet a second process was
published, and sentence deferred till the 26. of the same month On which day
the Mayor was also warned with his brethren to be present to behold what
should be determined.

When they had taken their places, there was exhibited to the commissioners the
process that was lastly published to cite them.

This being done, ye B. of Chester makes a speech, and recites ye sentence
out of a scroll, and condemned Bucer and Phagius Bucer and Phagius dug out
of their graves.
of heresy. After sentence thus read, he commanded their bodies to be dug
out of their graves, and first to be disgraded from holy orders, he delivered
them to the secular power.

All this being ended, they dispatch a purseuante to advertise the Cardinal
what they had done, and required the writ de comburendo. And while he went on
his message, they willed all suspected books to be brought for to be burned
with the corpse of Bucer and Phagius.

The purseuante being returned with the writ: upon the receipte thereof they
appointed the 6, day of February for the accomplishment of the matter.

So the Vicechanceller on that day taking with him, Marshall the common
notarie, went first to saint Michaels church, where Phagius was buried: there
he calls forth Andrew Smith, Henry Sawyer, and Henry Adams, men of the same
parrish, and bound them with an oath to dig up Phagius bones and to bring them
to the place of execution. Marshall took their oaths, receiving the like of
Roger Smith, and William Hasell the town Sergeants, and of John Capper warden
of the same Church, for doing the like with Bucer. Their cofins being taken up,
they were lincked with a chain to a post on the market hill, and fire put too,
Bucer and Phagius corpse burned with many good books.
were burned: and a number of condemned books with them; which while they were
burning (that gave the people cause greatly to mislike their cruelty) on the
market hill, Doctor Watson enueyeth against them in the pulpet in S. Mary's
church: although Bucer taught no other thing, then both he and Scot had
subscribed to in king Edwards days.

The next day after the B. of Chester went with great solemnity to the Church
of our Lady and Saint Michaell. Which done, the Commissioners bestowed a few
days in punishing such as they thought had offended, and enacted certain
Statutes, prescribing, at how many Masses every man should be, day by day, and
how many Pater nosters and Auies every man should say, when he should enter
into the Church. And in his entrance, after what a (...) his should ^owe
himself to the Altar: and at what time of the Mass a man should stand, when
sit down, with a number of such superstitious toys. Which things being thus
ordered, the University bestows the degree of Doctor upon Ormane^ and Cole,
and to the holy reformers dep^^^ who yet before they departed, The holy
commissioners depart from Ca^bridge.
gave commandment that the Masters of every house should copy out their
Statutes, which contained certain (...) rules for every house particularly.
Swineborne master of Clare hall, being demanded whether he would have their
engrossed in paper, or parchment, answered: it made no matter, paper would for
continuance serve the turn well enough.

According as they dealt with the bodies of Bucer and Phagius at Cambridge, so
likewise at Oxford, they used Per Martyrs They take Peter Martyrs wives corpse
at Oxford.
wife (while she lived, a grave and sober matrone.) Anno 1552. she departed
this life.

Now when B. Brooks of Gloucester, Nichol, Ormanet, Datary, Robert Morwen,
president of Corpus Christi College, Cole and Wright, Doctors of the Civil
law, came thither as the Cardinals visitors. They among other things having
commission for the same, ministered an oath to such as had acquaintance with
her, that they should not conceal what they knew touching religion, concerning
her faith. Who because they understood not her language, answered: they could
know nothing. Which the commissioners also certified the Cardinal. But that
notwithstanding, he left not the matter so, but wrote down his letters, a good
while after, to Marshall, the Deane of Friswides, that he should dig her up,
and lay her out of Christian burial, because she was buried nigh S. Friswides
relics. Whose commandment Doct. Marshall calling his spades and mattockes
together in an Evening, when he was well whitled, did fulfill and buried her in
a dunghill.

Anno 1557. 10 of the 15. persons mentioned in the other book that were in
prison in the castle of Canterbury, whereof five were famished, were committed
to the fire by Thornton called B. or suffragan of Dover, otherwise called Dick
of Dover, and by Nicholas Harpesfield Archdeacon of the same province.

The names of those ten be these: John Philpot John Philpot. W. Waterer.
Steph. Kempe. W. Haydhith. Th. Hudson. Matthew Brodbridge. Tho. Stephens. Nich.
Final. W. Lowicke. W. Prowting.
of Tenderden. W. Waterer of Bedington, Stephen Kempe of Norgate, W. Haidhith,
Th. Hudson of Shalenge, Matthew Brodbridge of Tenderden, Thomas Stephens of
Bedingden, Nicholas Final of Tenderden, W. Lowicke of Crambrooke, W. Prowting
of Thoneham. Of these six were burned at Canterbury about ye xv. of January,
two, that is, Stephen and Philpot at Wye. About the same month, other two,
Final and Brodbridge, at Ashford the 16. of the same month.

In february following came out another bloody commission from the king and
Queen, Another bloody commission.
yet more to inflame the fire of persecution. After the publishing of which
Commission the eight of February, persecution did rage most fiercely in all
quarters: so that the prisons were full of prisoners: namely, in the dioces of
Canterbury. And in the town of Colchester, it was so fierce, that 22.
together, men and women were apprehended at one clappe, 14. men and 8. women:
of which, some escaped; the other were driven up like a flock of Christian
lambs to London, with 2. or 3. leaders at the most.

The blood of which people, Boner would have sucked, had not Cardinal Poole
Cardinal Poole merciful.
stayed his rage. Who although he were a papist and an enemy, yet was he not so
bloody as the other were.

So these people, being suffered to draw themselves out a submission, were
delivered, notwithstanding diverse of the^ afterward were taken and suffered.

The names of that multitude were these: Robert Coleman of Walton, in the
County of Essex, laboring man, Joan Winsley of Horsley magna in the same
County, Stephen Glouer of Railey in the same County, Glouer, Ri, charde
Clarke, of much Holland in the same County, mariner, W. Munt of much Bentley
in the same County, husbandman, Thomas Winseley, of much Horsley in the same
County, sawyer, Margaret Field of Ramsey in the same County, Agnes Whitlocke
of Douercourte, Alice Munt of much Bentley, Rose Allen of the same town,
Richard Bongeor of Colchester, Currier, Richard Atkyn of Halsteed weauer,
Robert Barcock of Whistone, carpenter, Rich. George of Westbarfolt, labourer,
Rich, Gelly of Colchester mariner. Tho. Feresham, mercer of Colchester, Robert
Debnam late of Dedham, Cisley Warren of Cockshall, Christian Pepper widow, of
the same town Allen Simson, Eline Euring, Alice the wife of Rob. Will. at
colchester, William Bongeor of Colchester Glaster. Their chief trouble was for
the article of the Lords supper.

The same year, 1557. 1557 T. Losebie. H Ramsey. T, Thirtell. M. Hyde. A.
Stanley.
the xij. of April, suffered v. godly Martirs in smithfield: Thomas Losebie,
Henry Ramsey, Thomas Thyrtel, Margaret Hyde, and Agnes Stanley. The vij. of
January they were examined by Darbishire then Chancellor to Boner. Who dealt
so with them, that they were dismissed for that time: but the B. taking the
matter into his hands, the vi. of March, dealt more hardly with them. And
again, the first day of April conuented them: and finding them constant in the
truth, neither to be moved by his threats, nor allurements, proceeded to their
condemnation. The afternoon, the B. first called for Loseby (who when in
reading of his articles) mention was made of the Sacrament of the altar) the
Bishop putting off his cappe, The valeaunt Martyr.
and his fellows, said: My Lord, seeing you put off your cap, I will put on
mine, and therewithal did put on his cap. So sentence was pronounced upon him,
and the rest severally. Who courageously, and constantly defied to the bishops
face, their Popish Idolatry and superstition. And so were they delivered to
the Sheriffs of London: who the xij. day of April brought them into
Smithfielde. Where all together in one fire joyfully they slept in the Lord.

In the Month of May following, three other suffered in Saint Georges fields
in Southwarke: whose names were, William Morant, one King, and Steeuen
Gratwicke. W. Morant. King. S. Gratwick.
Who was above all most unlawfully put to death: For first he was condemned by
the Bishop of Winchester, and the Bishop of Rochester, Unjust preceding.
which were not his Ordinaries: neither could his appeal be taken. Then when
they had no color, they suborned one of the Priests to come in for a false
Ordinary, and sit upon him, and pretended false articles, which were no part
of his examination. And having no other ground, nor just matter against him,
but only for saying these words: That which I said, I have said, they read
the Sentence of Condemnation against them.

So he with the other two, about the end of May, was burned for the testimony
of Jesus Christ in S. Georges fields. While the Bishop was reading Sentence
against Gratwicke, his Chaplains cried out, saying: stop, stop my Lord,
for now he will recant. Then the Bishop asked him what he would do. To whom
he answered, Faith surely grounded.
My Lord, my faith is grounded more steadfastly, than to change in a moment. It
is not process of time that can alter me, unless my faith were as the waves
of the Sea. So the Bishop made an end, and delivered him to the Sheriff.

I. Bradbridge. W. Applebie-Pettonel. Ed. Allen. K. his wife. I. Mannings. E. a
blind maid
In the xxviij. day of the month of June, were vij. Christian, and faithful
Martirs burned at Maidstone in Kente, through the cruelty of Richard Thornton,
suffragan of Dover, and the bloody Archdeacon of Canterbury. Their names were,
Ioane Bradbridge of Staplehurst, Walter Applebie of Maidstone, Petronell his
wife, Edmund Allen of Frite^den, Katherin his wife, Joan Ma^nings, wife, of
maidstone, Elizabeth, a blind maiden. Edm. Allen was a Miller, in the parish
of Frittenden in Kent, who in a dear year would feed the poor, and would
read unto them the scriptures, and exhort them. He was taken by the means of
John Tailor, Priest of the Parish, and committed (after much vile taunting and
railing) to prison, by sir John Baker knight.

The ninteenth day of June, were burned seven: four women and three men, at
Canterbury, for the testimony of Christ. I. Fishcock. N. White. N. Pardu, B.
Final. Widow Brad. Wilsons wife. Bendens wife.
Their names were these: John Fishcock, Nicholas White, Nich. Pardue, Barbara
Final, widow, Bradbridge, widow, who was thought to have been with child,
Wilsons wife, and Bendens wife. The usage of Alice Benden was most cruel. She
being delivered, was by the foolish words of her own husband imprisoned
again, who took money of the Constable to carry her to prison himself: The
husband against the wife.
but that the wife tendering her husbands fame, and that the world should not
witness against him so facinorous a fact, went to the Constable, desiring him
to go with her: who answered that he could not, but lent her his boy to go with
her, with whom she went to Canterbury castle. Where she being in prison,
practiced with a prison fellow of hers, the wife of one Potkin, to live both of
them with two pence half penie a day, to try thereby, how well they could
sustain penury, if they were put to it: for they had heard when they should be
removed to the Bishops prison, The martyrs diet in prison.
their livings should be but three pence half penie each day: and did in deed
so live both, fourteen days, ere she were from thence removed.

The two and twentieth day of January following, her husband went and told the
Bishop, that she had a brother, whose name was Roger Hall that resorted unto
her, who if he were kept from her, he said she would turn: for he
comfort her (says he) and gives her money, and persuades her not to
recant. Upon which report of her husband, she was removed to a prison called
Monday hole, and straight charge given, that if her brother came, he should be
taken: but he coming early in the morning when her keeper was gone to ringe,
(for he was a bell ringer) otherwise did not know where she had been
imprisoned, but by hearing her voice as she powered out unto God her sorrowful
complaints, saying the Psalms of David. And there putting money in a loaf of
bread, and sticking the same on a pole, so did he reach it unto her: and this
was five weeks after her coming thither: all which time no creature was
known to come at her, more then her keeper. Three farthings a day the martyrs
allowance. Alice Bende^ a constant martyr.
Her lying in that prison was upon a little short straw, betwixt a pair of
stocks and a stone wall, and her allowance three farthings a day: that is, an
half penny in bread and a farthing in drink, neither could she get any more
for her money: wherefore she desired to have her whole allowance in bread, and
used water for drink. Thus did she lie nine weeks: during which time she
never changed apparel.

At the first coming into this place she did grievously bewail her state,
with great sorrow, and reasoned with her self why the Lord God, with his
heavy justice suffered her to be sequestered from her loving fellows in so
extreme misery. In which she continued till on a night as she was in her
sorrowful supplications, in rehearsing this verse of the Psalm: Why art thou
so heavy O my soul, and again the right hand of the most highest can change
all: God sends the spirit of comfort.
she received comfort in the midst of her miseries, and after that continued
joyful until her deliverance from the same. So she with the rest the
nintenth of June were consumed with fire for the testimony of Jesus, after they
kneeling down together had called upon the name of God.

Bradbriges wife when she was condemned of the Bishop to be burned, had two
children named Patience and Charity. Who then said to the Bishop, that if he
would needs burn her, yet she trusted that he would take and keep Patience
and Charity, The B. will neither meddle with Patience nor Charity.
meaning her two daughters: Nay quoth the Bishop, by the faith of my body, I
will meddle with neither of them both.

About this time Matthew Plase weauer of the parish of Stone in Kent, was
examined before Thorneton, Harpsfielde, etc. And constantly maintained the
truth against the popish hypocrites: Ten at one fire Rich. Woodma^ G. Stephens,
R. Maynard, Alex. Hosema^, Tom. a Wood, Marg. Moris, James Moris, Denis Burgis,
Ashdons wife, Groves wife.
but what became of him it is uncertain.

In the town of Jews were ten faithful servant of God, put in one fire the
two and twentieth day of June. Their names were Richard Woodman, George
Stephens, Robert Maynard, Alexander Hoseman, his servant Tomasin a Wood,
Maynards maid, Margery Moris, James Moris her son, Denis Burgis, Ashdons
wife, Groves wife. Rich. Woodman was twice imprisoned for the testimony of
Jesus. At the first apprehension, he was imprisoned a year and a half in the
kings bench, and afterward 8. weeks in the Bishops colehouse, lacking one
day. His first apprehension was for reproving a Preacher in the pulpit, in the
Parish of Wambleton, where he dwelt. For which he was twice before ye Bishop
of Chichester, and five times before the Commissioners, and then sent to
Londons Cole-house, and many times called before him.

He was six times examined in the Colehouse, and 26. times before, so that his
examinations in all were 32.

The second time he was found out, and taken by means of his father and
brother: Father against the son.
who had as much goods of his in their hands, as were well worth six and
fifty pounds a year, a Lordship, and an honor and half a Lordshippe, which
he had delivered unto their hands to pay his debtes, and the rest to remain
to his wife and children, which was two hundred pounds better then the debt
came to.

The same day that Philpot was burned, which was the 18. of December, he with
four more, were delivered out of Boners hands with very good conditions: in
such sort as Woodman said of him, that his heart was so drunken with yt blood
of Philpot, Boner drunk with the blood of Philpot.
that he thought he could not tell what he did. For two days before (said he)
he promised them they should be condemned, that same day they were delivered.
Yet the morning after they were delivered, he sought earnestly for some of
them again, waxing dry after his great drunkenness.

Before his second apprehension, he continued in a Wood under a tower, 6. or 7.
weeks: with his Bible, pen and ynke, and other necessaries: his wife
bringing him meat daily.

Anno 1557. the 14. of April, he was brought before the Bishop of Chichester,
Doct. Story, and Doct. Cook, of who^ after examination of diverse points, as
of marriage of priests, concerning the assurance of having the spirit of God,
(which the Papists account arrogancy to affirm,) and concerning the 7.
sacraments, he was had to the marshalsea, and there remained till the 27. of
April. At which time he appeared again before Chichester, two of his
Chaplains, and Doctor Story, of whom he was examined of the seven Sacraments,
and not agreeing with them therein, he was commanded again to the
marshalsea, no man to speak with him.

The 12. of May he was examined again of Doct. Langdall, parson of Buxted in
Sussex, and Chaplain to my Lord Mountague, and master James Gage at my Lord
Mountagues house in Southwarke: where he set Langedall up in diverse points of
religion: as of the force of Baptism, whether it be of necessity of
salvation to all, and of the state of infants that die without it: touching the
Sacrament of the Altar, etc. and so was had again to prison till the five and
twenty of May. On which day he was examined again of Winchester, Rochester,
and a certain Doctor, with diverse other Priests and Gentlemen, sitting in
Saint Georges Church in Southwarke, of whom being wrangled with touching
Priests marriages, and his reproouing of a reuolting Preacher, he was
dismissed again to the marshalsea, till the fifteen of June. At which day he
appeared before Winchester, the Archdeacon of Canterbury, Doctor Langdall, etc.
and would not answer nor swear before Winchester, because he was not his
ordinary. Who when he threatened him, made answer: I look for no help of
men, God is on my side, I praise him therefore: I will not care who be against
me, neither do I. So was he had to the marshalsea again, where he remained
till the sixteenth of July: on which day he was condemned by Winchester,
chiefly for the point of the Sacrament of the Altar, and so was burned with
nine other, which were taken not past two or three days before their
judgment, and burned before the writ could come down. Quick dispatch.
Such quick dispatch they made. They suffered the two and twentieth day of June
at Jews.

About the same time one Ambrose died in Maidstone prison, who else should have
been burned in the quarrel of Christ.

About the same time was one Richard Lush condemned of Cutbert Bourne B. of
Bath and Wells, and given to the secular power for the sincerity of the
Gospel: whether he were burned or not it is uncertain.

In the month of July next, ensued the martyrdom of Simon Miller of Linne,
and Elizabeth Cooper. Simon Miller Simon Miller. Eliza. Cooper.
being at Norwich, and seeing the people coming from their Popish service,
asked them where he might have the Communion. At which words, a Papist said:
he would bring him where he should not miss, and brought him to the
Chancellor of Norwich, who as he was examining him, spied his confession
which he had put into his shoe, which did appear: and asked if he would stand
to the same. Which when he said he constantly would do, he was committed to a
keeper in the Bishops house: from whence (on what condition it is uncertain)
he was dismissed, and went home to his house at Linne, Where (when he had set
all things in order) he returned again to his Prison in the Bishops house, and
there continued constant in the profession of the truth, till by the B. and
his Chancellor he was condemned to death.

Elizabeth Cooper was a Pewterers wife, dwelling in Saint Andrews parish in
Norwich: where before she had recanted, and being unquiet in mind, and greatly
troubled in conscience for the same, at the last she came into ye church (the
people being at their Superstitious Service: and before them all bewailed her
fall, Elizab. Cooper repents of her recantation.
and greatly repented of that she had done. For which she was taken by M.
Sutterton the Shiriffe, and burned with Simon Miller. When the fire came unto
her, she a little shronke thereat, crying ah a. Which when Simon Miller heard,
he put his hand behind toward her, and willed her to be strong and of good
cheer: we shall have a joyful and sweet supper. Whereby she was strengthened
still, and quietly ended her combat, with victory.

Of those 22. which were before mentioned: that were then delivered by the
means of the Cardinal Poole, was William Mount of much Bentley in Essex
husbandma^, W. Mount. Alice, his wife. Rose Allen.
with Alice his wife, and Rose Allen maid, the daughter of the said Allice
Mount. They coming home again, refrayned from their parish Church, and
frequented the company of good men. Wherefore, a wicked priest of the town,
Sir Thomas Tie, who by reason he himself had been a professor, knew all their
haunt, complained of them to the Lord Darcie, and wrote also against them to
Boner. So the 7, day of March, at two of the clock in the morning, one master
Edmund Tyrrel, (who came of the Tyrrels that murdered K. Edward the 5. and his
brother) took with him the Baylieffe of the hundred, called William Samuel,
dwelling in Colchester, and the two Constables of much Bentley, John Baker, and
William Harris, and other company, and came to father Mountes house, and
apprehended him, and his wife being sick, saying they should go to Colchester
Castle. Which mother Mount hearing, desired her daughter might first fetch her
some drink, for she was very sick. Which they granted her. So her daughter
Rose Allen Rose Allen.
took a pot, and went with a candle to draw drink: and as she came back
again, Tirrel met with her, and willed her to give her parents good counsel,
etc. To whom she answered: sir, they have a better instructor than I: for the
holy Ghost does teach them, I hope, which I trust will not suffer the^ to
err. Tirrel said, Why? art thou still in that mind you naughty huswife? Marry
it is time to look unto such heretics in deed. Rose. Sir, with that which you
call heresy do I worship my Lord God, I tell you truth. Tirrell. The
tragical dialogue betwixt Tirrell and R. Allin.
Then I perceive you will burn (gossip) with the rest for companies sake.
Rose. If I be so compelled, I hope in his mercies (if he call me to to it) he
will make me able to bear it. So he (turning to his company) said: Sirs, this
Gossip will burn, do ye not think it? Marry sir (quoth one) prove her, and you
shall see what she will do by and by. So the cruel Tirrell taking the candle
from her, held her by the wrest, and the burning candle under her hand,
burning crossewaies over the back thereof, so long, till the sinews cracked in
sunder. In which time of his tirannie, he said often to her: Why whore, will thou not cry: thou young whore, will thou not cry? etc. Unto which she
always answered, that she had no cause, she gave God thanks. He had more
cause to weep (she said) than she, if he considered the matter well. In the
end, Tyranny overcome with patience.
when the sinews brake, he thrust her violently from him, and said: Ah strong
whore, thou shameless beast, thou beastly whore, etc. But she (patiently
suffering his rage) at the last said: Have you done what you will do? And he
said, yea. And if thou think it be not well, then mende it. R. Mend it, nay,
the Lord mend you, and give you repentance, if it be his will. And now (if you
think it good) begin at the feet, and burn the head also. And so she went,
and carried her mother drink, as she was commanded.

After they had searched the house for more company, at the last, they found
one John Thurstone, I. Thurston, and M. his wife.
and Margarette his wife also with other, whom they carried to Colchester
Castle immediately.

With William Mount and his Family, was joined also in the same Prison at the
Town of Colchester, another faithful brother, John Johnson, otherwise called
Aliker, of the Town of Thorpe, in the County of Essex, Labourer, of the age
of 34. years, his wife being dead, and three children by her left with him.

Other six prisoners lay in Mot-hall, in the same town, whose names were,
William Bongeor, W. Bongeor.
of the Parish of S. Nicholas in Colchester, Glasier, about the age of 40.
years: Agnes Siluerside, A. Siluerside.
alias Smith, of Colchester, widow, of the age of sixty years: Thomas Benolde
T. Benold.
of Colchester, Talowchaundler: William Purcas W. Purcas.
of Bocking in Essex Fuller, of the age of twenty years: Helene Ewring, H.
Ewring.
the wife of John Ewring, Miller of Colchester, of the age of forty and eight
years: who was one of the two and twenty prisoners before mentioned, and was
by Robert Maynarde (then Bailiffe of Colchester) imprisoned in the Mot-hall.
The sixtth of this company was Elizabeth Folks, E. Folks,
a servant, of the age of twenty years. These were imprisoned in the Mot-hall,
and the other four were in the Castle. Diverse examinations these good men had
at sundry times, before Justices, Priests, and Officers. As, Master Roper,
John Kingstone Commissarie, John Boswell Priest, and Bishop Boners Scribe.
Last of all, they were examined in the Mot-hall the three and twenty day of
June, by Doctor Chadsey, John Kingstone Commissarie, with other priests, and
Boswel the Scribe, in the presence of Robert Brown, and Robert Maynard,
Bayliffes of Colchester, with diverse Justices, and Gentlemen of the Country.

At which time, sentence of death was read against them, chiefly for denying
the Real presence in the Sacrament. Elizabeth Folks the young maid, being
asked whether she believed the Lord to be present in the Sacrament
substantially and really: A sharp answer of the Martyr.
made answer, that she believed it was a substantial Lie, and a real Lie.
Then they read the Sentence of condemnation against her. In which time Doctor
Chadsey wept, that the tears trickled down his cheeks.

This Elizabeth Folks Eliz. Folks.
the day before she was condemned, was examined only upon this article,
whether she believed that there was a Catholic Church or no? Unto which she
answered, yea: then was she immediately by Boswels means the Scribe, delivered
unto her uncle Holt of Colchester to be kept, who carried her home to his
house, where she might have departed if she would: means being offered to
co^uey her away. But she hearing that some doubted that she had yielded to the
Pope (although it was most untrue) would in no wise content her self, but
wept, and was in such anguish of mind, that (no remedy) she would to the
Papists again. And coming before them at Cosines house at the white heart in
Colchester, she was at utter defiance with them and their doctrine, and so was
condemned with the rest, as also were the 4. that were put into the castle. Of
which company, Rose Allen Rose Allen condemned soong for joy.
after her condemnation song for great joy to the wonder of many.

The 2. day of August was appointed for their martyrdom, on which day betwixt
7, and 8. of the clock in the morning, these 6. were brought from Mote-hall, to
a place of of ground hard by the town wall, the place of their martirdo^.
Where al things being prepared, they made their prayer to God, but not in such
sort as they would, because they were interrupted, especially by one master
Clear, who sometime had been a Gospeller.

Elizabeth preparing her self to the fire, when she had plucked off her
peticote, would have given it to her mother, A notable speech of the martyr.
but was not permitted. Therefore (taking it in her hand) she threw it from
her, saying: Farewell all the world: farewell faith, farewell hope: and so taking
hold of the stake, said: Welcome love. When these vi. were all nailed to
their stakes, and the fire about them, they clapped their hands together (for
joy) in the fire. So joyfully they all ended their lives in the quarrel of
Christ.

The same day in the afternoon, they four of the Castle were likewise
martired in the flaming fire, and gladly gave their lives for the witnessing of
the truth.

John Thurston, who was taken in the house of W. Mount, of Much Bentley, about
the month of May, dyed in Colchester castle, a constant professor of Jesus
Christ.

In the Month of August was George Eagles put to death at Chelmseford: treason
being objected against him yt he should pray that God would turn Queen Mary's
heart, or take her away. He was condemned and executed for treason, but the
meaning was for religion.

He in the troublesome time of Mary's days gave himself in all places to
strengthen the brethren. And such was his pains in travail that (going from
place to place) he was called Trudgeouer. George Eagles called Trudgeouer.
His diet was for the space of 3. years very thin, and his drink water: and
such spite had the papists against him, that there was an edict proclaimed in
the Queens name through Essex, Suffolk, Kent, and Northfolke: promising the
party that should take him 20. pounds for his pains. At length being at
Colchester upon Marie Magdalens day: at which time they kept a fair in the
town, he was espied, and flying was taken, and condemned for treason, such as
was mentioned before,

One Richard Putto the elder, an Inneholder, dwelling at the sign of the cock
at the same time, did much trouble him, in persuading him to confess he had
offended the Queen, etc. And so did he also trouble him being on the ladder.
Being drawn to the place of execution, he read very devoutly on a Psalm book
which he had in his hand: and with patience endured the torment.

About this time suffered at Norwich a godly man called Richard Crashfield, R.
Crashfielde
condemned by Dunnings the Cha^cellour. He was four times examined. The third
time by Doctor Bridges, and the other by Dunnings: by whom he was condemned,
and suffered the fifth day of August. At whose burning, one Thomas Carman was
apprehended.

About the same time, the xx of August, one named Friar, with the sister of
George Eagles, Friar and the sister of G. Eagles. Joyce Jews.
was burned at Rochester.

In the month of September was Mistress Ioice Jews, wife to Thomas Jews of
Ma^chester burned for the gospel at Liechfield. She was instructed in the
ways of Christ, and to abhor the Mass and the popish superstition, by
master John Glouer before mentioned. At which time being compelled by her
furious husband to come to church, when holy water was sprinkled upon her, she
turned her back: whereupon immediately a citation was sent for her by a Sumner,
The Sumner caused to eat the citation and drink to it.
whom her husband caused to eat the citation, and drink to it: wherefore he
was much troubled and was feign to submit himself, his wife remaining
constant: for whom he was bound in an hundred pound, after a months respite to
bring her again. Who at the day, being exhorted not to venture his wife in
carrying her to ye bishop, said (most unkindly) he would not forfet any thing
for her, and brought her to the B. who commanded her to such a stinking
prison, that her maid that kept her company did sown therein.

Thus being kept in prison, and found constant, after many examinations she was
condemned, and the night before she should suffer she was wonderful cheerful
and merry, so spending the time in prayer, reading and talking with them that
were purposely come unto her, for to comfort her with the word of God. She was
(after her condemnation) kept in prison a whole year, because the Shiriffe of
that year would not burn her.

About three of the clock in the morning, Satan began to trouble her with
doubt of her salvation: Satan troubles the martyr.
in which doubt by those that were with her, she received great comfort, and
assurance.

About eight of the clock, M. Shiriffe comes and tells her she had but an
hour to live in this world. To whom she answered: M. Shiriffe your message is
welcome to me, and I thank my God, that he will make me worthy to adventure my
life in his quarrel.

When she was at ye stake, (because she was not acquainted with the fresh air,
coming out of a close prison) one of her friends had provided her drink. Now
when she had prayed three times, in the which she desired God to abolish the
idolatrous Mass, whereto all the people and the Shiriffe himself said, Amen:
She took the cup into her hands, saying: She drinks to all that love the
gospel.
I drink to all those that unfeignedly love the gospel of Jesus Christ, and
wish for the abolishing of the papistrie. When she had drunk, her friends
drunk also, which were afterward troubled for the same. So being bound to the
stake, and fire put to her, she with patience endured, for his names sake that
had redeemed her.

About the 17. day of September were burned at Islington nigh London, these
four constant professors of Christ, Rafe Allerton, Rafe Allerton. James
Austoo. Marg. Austoo. Richard Coth.
James Austoo, Margery Austoo his wife, and Richard Coth. Rafe Allerton was
apprehended by Thomas Tie priest, sometimes a professor of the gospel. He was
diverse times examined before London at Fulham the eight of April: again the
second of May before him and three of the Counsel.

Again the 15. of May in the Bishops palace at London: and at the last,
remaining constant in the profession of the truth, being vehemently pursued by
Thomas Tie, the seuententh of September he was condemned, and burned with the
other three.

The tenth day of September, James Austoo being brought with the rest into the
bishops chapel at Fulham, he was demanded of the bishop if he knew where he
was now, The courageous martyr.
and in what place, and before whom etc. Yea quoth Austoo: I know where I am,
for I am in an Idols demple. Whereat Boner perceiving his constancy,
pronounced sentence against him.

Margery his wife was sore afraid, and terrified in the prison at twelve of the
clock at night, one coming in to her, into the prison with a knife drawn,
and attemptyng to cut her throat, but that she called upon God for help:
whereat he departed, without doing her any hurt. They fear the martyr in the
prison.
The next night, they made a rumbling over head like thunder to scarre her out
of her wits, but GOD gave her strength.

At what time the ten before suffered at Colchester, there were also two
women condemned with them, but were deferred, the one omitted and left in the
prison, while she was praying apart, for the strength of Gods spirit, the
other, because her name was false written. 1. Their names were, Agnes Bongeor,
Agn. Bongeor. Margery Thurstone.
whom they wrote Bowyer, and Margerie Thurston. These twain were both the
seventeen day of September, burned at Colchester, for the witness of Christ,
which they cheerfully endured for his names sake.

This year the 20. of September, was burned at Northhampton, John Knode John
Knode.
a shoemaker, condemned of William Bynsley, Bachelor of law, and Chancellor to
ye B. of Peterborow, and delivered to the sheriff, Sir Tho. Tresham: whose
officers burned him without the Northgate in the stone pits. One John Rote a
Popish Priest, Vicar of S. Giles in Northampton standing by, did declare unto
him, The martyr refuses pardon.
that if he would recant, he had his pardon for him. To whom he answered, that
he had his pardon by Jesus Christ.

This year, the 12. of Sept. suffered John Noyes John Noyes.
of Laxfield in ye same town, in the county of Suffolk, Shoemaker. He was
apprehended by M. Tho. Louel, Wolfren Dowsing, and Nichol. Stonnard, of the
same town: and brought before the Justices, and the sheriff, who the next day
cast him into Aye dungeon, where he lay a certain time, and then was carried to
Norwich: where the B. condemned him in the presence of his Chancellor, D.
Dunnings, Sir William Woodhouse, Sir Th. Woodhouse, M. Geor. Heyden, M.
Spencer, William Farrar Alderman of Norwich, etc. Being condemned, he was sent
again to Aie prison, and upon the 21. of September about midnight, was brought
from thence to Laxfield to be burned: where coming to the place of martyrdom,
he said the 50. Psalm, with other prayers: and being bound to the stake, he
said, fear not them that can kill the body, but fear him, etc. So the fire
being kindled, he with patience finished his course, and gave testimony to the
Gospel of God.

The 23. of September, was Cecil Ormes Cecil Ormes.
burned at Norwich for the testimony of the truth of Christ, betwixt seven and
eight of the clock in the morning. She was taken at the death of Simon Miller,
and Elizabeth Cooper, for that she said, she would pledge them of the same
cup that they drank on.

The 23. of July she was called before the Chauncelour, sitting in judgment
with master Bridges, and others: who offered her, if she would go to
Church, and keep her tongue and say nothing against them, liberty. Which she
refused, saying: if she should do so, GOD would surely plague her. Therefore
do with me, says she, what ye will: and said, if he condemned her, he
should not be so desirous of her sinful flesh, as she would (by Gods
grace) be content to give it in so good a quarrel. The constant martyr.
So he pronounced his bloody sentence against her, and delivered her to the
sheriffs, Thomas and Leonard Sotherton,

This Cecil Ormes had before recanted: for which she fell into great anguish
of mind, and had gotten a letter made to give unto the Chancellor, to let him
know, she repented her recantation, etc. But before she exhibited her hill, she
was taken.

Being brought to the place of execution, where Miller and Cooper were burned,
and the same stake, she laid her hand thereon, Cecil Ormes at the stake.
and kissed it, and said, Welcome the sweet cross of Christ, and so gave her
self unto it. After the tormentors had kindeled the fire to her, she said, my
soul does magnify the Lord, and my spirit reioyseth in God my Savior. And
quietly, (as she had been in a slumber) ended this mortal life.

In the dioces of Chichester many were condemned, and martired for the witness
bearing to the truth: whose names were these: John Freeman of East Grinsted, I.
Foreman.
John Warner I. Warner.
of Berne, Christian Glouer, C. Glouer.
of the Archdeaconrie of Jews, Thomas Athoth, T. Athoth.
Priest, Thomas Auington T. Auington.
of Ardinglie, Dennis Burges D. Burges.
of Buxsted, Tho. Rauensdale T. Rauensdale.
of Rye, John Milles I. Milles.
of Hellinglesh, Nicholas Holden N. Holden.
of Withiam, John Heart I. Heart.
of Withiam, Margery Morice M. Morice.
of Hethfield, Anne Try A. Try.
of East-greensteed, John Oseward I. Osewars.
of woodmancote, James Morice I. Morice.
of Hethfielde, Thomas Dowgate T. Dowgate.
of East-greenesteed, and John Ashdon I. Ashdon.
of Ketherfielde. The greatest doer then against these martirs, and sitters
upon their condemnation, were these, Christopherson the B. after, Day, Richard
Briseley, Doctor of Law, and Chancellor of Chichester, Robert Tailor Bachelour
of Law, his Deputy, Tho. Backarde, Ciuilian, Anthony Clarke, Albane Langdale,
Bachelour of Divinity.

In the Month of November, was Thomas Spurdance T. Spurdance.
(one of Queen Mary's servants) burned at Bury He was taken by two of his
fellows, John Hammon, otherwise called Barker, and George Lawson, both dwelling
in Codnam, in the County of Suffolk. Who carried him to one Master Gosnall,
dwelling in Codnam, and by him was sent to Bury. He was first examined by the
Bishops Chancellor, and then by the Bishop himself, and by him condemned.

Being before the Bishop, he was exhorted by a Gentleman that stood by him,
to take a day, and to advise himself. Unto whom he made answer: If I save my
life, I shall lose it, and if I lose my life for Christ's sake, I shall be sure
to find it in everlasting life. And if I should take a day, when the day
comes, I must say then, even as I do now, except I will lie, and that
needs not.

The same year, the eighteen day of November, were these three burned in
Smithfielde: John Hollingdale, I. Hollingdale,
William Sparrowe, W. Sparrow.
and Richard Gibson. R. Gibson.
William Sparrowe had recanted before, and afterward did greatly repent him
for the same, saying unto Bishop Boner, that it was the worst deed that ever
he had done. And said unto him moreover, That which you call heresy (quoth he)
is good and godly, and if every hair of my head were a man, I would burn
them all (said he) rather then I would go from the truth. Note.


As Boner ministered his Popish Articles unto M. Gibson, even so likewise did he
again propounde other Articles unto Boner. Articles for articles.
As, whether the Scriptures were sufficient to instruct to salvation? From whom
authority comes, and what it is? Whether any but Christ is Lord over faith?
By what marks Antichrist is to be known? and so forth, to the number of nine.
In the end, Boner delivered them to the Secular power: and the eyghteenth day
of November they cheerefullie witnessed the truth in the flames of fire.

The xxij. of Dece^b. John Rough Minister, a Scotishma^, and Marg. Mearing, M.
Mearing.
were burned for the gospel in smithfield. John Rough I. Rough.
had been of the order of the black Friars xvi. years: and at the request of
the Lord Ha^mleton, Earl of Arran, and governor of Scotland, the Archbishop
caused the Provincial of that house (having thereto authority) to dispense
with him for his habit, and hood, and so he took him to be a Secular Priest,
to serve in his Chapel. In whose service he remained a whole year.

In which time, God did open his eyes to see the truth, and was sent by the
same Governor to preach in the freedom of Ayos, where he remained the spare
of four whole years.

Afterward he came into England, after the battle of Muscleborow, and
preached at Carlill, Barwicke and Newcastell: and after that was placed by the
Archbishop of York in a benefice nigh Hull. Where he remained till the death
of King Edward: after whose death, he fled with his wife into Freeseland: and
there lived by knitting of caps, hose, and such like: till about the end of the
month of October last, before his death. At which time, lacking yearne, M.
Rough minister of the congregation at London.
he came over to make provision: and coming over to London, was of the
congregation there made their minister.

In the end with Cutbert Symson, he was taken at the Sarasines head in
Islington, by the means of a dissembling brother, called Roger Sergeaunt a
Tailor, and was carried to the Counsel, and of them was sent to Newgate: where
he had remained but a while before Bishop Boner sent for him, the eighteenth
day of December, and ministereth unto him certain Articles. And again the
ninteenth day persuaded with him. On the twentieth day finding him constant, he
pronounces sentence of condemnation against him.

Amongst other talk with Bishop Boner, he affirmed that he had been twice
at Rome, and there had seen plainly with his eyes, which he had heard many
times before, namely that the Pope was the very Antechrist: for there he saw
him carried on men's shoulders, and the false named Sacrament borne before him:
yet was there more reverence given to him, then to that which they counted for
their God. When B. Boner heard this, More reverence done to the Pope, then to
the bread God.
rising up and making as though he would have torn his garments, have thou
(said he) been at Rome? and seen our holy father the Pope: and do thou
blaspheme him in this sort? and with that flying upon him, he plucked of a
piece of his beard, and after making speedy have to his death, burnt him before
six of the clock in the morning.

This Master Rough being at the burning of Austoo in Smithfield, and returning
homeward again, met with one M. Farrara a merchant of Hallifar, who asked him
where he had been: unto whom he answered. I have been (said he) where I would
not for one of mine eyes, but I had been: where have you been (said M.
Farrar) Forsooth (said he) to learn the way: and so told him, he had been at
the burning of Austoo, where shortly after he was burned himself, and with him
Margarete Meering.

This Margarete Meering, (wherefore it is uncertain) gave occasion to be
excommunicated, and so was by M. Rough himself in the open face of the
congregation: which she took in evil part, and gave out threatenings against
the congregation, but God disposed otherwise.

For the Sunday after, M. Rough, being taken by the information of one Roger,
Sergeant to the bishop of London, was laid prisoner in the Gate house at
Westminster, where none of his friends could come to visit him. This Margery
hearing thereof, got her a basket and a clean shirt in it, and went to
Westminster, where she fayning her self to be his sister, got into the prison
to him, and did to her power not a little comfort him.

The Friday after she standing at Marke-lane end with another woman a friend of
hers, saw Cluny Boners sumner coming into the street toward her house.
Whom when she saw, Margery Meerings ready to suffer for Christ.
said to the other woman standing with her, whether goes yoonder fine fellow,
said she? I think surely he goes to my house, and in vewing him still, at
the last she saw him enter into her door: so immediately she went home: and
asked him, whom he sought? Whereunto Cluny answered, for you: you must go with
me: Mary (quoth she) here I am, I will go with you. And coming to the bishop,
she was laid in prison, and the Wednesday after, burned in Smithfield.

An. 1558. 28. of March was Cutbert Simson Cutb. Symson.
deacon of the same Church whereof M. Rough was minister in London, burned in
Smithfield, and with him Hugh Fox, Hugh Fox. 1 Deuenish,
and John Deuenish apprehended together at Islington, and so together
cheerfully suffered for righteousness sake.

Being called into the Warehouse of the Tower before the Constable of the
Tower, and the Recorder of London, master Cholmeley, and refusing to tell who
came to the English service, he was put in a rack of iron, where he stood
three hours, and being loosed from thence, because he would bewray none, on a
Sunday after, they did bind his two fingers together, and put a small arrow
betwixt them, and drew it through so fast, Cuthbert Simson racked twice.
that the blood followed and the arrow brake. It was thought this was done
rather in the Bishops house. After they had twice racked him, they five
weeks after sent him to Boner, of whom he was condemned.

Yet gave he him great testimony of patience before all the people in his
Consistory, saying: if he were not an heretic, Boner comme^deth the patience
of Cuth. Simson.
he is a man of the greatest patience, that yet ever came before me. For I
tell you, he has been thrice racked upon one day in the Tower, also in my
house he has felt some sorrow, and yet I never saw his patience broken.

The 9. of April, An. 1558. William Nichol W. Nichol.
was burned for the cause of the Gospel, at Hereford in West Wales.

The 19. of May after, suffered William Seaman W. Seaman.
of the age of 26. an husbandman, dwelling in Mendlesham in the county of
Suffolk, Tho. Carman Tho. Carman.
and Thomas Hudson Tho. Hudson.
of Arlsham in Norfolk all three together at Norwich, for the cause of Christ.

William Seamon was pursued and taken by the laying wait of Sir John Tirrel:
who having searched for him himself in vain, gave charge to his servants,
Robert Balding and James Clarke: by whom he was taken and brought to Sir John
Tirrell, who sent him to the B. of Norwich, by whom he was condemned.

After his death he left behind him a wife, and three children very young, and
with his children, the wife was persecuted out of the town of Mendlesham,
because she would not go to hear mass, and all her corn, and goods seized,
and taken away by master Christopher Coals officers, Lord of the town.

Thomas Carman was taken, because he pledged Bichard Crashfield at his burning.

Tho. Hudson, after he had long bin absent from his wife, and children, for the
avoiding of the popish idolatry and superstition, came home to his house to
visit, and to comfort them, and at the first lay among the fagots: where his
wife had made him a place to remain in the day. At the last, he walked abroad
for certain days openly in the town, crying out continually against the
mass, and that trumpery: and in the end coming home to his house, he sat him
down upon his knees, having his book by him, reading and singing psalms
continually without ceassing, for 3. days and 3. nights together: refusing
meat, and other talk, to the great wonder of many.

Then one John Crowch, his next neighbor went to the Constables, Robert
Marsham and Robert Laws in the night, to certify them thereof. For Berrie the
Vicar of the Town did command openly to watch for him, and the Constables
understanding the same, took him by break of day. The two and twenty of
April, when Hudson saw them come in, he said, now mine hour is come,
welcome friends, welcome. You be they that shall lead me to life in Christ:
Note.
I thank GOD therefore, and the Lord enable me thereto for his mercies sake.
So they led him to Berry the Commissary, who wrote unto the Bishop letters
against him, and sent him to Norwich bound like a thief: whither he went with
joy, and singing cheer.

In prison he was a month, where he did continually read, and invoke the
name of God.

After they had all three been chained to the stake, Thomas Hudson immediately
comes forth from them under the chain, fell down upon his knees, and
prayed vehemently unto the Lord for comfort, (for he was at the very stake
distressed): the^ rose he with great joy, as a man new changed from life to
death: and said now I thank God, I am strong, and pass not what man can do
unto me: Note.
and so with his fellows gave testimony to the truth in the flames of fire.

Somewhat before this time was one mother Seaman, mother to Will. Seaman
persecuted for the gospel, being of the age of 66. and was glad to live
sometimes in groves, in bushes, etc. After she was dead, (the Lord taking her
away by sickness) one M. Simonds the commissary, dwelling at Thornden, gave
commandment, she should not come in Christian burial: so she was buried in a
pit, under a moats side.

Likewise one mother Bennet of the town of Wetherset, after her departure this
life, was laid in a grave by the high way side.

The 26. of May, suffered at Colchester, William Harris, W. Harris.
Rich. Day, Rich. Day.
and Christian Gorge Christ. Gorge.
a wife, whose husband had another wife burnt before this Christian, whose name
was Agnes Gorge, that suffered with the 13. at Stratford the Bow. After the
death of Christian, he married an honest godly woman, and in the end, being
taken with his wife, with her he remained in prison till the death of Q. Marie,
and was delivered by our most gracious Queen Elizabeth. A sharp proclamation
against godly books.


In the month of June came forth a Proclamation very sharp against godly
books, by the king and Queen.

On ye backside of the town of Islingto^, were assembled xl. godly persons,
men and women, virtuously applying themselves in prayer, and reading the
word. Whereof 22. were by Sir Roger Cholmeley and the Recorder, sent prisoners
to Newgate, where they lay eight days before they came to examination Of these
xxij. thirteen were burned, seven in Smithfield, and six at Brainford. In
prison two died in Whitson week: the names of whom were Matthew Withers and T.
Tailor. Seven of them which remained, escaped with their lives hardly without
burning, whose names were these: John Milles, Thomas Hinshaw, Robert Bailey
wolpacker, Robert Willers, Hudleys, Thomas Ceast haberdasher, Roger Sandey.

The 7. that suffered were brought before Boner the 14. of June, to make
answer to such articles as should be objected. Which when they consta^tly did,
according to the truth of the Gospel, they were by Boner condemned, and the
17. day of June were sent again to Newgate, where they remained til the 27.
day. On which day they cheerfully suffered in Smithfield in the fire.

Their names were these. Henry Pond, Henry Pond.
Raynold Eastland, Rain. Eastland.
Robert Southam, Rob. Southam.
Matthew Richarby, Mat. Richarby.
John Floyd, John Floyd,
John Holiday, John Holiday.
Roger Holland. Rog. Holland.
This Holland was a merchant taylour in London, sometimes apprentice with one
master Kempton, at the black boy in Watlingstreet. He was before his
conversion a Papist, and a very lewd young man: and was brought to the knowledge
of the truth by the exhortation of a sober maid, that was servant in the same
house: whom afterward he did marry, and lived virtuously together til such time
as the cruel Papists made separation by fire,

The same day they suffered; Proclamation was made, that none should be so
bold to speak or talk any word unto them, A straight Proclamation
or receive any thing of them, or to touch them, upon pain of imprisonment,
without either Bail, or mainprise.

Notwithstanding, the people cried out, desiring God to strengthen them: and
they likewise prayed for the people, and the restoring of the word of God.

R. Holland at the stake.
At length, Roger embracing the stake and the Reeds, said these words: Lord,
I most humbly thank thy majesty, that thou have called me from the state of
death, unto the light of thy heavenly word, and now unto the fellowship of thy
Saints, that I may sing and say: Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of Hosts, and,
Lord into thy hands I commit my spirit. Lord bless the people, and save them
from idolatry. And so with the rest of his fellows ended his life, lauding and
praising God.

The fourteenth day of July suffered other six at Brainforde, seven miles from
London. Their names were these: Robert Milles, R. Milles.
Steeuen Wight, S. Wight.
a Tanner, Steeuen Carton, S. Carton.
John Slade, I. Slade.
Robert Denis, R. Denis.
and William Pikes, W. Pikes.
or Pikers. They were condemned by the Bishops Chancellor, D. Darbishire, in
the presence of Sir Edward Hastinges, and Sir Thomas Cornwalles, and suffered
joyfully for the testimony of Jesus.

Of the six of that company which escaped burning, two were scourged by
Bishop Boner in his Garden, Thomas Hinshawe, about the age of nineteen or
twenty years, being Apprentice, and dwelling in Paul's Churchyard with one
M. Puggeson, and John Milles, a married man: on whom he spent two rods, and
on Hinshaw one. Hinshaw was delivered by reason he fell sick of a burning ague
( Boner not thinking he would live) when he had been a year in prison. In
which space Queen Marie died, and he shortly after recovered health.

John Milles was a Capper, a right faithful servant of God. The cause why he
was scourged, was, because when Boner asked him what time he crept to the
cross, he answered, not since he came to the years of discretion, nor would
not, but rather be torn in pieces with wild horses.

Boner (ofttimes speaking to John Milles) would say, they call me bloody
Boner: a vengeance on you all, I would fain be rid of you, but you have a
delight in burning: but if I might have my will, I would sow your mouths, and
put you into sackes, and drown you.

On a day, his wife (being great with child, and looking every day to be
delivered) goes unto Bishop Boner, and entreats him for her husband,
saying, she would not depart, but would lay her belly in his house, except he
were delivered. So Boner required of him, but only to say in Latin, In nomine
Patris, and Filij, and Spiritus sancti: and so sent him away.

The tenth day of Iulie, was Richard Yeoman R. Yeoman.
martyred for the testimony of Jesus Christ. He was about the age of 70.
years, and had been D. Tailors Curat in Hadley, after he had bin kept close a
year in his own house, and got his living by carding of wool, which his wife
did spinne.

He was taken by one Parson Newall, who had gotten the Benefice, and put him
into the Cage, and set him in the Stocks, where he found John Dale, who for
reproouing Newall and his Curat, calling them blind Guides, was also stocked
in the cage. They were both sent to Bury jail, by sir H. Doel, after they had
pinnioned them, and (as they had bin thieves) bound their legs under ye horses
bellies. Where they were put into the lowest Dungeon: where John Dale fell
sick, and died, and was buried in the fields. He was of the age of six and
forty years, by occupation a Weauer, well learned in the Scriptures, and
faithful in all his conversation.

After John Dale was dead, Richard Yeoman was removed to Norwich prison,
where he (remaining steadfast in his confession of the truth) was condemned,
and suffered death for the name of Christ.

About this time, there was a young man in the Town of Hadley, named John
Alcocke, a Sherman by his occupation: who (because he would not give
reverence to the Procession) was sent up to London by Newall. And being put in
the lowest Dungeon in Newgate, died in prison, and was buried on a Dunghill.

The xxix. of Iulie was burned Thomas Benbridge, T. Benbridge.
a a Gentleman, for witnessing to the Gospel. He was of the Dioces of
Winchester, and sustained sundry conflictes for the truths sake, at Doctor
Wyle the Bishops hands: and being condemned, and now tied to the stake: Doctor
Seaton, who had once been with him before to entice him, came again, and
exhorted him to recant. To whom he said, away Babilonian, away. So when they
saw he would not yield, before he was any thing like covered with faggots,
they put fire unto him: which first took away a piece of his beard, whereat he
nothing shrancke at all: then it came on the other side, and took his legs:
and the nether stockings of his hose being leather made the fire to pearce the
sharper, so that the intolerable heat thereof made him cry, I recant. They
suddenly therewith thrust the fire from him: A notable conflict betwixt the
flesh and the spirit of God.
which was also removed in haste by certain of his friends that stood by, and
helped thereto. So the sheriff (who was Sir Richard Peckhall) took him from
the stake, for the which he was sent to the Fleet, and lay a certain time.

When he was taken from the stake, Doct. Seaton wrote him articles, whereto with
much ado he subscribed. But afterward it grievously repented him that he had
done, and so did he write to Doct. Seaton. Whereupon declaring his conscience,
he was the same day seuenight burnt indeed. Where the vile Tormentors did
rather broyle than burn him.

About the beginning of August, not long before the sickness of Queen Marie,
by D. Hopton being Bishop of Norwich, and Doctor Spencer, supplying the room
of his Chauncellor, these four, John Cook, I. Cook.
a Sawyer, Robert Miles, R. Miles.
otherwise called Plummer, a Shereman, and Alexder Lane, A. Lane.
a Wheelewright, and James Ashley, I. Ashley.
a Bacheler, were burned at S. Edmundsburie.

The same year, the fourth day of November, Alexander Gouche, A. Gouche.
and Alice Driuer, A. Driuer.
were persecuted by M. Moon a Justice in Suffolk, a bloody Tiraunte, and
were sent to Melton jail where they remained a while, and at length they were
carried to Bury, against the Assise at S. James tide, and being there examined
of matters of faith, did boldly stand to confess Christ crucified, defying the
Pope with all his papisticall trash.

Among other things Driuers wife likened Queen Mary in her persecution to
Iezabell. For which forthwith her ears were cut of: which she joyfully and
gladly endured, for his name. After the assise at Bury, they were carried to
Melton goal again, where they remained a time.

Alexander Gouch was of the age of xxxvj. a weauer of shredding couerlets,
dwelling at Woodbridge in Suffolk and borne at Vfford in the same County.

Driuers wife was about the age of 30. and dwelt at Grosborough, where they
were taken in Suffolk: her husband was an husbandman.

They were afterward carried from Melton to Ipswich, where they were examined
before Doctor Spenser. Driuers wife was twice examined, and with great
boldness and constancy, maintained the truth, and by power of the word did
put to silence both the Chancellor, and Doctor Gascoyne, so that they one looked
on another, and had not a word to say (quoth she.) God be honored, you be
not able to resist the Spirit of God in me a poor woman. I was an honest
poor man's daughter, never brought up in the University as you have been, A.
Driuer of an excellent spirit
but I have driven the plough before my father (I thank God:) yet
notwithstanding, in the defense of Gods truth, I will set my foot against the
foot of any of you all. And if I had a thousand lives, they should all go
for payment thereof. So the Chauncellor rose up, and read the Sentence of
condemnation against her. And so was she sent to prison again, as joyful as
the Bird of day, Praising and glorifying the name of the Lord.

After her was condemned Alexander Gouch. By seven of the clock in the morning
they were come from Melton six miles of Ipswich, and being in their prayers
were greatly molested by Sir Henry Doell then Shiriffe, but especially by
Richard Smarte one of the Bayliffes. Then they being tied to the stake, and the
iron chain being put about Alice Driuers neck, Oh (said she) here is a
goodly neckerchiefe, blessed be God for it. Then diverse persons came and took
them by the hands. The Shiriffe cried, lay hands on them, lay hands on them.
With that a great multitude ran to the stake: which when the Shiriffe saw, he
let them all alone. There was one Bate a harbor a busy dooer against them at
the fire, who within three or four weeks after died very miserably.

In the same month that Queen Mary died, were three martyred at Bury,
Phillip Humfrey, Phil. Humfrey.
John David, John David.
Henry David Henry David.
his brother, these were burned notwithstanding it was known Queen Mary was
past remedy.

In the same month was the wife of one called Priest Priests wife.
of the age of four and fifty years, dwelling in the Dioces of Exceter, not
far from Lawceston, burned at Exceter for the testimony of the truth. She
was persecuted of her husband and children, The wife was persecuted of husband
and children.
and condemned by the Bishop, whose name was Troubleuile. Among other
communication, when the Bishop had said: let this mad woman be put down to
prison till we send for her husband: she answered him: no, I have but one
husband which is here already in this city (meaning Christ) and in prison
with me, from whom I will never depart. Christ the martyrs husband.
After that saying they thought good to give her a months liberty, to prove
if she might thereby be changed, during which time of her liberty, it
happened that she entering into Saint Peter's church, beheld there a cunning
Dutchman, how he made new noses to certain fine Images, which were disfigured
in King Edwards days. What a mad man art thou (said she) to make them new
noses, which within a few days shall also loose their heads. The Dutchman
accused her and laid it to her charge. And moreover she said unto him: thou art
accursed, and so are thine Images. He called her whore. Nay (said she) thine
Images are whores: A worthy martyr.
and thou art a whore hunter: for does not God say. You go a whoring after
strange Gods, figures of your own making? and thou art one of them. Then was
she sent for and clapped fast.

At the last when they perceived her to be past remedy, and had withstood all
their threatenings and flattery, she was delivered to the temporal power. Of
whom she was exhorted, yet to call for grace, and to leave her fond opinions,
and go home to thine husband (said they:) thou art an unlearned Woman, thou art
not able to answer to such high matters. Note.
I am not (said she) yet with my death I am content to be a witness to
Christ's death: and I pray you make no longer delay with me, my heart is
fixed, I will never otherwise say, nor turn to your superstitious doings.

Then the Bishop did say, the Devil did lead her. No my Lord (said she) it is
the Spirit of God which leads me, and which called me in my bed, and at
midnight opened his truth unto me: (for once especially, at midnight praying
to God for strength and assistaunce, she found it plentifully). In the end
after she had received sentence of death, she lifted up her voice, and
thanked God, saying: I thank thee my Lord God, this day have I found that I
have long sought. After judgment given against her, they promised to spare her
life if she would yet recant. Nay that will I not (said she). God forbid that
I should loose the life eternal, Note.
for this carnal and short life. I will never turn from my heavenly husband
to my earthly husband: from the fellowship of Angels, to mortal children. And
if my husband and children be faithful, then am I theirs: God is my Father,
God is my mother, God is my sister, my brother, my kinsman. God is my friend
most faithful: so being brought to the place of slaughter, she meekly suffered,
calling upon the name of God, saying: God be merciful to me a sinner: God be me
merciful to me a sinner.

The 7. of May were burned at Bristow, (being condemned by M. Dalbney the
Chancelour:) Richad Sharp Weauer of Bristow, and Thomas Hall Tho. Hall.
Shoemaker of the same town. Sharp Ioh. Sharp.
by the persuasion of the Chancellor, had recanted, and afterward felt such
anguish of mind and conscience, that shortly after coming to his parish
Church, called Temple, he came to the quire door, and said with a loud
voice: Neighbors, bear me record, that yonder Idol (pointing to the altar) is
the greatest and most abominable that ever was: and I am sorry that ever I
denied the Lord my God. Whereupon he was apprehended, and burned with the other
at one stake: which they cheerfully suffered, embracing the flame.

The 27. of the same month, Tho. Benion Tho. Benion.
was burned at Bristow. being condemned by the same Chancellor Dalbney.

The 10. of November, suffered five of Gods children at Canterbury: being
hastened to the fire, by the bloody Archdeacon, notwithstanding he had heard in
what danger Q. Mary was. Their names were, Ioh. Cornford Ioh. Cornford.
of Wortha^, Christoph. Brown Christopher Brown.
of Maidstone, John Herst John Herst.
of Ashford, Alice Snoth, Alice Snoth.
Katherin Knight, Kath. Knight.
alias Tilney an aged woman.

Against these, when sentence should be read, and they excommunicated, one of
them, John Cornford, stirred with a vehement spirit of the zeal of God,
proceeding in a more true excommunication against the Papists (in the name of
them all) pronounced sentence against them, in these words following.

In the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, The martyr excommunicateth the Papists.
the son of the most mighty God, and by the power of his holy spirit, and
the authority of his Apostolic church, etc. proceeding with his excommunication
against all mainteiners of the false church. Which sentence took such effect
against the enemy, that within six days after Queen Mary died, and the
tyranny of all English Papists with her.

Note.
Alice Snoth, or Agnes Snoth, who was burnt before, being at the stake; called
for her Godfather and Godmothers: whom, when the maid saw, she asked them what
they had promised for her, and so immediately rehearsed her faith, and the
commandments of God, and required if there were any more that they had
promised in her behalf, and they said no. Then (said she) I die a Christian
woman: bear witness of me And so was she with fire consumed.

These godly martyrs, in their prayers which they made before their martyrdom,
desired God that their blood might be the last that should be shed, and so it
was.

There were diverse of Gods children in prison, which by the death of Queen
Marie escaped, some after sentence of death pronounced. Of which sort were,
John Hunt and Richard White, who after two years captivity, were condemned
by Doctor Geffery the Bishops Chancellor. The Sheriff being urged very
vehemently to burn them, refused, because they had no writ. Which coming down
not long after, one M. Michael, Sir Anthony Hungerfords vndersheriffe, a godly
man, took it, and burnt it, saying: I will not be guilty of these men's blood.
Within four days after, the Chancellor dies, and the confessors of the
Gospel remained in prison, till the happy days of Queen Elizabeth.

There was a godly man, named John Fette, a Tailor, of 42. years, dwelling in
the parish of Clarkenwell, accused by his own wife, The husband accused by his
wife.
and imprisoned by the B. in Lollards tower, where he suffered great extremity,
hanging in the stocks. This poor man had a child, of 8. or 9. years old,
that came to visit his father: to whom a Priest of the Bishops house, said,
why? thy father is an heretic. No (said the boy) my Father is no heretic, but
you are an heretic. For you have Balaams mark, With that the Priest took the
child, and scourged him so sore, that he was al on a gore blood, and so caused
Clunie to carry him to his Father, naked, the Sumner having his coat upon his
arm. At his coming to his Father, the child fell down upon his knees, and
asked him blessing. And being demanded by his Father, who had used him so, he
made answer, that a Priest with Balaams mark, Balaams mark.
had done it. And with that Clunie with violence pulled him from his father,
and kept him three days after in the Bishops house. Who, to salve up ths
matter, delivered the father and the child. Cruelty of the Balamites
But the child died within xiiij days after.

Anno 1560. Nicholas Burton, 1560. N. Burton burned in Civil.
a Merchant of London, dwelling sometimes in the Parish of little Saint
Bartholmewes, was burned in the City of Civil in Spain. Who died so
chearefullie, and with such patience, that the Tormentors and enemies said,
that the devil had his soul before he came to the fire, and therefore (said
they) his senses of feeling were past him.

After his death, another merchant of Bristow (for whom Burton was Factor) sent
his Attorney into Spain, called John Fronton, a Citizen of Bristow, to claim
those goods which belonged to the other Merchant. Against who^ (after
imprisonment, because he could not say his Aue Maria after the Romish fashion
Aue Maria after ye Romish fashion.
) they gave sentence that he should lose all the goods he sued for, though
they were not his own, and besides, suffer a years imprisonment.

At what time Burton suffered, which was anno 1560. was also martired another
Englishman, with thirteen mo, one of them being a Nun, and another a Friar,
both constant in the Lord.

The ij. day of November, was burned John Baker, and William Burgate, both
Englishmen, apprehended in Calis, and burned in Civil.

Anno Domini, one thousand, five hundred, and threescore, Mark Burges, M.
Burges.
an Englishman, Master of an English Ship, called the Minion, was burned in
Lishborne, a city in Portugal, and William Hook, W. Hook.
of the age of xvi. years, stoned to death by certain young men of Civil, for
the confession of his faith,

As the most were burned and tormented to death, so some were torn with
scourging, as, Richard Wylmot, and Thomas Fairefaxe, both whipped in Drapers
hall, through the cruelty of Brooks, then Master of the Company. That Wylmot
could not lie in his bed vi. nights after: and neither of them enjoyed health
after.

They were thus scourged for saying, they were sorry for D. Cromes recantation.

After these two, was one Green scourged because he had a book, called
Antichrist: and would not bewraye more matter, to their mind. He was accused
by his Master, called John Waylande, a Printer, and brought before Doctor
Story: by whom (after long stocking, and evil usage in prison) he was
adjudged to be whipped. Which was performed upon him in the presence of Doctor
Story, in Christ's Hospital.

Also, Steeuen Cotton, burned (as before) at Brainforde, was twice beaten by
Boner, Likewise was James Harris of Byllerica in Essex, scourged by Boner, in
his garden. So likewise Robert Williams endured the same torment by the bloody
Bishop.

With these also is to be numbered a poor Beggar, which was whihped at
Salisburie, after he had been put into a Dungeon, because he would not
receive the Sacrament at Easter, in the town of Colingborowe.

As some were tried by burning, racking, and scourging, so upon other some the
Lord did lay a lighter hand of imprisonment, as upon William Living and his
wife, in the city of London, John Lythall, Elizabeth Young, and William Wats of
Tunbridge, who fled away, his keepers being tippled and fallen asleep.
Alexander Winshurst a priest that escaped by negligence of Cluny, who left none
at home to keep him fast, in whose house he was prisoner, Bosoms wife: the
Lady Kneuet of Northfolke, toward an hundred years old: the Lady Vane, who
with much trouble, yet passed these terrible days with life.

In the time of King Henry the eight, Anno 1546. there was one John Dauis a
child of twelve years old, John Dauis a child of twelve years old.
dwelling with one Master Johnson Apothecarie in Worcester, who being
complained of by his Mistress the wife of Master Johnson, for that he had
written something against the six Articles, and had the Ballad called, Come
down, for all your shaven Crown. After long imprisonment with bolts of irons
on his legs, was arraigned, being holde^ up at the bar in men's arms before
the judges, who were Portman and Meruen, and by the death of king Henry was
delivered: else had he been burned for that offense. He endured the prison
from the foureteenth of August, till within seven days of Easter.

Likewise Mistress Roberts by Gods providence escaped danger, dwelling in
Hawkhurst in Sussex, Mistress Anne Lucie of Nottingham, etc. Likewise a
congregation at Stoke in Suffolk was delivered by Gods merciful providence,
but especially that of London was diverse times in peril, and always was
preserved of God: in which congregation were sometimes forty, The congregation
in London.
sometimes an hundredth, sometimes two hundredth, sometimes mo, sometimes less.
About the latter end of Queen Mary it greatly increased. From the first
beginning, which was about the first entry of Queen Mary's reign, they had
diverse ministers: First Master Scamler, then Thomas Foul, The ministers of
the congregation in London.
after him Master Rough, then Master Augustine Benher, and last Master
Bentham: who likewise was by Gods providence wonderfully preserved.

Likewise at Calis few there were of the professors of the gospel that
miscarried: especially John Thorpe and his wife were mercifully preserved and
succored of strangers. To these are to be added Edward Benet, Ieffery Hurst,
in the town of Shakerley in Lankeshire, who were saved by the death of Queen
Mary. William Wood of Kent of the parish of Strowd, who was delivered by the
disagreement of Kennall and Chadsey, two popish Doctors that examined him, as
Paul was delivered by the contention of the Phariseis and Saduces.

Likewise was Simon Greeuens mercifully delivered, being at the assembly held
at Spire, and complained of to the king by Faber, the B. of Vienna, whom he had
gently reproved for maintaining certain errors in his Sermon which he had
there preached.

So likewise the Lady Katherine duchess of Suffolk hardly escaped, and passed
the seas into Germany, where she suffered the afflictions of a stranger in
another land.

Also Th. Sprat, and William Porredge escaped very narrowly persecution by M.
Brent Justice in Kent, and the two Blachendines. John Cornet prentise with a
minstrell, was only whipped by the commandment of the Earl of Oxford, and
banished the town of Roughedge.

So likewise Thomas Brice professor of the gospel hardly escaped the bloody
hands of the tyraunts. To those aforesaid are to be added, Gertrude Crockhey of
S. Catherines, William Maulden in the time of the six articles, Robert Hornebey
groom of the chamber to the Lady Elizabeth, Mistress Sands now wife to sir
Morice Bartlet, then Gentlewomen waiter to the Lady Elizabeth while she was
in the Tower, Father Rose borne in Exmouth in Devonshire, after much affliction
in King Henry's days, and more grievous in Queen Mary's, after his constant
witnessing of the gospel, escaped, and passedouer seas, and there lived till
the death of Queen Mary: and of late being aged of 76. years, was preacher in
the town of Luton in Bedfordshire.

Doctor Sands likewise Vicechauncellor of the University of Cambridge, who for
his Sermon at Cambridge, preached against Queen Marie, was imprisoned in the
Tower, and afterward in the marshalsea, by the means of Sir Thomas Holcroft.
Being set at liberty, hardly escaped beyond the seas where he lived all
Queen Mary's time in Germany.

Anno 1556. there was a complaint against such as favored the Gospel in
Ipswich, exhibited to Queen Mary's Counsel, sitting in commission at Beckles
in Suffolk, the 18. of May, An. 1556. by Phillip Williams, alias Foteman, John
Steward and Matthew Butler sworn for that purpose.

The names of such as fled out of the town, Such as fled out of Ipswich for
persecution.
and lurked in secret places, were these: Of S. Mary tower, Rober Partridge,
Rose Nothingam, daughter of William Notingam the elder. Of L. Laurence: Anne
Fenne servant to Robert Notingam, Andrew Ingforby, his wife and daughter,
Ipswich a good town.
Thomas Tomson, Shoemaker, supposed to have received but twice those 17.
years, Martine Locksmith his wife. Of Saint Margarets: William Pickesse
Tanner, John Woodles Couerletweauer, and his wife, William Harset Bricklayer,
Thomas Fowler Shoemaker, W. Wrightes wife at the Windmill, Laurence Waterward,
late Curate, borne in Chorley in Lancashire. Of Saint Nicholas, widow Swanne,
Matthew Bird, and his wife, Stephen Greenwich, and his wife, William Coleman
servant to the said Stephen, Robert Coleman and his wife, Roger Laurence,
alias Sparrow, John Carleton Sadler, William Colemam, James Hearst his wife. Of
Saint Peter's: Richard Houer, apprentise with Nicholas Notingham, Richard Hedley
a seller of heretical Books. Of Saint Stephens: James Booking Shoemaker, his
wife, John Raw late servant to James Ashley, William Palmer, Richard Richman
Shoemaker his wife, daughter to mother Fenkell midwife. Of Saint Clements,
mistres Tooley, who departed to Darsham in Suffolk, Agnes Wardall the elder
Widow, Robert Wardall her son. Of Saint Mathewes: John Shoemaker and his
wife.

The names of such as had not received the Sacrament. Of saint Clements, Robert
Braye, John Notingham, Agnes VVardall wife of Robert VVardal, Nich. Notingham,
Richard Michell, William Jordan his wife, Rich. Butler, Robert Brown.

Of Saint Peter's: John Reed, Thomas Spurdance, John servant to Stephen
Greenleefe. Of Saint Stephens, Robert Scolding. Of saint Margarets, John
Greenwich, and his wife. Of saint Nicholas, Thomas Sturgeon mariner, John Fenne
his wife. Of saint Marie Kye, Robert Branstone, brother and servant to William
Branstone. Of saint Marie tower, Martine Johnson, who lies bedredde, Agnes his
keeper, Benet Alceed, servants to Robert Nottingha^. Of saint Laurence, Robert
Silk his son. Of saint Marie at Ellens, John Ramsey and his wife in prison.

The names of such as observed not ceremonies.

Of saint Clements, some refused the Paxe, Robert Brage his wife refused to
suffer any child to be dipped in the Font: Ioane Barber widow, Thomasin her
daughter, refused to behold the elevation of the sacrament.

Mistress Ponder mother to Ioane Barber in the same fault, Tie a mariner his
wife. Of saint Marie Ellines, Richard Hawarde refused the Paxe at Mass in
Saint Laurence. Of saint Peter's, Master Lions at mass at saint Marie Stoke
refused the Paxe, mother Fentell, Ioane Ward alias Bentley wife, refused to
have their children dypped in the Font. At Saint Stephens, mother Beriefe
refuses to have children dipped in fontes. At S. Nicholas, George Bush his
wife rejected the host, after receipt of it.

Names of priests wives that had access to their husbands.
RAfe Carletons wife, Curate of S. Mathewes, and S. Marie at Ellins. Elizabeth
Cantrell wife to Rafe Cantrell, Jane Barker, wife to Robert Barker, priest late
of Bury, Latimers wife Curate of S. Laurence and S. Stephens, William Clerks
wife late curate of Barkham, and S. Marie at Ellines.

The names of the mainteiners against this complaint.
RObert Stirrup Customer to Queen Marie, Gilbert Stirrup, Deputy to Edward
Grimstone for his butlerage, Master Butler the elder, searcher, mistress
Tooly, Margaret Bray, Ioane Barker widow, mistress Bird, Bastian Man his
wife and himself.

Their requests to punish, and convent certain for example.
TO convent Richard Bird, Iayler, who by evil counsel does animate his
Prisoners of his Sect: Thomas Sadler, for speaking certain words to John
Bate, the Crier of the town, that it might please the Bishop to wish his
Commissarie and Official, to be upright and diligent in their office, and to
appoint a Curate of ability, to feed his Cure with Gods word. That none
might be suffered to be Midwiues, but such as were known to be Catholics.
That Rafe Carleton, Curate, might be conuented, whether by corruption of money
he has engrossed his book of any that are there named, and has not received
in deed as it is reported.

The miraculous preservation of Lady Elizabeth, now our most gracious Queen of
England.
QVeene Mary before she was crowned showed great favor to the Lady Elizabeth,
and would go no whether but would have her by the hand, and send for her to
dinner and supper: but after she was crowned, she never showed her any such
kindness, The affliction of Lady Elizabeth, our most gracious Queen.
but kept her self aloof from her.

After this, it happened immediately upon the rising of Sir Thomas Wiat, that
the Lady Elizabeth, and the Lord Courtney, were charged with false suspicion of
Sir Thomas Wyats rising. Whereupon, the next day after the rising of Wyat, the
Queen sent for her from her house at Ashridge, by three of her Counselors,
Sir Richard Southwell, Sir Edward Hastings, then master of the horse, and Sir
Thomas Cornwallis, with their retinue, and troop of horsemen, to the number of
250: who at the same time found her sore sick in her bed. It was ten of the
clock at night before they came, and they were so boisterous, yt being desired
to stay and come in the morning to speak with her, they came hastily rushing
into her Graces chamber, as soon as the Gentlewoman, that was to do the
message from them to her. And coming in unto her, they declared the Queens
pleasure, which was, that she should be at London the seventh day of that
present Month. Adding moreover unto her, that their Commission was such, that
they must needs bring her with them, either quick or dead. And thereupon
called for Physicians, Doctor Owen, and Doctor Wendie, and demanded of them
whether she might be removed from thence with life, or no. Whose answer was,
that she might.

So in conclusion they willed her to prepare against morning at ix of the
clock, to go with them.

On the morrow (at the time prescribed) they had her forth as she was, very
faint and feeble, and in such weak case, that she was ready to sown three or
four times betwixt them.

So (all sick in the Litter) she came to Redborne, where she was guarded all
night. From thence to Saint Albons, to Sir Rafe Rowlets house, where she tarried
that night, both feeble in body, and comfortless in mind. From that place
they passed to Master Doddes house at Mimmes. Where also they remained that
night. And so from thence she came to Highgate: where (being very sick) she
tarried that night, and the next day. From that place she was conveyed to the
Court.

Now when she came to the Court, her Grace was there straightway shut up, and
kept as close Prisoner the space of a fortnight: which was, till Palme-sunday,
seeing neither King, nor Queen, nor Lord, nor friend, in all that time, but
only the Lord Chamberlayne, Sir Ioh. Gage, and the Vicechamberlayne, who was
attendant unto the doors.

The Friday before Palme-sunday, the Bishop of Winchester, with nineteen of
the Counsel, came unto her grace, L. Elizabeth falsely accused.
from the Queen, and burdened her with Wiates conspiracy, and charged her
also with the business made by Sir Peter Carewe, and the rest of the Gentlemen
of the West Country. Which she utterly denied, and cleared her innocence
therein.

In conclusion, they declared unto her, that it was the Queens pleasure she
should go to the Tower, until the matter were further examined, and then they
departed.

Within the space of an hour, or little more, came four Lords of the
Counsel, which were, the Lord Treasurer, the Bishop of Winchester, the
Lord Steward, the Earl of Sussex: with the Guard, who warding in the next
Chamber to her, secluded all her Gentlemen and yeomen, Ladies and Gentlewomen,
saving that one Gentleman Usher, three Gentlewomen, and two Grooms of her
chamber, were appointed in their rooms, and three other men of the Queens,
and three waiting women, to give attendance that none should have access to
her Grace. At which time, there were an hundred of Northern Soldiers An
hundred northren soldiers watch ye L. Elizabeth.
al in white coats, waiting about the gardens all that night, and likewise two
Lords watching there also with their bands and company.

Upon Saturday following, two Lords of the Counsel (the one was the Earl of
Sussex) came and certified her grace, that forthwith she must go unto the
Tower.

The barge being prepared for her, and the tide now ready, in heavy mood her
Grace requested the Lords, that she might tarry another tide. But one of them
replied, that neither tide nor time was to be delayed.

And when her Grace requested that she might write to the Queen, he made
answer, he durst not permit that. But the other Lord, the Earl of Sussex,
kneeling down, told her Grace that she should have liberty to write, and
as he was a true man, he would deliver it to the Queens Majesty, and bring
her Grace an answer thereof again, whatsoever came thereof.

Whereupon (being not permitted to speak with the Queen) she wrote unto her
Majesty. On Palmesunday about nine of the clock, those two Lords returned
again, declaring, that it was time for her grace to depart. So she took her
Barge with the two Lords, three of the Queens Gentlewomen, and three of her
own, her Gentleman Usher, and two of her Grooms, lying, and hoouering a
certain space upon the water, because it was yet dangerous for them to shoot
the Bridge. At the length, coming to the stairs, when she la^ded, and coming
out of the barge, having one foot upon the staiers. Here landeth (said she) as
true a subject being prisoner, The Lady Elizabeth had none other friends but
God.
as ever landed at these stayers: and before thee O God I speak it, having
none other friends but thee alone. After she came to the Tower and was
imprisoned, the doors were bolted, and forted upon her. Lady Elizabeth
prisoned in the Tower.
At which time she called to her Gentlewoman for her book: desiring God not
to suffer her to build her foundation upon the sands, but upon the rock:
whereby all blastes of blustering weather should have no power against her.

Within five days after comes Stephen Gardener, the ruler of the roast, with
diverse other of the Counsel, and examined her of the talk that was at
Ashridge betwixt her and Sir James a Croft, concerning her removing thence to
Dunnington castle.

To whom she said, she remembered that M. Hobby and her Officers, and Sir James
a Croft had such words: but what is that to the purpose, my Lord (said she)
but that I may go to mine own houses at all times.

That day or there about, diverse of her own Officers brought provision for her
meat: offering, and making request to the Lord Chamberlain, Constable of the
Tower, they might serve the same. Whose request, he with great indignation, and
threatenings refused, saying: for that she is a prisoner, she should be served
with none other, but ye Liefetenants men.

Upon this occasion, her graces officers made suit unto ye Counsel, that some
might be appointed to bring her diet unto her: which was granted, and
thereupon were appointed one of her Gentlemen, the Clark of her kitchen, and
her two purueyors, to bring in her provision once in a day. And upon the same
suit of her Officers, were appointed to wait upon her Grace, two Yeomen of her
Chamber, one of her Robes, two of her Pantrie, and Ewrie, one of her Butterie,
and another of her Sellar, and likewise, two of her kitchen, and one of her
larder: all which continued with her the time of her trouble.

After this sort having lien a whole month there in close prison, and being
very evil at ease, she desired of the Lord Chamberlain, and the Lord
Shandoys, that she might have liberty to walk in some other place, because
she felt not her self well at ease. This request could not be granted till the
next day the Lord Shandoys had obtained of the Counsel, that she might walk
into the Queens lodgings: so that he and the Lord Chamberlain, and three of
the Queens gentlewomen did accompany her, the windows being shut, and she not
suffered to look out at any of them.

Afterward there was liberty granted her to walk in a little garden, the
doors and gates shut. At which times of her walking there, the Prisoners on
that side were straightly commanded not to speak or look out into the
garden, till her Grace were gone away: having to that purpose their keepers to
wait upon them for that time.

The L. Chamberlain hard to the Lady Elizabeth.
During this time, there used a little boy, a man's child of the tower, to bring
her Grace flowers: who was forbidden any more to do so by the Lord Chamberlain.

The next day as she was walking in the garden, the child peeping in at a hole
in the door, said unto her, Mistress, I can bring you no more flowers.
Whereat she smyled, understanding thereby what they had done.

The fifth day of May the Constable was discharged of his office in the Tower,
and one Sir Henry Benefield Sir Henry Benefield.
placed in his room. He brought with him an hundred Soldiers in blewe cotes,
which did much amaze her: so that she asked, whether he were of that
conscience or no, that if her murdering were secretly committed to his charge
he would see the execution thereof. They persuaded her, that God would not
suffer such wickedness to proceed: saying, they knew not what manner of man he
was. Well (quoth she) God grant it be not so: for thou O God can mollify
all tyra^nous hearts, and disapoint al such cruel purposes, and I beseech thee
hear me thy creature, which am thy servant, and at thy commandment, trusting
by thy grace ever so to remain.

On Trinity Sunday being the 19. of May, she was removed from the Tower, the
Lord Treasuror being then there for the loading of the carts, and discharging
the place of the same: where sir Henry Benefield, (being appointed her gailor)
did receive her with a company of rakehels to guard her, besides the Lord of
Darbies band, unto whom at length came the Lord of Tame joined in Commission
with sir Henry, for the safegarding of her person, Lady Elizabeth to Woodstocke.
and they together conveyed her grace to Woodstocke.

The first day they conducted her to Richmond, where she continued al night,
being restrained of her own men: and Benefields soldiers appointed in their
rooms, on which night she looked for none other but to have been murdered,
Lady Elizabeth in great fear.
and passed the same night in great fear.

Afterward passing over the water at Richmond, going toward Windsore, her
grace espied certain of her poor servants standing on the other side, who
were very desirous to see her: whom when she beheld, turning to one of her men
standing by (she said) yoonder I see certain of my men, go to them, and say
these words, Tanquam ouis. Ta^quam ouis.
So passing forward that night, she was lodged at Windsore at the deanes house.
From thence she was guarded the next night to Master Dormers house.

On the morrow her grace passing from M. Dormer (where was for ye time of her
abode there, a straight watch kept) she came to the Lord of Tames house, where
she lay all the night, being very Princely entertained both of Knights and
Ladies, Gentlemen and Gentlewomen: whereat Sir Henry grunted, and was offended.
Whereunto the L. of Tame answered: that he was well advised of his doings,
being joined in Commission as well as he: adding with warrantise that her grace
should be merry in his house.

The next day, as she should take her journey toward Woodstocke, the Lord of
Tame with another Gentleman being at tables playing, and dropping vie Crowns,
the Lady Elizabeth passing by, stayed and said she would see the game out:
which sir Henry would scarce permit.

After this sir Henry went up into a chamber, where was appointed for her grace
a chair, two cushions and a foot carpet very fair and princely, wherein
presumptuously he sat, S. Henry Benefield presumptuous and uncivil.
and called one Barwicke his man to pull of his boots. When supper was done,
he called my Lord, and willed him, that all the Gentlemen and Ladies should
withdraw themselves, every one to his lodgyng, maruelling much that he would
permit such a company, considering so great a charge committed to him. Sir
Henry, quoth my Lord, content your self, all shall be voided, your men and
all. Nay my Soldiers, quoth Sir Henry shall watch all night. The Lord of Them
answered, it shall not need. Well said he, need or need not, they shall so
do.

The next day she was carried to Woodstocke, where she was enclosed as before
in the Tower of London.

At length she had gardens appointed for her walk: but always when she did
recreate her self therein, the doors were fast locked up, in as straight
manner as in the Tower, being at the least 5. or 6. locks between her lodging
and her walks: Sir Henry keeping the keys and trusting no man therewith.
Wherefore she called him her gailer.

After she had bin at Woodstocke a while, she was permitted by the Counsel to
write unto the Q. and so she did, sir Henry always at hand to observe what she
wrote: neither would he permit her letters to be carried, 4. or 5. days after
ye writing thereof, till at the last, he delivered them to one of her
Gentlemen. Then about the 8. of June, came down D. Owen, and Doctor Wendie to
minister physic to her, for that she was sickly. Whereof she being amended,
they returned again to the Court: making there good report to the Q. of her
Graces behavior, and humblenes toward the Queens majesty: which the Q. took
very thankfully.

About this time, was there a great consulting among the B. and
gentlemen-touching a marriage for her Grace. Which some of the Spaniards wished
to be with some stranger, that she might go out of the Realm with her portion.

A Lord being there, at the last said, that the King should never have any
quiet common wealth in England, The Spaniards are against the murdering of Lady
Elizabeth.
unless her head were stricken from her shoulders. Whereunto the Spaniards
answered, God forbid that their king, and master, should have that mind to
consent to such a mischief. From that day ye Spaniards never left their good
persuasions to the king, that the like honor he should never obtain, as he
should in delivering the Lady Elizab. grace out of prison. L. Elizabeth
delivered out of prison.
Whereby at length she was happily released from the same.

Herevppon, shortly after she was sent for to come to Hampton Court, from her
comfortless captivity in Wodstocke, where she was at sundry times in great
danger of life: first through fire, which began to kindle, between the
boords, and seelings under the Chamber where she lay: done of purpose, as it
was credibly thought, of a knight who was joined in commission with Sir Hen. It
was thought, and also was affirmed of one Paul Penny, a keeper of Woodstocke, a
notorious ruffian, and butcherly wretch, that he was appointed to kill the Lady
Elizabeth, who both saw the man often in her sight, and also knew thereof.

An other time, one of the privy chamber, a great man about the Queen, and
chief dearling of Stephen Gardener, named master James Basset, came to
Blandebridge, a mile from Woodstocke, with 20. or 30. privy coats, and sent
for Sir Henry to come and speak with him. But so it happened, a little
before, Sir Henry was sent for by Post to the counsel, leaving straight word
behind him with his brother, that no man whatsoever he were, though coming
with a bill of the Queens hand, or any other warraunt, should have access to
her before his return again. By reason whereof master Benefields brother
coming to him at the bridge, God delivers L. Eliza.
would suffer him in no case to approach nigh: who otherwise (as is supposed)
was appointed to murder the innocent Lady.

Her Grace being in the Tower of London, a writ came down, subscribed with
certain hands of the Counsel for her execution: but that God stirred up
master Bridges the Lieftenaunt the same time of the Tower, to come in haste to
the Queen, to give certificate thereof, and to know further her consent
touching her sisters death. Whereupon, the devise (which was Winchesters
devilish platform) was disappoynted. Moreover, during her imprisonment, one
master Edmund Tremanie was on the rack, and master Smithwike, and diverse
others in the Tower were examined, and diverse offers made them to accuse the
innocent Lady. Which when she heard of, departing from Woodstocke, she wrote
these verses with her diamond in a glass window. Much suspected by me: nothing
proved can be: quoth Elizabeth prisoner. Elizabeth prisoner.


Now departing from Wodstocke, Sir Henry and his soldiers, with the Lord of
Them, and Sir Rafe Chamberlain garding her: the first night she came to
Rocet. In which journey such a mighty wynd did blow, that her servants were
feign to hold down her clothes about her: insomuch yt her hood was twice or
thrice blown from her head. Whereupon, she desirous to return to a
Gentleman's house near there, could not be suffered by Sir Henry, but was
constrained (under an hedge) to trim up her head, so well as she could.

After this, the next night they came to M Dormers, and so to Colbrooke, where
she lay all that night, at the George. On which night, all her men were taken
from her, saving her Gentleman Usher, three gentlewomen, two Grooms, and one
of her wardrobe: the soldiers watching and warding about the house, and she
close shut up. This was, because certain of her Gentlemen and Yeomen (to the
number of 60.) came to meet her, and salute her.

The next day following, her Grace entered Ha^pton court, on the backside, into
the Princes lodging, the doors being shut to her, and she guarded (as before)
with Soldiers. She lay there a fortnight at the least, before any body had
recourse unto her. At the length came the Lord William Howarde, who marvelous
honorably entertained her. And not long after, came the Bishop of
Winchester, the Lord of Arundell, the Lord of Shrewsburie, and Secretary
Peter, whom she required to be a mean for her delivery out of prison. S.
Gardener requested her to submit her self to the Queen, and to crave pardon.
Which she said, she would not do, having never offended: and that she had
rather lie in prison all the days of her life: requiring law, if she had
offended.

The next day he came again to her, and used persuasions to have her
acknowledge her self faulty. She again refuses: adding, that it were as
good for her to be in prison with honesty and truth, as abroad, suspected of
her Majesty. And this that I have said, I will (quoth she) stand unto, for I
will never belie my self. So Winchester, and the rest (kneeling down) prayed
that all might be forgotten: and so departed, leaving her fast locked as before.

A seuennight after, the Queen sent for her Grace at ten of the cloak in the
night, to speak with her: for she had not seen her in two years before. So
Mistress Clarentius conducted her to the Queens bedchamber, where her Majesty
was. At the sight of whom, her Grace kneeled down, and desired God to preserve
her Majesty: saying, she mistrusted not, but she should prove her self as
good a Subject to ward her Majesty, as ever did any. And desired her Majesty
even so to judge of her. To whom the Queen answered, you will not confess
your offense, but stand stoutly to your truth. I pray God it may fall out so.
If it do not (quoth the Lady Elizabeth) I request neither favor, nor pardon
at your hands. Thus her Grace departing, went to her lodging again, and the
seuennight after, she was released of Sir Henry her Jailer. And so (being
set at liberty) she went into the Country, and had appointed to go with
Sir Thomas Pope, a Counselor, and one of the Queens Gentlemen Vshers.

Then there came to Lamheire, Master Iermingham, and master Norris, gentleman
Usher, Queen Mary's men, and took away from her Grace, Mistres Ashley to the
Fleet, and three other of her gentlewomen, to the Tower.

Shortly after God took away Guard. Gardener dies.
her mortal enemy: and after him, other of her enemies dropped away, one after
another: and her liberty still increased, till at the length, in the Month of
November, and the seventeen day of the same, three years after the death of
Gardener, died Queen Mary. Queen Marie dies.
Of which Queen this may truly be affirmed, that before her, was never read
in story of any king or Queen of England, since the time of king Lucius, under
whom (in time of peace) by hanging, heading, burning, and imprisonment, so much
Christian blood was spilled within this Realm, as was under the reign of
Queen Marie, for the space of iiij. years to be seen.

The unprosperous success of Q. Marie, while she persecuted the children of
God.
FIrst, incontinently after she had received the Pope, the fairest and greatest
ship she had, called great Harrie, was burned. A vessel not matchable in all
these parts of Europe.

Then fell there such a dearth, that her poor subjects were feign to eat
Acornes for want of corn. Moreover, Calice was lost in her time: besides the
ill luck she had in her childbirth: and her husband for saking her, and in
the end her short reign, even the shortest of any King or Queen since the
conquest, only excepted king Richard the third.

The severe punishment of God upon the persecutors of his people.
OF Gardener mention has been made before. Morgan B. of S. David's, who
condemned B. Farrar, was so stricken by God, that his meat would not go down,
but rise and pick up again, sometimes at his mouth, sometime blow out of his
nose, most horribly to behold: and so continued till he died.

Justice Morgan that sat upon the death of the L. Jane, not long after fell mad,
and so died, ever having in his mouth Lady Jane, Lady Jane, etc. D. Dunning
died before Q. Mary fitting in his chair, he was the bloody Chauncellor of
Norwich. Likewise sudden death fell upon Berry Commissarie of Norwich, who
fell down suddenly to the ground, gave an heavy groan, and never stirred
after. B. Thorneton Suffragan of Dover, looking upon his men, playing at the
boules, fell down in a palsy, and willed to remember God: yea (said he) and
my Lord of Canturbury too. Another Suffragan that succeeded him, brake his
neck down a pair of stairs in the Cardinals chamber at Greenewich, after
he had received the Cardinals blessing.

One Grundwood of Hitcham, who was procured by William Fenning to witness salsly
against a godly man, one Cooper of Watsame, that he should wish if God would
not, that the Devil would take away Queen Mary: as he was in his labor
staking up a gulphe of corn, suddenly his bowels fell out, and so he died.
The Parson of Crondall in Kent, having received the Popes blessing from
Cardinal Poole, shrunk down in the pulpet, and was found dead. D. Geffery
Chancellor of Salisbury, having appointed the day before his death, to call 90.
persons before him to examination, was prevented by Gods hand, and so died.

Master Woodroof, who was cruel against M. Rogers, was stricken the one half
of his body, that he lay benumbed, and so continued seven or eight years, till
he died: and scarce escaped any of them, but the hand of God strangely was upon
them all before their death, Popish prelates die thick together about the
death of Queen Mary.
that had defiled themselves with the blood of Gods children. Especially it is
to be noted, how many of the popish prelates died not long before Queen Mary,
or not longer after.

Before her died Coats B. of Winchester, Parfew B. of Harford, Glinne B. of
Bangor, Brooks B. of Gloucester, King B. of Them, Peto elect of Salsbury, Day
B. of Chichester, Holyman B. of Bristow.

After her Cardinal Poole the next day, of some Italian Physic, as some did
suspect, then I. Christophorsen B. of Chichester, White B. of Winchester,
Hopton B. of Norwich, Morgan B. of S. David's, Rafe Bayne B. of Liechfield and
Couentrie, Owine Oglethorpe B. of Carlill, Cutbert Tonstall, who was no bloody
persecutor B. of Durham, Thomas Raynolds elect of Hereford, after his
deprivation died in prison: Doctor Weston Deane of Westminster, after Deane of
Windsore, chief disputer against Cranmer, Ridley, and Latimer. Master
Slythurst master of trinity College in Oxford, who died in the Tower: Seth
Holland Deane of Worcester, and Warden of Alsoule college in Oxforde, William
Copinger monk of Westminster fell mad and died in the Tower, Doct. Steward
Deane of Winchester.

Such of the Popish Clergy as escaped death, and were committed to prison
were these: In the Tower, Nicholas Heath Archb. of York, and Lord Chancellor,
Th. Thurleby B. of Ely, Th. Watson B. of Lincoln, Gilbert Bourne B. of Bath
and Wells, Rich. Pates B. of Worcester, Troublefield B. of Exceter, John
Fecknam Abbot of Westminster, John Baxall Deane of Windsor and Peterborow,
Godwel B. of S. Ass, and Maurice elect of Bangor ran away. In the Marshalsea,
Edmond Boner, Tho. Wood, B. elect.

In the Fleet, Cuthbert Scot Bishop of Chester, whence he escaped to Louain,
and there died. Henry Cole Deane of Paul's, John Harpesfield Archdeacon of
London, and Deane of Norwich, Nicholas Harpesfield Archd. of Canterbury,
Anthony Dracot Archd. of Huntington, William Chadsey Archdeacon of Middlesex.

Anno 1572. John Whiteman, John Whiteman a notable martyr.
Shoemaker of Rye in Sussex, a married man of 23. years. It being service time
at Ostend in Flanders, went to the Church, and at the time of the heave
offering, stepped to the sacrificer, and took from over his head his Idol,
saying these words in the Duitch tongue. Is this your God? And so breaking it,
cast it down under his feet, and trod thereon. Forthwith he was taken, and on
Tuesday after had sentence given against him: first to have his hand cut off,
and his body scorched to death, and after to be hanged up. Which sentence he
took so patiently, and the execution thereof with such willingness, that so
soon as he was out of the prison to be carried to execution, he made such
haste, and as it were a ran to the place of execution, that he drew the
hangman after him.

There was prepared for his execution, a post with spars from the top thereof,
aslope down to the ground, in manner of a tent: to the end, that he should be
scorched to death, and not burned. When he was come to the place, the hangman
commanded him to lay down his right hand upon a block, which he immediately with
an hatchet smote of the goodman still continuing patient and constant. Then the
hangman stepped behind him, and bids him put out his tongue: which he forthwith
did as far as he could out of his head, through the which he thrust a long
instrument like a packneedle, and so let it stick. So being stripped into his
shirt; he was put into the tent, and made fast with two chains, and fire put
round about him, which broiled him and scorched him al black: and when he was
dead, he was carried to be hanged upon a Gibbet besides ye town.

Anno 1558. the last day of March was appointed a day of conference, betwixt 9.
priests, and 9. protestants, concerning matters of religion.

A conference for matters of religion.
The names of the Papists were these: Winchester, Lichfield, Chester, Carlisle,
Lincoln, Cole, Harpesfield, Longdale, Chadsey. The names of the Protestants,
Story B. of Chichester, Cox, Whitehead, Grindall, Horn, Sands, Best, Elmer,
Jewel.

Three propositions to dispute of.
The matter they should dispute of, was comprehended in these propositions. 1 It
is against the word of God, and the custom of the ancient Church, to use a
tongue unknown to ye people, in common prayer, and administration of ye
sacraments.

2 Every Church has authority to appoint, take away, and change ceremonies,
and Ecclesiastical rites, so the same be to edification.

3 It cannot be proved by the word of God, that there is in the mass offered
up a sacrifice propitiatory for the quick and the dead.

It was decreed, according to the desire of the papists, that it should be in
writing on both parts (for avoiding of much altercation of words) and each of
them should deliver their writings to other, to consider what were improued
therein, and to declare the same again in writing some other convenient day.
This was agreed on of both parts. The Lords also of the parliament made means to
her majesty, that ye parties of this conference might read their assertions in
ye English tongue, and that in the presence of the nobility, and others of the
parliament house, for the better satisfaction, and the better enabling of their
own judgments, to treat and conclude of such laws as might depend thereupon.

This was thought very reasonable, and agreed upon: the day being appointed ye
last of March, and the place Westminster church. Notwithstanding this former
order appointed, and consented unto on both parts. The asse^bly being now made,
ye B. of Winchester, and his colleagues, alleging that they had mistaken that
their assertions and reasons should be written, and so only recited out of a
book, said that their book was not then ready written, but they were ready to
argue and dispute, The Papists flee from the agreement.
and therefore they would for that time, repeat in speech that which they had
to say to the first probation.

This varying of theirs from the first order was permitted, without any great
refusing, because they excused themselves with mistaking the order, and agreed
again that they would not fail, but put it in writing according to the former
order, and deliver it to the other part.

So the B. of Winchester. and his Colleagues appointed D. Cole, Deane of Paul's
to be ye vtterer of their minds. Who partly by speech only, and partly by
reading authorities written, and at certain times informed by his colleagues
what to say, made a declaration of their meanings, and their reasons to their
first propositions. Which being ended, they were asked by the privy Counsel,
if any of them had any more to say? and they said no. So the other were
licensed to show their minds: which they did according to their first order,
exhibiting all that which they meant to propound, in a book written: which
(after prayer made most humbly to God, for the endewing of them with his holy
spirit, and a protestation also to stand to the doctrine of the Catholic
church builded upon the Scriptures, and the doctrine of the Prophets and
Apostles) was distinctly read by one Robert Horn batcheler of Divinity, after
B. of Winchester. Which when he had done with some likelihood (it seemed) that
the same was much allowable to the audience, certain of the B. began (contrary
to their former answer) to say that they now had much to say to this matter.
So it was ordered, and agreed upon on both parts in full audience, that upon
monday following, the Bishops should bring their minds, and reasons in writing
to the second assertion, and the last also (if they could) and first read the
same. And that done, the other part should bring likewise theirs to the same:
and being read, each of them should deliver to other the same writings: and in
the mean time the Bishops should put in writing, not only that which Doctor
Cole had that day uttered, but all such other matters as they any otherwise
could think of for the same. And as soon as they might possible, to send the
same book touching that first assertion to the other part, and they should
receive of the^ the writing which Master Horn had read there that day. And
upon Monday it should be agreed, what day they should exhibit their answers
touching the first proposition. This both parties assented unto, and so the
assembly was quietly dismissed.

On Monday, the assembly being met by the Lords of the Counsel, and other
of the Nobility, etc. the Popish Bishops brake again their order agreed upon,
Papists break order again.
and refused to deal in the second Question, according as it was agreed upon,
but would needs read that which they had written of the first proposition.

Moreover they refused to begin, but would have the other part to begin
first, and being glad to avoid altogether the cause for which they were
assembled, began to cavil with Master Horn of what Church he was of and his
fellows: my Lord Keeper perceiving their digressio^ from ye purpose,
admonished them thereof. In the end they would not be brought to begin. So ye
assembly was feign to break up, nothing being done: for which their
wilfulness and contempt, Wilfulnes and contempt in the popish bishops.
the Bishops of Winchester and Lincoln were committed to the Tower, and the
rest, saving the Abbot of Westminster (who was willing to begin) stood bound to
make daily their appearance before the Counsel, and not to depart the city
of London and Westminster, until further order were taken with them for their
disobedience and contempt.

About the time that the B. aforesaid were committed to the Tower, Boner was
committed to the Marshalsea.

In this Parliament, Doctor Story vaunted himself ope^lie of his cruelty in
Queen Mary's days (as indeed he was one of the cruellest) lamenting that he
had not laid to the root, (as his intent was) but rather shrubbed off the
twigs, Story vaunteth of his cruelty.
saying: he was once at the burning of an heretic (for so he termed the
Martirs) at Vxbridge, where he tossed a faggot at his face, as he was singing
Psalms, and set a whinbush of thorns under his feet, a little to prick him.
With many other words to like effect.

In this Parliament the Pope lost his supremacy, Popes Supremacy repealed: The
Gospel advanced.
and the bloody Acts of Q. Marie were repealed, the Gospel adua^ced, and the
old Bishops deposed for refusing to subscribe to the Queens lawful Title.

In whose rooms and places, succeeded, first to Cardinal Poole, D. Matthew
Parker, Archbishop of Canterbury: In the place of Heath, succeeded Doctor
Young: In the stead of Boner, Edmund Grindall was Bishop of London: Popish
Bishops displaced and Protestants placed.
For Hopton, Thurlebie, Tonstall, Pates, Christopherson, Peto, Coats, Morgan,
Feasie, White, Oglethorpe, etc. were placed, D. Parkhurst in Norwich, D. Cox in
Ely, Jewel in Salisburie, Pilkenton in Duresme, D. Sands in Worcester, M.
Downam in Westchester, Bentame in Coue^tree and Lichfield, David in Saint
David's, Allie in Exceter, Horn in Winchester, Scorie in Hereford, Best in
Carlil, Bullingham in Lincoln, Scambler in Peterborow, Bartlette in Bath,
Ghest in Rochester, Bailie in Chichester, etc.

About the month of June, anno 1581. Richard Atkins, and englishma^, borne in
Hartfordshire, came to Rome, and having found the English College, knocked at
ye door, and after other speech, declares unto his Countreimen, that he came
lovingly to rebuke the great disorder of their lives, and to let the proud Pope
understand, that he offends the heavenly Majesty, committing Idolatry,
etc.

When they heard these words, one Hugh Gryffon, a welchman, caused him to be
put into the Inquisition. From whence (upon what condition it is not known)
within few days he was set at liberty again. And one day going in the
street, he met a Priest carrying the Sacrament: which offending his conscience
to see the people so worship it, he caught at it, to have thrown it down:
but missing of his purpose, and being judged by the people to have caught at
the holiness, which (they say, comes from the Sacrament) of mere devotion,
he was let pass.

R. Atkins overthrows the Chalice at Rome.
Within few days after he came to S. Peter's Church, where the Priest was at
the Elevation: and showing no reverence, stepped among the people to the Altar,
and threw down the Chalice with the wine, striving also to have pulled the
Cake out of the Priests hands.

For this fact he was carried to prison, and being condemned, within a while
after was set upon an Ass without any Saddle, he being from the middle upward
naked: and all the way as he went to execution, four did nothing else but
thrust at his naked body with burning Torches. Whereat he never moved, nor
shrunk any jot, but with a cheerful countenance labored to persuade the
people: often bending his body to meet the Torches as they were thrust at him,
and would take them in his own hand, and hold them still burning upon his
body: whereat the people wondered not a little.

Thus he continued almost the space of half a mile, till he came before S.
Peter's, where the place of execution was.

When he came to the place of execution, they had made a devise to burn him by
peecemeale. Which he suffered with such constancy and cheerfulness, that
when they offered him a cross, he put it away with his hand: saying, they were
evil men to trouble him with such paltrie, when he was preparing him self to
God, whom he beheld in majesty and mercy ready to receive him into his
eternal rest. They seeing him in that constant mind, left him, and commended
him to the devil, whom they said he served, thinking he had been possessed.
This is faithfully aduouched by I. Young, that the^ served M.D. Morton at Rome:
who seeing his martyrdom, when he came home to his house, in presence of M.
Smith his son, Master Creed, and John Young his man, spoke as follows:
Surely this fellow was marvelous obstinate, he nothing regarded the good
counsel which was given unto him, nor shrancke all the way, when the torches
were thrust at his naked body: beside in the place of execution he did not
faint, nor cry one jot in the fire, albeit they tormented him very cruelly,
and burned him by degrees, yet all this he did but smile at. Doubtless, but that
the word of God cannot be but true, else we might judge this fellow to be of
God: for who could have suffered so much pain as he did. But truly I believe
the Devil was in him.

Anno 1572. 1572. The Admiral of France.
the two and twentieth day of August, the Admiral of France coming from the
Counsel table, by the way was strike^ with a pistol charged with 3. pellets in
both his arms: and at a Watchwoorde given, was afterward slain foorthright:
and murderers appointed the whole city through to masacre the poor
Protestants, men, women, old, and young, to the number of 10000. in three
days: The masacre of Paris.
although the rage endured longer. In which number was slain Petrus Ramus,
Petrus Ramus.
the restorer of all liberal arts, especially the greatest M. of Logike, and
the perfectest practiser of the same, that ever lived before him.

Also Lambinus, Plateanus, Lomenus, Chapesius with others suffered this
barbarous, and more then beastly cruelty: which did not contain it self only
within Paris walls, but extended it self to other parts of France,
especially to Orleans, Toulouse and Roane. In which cities it is almost
incredible what cruelty was showed in numbers destroyed: so that within the
space of one month 30000. 30000. martyrs in France.
of religious and christian Protestants are numbered to be slain.

This murder did so rejoice the Pope, that he with his Cardinals went a
procession with their gunshot, and sang Te Deum: and in honor of that act,
commanded a Iubelie with great indulgence.

Likewise in France the 18. of the same month the king commanded processions,
bonfires, and ringings, singings, and giving thanks to God for so worthy a
victory, upon S. Bartholomewes day against the innocent protestants.

The same year about the 4. of Dece^ber, he began to lay siege to Rochell
Rochell besieged.
a town belonging to ye Protestants, which endured 7 months. In which when
the poor began to lack corn and victual, there was sent to them every day
in the river (by the hand of the Lord) a great multitude of fish, Gods
providence.
called Surdons, which the poor people did use in steed of bread, Which fish
the same day that the siege brake up (about the 10. of June) departed, and came
no more.

At this siege were slain of the kings captains 132. of the which the chiefest
was, Duke D'Aumale. In the end an agreement pacificatory was concluded,
containing 25. articles: (in which also were contained certain other cities
protestants. Which the 10. of June Anno 1572. was solemnly proclaimed at Rochel.

The year following, died ye cardinal of Loua^, a pestilent Achitophel
against the children of God, and Charles of France the 9. the bloodiest Tyrant
that ever the earth bare, the 25. of May, being five and twenty years of age.
His disease was such, that his blood gushing out by diverse parts of his body,
he tossing in his bed, and casting out many horrible blasphemies, lying upon
pillowes with his heels upward, and head downwarde, voyded so much blood at
his mouth, that in few hours after he died. The Tyrant dies.


FINIS.
A Table of all the principal matters contained in this Book.
Tiberius Nero page 1. Christ eadem Caius Caligula eadem Caius Nero eadem Peter
and Paul eadem Titus page 2 Vespasian eadem Jews destroyed eadem Stephen
eadem James eadem Herod eadem Nicanor eadem Simon eadem Parmenas eadem Thomas
eadem Simon Zelotes eadem Judas eadem Augarus eadem Simon eadem Traianus eadem
Bartholomeus page 3 Andrew eadem Egeas eadem Matthew eadem Hircanus eadem
Matthias eadem Phillip and his Daughters. eadem James eadem Other eadem The
Jews eadem Nero Domit. page 4 Peter eadem Simon Magus eadem Peter's wife eadem
Paul eadem Domician eadem Nephews of Judah eadem Simeon page 5 Iustus eadem
John eadem Flauia eadem The 2. persecution eadem Euaristus eadem Alexander
eadem Hermes eadem Euentus page 6 Theodulus eadem Hermes eadem Albina eadem
Quirinus eadem The third persecution ead. Nerua eadem Traianus eadem Plinius
secundus eadem Plinies letter for mitigation of the persecution ead. The
Emperors answer. page 7 Simeon eadem Attalus eadem Phocas eadem Sulpitius
eadem Seruilianus eadem Emphrosina eadem Theodora eadem Salma eadem Seraphia
eadem Nereus eadem Achilleus eadem Sagaris eadem Ignatius page: 8 Polycarpus
eadem Magnesia eadem Publius eadem Hadrian eadem Euentius eadem Theodorus eadem
Hermes eadem Quirinus eadem Zenon eadem Achaicus eadem Eustachius eadem
Faustinus eadem Iobita eadem Caelocerius eadem Iustus page 9 Pastor eadem
Sympronissa and her seven children eadem Sophia, and her two children page 10
Quadratus eadem Aristides eadem Serenus eadem Persecution assuaged in Asia
eadem Antonius Pius eadem Persecution cease ead. Ma. Antoninus page 11 Verus
eadem Lucius eadem Germanicus eadem Polycarpus eadem Irenarchus page 12 Herodes
eadem Nicetes eadem Metrodorus page 13 Pionius eadem Carpus eadem Papylus eadem
Agathonica eadem Felicitas with her seven children eadem Justinius eadem Lucius
page 14 Concordus eadem Symmetrius eadem Vetius eadem Sanctus eadem Maturus
eadem Attalus eadem Blandina page 15 Bibledes eadem Photinus eadem Alexander
eadem Pontius eadem Melito page 16 Claudius Apollinaris ead Quadratus eadem
Aristides eadem Athenagoras eadem Persecution stayed eadem Miracle eadem
Commodus eadem Martia. eadem Apollonius eadem Vincentius page 17. Eusebius
eadem Julius eadem Peregrinus eadem Xistus eadem Telesphorus eadem Hyginus
eadem Pius eadem Serapion eadem Egesippus. eadem Miltiades eadem Heraclitus
eadem Theophilus eadem Dionysius page 18 Penitus eadem Clemens Alexandrinus.
eadem Contention among the christians for Easter day. eadem. Pertinax eadem
Seuerus eadem Hilarious page 19 Leonides eadem Origin eadem Origens books
eadem Plutarchus eadem Serenus eadem Basilides page 20 Alexander. eadem
Narcissus eadem Andoclus eadem Asclepiades. eadem Iraeneus eadem Victor eadem
Tertullian page 21 Theophilus. eadem Policrates. eadem Zephyrinus page 22 Perp.
etc. eadem Bassianus eadem Varius Heliogabalus. eadem Mammea eadem Maximinus
page 23 Calixtus eadem Vrbanus eadem Tiburtius eadem Valerianus eadem Agapitus
eadem Calepodius eadem Pammachus eadem Simplicius eadem Quiritius eadem Iulia
eadem Tiberius page 24 Valerianus eadem Martina eadem Maximinus eadem Gordian
eadem Phillip eadem Pontianus eadem Philetus eadem zebenus eadem Ammonius eadem
Julius Aphricanus eadem Natalius eadem. Anterius page 25. Hippolitus eadem
Fabian page 26 Origin sacrifices eadem. Origin excommunicated. eadem Origin
repents. page 27 Heracleas eadem Dionysius eadem Alexandrinus. eadem Cruel
persecution. eadem Alexander eadem Mezauanes eadem XL. Virgins page 28. Peter
eadem Andrew eadem Paul eadem Nichomachus eadem Dionysia eadem Germanus eadem
Theophilus eadem Cesarius eadem Vitalis eadem Polychronius eadem Nestor eadem
Olimpiades eadem Maximus eadem Anatolia eadem Audax eadem Soothsayers eadem
Metra eadem Apollonia page 29 Serapion eadem Revolt eadem Iulianus eadem
Cronion eadem Eunus eadem A soldier eadem Macer eadem Epimachus eadem
Alexander eadem Ammonarion page 30. Mercuria eadem Dionysia eadem Heron eadem
Isodrne eadem Dioscorus eadem Nemesian eadem Ammon. eadem Zenon eadem Ptolomeus
eadem Ingenius eadem Theophilus eadem Ischrion eadem Cheremon eadem Dionysius
page 31 Alexandrinus eadem Timotheus eadem Gaius eadem Faustus eadem Petrus
eadem Paulus eadem Christophorus eadem Menaitus eadem Agatha eadem Tryphon
eadem Theodora page 32. Agathon eadem Paulus eadem Andreas ead. Justinius eadem
Portius eadem Secundianus eadem Verianus 33 Marcellinus eadem Sore persecution
eadem Children persecuted ead. Pergentius eadem Laurentius eadem Revolt eadem
Nouatus 34 Cyprian eadem Cornelius eadem Aurelius eadem Mappalicus eadem Decius
death eadem A plague of ten years ead. Cyprian de mortalitate, 35 Vibias eadem
Gallus eadem Volusianus eadem The teachers of Christianity banished eadem
Nemesianus eadem Felix eadem Lucius eadem Seagrius eadem Rogationus eadem
Stephanus eadem Contention eadem Emilianus eadem Valerianus and Galienus ead
Valerianus seduced eadem Disordered life of christians 36 A vision eadem
Cyprians Apology for christians eadem Cyprian once a Magician eadem Cecilius
conuerteth Cyprian eadem Agrippinus 37 Cyprian banished eadem Cyprian beheaded
eadem Diverse Cyprians eadem Sextus with six of his Deacons eadem Laurence
broyled on a grid-iron 38 Dionisius Bishop of Alexandria eadem The brethren
visited eade^ Eusebius eadem Faustus eadem Priscus 39 Marcus eadem Alexander
eadem 300. martired eadem Three virgins ead. Pontius eadem Gods judgments
eadem Zeno eadem Eugenia eadem Helenus eadem Victor 40 Victorinus eadem
Claudianus eadem Bossa eadem Fructuosus eadem A vision ead. Sapores eadem Gods
judgments eadem Earthquakes eadem Persecution moderated, ead Marinus eadem
Theodistus 41 Dionysius eadem Felix eadem Eutichianus eadem Gaius eadem
Gregorius magnus eadem Claudius eadem 262. Martirs eadem Quintilianus eadem
Aurelianus eadem The tirant terrified 42 Annius eadem Tacitus eadem Florianus
eadem Aurelius Probus eadem Carus eadem Carinus eadem Numerianus eadem Cerillus
martired eadem Dioclesian eadem 19. years quiet in the church eadem 44. years
quiet, the Church grows eadem Church dissolute eadem Large Temples builded,
eadem The tenth persecution, 43 Maximianus eadem Cesars eadem Dioclesian would
be worshipped as a God eadem Miracle eadem Churches burned eadem Scriptures
destroyed, eadem Siluanus 44 Pamphilus eadem Tirannion eadem Arnobius eadem Two
maids of Antioch ea. Siluanus eadem Tharatus eadem Probus eadem Andronicus
eadem Peter of the household ead. Dorotheus eadem Gorgonius eadem Anthonius 45
Lucianus eadem Serena the wife of the Emperor, martired eadem Two thousand
together in a temple burned eadem A whole city of Christians burned eadem
Eustachius eadem Peleus and Nilus eadem The B. with the elders, martitired
eadem A legion of Christians martired eadem Mauritius eadem 79. martired 46
Great persecution in Italy, ea. Victor eadem Lucian eadem 18. martyred eadem
Persecution of Spain ead. Rivers died with blood of Christians eadem In
Britayne great persecution page 47 Strange torments ead. The persecutors weried
with slaughter eadem Revolt eadem 17000. slain in thirty days eadem 300. at
Alexandria eadem 300. at Colen eadem Thebane Soldiers 6660. page 48
Constantinus eadem Constantius tries his court who were christians. pa. 49
Gods judgment upon Maximinus eadem Syluanus eadem Petrus page 50. Quirinus
eadem Marcellus eadem Timotheus eadem 270. martired eadem Antheus a king with
37000. martyrs eadem 79. martyrs eadem Famine and pestilence. eade^. The
villainy of Maxentius. page 51 A vision of the cross eadem Maxentius drowned.
page 52 The last persecution. eadem. Liberty to the christians. ead. Dioclesi.
dies eadem Maxim. glorifieth the God of the christians eadem Learning named by
Lycinius, the poison of the common wealth page 53. Lycinius a great persecutor.
eadem Churches rased to the ground eadem Theodorus eadem Basilius eadem
Nicholaus eadem Paul eadem 42. Christian soldiers. ead. Inuenters of torments
ead. Licinius vanquished ead. Licinius slain page 54 Constantius dies, and is
buried at York eadem Alban the first martyr in England eadem Amphibalus eadem
Aaron and Julius eadem England only touched with the tenth Persecution. eadem.
A child tormented. page 55 A miracle eadem Gordius eadem 40. martyrs eadem A
notable mother page 56 Forty martyrs eadem Cyrus eadem Johannes eadem
Athanasia and her 3. daughters eadem Sebastian eadem Barlan page 57 Agricola
eadem Vitalis eadem Vincentius lamentable martyrdom eadem Tormentors scourged.
ead. Procopius eadem Panthaleon page 58 318. martyrs eadem 2000. martyrs eadem
Cassianus eadem Constancy of women ead. Eulalia eadem A miracle page 59
Katherine eadem Iulitta eadem Fausta eadem Succession of the bishops of Rome.
page 60. Lucina eadem Yet persecution in Asia under Sapores eadem 128. martyrs
page 61. The magicians raise persecution eadem Simeon eadem Vsthazares eadem A
notable history eadem An hundred suffer eadem A cruel edict page 62. Magicians
eadem Azades eadem The teachers only put to death eadem Trabula eadem Iacolus
eadem The Arch-magician page 63 Athalas eadem Innumerable slain. eadem 250,
martirs eadem 15. thousand martired among the Persians. ead. Constantine to
Sapores, for mitigation of the persecution eadem Andas 64 Homisda eadem Suenes
eadem Benjamin eadem Iulianus eadem Emilianus eadem The martyr comforted, ead.
Arethusians 65 Marcus Arethusus ead. The temple of Venus destroyed eadem The
persecution of the primitive Church ends eadem A month, for a Saboth of
years ead, Satan bound up til Wickliffe 66 Constantine borne in England eadem
Helena daughter of K. Coilus eadem Constantines mother ead. Constantine a
father of the Church eadem Nicene council eadem Constantine teaches his
soldiers a prayer eadem Appeal granted by Constantine 67 Provision for
learning. ead. The scriptures written for the use of the church eadem
Constantine baptized a little before his death eadem The rest of this history
concerns chiefly England, and Scotland 68 England received the gospel in
Tyberius time eadem Easter kept in England after the manner of the East church
eadem The gospel came into England from the East, and not from Rome eadem K.
Lucius the first Christian K. of England eadem Fugatius and Damianus. ead.
Eleutherius 69 Almost all Christianity destroyed in England ead. Guetelinus
Archbishop of London eadem 271. of the nobility of Engl. slain by the Saxons.
ead. The first persecution in England by Dioclesian 70 The second by Gnauius
and Melga eadem Vrsula eadem 11000. virgins eadem The third by Hengist ead.
Aurelius Ambrosius restores the churches eadem Gurmundus eadem Ethelbert eadem
Gospel received of the Englishmen eadem Austen sent into England by Gregory B.
of Rome. ead. I Will of Tenet eadem Berda, and Lebardus 71 Godly conversation and
miracles eadem None compelled to believe the abbey of S. Peter, and S. Paul in
Canterbury. ead. Questions resolved from Rome 72 Bishops livings how to be
bestowed eadem Clerks may marry ead. Diverse ceremonies ead. Degrees for
marriage ead. A pall from Rome 73 Mellitus eadem Austens oak eadem Britains
and Scots, refuse the Easter of Rome 74 Abbey of Bangor eadem Austens pride
offends the Britains eadem 1100. Monks of Bangor slain eadem Dinoe eadem
Laurentius eadem Gregory dies eadem Austen dies eadem Strife about Primacy 75
Patriarch of Alexandria would be universal eadem The title of Seruus seruorum
Dei ead. Sabinianus first universal bishop eadem Phocas gives first title of
universal bishop eadem Ethelbert dies eadem A vision 76 Edwine baptized eadem
Paulinus the first archbishop of York 77 Oswald a notable K. ead. Kinigilsus
converted Bernius 78 The sea of Winchester. ead. Weda converted ead. Wolferus
converted ead. Sigbert baptized 79 Finanus eadem The questions of Easter. ead.
Hilda eadem Cedda eadem A rude reason of the K. 80 The bones of Aidanus. ead.
Southsex converted ead. Great famine 81 The art of fishing taught. eadem
Wilfride restored eadem Wilfride expulsed again. ead. Mahomet begins ead.
Turks conquered the Saracens 82 Theodorus eadem Latin service and Mass first
brought into Engl. ead. The archbishop plaieth Rex eadem A prouincial Synod at
Thetford eadem The sixth general council at Constance eadem Marriage forbidden
ead. The first Latin mass at Constantinople eadem King Iua made a monk, and
after an abbot 83 Aldelmus eadem John of Beuerley eadem The right observing of
Easter, now first received of Picts and Britains ead. Shaven crowns eadem
The K. tha^keth God, for the priests shaven crowns. 84 The devise of
Ethelburga the Queen eadem The Queen becomes an Abbess eadem Peter Pence
eadem Celulfus a learned king. eadem. Diverse learned men flourish eadem Bedaes
Anglorum historia. eadem Beda 85 Beda translated the Gospel of John into
English. ead. The king made a monk. eadem A noble library in York by a bishop
eadem The lords prayer, and Creed in the English tongue. 86 Cuthbert 87 Pope
Boniface an Englishman ead. Boniface a great mainteyner of Nuns eadem
Religious fathers permitted to carry Nuns about with them a preaching. ea.
Libda and Tecla eadem Childerike deposed by the pope eadem Detestable doctrine
of Boniface 88 Great maisteries wrought against the Emperors by popes eadem
Philippicus the Emperor lost both his eyes, and the empire eadem The clause
for relics, memorial offerings, and offeringes for the dead eadem The
priests vesture eadem Constantinus the first, gave his feet to be kissed of
the Emperor eadem Lambrith to Lichfield 89 The king gives the tenth of his
goods to the church. eadem Romescot, or peter-pe^ce. ea. The donation of
Pipine the traitor and murderer. 90 Invention of Organes. eade^ Pope deposed,
and his eyes put out ead. Pope strives for images. eadem Images Lay men's
calendar. eadem Cost upon images eadem Strife for Gregory's mass. 91 A miracle
falsely interpreted. eadem The empire translated to the French. eadem A. B. C.
Monasteries. ead. Irene the Greek Empress a mainteiner of Images. 92 The
cruelty of Irene ead. The Emperors eyes pulled out by his mother, ead.
Monasteries erected, and founded in England. eadem Common schools at Cambridge
93 The first Nun in North u^berland ead. King Edgar builded 40. abbeyes 94
The church freed from tributes. 95 Diverse faxon kings become monks ead. Queens
became Nuns. ead. Under the Britains, the Metropolitan sea at London. 96
Cuthbert forbids funenerals to be made for him ead. 34. popes, in the time
of 17. archbishops ead. The land brought into one monarchy, and called Anglia
ead. A Bishop made king of England ead. Lands given to the church. ea.
Peterpence throughout all England 97 General councels called by Emperor ead.
Against excess of apparel in the clergy 98 Against the dicing and whoring of
the popes clergy. eadem Silver and gold not to be worn in shoes. ead.
Feast of al saints first erected. ead. Alteration of popes names. ead. Swines
snoute ead. Gilberta a woman pope ead. The pope trauaileth with child ead.
Dirge for the dead 99 Popes decrees, equal with the apostles writings ead. A
prelate called God. eadem Polonians and Sclauonians exempt from latin service.
eadem Against priests marriages. eadem Huldrich of Auspurgh. ead. The Emperor
begins to decay, the pope to swell. eadem King Edmund slain by the Danes
100 Alfred first takes unction from the pope ead. K. of danes christened 101
Alfrede a notable king ead. Time notably spent by the king eadem Grantchester
founded by Beda 102 Paris began from Gra^tchester, eadem Alfred very learned
eadem The psalter translated by Alfred 103 The K. careful to furnish the land
with knowledge ead. Neotus ead. Johannes Scotus ead. Scotus book de Corpore
condemned eadem Sco. slain by his scholars 104 David's psalms always with the
king eadem 9. popes in 9. years ead. P. Steven rages against the body of
Formosus 105 Barbarous cruelty against Formosus eadem Ca^dles on ca^dlemas
day, 106 A pope set up by Theodora a famous harlot ea. Pope smothered ead Pope
poisoned ead. Mo^ks called Cluniace^ses, ea. The K. authority sufficient in
electing of bishops 107 The kings daughter set to spinning ead. The K. sons
first Philosophers, then governors ea. Empire translated from France to
Germany ead. Attaching of thieves 108 Stealing above xii. d. ead. Monkery
comes into Enland eadem Oswaldus a great patron of monkerie eadem Saint
Edmonds-bury 109 Dunstane suspendeth the K. for adultery eadem Priests
displaced, monks placed 111 New Monks differ from old eadem K. Edgar maintained
learning 112 48. monast, founded by Edg. The K. enioined penance by Dunstan
eadem Saboth from saturday 9. of the clock, til monday 113 Strife between
priests and Monks ead. A monstrous evil pope 114 P. restored by harlots ead.
P. killed in adultery ead. Pope gives his election to the Emperor 115 Pope
put in prison ead. Cruel revenge of the P. ead Christning of belles ead. Pope
strangled ead. Popes eyes put out, and he famished in prison 116 The popes dead
body drawn through the streets ead popes eyes put out ead Cruelty ead A
council at Rome 117 7 Electors of the empire ead The strange reign of a K. ea
Peace bought of the Danes for money ead Sea of Durham began 118 Danegelt ead
Danes slain ead Turkillus, a Dane ead Vexation of the Danes ead Treason of a
Deacon ead Monks tithed by the Danes 119 Elphegus stoned by the Danes eadem The
K. chased by the Danes ead Fasting and prayer ead The crown of England offered
to S. Edm. shrine 120 A false Judge deposed ead Edmund slain ead Promise well
performed 121 Reward of traitors ead King Edgars laws ead Hardeknoutus dies
122 The last K. of the Danes ead Alfred cruelly murdered ead Romescot ead S.
Edmonds bury turned from priests to monks 123 A Roode crowned king of England
ead A good law against adultery ead The land vexed by the Danes 255. years ead
M. Scotus ead Duke of Normandy made heir of the Crown 124 Harold swears to
duke W. ead Abbey of Couentrie ead King Edward dies ead K.E. began the common
law 125 The law at this day ead D. Will. contrary to his oath, overthrows
laws ead Conditions of peace offered to Harold ead Saxons rule ends 126
Archb. of Cant. ead Siluest. agrees with the devil for the popedom ead The
devil deceived Sil. ead Rattling of Silu. bones 127 Feast of all Souls ead The
popedom sold ead Petra dedit etc ead 3 popes at one time ead No P. without the
Emp. ead One P. poysoneth 6 ead Hildebrand 128 Council at Versellis ead Council
at Laterane ead Priests may not marry. ead. The pope and archbishop fall out at
Mass eadem Brazutus the poisoner. ead. The terrible sentence of
excommunication 130 The pope elected only by the Cardinal eadem Berengarius
recanteth. ead. Transubstantiation hatched. eadem Toctius threatens the P. ea.
Two popes fight eadem Hildebrand pummeled the pope 131 The pope stinted at
twenty pence the day eadem Hildebrand encrocheth the treasure of the church.
ead. William Conqueror 133 Cruelty of the co^queror. ea. Englishman, a name of
reproach eadem England five times ouerrun. eadem Normans placed eadem Stigandus
archbishop deposed eadem Lanfranke Archb. of Canterbury 134 Contention for
primacie. ead. Two palles given to Lanfrank eadem York subject to Ca^terb. ea.
Bishops seats altered from towns to cities 135 Ecclesiastical decrees ead.
Priests against monks ead. Lanfranke dies for sorrow. eadem P. Hildebra^d a
sorcerer. ead. Hildebrand co^temneth the Emperor 136 Both the swords eadem
Pope cannot err eadem Presbiteresse eadem Council against marriage of priests
eadem Decree against marriage resisted eadem A schism eadem Hildebra^d a
villainous pope eadem None chosen pope under 3. days after his predecessors
burial 137 The pope excommunicateth the Emperor ead. The P. practices to
kill the Emp. at prayer eadem Hildebrand asked counsel of the host, and
casts it into the fire, because it would not answer ead. The Emperor goes
barefoote to the Pope ead. A popish interpretation of simonie 138 A terrible
pope eadem The Emper. forced to yield to the Pope eadem The Emper. brought
under the Popes foot eadem The Emperor yields his crown to the Pope ead.
Hard conditions eadem Henricus 4. deposed 140 Petra dedit Petro eadem Rodolph
chosen Emp. ead. Rodolph wounded to death. eadem Crimes against the P. 141
Hildebrand deposed, dies in banishment ead. William co^queror dies. ead. The
Co^queror given to make peace in his land 142 Great slaughter of Englishmen
eadem The first B. of Salisbury. ead. Secundu^ vsum Sarum ead. The use of
Gregory ead. The Abbot kills his mo^ks. eadem A bishop eaten with mise. 143
Rats tower eadem William Rufus eadem Lanfranke dies eadem Nothing of the king,
but for money eadem Victor 3. Pope eadem Victor poisoned in his chalice 144
Charterhouse monks. ead. Vrbanus pope eadem Two popes at once ead. White
monks eadem Viage against the Saracens. eadem Peter the heremite 145 Jerusalem
won from the Saracens eadem Prohibition of going to Rome eadem Canonical
hours eadem Lawful for subjects to break their oath of allegiance. eadem The
city of Canterbury given to the archb. ead. Anselme the Archbishop against the
king eadem Vrbane and Clement, popes at strife 146 The king feign to relent to
the archbishop eadem A Council eadem Archb. of Ca^terb. called the pope of
England ead. 29. Articles of controversy between the Church of Rome, and the
Greek Church 147 The Latins holden for excommunicates eadem The Romans every
year solemnly excommunicated of the Greeks eadem The Pope excommunicated the
Greeks 148 The pope commands the king of England. ead. The king slain page
149 Kings of Wales cease. eadem King Beauclarke. eade^ King Edwards laws
restored. eadem Little saint Bartholomewes founded by means of a minstrell
eadem Priests sequestered from their wives eadem Anselme restored ead. Priests
would not forsake their wives 150 Anselm insolent against the king. ead. For
the price of his head. eadem A proud pope ead. The king reconciled to Anselme
151 Priests pay money to the K. for their wives. ead. Anselme yielded to in all
points. eadem Pope Paschalis 152 The popes ornaments. eade^. Popes seven fold
power. eadem That Antichrist was borne. edem Married priests condemned for
Nicholaitans. ead. The Emperor deposed by the pope eadem Let God see and
judge. ead. The pope sets the Emperors son against his father. 153 The
Emperor craves to be a prebend, but could not obtain it ead. The Emperor
dies for sorrow. ead. No Emperor to have to do with the election of the pope
ead. The Emperor like to be slain at Rome. ead. The pope feign to agree to
the Emperor ead. The pope breaks covenant. 154 The Germans rebel. ead. The
Emperor gives over to the pope ead. Bernardine monks. ead. Gelasius ead.
Gregory 8. ead. Calixtus ead. The Emperor feign to yield. ead. A shameful usage
of the pope ead. Imber days 155 Premonstratensis ead. Canterbury five years
void to the Kings use. eadem Ely made a bishopric. eadem A council of 434.
prelates. eadem The pope excommunicateth the Emperor 156 The king of England
sueth to the pope eadem Submit to Canterbury. eade^. Pope for Thurstine. eadem
The Gray Friars. eadem Priests pay to the king for their wives eadem Dane gelt
released by the king 157 Honorius 2. eadem Arnulphus eadem Opus tripartitum.
eadem Abuses of the church preached against eadem Knights of the Rhodes, and
Templars eadem Honorius ead. Contention betwixt the popes 158 Strike a priest
eadem Archbishop poisoned in his chalice ead. Petrus Lombardus 159 Petrus
Comester ead. Hildegard the Nun and prophetess ead. Gilbertines. eadem
Priests no rulers in worldly matters. eadem Book, bell, and candle. eadem
Lucius eadem Eugenius 160 Anastasius eadem Adrianus an English man pope ead.
Hildegard prophecieth against the kingdom of the pope eadem Justice
stourisheth when the pope is ouerthrown. ead. Thomas Becket 161 Gerhard.
against the church of Rome eadem The pope Antichrist. eadem Whore of Babylon
ead. Execution by the pope. ead. The Emperor holds the popes stirrup on the
wrong side 162 Popes legates forbidden in Germany eadem The Germans excuse the
Emperor ead. The pope choked with a fly 163 The order of the hermits, ea.
Alexander 3. pope ead. The Emp. fayn to seek peace with the pope eadem The pope
set his foot on the Emperors neck ead. Against marriage of priests. ead.
Variance betwixt the king and Becket 164 Executed for a traitor that brought
curse from To. ead. Peter pence denied ead. Saluo ordine suo eadem Becket
relenteth to the king eadem Becket stout to the K. ead. The K. should be the
popes legate 165 Robbers, felo^s, murderers, among the clergy ead. Becket
flies and turns his name to Derman ead. Becket in exile 7. years. 166
Beckets kynred banished. eadem The K. fears Becket ead. Because the pope had
condemned them 167 The K. yeldeth to Becket. ea. 4. armed me^ kill Becket. ead.
The murderers do penance. eadem Whether Becket were saved or damned eadem 270.
miracles done by Becket eadem A blasphemous anthem. 169 None should hold Beck. a
martyr, or preach his miracles. ea. The kings penance eadem Sharp penance
eadem Canterbury burnt eadem Contention betwixt York and Canterbury eadem No
bishopric to remain longer then one year in the kings hand 170 Contention
between the Archbishops ead. From words to blows. ead. No task, nor first
fruits. 171 The king died ead. The form of words in giving the pall eadem
Order of the pall eadem The B. oath to the pope, ead. Becket and Bernard
canonized for saints 172 Baldwinus ead Pauperes de Lugduno ead Waldenses ead
Franciscus. Dominicus 173 Waldus ead The doctrine of Waldenses ead The zeal of
the Waldenses 174 Testament by heart ead Marks of the cross, to fight for the
holy land 175 Nuns incontinent life. ead K. Jews of France makes pilgrimage
to Becket ead Albingenses ead Monks of the Charterhouse ead Pope Clement 176
Jews destroyed ead A bishops Chancellor. ead. A Bishop chief Justice of
England eadem The journey for the Holy land eadem The form of the oath to the
holy land, eadem The French breaks his oath 177 Achon won by the Christians
178 Saladine put to flight. 179 Bishop William ruffleth in the kings absence
eadem 1500. horse the Bishops train eadem Clement dies eadem Pope Celestine
eadem P. sets the crown on the Emp. head with his feet, and dasheth it of
again 180 The Archbishop rudely handled eadem Rufling Will. deposed 181 William
is taken disguised like a woman eadem William goes over sea. ead. The king
takes truce with the Saracenes. eadem The king taken at his return from the
Saracens, and sold to the Emperor. 182 Chalices, crosses, and shrines sold to
redeem the K. ead. Chalices of latin and tin. ead. Fulco ead. The kings three
daughters bestowed eadem King Richard slain eadem King John 183 The K.
threatens the pope. eadem The king interdicted. 184 The king against the
clergy eadem Pandulph and Durance, Legates. ead. Subjects assoiled of their
oath, of obedience eadem The king cursed by the pope eadem The Pope gives
England to the french king 185 The king submits to the Pope eadem England
and Irelande farmed of the Pope eadem The K. resigneth his crown to the popes
legate ead. The Duke of Millan 186 Strange decrees of the Pope eadem
Transubstantiation ead. Pope dies eadem Honorius eadem King John poisoned ead.
The prophecy of Caiaphas eadem The monk dies 187 King John dies ead. Mayor
in London eadem Americus against Images, 188 Private tithes eadem Receiving at
Easter eadem Bell and Candle before the Sacrament ead. The mass received, as
from the Pope ead. P. stirs up diffention in the world eadem Correction of
princes belongs to the pope ead. 100. Alsatians burned in one day by the P.
ead. Rablement of religious order in the P. church 189 Dominikes 191 Friars
Minorites eadem The perfection of the gospel eadem Many sorts of Franciscans
eadem Crooched friars 192 Beck. shrined after his death eadem Incredible
exactions from Rome eadem The Popes request in England 193 Gifts to the P.
Legate ead. Contention betwixt Canter and York for dignity ead. The strife
ended ead. 300. Romans to be placed in benefices in England 194 The P. desires
to be strong, to suppress the Emperor ead. A council at Lions ead New
exactions in England eadem No tax of money out of England to Rome 195 The K.
rele^teth to the P. ead. The 3. part of church goods, and yearly fruit of
vaca^t benefices to the pope eadem 60000. florens in one year to Rome, besides
etc. eadem The Albingenses assailed by the Pope eadem Friar minorits in Eng.
ead. Ioh. de S. Egidio eadem Alexander de Hales eadem Carthusians 196 Minster
at Salisburie ead. Contention about spiritual jurisdiction ead. Westminster
exempt from the B. of London ead. Wardship, initiu^ maloru^ ead Honorius the
Emp. enemy, dies eade^ Popes unreasonable request denied in France 197 War
against the good earl of Toulouse eadem The Earl of Tholous excommunicated
eadem The French K. dies eadem Auinion ouerrun by treason of the P. Legate 198
P. chased out of Rome ead Co^tentio^ for superiority ead Chapt. of the bible
distinct by Steven Lanctho^ 199 Tenths of all the goods of Enland and Scotland,
to be given to the pope ead Prelates driven to sell their chalices and copes
200 Usurers brought into England by the P. Legate ead Next years corn tithes
to the P. ead Earl of Toulouse assailed again ead Bishops set on checker
matters, exercised Sessions and judgments 201 P. neglects the K. and
satisfies the Archb. ead Randulph Neuel ead A good bishop ead Hubert L. chief
Justice 202 Italians spoiled ead William Withers 203 L. Hubert destitute on
every side 204 Londoners hate Hub. ead Hubert brought to the Tower 205 Hub.
sent back again 206 Lucas, archb. of Dublin, true friend to L. Hubert ead Hard
choice offered to Hub. ead The K. somewhat appeased toward Hub. 207 Hub.
somewhat cheered ead Craft of a bishop ead Great reverence of ye church 208 The
K. hard again to Hub. ead L. Hub. received into the K. favor ead Caursini,
Italia^ usurers ead P. visitation general ead A deformation, no reformation 209
Benedict order ead Peter bishop of Winchest. ea They would displace the K. ea
Monastery of conuerts ead Edmund 216 R. Grosted ead King flows bad council
ead Reformation ead Courage of K. ead Pictauians expelled 211 Catini in Almain
slain ead Albingenses slain ead Hub. comes to the K. ead Reconciliation ead
Dissension betwixt the P. and the Romans ead P. greater tha^ any man 212
Romans slain eadem Schism of the East church, from the West eadem Germanus
213 The sign of the Cross, to fight against Grecia^s. ead. The people
excommunicated eadem Intolerable exactio^s of the pope eadem Prince of Wales
set against the K. of England ead. No messenger permitted to, or fro Rome ead.
60000. marks yearly to Rome eadem The popes legate departs England eadem
Council at Lions eadem Emperor Frederike cursed by the pope eadem The P.
persuades to war against England 215 The popes wars eadem War against
the Greeks. eadem 60000. pounds exacted by the pope eadem The grieuances of
England. 216 The French K. receives the sign of the cross eadem The voyage
of the holy land. eadem The P. refuses all agreement with the Emperor 217
Damiata won from the Turks eadem The P. hinders peace. 218 The army of
christians wholly destroyed eadem 80000. christians perish in the wars against
the Turks eadem Frederick crowned Emperor by pope Honorius. 219 Gifts to the
church of Rome ead. Honorius curses the Emp. Frederik ead. The Emperor
reconciled with the pope 220 Honorius dies ead. P. Gregory 9 ead. The pope
threateneth the Emperor ead. The pope offended with the Emperor for not kissing
his feet, but his knee ead. The iourny against the Saracens 221 The popes
false accusation against the Emp. ead. Emperor craves the popes favor ead.
Emperor crowned king of Jerusalem 222 The Pope practices against the Emperor
while he warreth against the Saracens eadem The Pope practices with the
Saracens eadem A quarrel to the Emp. ead. The Emperor returns and wins
towns from the Pope in Italy 223 The Emperor offers to give account to the
Pope. eadem Peace betwixt the Emperor and the pope eadem 120000. ounces of gold
to the P. for the Emperors absolution eadem The Pope moves the Emperors
son to rebel against his father ead. The Emperor prevails, for all the
popes curse 224 The pope pronounces sentence of proscription against the
Emperor. ead. Revolt from the Emperor to the pope ead. The church spoiled to
maintain the popes wars. ead. The Emperor prevails. 225 Everlasting life
promised to such as would fight against the Emperor. ead. The pope hinders
the defense of christendom. ead. The Emperor wastes about Rome 226 The pope
dies with anger. eadem Salve Regina, brought into the church ead. The
Decretals ead. Pope Celestine ead. Pope dies eadem An army against the
Tartarians ead. Innocentius 4. eadem The Emperor seeks peace, the Pope will
none eadem Pope, Judge and accuser ead. A voice heard, thou wretch, come and
receive thy judgment eadem The Emperor dies eadem Preachers bold against the
Pope 298 Arnoldus de noua villa condemned eadem Johannes Seneca appealeth from
the Pope to a Council eadem G. de Sanstoamre, against the Pope 229 De
periculis ecclesiae eadem Thirty nine arguments that friars be false Apostles,
eadem Euangelium aeternum Spiritus Sancti eadem The shell to the kernel. ead.
A blasphemous Gospel of the friars eadem Laurence 230 Petrus Johannes ead.
Pope Antichrist ead. Rome Babylon ead. Dead bones burned ead. R. Gallus eadem
Visio^s against the pope. ead. R. Gallus B. of Lincoln. ead. Inuectiues against
the P. 231 K. of England the popes ma^ciple, vassal, page. eadem Manifest and
known that once should come a defection from Rome ead. The Pope an heretic
ead. Roman virtues ead. R. Grosted prophesies against Rome eadem The virtues
of R. Grosted. 232 A maule of the Romans. ead. P. Innocent 4. a great
impouerisher of christe^dom. ea. 70000. marks reuenews of forreners placed in
the land by the pope ead. Grosted appears in a vision to the pope eadem
Grosted strikes the P. 233 Innocent dies eadem Alexander 3. eadem Wholesome
laws ead. The pope dispenses with oaths eadem Pope dies eadem Pope Vrbane 4.
eadem War betwixt the king and the Barons eadem Vrbane dies eadem Clement 4.
eadem Thomas Aquine, Bonauenture 234 Tenths to the King ead. Peace betwixt the
king, and the Barons eadem Cathedral Churches popes pensions eadem Clement 4.
dies ead. Gregory 10. eadem Against the Saracens ead. Great concordances 235 A
general council ead. Abbey of Hales ead. King dies eadem Westminster church
ead. Blackfriers by Ludgate ead. Jews banished the realm utterly eadem The
Scots pertain to the popes chapel eadem Scots converted by the relics of
S. Peter 236 Celestine begins to reform the Church of Rome eadem Boniface
a crafty knave. ead. Peter thrust into prison. ead. Boniface P. of Rome ead.
The Pope curses the French king to the fourth generation eadem The pope
scoffeth, etc. ead. The first Jubilee eadem Power of both swords. ead.
Extrauagant 238 Constitutions eadem Sextus Nicholaus eadem Pardons and
indulge^ces. ead. The quarrel betwixt the P. and the French king ead. The king
of France forbids to carry treasure to Rome eadem The popes proud style to
the French king eadem Magareta against the Pope. 239 Four articles against the
Pope eadem Magareta against the Pope. 239 Four articles against the Pope eadem
28. articles against the pope eadem The pope hides himself. ea. Adulphus eadem
Reginaldus de supina. ead. Cardinals goods rifled. ead. Pope craves truce
eadem The pope rejected eadem The pope glad to make amends 241 Conditions
offered to the pope eadem The gates of the popes palace fired eadem The P.
rather would die the^ renounce his popedom. ea. The pope spoiled of infinite
treasure eadem The pope homely used. ead. The P. almost starued ead. The pope
delivered, almost famished 242 Pope dies eadem Benedict eadem Decretals eadem
Clergy exempt from subsidy eadem The clergy out of the kings protection eadem
The king of England troubled with the sea of Canterbury 243 No benefice but one
ead. Cussanus king of the Tartarians eadem The Tartaria^s christened. ea.
Merto^ college in Oxford. ea. Henr. de Gandauo eadem De villa Noua eadem
Scotus, Duns eadem Clement 5. eadem The court of Rome to Auinion eadem The pope
reigned as Emperor sede vacant ead. Templars put down ead. Corpus Christi
day 244 The Cleme^tine decretals. ea. The Emperor poisoned by a monk in the
chalice. ead. The Emperor of Constantinople excommunicated. ea Pope John eade^
Pope Benedict eadem This world made for the cardinals ead. Complaint against
the pope for oppressing England. 245 An Epistle of Casse to the church of
England. eadem The pope still reigns his exactions 246 Pope Eugenius eadem
Articles against the spirituality eadem Knowledge of civil causes belongs not
to the clergy. 247 Reformation to be done. ead. The king dies 248 Crouched
Friars ead. Knights of the Rhodes. ead. Templars burnt at Paris. ead. The
Templars put down universally eadem The pope sells the Te^plars lands eadem
Cistercian monks exempt. ea. The pope couseneth the Fra^ciscane Friars 249 The
Venetians cursed of the pope eadem A monstrous tyranny. ead. Walter Reinald 250
Clement 5. dies ead. Papacy void 2. years ead. Pope makes profit of the
variance of princes ead. 8. pence in every mark. ead. Michael house founded in
Cambridge. eade^ Nicholaus de lyra ead. Guilielmus 251 Occham ead. Adam eadem
Simon M. eadem Clement 252 A great heresy ead. Ludouicus ead. Bauarus Emperor
eadem Contention betwixt the pope and Emp. 24. years. eadem pope has full
power to creat and depose Emperors at his pleasure ead. Marsilius Patauinus
ead. Defensor pacis eade^ Pope Nicholas 253 Benedict. 12 eadem Emperor deprived
ead. Variance betwixt the pope and French king ead. The Emp. must resign all
to the pope eadem The feends hant the pope. ea. Black curses against the
Emperor ead. Archb. of Me^tz deprived. ea. War with the king of England eadem
The Emperor gives over to the pope eadem The Emp. poisoned. eadem Gunterus de
monte nigro, chosen Emperor eadem Charles chosen Emp. 255 The Iubile every 50.
year. From Auinion to Rome. ea. 50000. pilgrims eadem The form of the bull of
Iubile eadem The pope commands the Angels eadem Against provisions from Rome
256 Tenths to the king ead. Orial college and S. Marie hall eadem The abbey of
Bury spoiled by the towns men. eadem The town of Bury fined at 120000. pound.
eadem The abbot of Cheuingto^ ea. King Edward the 3. 257 Charter from the king
to the clergy eadem Gregorius Ariminensis. ead. Taulerus eadem Franciscus
Petrarcha ead. Johan. de rupe Scisca. eadem Rome ye whore of Babylon. ea. Vade
mecum in tribulatione. ead. Conradus Hayer 258 Gerardus Rydder ead. Lachrimae
Ecclesiae ead. Michael Cesenas ead. Petrus de Carbona ead. Johannes de Poliaco
ead. Rome drunk with the blood of saints ead. Johannes de Castilion ead.
Francisc. de Alcatara ead. Simon Islip ead. Ca^terb. college in Oxford. 259 New
college in Oxford. ead Pope Innocent the 6. ead. Rome ye whore of Babylon. ea.
Strife between French prelates and Friars eadem Towns-me^ of Oxford spoil the
scholars 260 Idle holy days 262 A priests wages 263 S. Bridgets Nuns 261 Q.
college in Oxford. ead. Holy spear, holy nails. ead. The order of the
bishops of Canterbury eadem A prophecy eadem Haynchardus eadem A prophecy of
antichrist. 264 Complaint of the plowmen against the clergy. eadem Church of
Rome a bird, decked with other birds feathers, ead. Armanach. archb. of
Ireland. ea Richard Fitzrafe eadem John Badenthorp ead. 9 co^clusio^s against
friars, ea. A long controversy among the friars 265 Favorers of friars ead.
Defensorium curatotiu^ ead. Armanachus a mighty pillar of Gods church ead, How
Rome came by her patrimony eadem Nicholaus Orem 266 Jesuits begin eadem
Offices removed from the clergy to the laity eadem The P. remoueth from
France to Rome eadem Melitzing, a Bohemian ead. Reseruations of benefices in
England, no more for the Popes use 267 Praemunire to make appeal to Rome for any
cause 268 Holy Briget a great rebuker of the popish clergy ead The x.
commandments turned into two words, Dapecuniam eadem M. Paris. of Antichrist
ead. Ioh. Montziger ead. Nilus archb. of Thessal. ead. Henricus de Iota 269
Henricus de Hassia ead. The devils belly full of the P. voluptuousnes eadem 36.
burned for the truth ead. 140. suffered for refusing the Decretals eadem 24.
suffer at Paris ead The act of provision 270 An act to continue for ever ead.
Decrees against oppression of the pope ea. In Wickliffs time the world in
worst case 271 Wickliffe against Images ea. John of Gaunt, and L. Percy
favorers of Wickliffe ead. The opinions of Wic, ead. Wic. brought before the
bishops 272 Wic. bid sit down 273 From brauling to threats ead. A proud B.
wounded ea. K. Edw. the greatest brideler of the P. dies ead. Wickl. goes
barefoot, preaching ea. Articles out of Wick. preaching ead. Wic. articles
condemned for heretical 274 Popes bull against Wic. ead. P. diligence against W.
ea. 18. heretical opinions against Wick. 275 W. escapes the 2. time 276 W.
greatly supported by Lo^doners ead. pope Gregory dies ead. A schism betwixt
2. Popes, 39. years ea. Popes and antipopes ead Clement ead Benedictus 3 ead
Boniface 9 ead Innocentius 8 ead Gregory 12 ead Cruelty among the clergy,
during the schism 277 S. Sudburie beheaded of the rude people ead
Vicechancellor of Oxford enemy to Wickliffe ead Wic. mitigateth his enemies
278 Wickliffes articles condemned ead Tenths are pure alms 279 A terrible
earthquake ead Favorers of Wick. appointed to preach 280 Stokes an enemy to
Wick. 281 D. of Lancastar forsook the scholars of Wick. ead Repington and
Ashton reconciled ead Repington abiureth ead Lo^diners favor ye truth, 282
VVick. banished ead Schism cause of W. quiet, ea A cruel bishop 283 Wic.
parson at Lutterworth ead Wickliffs constancy ead Wick. books burned ead
VVic. favorers 284 Londoners take on them the bishops office ead Bones of wick.
burned after his death ead I. Husse, W. Swinderby 285 Articles against
Swinderbie 286 Henry 4. first persecuting K. in England 287 Articles against
Brute ead Temporalties taken from the Clergy 288 A turncote persecutor 289
Lucifer to the clergy ead Feendes glad at the want of preaching ead Devil
teaches what should be preached ead Abiurers 290 Well affected about Leicest.
ead R. Dexter, N. Tailor ead Leicester interdicted ead Matild an anchores, of
Wic. doctrine 291 Margaret Cailie, a Nun, forsakes her order ead Penance ead
Peter Pateshul ead Londoners zealous 292 The kings wife has the gospel in
English ead Thomas Arundel ead Articles in behalf of the gospel eadem
Multitude of arts not necessary 293 Rithme against the popish priests eadem
Favorers of the gospel. ea. Pope Boniface the 9. ead. The king writes a
christian admonition to the P. 294 Parlements holden against the pope eadem
Thomas Arundell proved a traitor 295 The king deposed 296 William Sawtree eadem
Objections against William Sawtree eadem Relapse 297 The manner of disgrading.
ea. The surples of a sexten 298 The time of Henry 4. ead. Thomas Badby martyr.
299 Crocodiles tears ead. The statute ex officio 300 Many shrink from the
truth eadem Articles eadem William Thorpe ead. Transubstantiation invented by
Thomas Aquinas 301 Against swearing on a book eadem A constant confessor of the
truth eadem John Puruey, the library of Lollards 302 Articles recanted ead. The
popes curse, the blast of Lucifer eadem How the temporalties of the clergy
should be bestowed eadem Boniface impudent in selling of pardons 404 Order
against the Schism, eadem P. Gregory the 12. 305 P. Gregory perjured. ead.
200000. Christians slain in a popish quarrel ead. The K. writes to the P.
ead. Pope Alexander 5. 306 Three popes together ead. Pope John 23. eadem John
Husse eadem Appeal better advised. ead. Pope John bends all his power
against the Bohemians eadem The tolling of Auies 307 40. days pardon for
saying of Auies eadem Steeple, belles, and organes, suspended eadem Contention
for litter ead. Penance for bringing litter in sackes, and not in carts eadem
A bill put into the Parliament to take temporalties from the clergy 308 The
kinds of popish feasts. 310 Notes of principal souls feasts eadem Lord
Cobham 311 Inquisitors for heresy. ead. Process to L. Cobham. ead. Lord
Cobhams answer to the king 312 Pope known by the scriptures to be Antichrist.
ead. The king forsakes L. Cobham eadem Confession of L. Cobhams faith 313 L.
Cobham arrested by the kings commandment. 314 L. Cobhams answer ead. L.
Cobham mocked 315 L. Cobham condemned. ead. A worthy martyr eadem Lord Cobham
escapes. 316 36. martyrs eadem Thomas Aru^dell dies. ead. Henry Chichesley
eadem Eat not, taste not, touch not. 317 Craft of the clergy eadem Husse
accused eadem Husse excommunicated for an heretic eadem Persecution in Boheme.
318 Prage divided 319 The people against the Prelates eadem None to control
Husse. ead. A Council at Constance to pacify the schism of three popes 320 A
council lasted 4. years, and had 45. sessions eadem Counsel ought to judge
the pope eadem The pope repents well doing eadem 40. articles against P. John.
321 Pope Martin eadem The Emperor leads the popes horse eadem The popes
Indulgence. ead. 3940. Prelates at the Council 322 450. common women belonging
to the Council ead. Good testimony of John Husse eadem Wenecelate de Duba 323
John de Clum eadem I. Husse comes to Constance eadem I. Husse kept in prison
324 I. Husse falls sick ead. Articles against Husse. ead. An aduocat denied
to Husse 325 Husse cruelly handled in prison eadem The Emperor breaks promise
with Husse 326 Husse answers for himself 327 Husse appears again. ead.
Husse not suffered to proceed in his answer. 382 39. articles against Husse.
eadem Articles auowed of Husse 329 John Husse will not recant. eadem The Emp.
against Husse. ead. Husse disgraded, condemned, and delivered to the seculars
331 Husse appealeth to christ. ead Husse derided for praying for his enemies
332 The courage of Husse. eade^ The Bishops cruelty against Husse eadem The
behavior of Husse at his death. 333 The ashes of Husse cast into the Rhine 334
Treatises of Husse in prison. eadem Hierome of Prage comes to Constance eadem
Treason against Hierome of Prage 335 Ierom carried to prison, ead. Peter the
notary and Vitus. ea. Jerome falls sick 336 Jerome abiureth eadem New
accusations against Jerome eadem D. Naso a great enemy to Jerome eadem New
articles against Ierom. 337 Jerome constant eadem Iero^ grievously fettered.
ead. Jerome prophecieth eadem Jerome condemned 338 Jerome sings after his
condemnation eadem Jerome sings at the stake. eadem Letters of the nobles of
Boheme to the counsel, sealed with 54. seals. 339 John Claidon. eadem Richard
Turming eadem The lantern of light. 340 The causes of persecution. ead Sharp
constitutions 341 John Barton, Robert Chapel eadem Chapel submits. eadem
Articles inioined Chap. ead. Diverse caused to abjure. 342 Collection to
maintain the popes war, against the Bohemians. eadem William Clerk eadem
William Russell eadem Radulph Mungin eadem Kent well affected 343 The L. Powes
takes the L. Oldcastle in Wales. 364 L. Cobham condemned. ead. All mischief
imputed to the Lollards ead. Bohemians cited to the counsel at Constance.
eadem Laws to bridle the Bohemians ead. 75000. li. the P. goods. 345 The Jews
offer their ceremonies to the pope. ead Pope threateneth the Bohemians eadem
Yearly memorial for the death of John Husse, and Jerome of prage ead.
Monasteries suppressed. ead. Captain Nicholas ead. The king threatens
Nicholas eadem The kings cruel determination disappoynted by his own death 346
Zisca eadem Tabor builded by Zisca. ead. Zisca puts the Emperor to flight.
337 Zisca loses his eye eadem Johan. Premo^stratensis, and his companions put
to death. ea. Dissension betwixt prage and Zisca 348 Reconciliation ead. Zisca
dies ead. The epitaph of zisca. eadem Zisca buried in a hallowed place in
despite of the P. 349 The popes bull, against the partakers of Wickliffe,
Husse, or Hierome. eadem Procopius eadem Conradus ead. Orphans ead. 3. armies
fly before they see their enemies 350 40000. horse against the protestants 351
The popish army flee before they see their enemies. ead. 50. towns destroyed
ead. Council at Basil ead. Embassage of the Bohemia^s to Basil 352 Peter an
English man ead. Four points wherein the Bohemians dissent from the church of
Rome ead. A disputation continued fifty days eadem Henry the 5. prince of
priests 353 The names of Archb. of Canterbury ead. William Tailor 354 William
Tailor reca^ted. ead. Four heretical points of W. Tailor 355 William Tailor
condemned and burned ead. John Florence eadem I. Florence his articles ead.
Submission 356 Penance eadem Richard Belward eadem His articles eadem John god
de Cell eadem Sir Hen. Pie eadem William White priest 357 Great vexatio^ for
the truth of Christ eadem Father Abraham 358 William White priest ead. John
Weddon priest ead. Many abjure eadem William White, Wickliffes scholar 359
White burnt in Norwich. ea. Cruelty eadem Richard Houedon 360 Th. Baghley, and
Paul Craw. ea. Thomas Rhedon burned at Rome eadem Pope Eugenius ead.
Persecution about germany. 361 Eugenius began the counsel at Basil ead. Order
for the times of general councels ead. The troubleso^ council at Basil,
continued 17. years. ead. Contention between the P. and the fathers of the
counsel. 362 Nicholaus Casnanus 363 Eugenius pronounced an heretic and
relapse. ead. 8. verities ead. Disputation of six days against Eugenius 364
Panormitan defender of Eugenius ead. John Segonius ead. Panormitane will have
the P. Lord of the church. 365 Servant of servants the most honorable title of
the pope ead. The council above the P. ea. Card. Arelatensis 366 Great discord
in the Council 367 Nicholas Amici ead Panormitan obstinate ead Policy of
Arelatensis 368 Arelatensis concludes ead Bishop of Lubeck 369 B. of Lubeck
favors the truth 370 Promoter of the faith 371 Prayers with tears 372 The
princes ambassadoures yielded ead Eugenius deposed 373 Death of pestilence at
the Council ead Oath of the Electors to the pope ead The manner of choosing the
pope 374 Amideus Duke of Sauoy. eadem Sigismund dies 375 Rochezanus dies
eadem Disputations upon the Bohemians articles eadem Vincelaus eadem Vldericus
eadem Peter Pain eadem Rhagusius eadem The Bohemia^s offended. ead. Popish
disputers against the Bohemians eadem Ambassadors from the counsel to Prage
376 The Bohemians have license to communicate under both kinds 377 Concord
betwixt the council and Bohemians. ead. The university to be increased with
prebends. ead. The feast of the conception of the virgin 378 The feast of the
visitation. eadem Good laws ordained in the council at Basil. eadem 24.
Cardinals ead. Jews to be converted. eade^ Stipend for the tongues. ead. 18.
new Cardinals ead. The Doulphin of France vanquished 369 Pope Nicholas 5 eadem
The Greeks abhor the Romans eadem 11. battles wonn by the protestants
against the papists 380 The papists ran away five times before any stroke was
given eadem Cruelty and treason against the Bohemians eadem Richard Which 381
Duchess of Gloucester condemned to perpetual prison eadem Roger Only burned
eadem Duke Humfreys articles against the Cardinal. ead Destruction of Duke
Humfrey 382 Alsolne and Bernard college in Oxford eadem Duke Humfrey
imprisoned, ead. Duke Humfrey found dead in prison eadem The desperate
cardinal 383 Mary Magdalen College in Oxford ead. Printing invented eadem
Printing later then Gunnes ead. Constantinople taken by the turks ead. One
neighbor destroys another for gain 384 Cruelty of the turks ead. No
Emperor, but king of the Romans, til the pope confirm him 385 A Iubile eadem
pope Calixtus eadem Auies to help the^ that fight against the turks eadem The
feast of Transfiguration ead. Edmunde of made a saint ead. P. pius Secundus ea.
pope alters his former judgment 386 Mentz loses his freedom ea. Discord
between pius and Dorotheus ea. p. paulus secundus ea. The pope for priests
marriage ea. pope Sixtus 4. ea. Stews at Rome ea. Iubile altered ea. Beads,
and Ladies psalter 387 A prodigal Cardinal ea. Liberty for sodomitry ea.
Innocentius 8. ea. K. of Boheme condemned of the pope ea. College of Eaton ea.
Henry 6. canonized for a Saint 388 An heresy to hold that christ was a beggar
ea. John Goose Martyr ea. John a Neat-heard 389 John de Wesalia recanteth ea.
Nominals, Reals ea. Revenues of the pope from the stews of Rome 390 Begging
friars ea. Alanus de Rupe ea. Rosarie of our Ladies psalter Fraternitas
coronarioru^ ea. Institution of the Rosarie ea. Sixtus dies for anger 391
Platina a shameful flatterer of the pope ea. Richard 3. usurper ea. K. Henry
7 ea. Maxim. fou^der of the university of Wittemberg ea. Learned men flourish
in the time of Maximilian ea. Veselus, a learned man, called Lux mundi 392 Ione
Boughton martyr ea. Fagots borne ea. A priest burnt 393 Babram, martyr ea. An
old man burnt ea. Sauanarola burnt ea. The pope Antichrist ea. Spirit of
prophecy in Sauanarola 394 Philip Norrice ead Germans sue to the Emp. against
ye romish church ead 10. greeuances ead Emperors edicts against the clergy 395
Iacobus Celestadiensis ead Alexander 6 ead Turks hire the P. to poison his
brother ead P. procures the Turk to war against the French King ead P. and his
Cardinals poisoned ead Pope Pius 3 ead Pope casts away the keys of peter ead
200000. Christians slain by the popes means 396 Council at Pyse ead Questions
against the P. ead Pragmatical function ead Pope curses the French K. ead
Persecution under the Turk 397 Saris 399 Ianizaries ead How Christian Captives
fly from their masters 401 How the Turk uses the Churches of Christians,
that be under his subiecon 402 Christians pay tribute to the Turk ead Fagots
borne 403 William Tilsley Martyr, eadem Cruelty against Nature eadem Penance
ead William Page burned in the cheek ead Father Roberts burnt 404 Thomas
Bernard ead James Morden ead Father River martyr ead Thomas Chaste ead Tho.
Norrice martyr ead Laurence Glest martyr 405 A woman burnt ead Gods judgment
ead Johannes Picus Mirandula 406 Picus set up 90. conclusio^s to be disputed
upon ead Furniture of Mirandulas study ead Ecclesiastical Laws before the
Conquest 407 Death of king Henry the 7. 409 Henry 8. ead Strife between the
Dominikes and Franciscans ead The feast of the virgin Mary's conception ead
Addition to the Aue Maria. eadem The virgin Mary conceived without sin eadem
Sleight of the friars ead. Pope Leo 410 Abiuration eadem William Sweeting, John
Banister martyrs eadem John Brown martyr ead. Richard Hunne ead. Doctor Horsey
the Chancellor eadem John Stilman burned 411 Thomas Man martyr ead. Pilate
washes his hands. eadem Great abiuration at Amersham eadem 200. converted by
Thomas Man eadem Known men, iustfast men. eadem William Sweeting eadem James
Brewster 412 Christopher, a Shoemaker. ead. College of brasen-nose in Oxford
ead. Brother detecteth brother, and husband the wife. ead. Many abjure ead.
Thomas Barnard burned eadem Unnatural cruelty 413 Doctor Collet. ead. Paul's
school builded ead. Pardons sold eadem Tecellius a Friar. ead. Luther an
Augustine Friar. ead. Luther accused to the bishop of Rome eadem Luther writes
to the pope. eadem Dialogues against Luther. 414 Eckius against Luther. ead. P.
complains against Luth. ead. Lu. submits himself 415 New pardons 416
Maximilian ead. Disputation at Lipsia 417 Zuinglius ead. Yearly money from
Germany to Rome ead. Luther burns the popes decrees ead. Pope curses Luther
ead. Luth. appears at Worms ead. Courage of Luther 418 Questions of Eckius
to Lut. ead. Luthers books of 3. sorts ead Lu. answer to Eckius ead The
Emperor purposes to root out the gospel. 419 Luther returns home. 420 The
Emperor outlaweth Luther ead. The book De Abroganda missa eadem Wittemberg
favors Luther eadem A book against Luther. 421 Defender of the Christian
faith eadem Pope Leo dies eadem Pope Hadrian 6. ead. A meeting at Noremberge.
eadem 100. greeuances of Germany against the pope. ead. pope Hadrian dies 422
Pope Clement 7. ead. Carolostadius eadem Luther dies eadem Lu. prayer at his
death. ead. Luther fulfilled Jerome of Prages prophecy eadem A council at
Ratisbone. 423 Acts against Luther. eadem Zuinglius eadem Dominicks against
Zuinglius 424 Io. Faber against Zuingl. ead Traditions of men abandoned in
zurike eadem Decree at Lucerna ead. Cantons divided eadem Images pulled down.
425 The Cantons that misliked Zuinglius eadem The mass banished eadem A
disputation at Berne. 426 Scriptures only to decide controversies eadem Ten
conclusions eadem The Bishops refuse disputation eadem The disputation lasted
19. days 427 Berne reformed ead. Geneua reformed ead. The Bernats refuse the
french kings league ea. A monument of reformation ea. Mass put down in
Strausborough 428 Basil reformed ea. A memorial of their reformation ea. The
name of protestants 429 Division of the pages for religion ea. Zuinglius slain
ea. Minister goes with the army ea. League betwixt the Ca^tons 430 Duke of
Saxon dies ea. Henry Voes ea. John Each ea. Courage of the Martyr ea. Cruelty
432 John M. eadem Master George eadem Great cruelty, and great patience 433
John Castellane ead. Constancy eadem Cruelty eadem Courage and constancy 434
Gods vengeance 435 John Huglein ead. No promise to be kept with heretics eadem
George Carpenter eadem Leonard Keysar eadem The mother and brethren, one
against another ead. Wendelimata 436 Peter Filsteden eadem Adolph Clarebacke
ead. Nicholas of Antwerpe ead. Johannes Pictor ead. A courageous martyr ead.
Mathias Werbell 437 A priest martyred ead. G. Sherrer eadem A sign eadem Henry
Flemming eadem Master Perceuall 438 Antonia eadem Justice Imsberge eadem Giles
eadem Franciscus Encenas eadem Sharp persecution 439 200. martyrs eadem Martin
Heurblot eadem Nicholas van Pole eadem John de Brucke eadem Vrsula and Mary
ead. Two brethren and their mother 440 Peter Bruly eadem Peter Miocaus eadem A
round answer eadem Bergeban eadem John Diazius killed by his brother 442 An
armed council at Angusta eadem The Interim eadem A priest in Hungary 443 A
strange cruelty eadem The duke of Saxony ead. Lantgraue of Hesse ead.
Hermannus archbishop of Colen eadem Martirdom for the truth. ea. Nicholas
Marion ead. A worthy martyr 444 Augustine eadem Two virgins eadem Magdeburge
eadem Hostius eadem Johannes Frisius eadem Bertrand le Blos eadem A wonderful
constancy. 445 The crustie God ead. 200. preachers banished Boheme eadem.
Ministers of Lorraine banished eadem Francis Warbut eadem Alexander Dayken ead.
Gillotus Viuer 446 Michella eadem Godfrey Hamell eadem John Malo eadem Parents
and children martyred together ead. James Pauan eadem Dionisius Rieux eadem
Johannes Caduceo ead. Five burned at Paris ead. Alexander Caius eadem John
Pointer eadem Peter Gandet eadem Quoquillard 448 John Coruon eadem Martin Gouin
eadem Claudius Painter eadem Steven Brune eadem Constantinus 449 John du Beck
eadem Aymond de la Voy ead. A notable saying eadem Frauncis Bribard ead.
William Russen ead. De Landa 450 James Cobard ead. Peter Clarke eadem William
Briconetus ead. 14, Christian martyrs ead. The priests sing at the death of
martyrs 451 Peter Chapet eadem The tongues of martyrs cut out eadem Samnitius
eadem Steven Polliot eadem John English 452 Michaell Michelot ead. Leonardus de
Prato ead. John Taffingnot ead. Michaell Mareschall ead. Octauian Blondes eadem
Hubert Cherrer 453 Florence Venot eadem Anne Andebert eadem Notable constancy
and courage in a woman ead. A poor tailor ead. Claudius 454 Leonard Galimard
ead. Maceus Marreon eadem Thomas Sanpalinus, a notable martyr eadem Marvelous
constancy. ead. Johannes Put 455 Claudius Mouerius ead. Renat Poyet eadem John
Loyer eadem Christian charity ead. Hugonius Grauier ead. Five students burned
ead. Christian charity 456 Petrus Bergerius ead. John Chanbone ead. Dionysius
Pelloquine ead. A worthy cha^pion of Christ. 457 Mattheus Dimotheus. ead.
William Neele ead. Simon Laloe ead. James Siluester ead. Nicholas Nail ead.
Peter Serre ead. The name of a priest, shameful to a christian 458 Stephen King
ead. Anthonius Magneus ead. William Alencon ead. Repentance 459 Paris Pamer
eadem Peter du Val. eadem John Filiolus eadem Notable constancy ead. Dionysius
Vair ead. Cruelty of the friars 460 Thomas Galbaragne ead. Nicholas Poul ead.
Richard Feutus ead. John Bertrand 461 Peter Rouseau ead. Arnold Myner eadem
Bartholomew Hector 462 Philip Ceur eadem Archambant eadem Gods vengeance 463
Nicholas Startorius eadem George Tardife ead. The father against the son.
eadem An assembly of 3. or 4. hundred of the faithful at Paris 464 A marvelous
deliverance. eadem The cardinal of Lorayne a slaunderer of the faithful. 465
An apology to the king. eadem Nicholas Clinet, and other martyrs ead. A notable
widow ead. Bibles and Testaments burnt. 466 Frederick Danuile, and Francis
Rebizies eadem Worthy martyrs ead. Rene Seaw eadem Laurence Almerike ead.
Villegaignon 467 John Bordell eadem Gefferey Varagle ead. Benet Roman ead.
Francis Viuax 468 Peter Arundeaw ead. Thomas Montard ead. An du Burg ead. The
tumult of Amboise. ead. Marlerote ead. Francis Sauromanus 469 The Emperor
three times admonished by Sauromanus 470 Rochus ead. The execrable inquisition
of Spain 471 Torments whole days together ead. Three sorts of men in danger
of the inquisition. 472 28. martyrs in the town of Validoly ead. Caracalla
ead. A christian flock ead. Sanbenita ead. Encenas 474 Franciscus Encenas 475
Fauinus eadem A constant martyr 476 The death of pope Paulus the 3. eadem Pope
Julius the 3 eadem Dominicus de Basuna. ead. Galeazius eadem John Mollins 477
Laurentius Spatha ead. De crassis 478 The zeal of Molius eadem Franciscus
Ganiba eadem Pompeius Algerius eadem Johannes Aloisius ead. Iacobus Bonellus
ead. Julius 3 eade^ Marcellus ead. Paulus 4 ead. Eighty eight martyrs together.
eadem The popes promise 480 Georgius Maurellus ead. Petrus Latomus ead. A
cruel monk ead. Michellotus Serra 481 William Melius eadem Gods vengeance
eadem Despair eadem Cruel sentence against Merindoll ead. The harlot of the
bishop of Aix, labors against Merindoll 482 Martyr burned with bibles about
his neck 483 The manner of Gods children in affliction ead. God hears the
Merindolians prayers ead. King Francis pardons the Merindolians 484
Confession of the Merindolians faith ead. Cabriers ead. Sadolet helped
Cabriers. eadem Examination of Merindolians 485 Cruelty of Antichrist. 487
Popish cruelty ead, Maurice Blanc ead. Merindol laid even with the ground ead.
Miniers breaks his oath with Cabriers 488 Marvelous cruelty ead. 1000.
slain ead. Cossa destroyed 489 Aubrius eadem Gods judgment upon the
persecutors ead. Switzers sue for the valley. eadem Gefferey Varicala ead.
Persecution 492 Those that yielded, more cruelly handeled, than those that were
constant. 493 Cruel Monks 495 The minister roasted eadem The wicked fly,
where none persecuteth 497 Odall Gemet 500 Rosa destroyed 501 God fights for
his people. 502 Supplication to the Duches of Sauoy eadem Liberty granted to
the Waldois ead.
The Table of the second part.
BVrning at Couentry page 1 Mistress Smith eadem Robert Sylkes page 2 Patricke
Hamleton ead. Patricks articles eadem Patricks places eadem Henry Forest 3
James Hamleton eadem Katherine Hamleton recant ead. Woman of Lies recant eadem
Norman Gorley martyr. eadem David Straton ead. Harding ead. Alice Doly 4 Robert
West ead. Father, wife, and children, accusing a christian. ead. Thomas Lound
ead. Certain abiured 5 Rome spoiled and the pope taken prisoner. 6 Rymes of
the pope ead. 220000. li. out of the kings treasure, for to fight against the
Emperor. ead. Proud prelates 7 Compassing the kings divorce ead. Cardinal in a
praemunire. eadem The K. gracious to the Cardinal eadem A parliament eadem
Grief of communalty against spiritualty ead. Articles against the Cardinal 8
I and my king ead Card. had french pocks ead Cardinal confesses the articles
ead Cardinal ungrate to the king 9 Cardinal arrested ead Cardinal dies ead
Body of the Cardi. stinketh above ground ead Master Humfrey troubled 10
Abiuring ead Tho. Hitten martyr ead Tho. Bilney ead 34, articles against M.
Bilney 12 Bilney condemned ead Bilney recanteth 13 Bil. his grievous anguish
after recantation ead Bilney repents ead Bil. smileth at the stake 14
Supplication of beggars 15 Fish has the kings protection ead Poor seely
souls of purgatory 16 Commission against English books ead Testament of
Tindals translation ead Richard Bayfield ead Bayfield condemned 17 Cruelty ead
Book of wicked Mammon 18 John Tewksburie recanteth ead John Tewksburie
repents John Tewksburie burned eadem Edward Freese 19 Bread of sawdust ead
Cruelty ead Valentine Freese and his wife 20 Friar Royce burned ead Bishops
commanded to translate the bible ead James Baynam ead Baynam submits 21
Baynam repents ead Baynam burned 22 Courage of a martyr ead John Benet ead
Idol of Douercourt ead Images cast down ead Christ's college in Oxford 23 John
Frith burned ead Sir Th. More pursues Frith ead Friths treatise 24 Friths
answer gotten ead Frith condemned ead Andrew Hewet ead Thomas Bennet Martyr 26
William Tracy ead. During Qu. Anne no great persecution 27 Commons against
Clergy. 28 Nothing from Rome ead. Supreme head eadem Popes usurping put down.
eadem No conuocations without the kings writ eadem Oath of Clergy to Pope
abolished 29 More resigneth chancellorship ead. King renounceth the Pope. eadem
Lady Elizabeth borne. ead. The Holy maid of Kent. 30 Gods judgment ead.
Thomas Cranmer Archb. of Canterbury ead. Preaching against Popes supremacy 31
Popes pardons abolished. ead. Guard. book, De Obedie^tia with Boners notes ead.
Ruin of religious houses. 32 Jewels and relics from abbeys eadem W. Tindall
burned eadem Tindall translated the Testament 33 Tindals protesting against
transubstantiation 35 Q. Anne put to death ead. The K. refuses the general
council at Mantua ead. Some religious houses given to the king ead. Articles
of religion taught. 36 Rebellion suppressed ead. Prince Edward borne ead.
Queen Jane dies ead. Ruffelings against the king calmed eadem The kings
articles ead. Many holidais abrogated 37 Scripture in English ead. Register
Book in every church eadem Religious houses rooted up. eadem 45. articles
against La^bert 38 A wicked persuasion 39 Lambert disputes eadem The king
condemns Lambert ead. Cromwell reads sentence against Lambert ead. Cromwell
craves pardon of Lambert eadem La^bert a worthy martyr. 40 Lamberts treatise
of the Sacrament eadem Robert Packingto^ going to prayer is slain ead. Collins
and his dog burned. ea. Cowbridge eadem Putdew eadem William Lerton eadem
Nicholas Peke 41 Notable courage of martyr. eadem The king refuses the
council eadem The kings farewell ead. Search injunctions 42 The king nusled by
Winchester eadem Six articles, a whippe of six strings eadem Treason and
felony ead. Cranmer against six articles. eadem Against adultery, etc. of
priests 43 Death for adultery repealed eadem Cromwell maule of the pope eadem
Life of Cromwell 44 Cromwell learnd the text of the new testament by heart. 45
Cromwell serves the Cardinal eadem English bible printed at Paris 47 Gardener
enemy to the Gospel ead. Th. Mathewes bible ead. Bible in English presented to
the king 48 Bible of large volume ead. Bishops promise to amend the bible, but
perform not 49 Doctor Barnes ead. Duns and Darbell put out of Cambridge ead.
Disputations of faith rare in Cambridge eadem Doctor Barnes converted by Bilney
50 The white horse in Cambridge called Germany. eadem D. Barnes arrested ead.
D. Barnes submits ead. D. Barn escapes out of prison 51 Acta Romanorum
Pontificum eadem Doctor Barnes to the Tower 52 Barnes, Garret, and Hierome
burned 53 Unjust proceeding ead. D. Barnes his four requests to the king 54
Four papists executed about the supremacy. ead. Favorers of truth ead.
Patrons of Popery eadem All prisons in London too little for the persecuted. ea.
Boner turns and becomes a persecutor 55 Six Bibles set up in Paul's. eadem
The Devil in the neck. ead. John Porter killed in prison. eadem Thomas Summers
dies in the Tower 56 Thomas Barnard, and James Morton martyrs ead. A popish
fear. eadem Bartrams boy, the Devil in the monks cowle 57 Lady Anne of Cleue
divorced eadem Six put to death for supremacy 58 The K. misseth Cro^well. ead.
White meats permitted in Lent eadem Marbeck pardoned 60 Filmer, Parson, and
Testwood burned eadem Notable martyrs ead. The king pardons 61 Winchester out
of favor. eadem False judges and accusers punished eadem Adam Damlip 62
Persecution in Calice. ead. Gods judgment and deliverance of his people 63 The
Lord Lisle dies in the Tower eadem Gods judgment upon a false accuser 64
Lord Awdley friend to the afflicted eadem Rockwood a persecutor dispaireth 65
Gods judgment ead. Adam Damlip eadem Adam Damlip executed. ea. Gods judgment
66 The rigor of six Articles. 67 Noblemen, and Gentlemen permitted to read the
scripture eadem Six articles qualified ead. Saxie hanged 68 Henry burned eadem
Kerbie eadem Roper eadem A notable speech of the constant servant of Christ.
eadem Doctor Crome reca^teth. ea. Anne Askew 69 Anne Askew answers
parabolically and boldly. 70 Anne Askew condemned. eadem Anne Askew sore
racked. 71 The King displeased with the racking of Anne Askew eadem Martyrs
pardoned at the stake eadem Winchesters practice against the Queen 72 The King
much altered. 73 The Queen delivered from danger ead. Kings of England and
France agree for a perfect reformation 74 Sir George Blage condemned eadem The
king dies eadem Persecution in Scotland. 75 Ten articles against John
Brothwicke ead. Thomas Ferrar ead. Saint Frauncis homely used. 76 Helene Stirke
a notable martyr ead. George Wiseheart 77 The meek death of George Wiseheart
eadem Gods judgment eadem Adam Wallace learned the psalter without book. ead.
Controversy in Scotland, whether the Lords prayer should be said to saints,
or no. 78 The Friar bids to say the pater noster to the devil. eadem Walter
Myll eadem A notable speech of the martyr 79 Style burned with the Apocalips
about his neck. 81 K. Edward reigns 83 The K. would not at the emperors
suit, let the Lady Mary have mass ead. Six articles abolished. ead. Religion
restored ead. Peter Martyr at Oxford. eadem Bucer. and P. Phagius at Ca^bridge
ead. Thomas Dobbe 84 Commissioners ead. A parliament eadem Rebellion 85
Muskleborow field 86 Boner shifteth and cauilleth. 87 Boner exhibiteth against
Latimer 89 Boner pronounced contumax 90 Boner depryued eadem L. protector eadem
Altars taken down 91 Lady Mary's popish practices restrained eadem Gardiners
seditious behavior 92 Gardener sent to the tower. ead. Winchester deprived.
page 93 Doctor Redman a favorer of the gospel ead. W. Gardener eadem
Pendegrace 94 W. Gardiners cruel execution eadem Marvelous constancy of W.
Gardener 95 Protector put to death for felony ead. Lord Gilford and Lady Jane,
married 96 Justice Hales eadem Queen Mary to the Council eadem Q. Mary's
promise to maintain religion 97 Ridley sent to the Tower. ead. Q. Mary
breaks promise. eadem Popish bishops restored, and other put down ead.
Hooper committed to the Fleet ead. Proclamation against the word of God ead. A
dagger hurled at the preacher ead. Bradford to the tower. 98 M. John Rogers
eadem Hooper appears 99 Couerdale appears ead. Hooper to the Fleet ead.
Pet. Martyr returns home. eadem Latimer appears 100 Cranmer to the Tower.
ead. French protestants suffered to pass hence eadem Mary crowned eadem A
parliament eadem Statutes repealed 101 Sir James Hales apprehended ead. Sir John
Hales lamentable end eadem Disputation of six days. eadem Disputation
confuted 103 The Prolocutor interrupteth Philpot ead. M. Elmer 104 Romish
Church against reason ead. Master Philpot a hearty man eadem Master Philpots
argument. 105 Convocation breaks up. eadem Communicatio^ of marriage betwixt
Q. Mary, and K. Philip 106 Doctor Crome to the fleet. eadem Wiat beheaded ead.
Lady Jane, and Lord Gilford beheaded eadem Gods judgment upon Morgan eadem
Articles 107 About 800. fly beyond the seas eadem Lady Elizabeth, and Lord
Courtney sent to the Tower ead. Popes supremacy not obtained 108 Boners
commendation of priesthood eadem Doctor Cranmer, Doctor Ridley, and M. Latimer
sent to prison unto Oxford 109 Disputers at Oxford ead. Questions to be
disputed of eadem Thirty and three Commissioners ead. Cranmer before the
Commissioners eadem Unity with verity ead. Ridley appears ead. Master
Latimer appears. 110 Neither Mass, nor the marybones, nor the sinews found
in the Scripture. eadem A disorderly disputation. 111 D. Ridley disputes eadem
D. Smith a turner and returner eadem Weston triumphs before the victory ead.
Master Latimer disputes. eadem Weston cries, Urge hoc. 112 The martirs bid,
read on the sentence 113 Latimer would not behold the procession ead. The
Prolocutor breaks promise with M. Philpot. eadem The Prolocutor opens
Cra^mer his letters to the Council eadem Master Bradford, Thomas Beacon, and
Neron to the to the Tower 114 A false rumor of the archbishop 115 In Kings
College Papists very forward ead. Lady Ellzabeth to the tower 116 Lady
Elizabeth to Woodstocke 117 Barlow, and Cardmaker to the fleet eadem Against
writing Scriptures on Churchwalles ead. Twenty and four places void together
in S. John's college in Cambridge. ead. Cardinal Poole la^deth. ead.
Absolutio^ given to the Lords and commons 118 Purchases of abbey lands to be
confirmed by the pope. eadem M. Rose sent to the Tower, eadem The act of popes
supremacy eadem Qu. Mary with child ead. Certain evil prayers to be treason
119 James George ead. Cardmaker submits. ead. Sentence against Tailor,
Saunders, and Bradford 120 M. John Rogers martyr. 121 M. Rogers, divinity
reader in Paul's eadem Rogers condemned 122 Cruel Gardener eadem Boner would
not suffer master Rogers to talk with his wife before his death. eadem
Master Rogers first martyr of Queen Mary's days eadem A prophecy of the
ruin of the pope in England. 123 Laurence Saunders ead. Laurence Saunders
constancy, and his letters 124 Sweet saying of Laurence Saunders eadem Hooper
burned at Gloucester 125 Hooper preached once or twice a day eadem Hooper
deprived 126 Hooper hardly used in prison 127 Hooper and Rogers to the Counter
eadem False rumors of Hoopers recanting 128 Hooper goes cherefullie to death
129 Hooper refuses his pardon ead. Hooper a worthy Martyr, ead. D. Tailor
martyr ead. All the prisons in England Christian schools and churches 130
Tailor, Bradford, and Sau^ders, condemned ead. Master Tailor pleasant at the
antichristian attire 131 D. Tailor makes Boner afraid ead. Doctor Tailor
masked, that he may not be known eadem Worms deceived by Doct. Tailor 132
Marvelous courage of Doctor Tailor 133 Doctor Tailors brains smit out at the
fire ead Gardener refers to Boner the butchering of Gods Saints ead Miles
Couerdale granted to the King of Denmark, 134 Thomas Tomkins Martyr, eadem
Tomkins his hand burned with a taper ead Tomk. burnt in Smithfielde 135 Father
compelled against the son ead Hunters mother encourages him to constancy
136 Hunter encouraged by his brother 137 William Sarton ead M. Higbed, and M.
Causton burned 139 Pigot and Knight Martirs ead John Laurence ead Robert Farrar
B. of S. David's burnt 140 Farrars words to a gentleman at his death 141 Rawlins
White ead Rawlins God, and the Bishops God 142 Rawlins wedding garments 143
Rawlins a worthy martyr eadem Rawlins persuasion 144 Pope exco^municateth those
that held abbey lands ead P. Julius the monster dies ead P. misseth his
peacock 145 A blasphemous pope ead Gods judgment ead Branch blamed for
carrying Deu^ time, vitiu^ fuge, about his neck ead George Marsh 146 G. Marsh
his great patience 148 Will. Flower wou^deth a priest at mass 149 Joy at Q.
Mary's delivery of child 151 Cardmaker and Warn Martirs 152 People encourage
Cardm. at his death 153 John Ardley a valiant Martyr ead John Symson martyr ead
John Tooly ead Hawks at his death gives a sign to his friends 155 Diverse
comfortable epistles written by Hawks ead Thomas Wats martyr 156 Queen Mary
proved not with child eadem T. Malt should have bin Q. Mary's child 157 A
Caveat for England. ead. Nicholas Cha^berlain, Tho. Summer, Will. Ba^ford. ead.
Bradford rejoices at the news of his martirdo^. 158 M. Bradfords word at the
stake eadem I. Leaf of 19. years of age, burned with Bradford. 159 John Leaf
a notable young martyr eadem Gods judgment eadem Bradfords letters eadem A
dead body summoned to appear, and answer 160 4. martirs in Canterbury ea.
Nicholas Hall, Christopher Wade martyrs 161 Margery Polley comfort Wade
eadem Wades prayer eadem Dyrick Caruer burned 162 John Lander eadem Thomas
Iueson 163 John Aleworth eadem John Denley, John Newma^, Patrick Packingam ead.
The martyr sings in the fire 164 Richard Hook eadem 6. godly martirs at
Cant. ea. George Tankerfield 165 A pretty saying of the martyr 166 For patience
of the martirs, the people said that they had the Devil ead. Robert Smith ead.
Martyr gives a sign 167 St. Harwood, Thomas Fust, William Hayle eadem Robert
Samuel 168 Samuel has a vision ead. Rose Notingham eadem W. Allen eadem
Roger Coo eadem Thomas Cobbe eadem Thomas Haywood, John Gateway 169 M. John
Glouer ead. God send his spirit of comfort 170 Robert Glouer eadem Cornelius
Bungey ead. Olyuer Richardine 171 W. Wolsey, and To. Pigot. ead. M. Ridley 172
Sundry letters and tractations M. Latimer eadem M. Latimer sometimes an earnest
papist, converted by Bilney eadem Doctor Buttes a favorer of good men 173
Verses of Latimer at the giving of holy bread and holy water 174 Smithfield had
long groned for M. Latimer 175 Latimer almost starued for cold in the tower ead
Latimers sundry letters eadem Sermon of piping and daunsing ead Master Latimer
to the King for restoring of the Scriptures 176 Latimers new years gift to to
the king eod Ridley covers his head at the name of the Pope eadem Ridley not
suffered to answer 177 Ridley and Latimer condemned 178 Ridley refuses his
pardon ead The behavior of Ridley and Latimer at the place of execution 179
Latimer prophecieth at the stake 180 Diverse Letters and Treatises ead Steven
Gardener dies ead Gods judgment on Gardener 181 Winchesters words at his
death ead John Web, G. Roper, G. Parker, Martirs 181 Men of upright minds
183 Hastening of judgment, a pleasure to the martyr 184 Sharp answer to
Boners message ead Philpots zeal against Morgan 186 Articles against Master
Philpot 187 Boner condemns Philpot 188 M. Philp. pays his vows in
Smithfield ead 7. burned together in Smithfield 189 Thomas Whittle repents,
and is condemned ead Whittles letters ead Bartlet Green ead Master Green
condemned 191 Master Green at the Stake ead Tho. Brown ead John Tudson ead
John Went ead Isabel Foster 192 Ione Lashford ead 5. martirs sing a psalm in
the fire ead Cranmer Archb. of Canterbury 193 M. Cranmers advice touching the
disputation for the kings divorce eadem Cranmer sent for to the K. 194
Embassage to Rome about the divorce eadem None would kiss the popes foot, but
a great Spaniell of the Earl of Wiltshires eadem Cranmer goes to the Emperor
eadem Cranmer satisfies Cornelius Agrippa eadem Cranmer made archbishop. 195
King Edward godsonne to Cranmer eadem Books of Cranmer ead. Cranmer not
brought to against his conscience. ead. Cranmer would do no reverence to the
popes subdelegate 196 Perjured persons for witnesses. 197 The meaning of
supreme head 198 The Archbishop condemned for not being at Rome, when he was
kept prisoner in England ead. Boner derideth the Archbishop 199 The poor
estate of the archbishop ead. Cranmer sets his hand to a recantation ead. Q.
Maryes special hate to Cranmer 200 Law of equality 201 The pitiful case of
Cranmer. eadem Cranmer bewaileth his reca^tation 202 Cranmer first burns his
hand, wherewith he subscribed eadem Cranmer burned eadem The wicked can not
discern spirits eadem Why Cranmer desired life. eadem John Spicer, William
Coberley, and John Maundrell 203 Purgatory the popes pinfold ead. Six at one
fire in Smithfield, viz. Robert Drakes, William Timmes, Richard Spurge, Thomas
Spurge, John Cauell, and George, Ambrose 204 A short answer of Timmes. 205
Commissioners into Norffolke, and Suffolk 206 John Harpoole, and Ioane Beats
eadem John Hullier eadem Six martyrs at one fire in Colchester eadem
Christopher Lister eadem John Mace, John Spenser, John Hammon, Simon Iayne, and
Richard Nicholas 207 Hugh Lauercocke, and John appryce burned ead. Lauercock
comfort his fellow eadem Thomas Drewry, and Thomas Croker 208 Thomas Spicer,
John Denny, and Edmund Poole, burned eadem The martyrs praise God in the flame
209 Thomas Harland, John Oswald, Th. Auington, Tho. Read, martyrs ead. Also
John Milles, and Thomas Wood ead. A merchants servant at Leycester 210
Thirteen at one fire, viz. Henry Adlington, L. Pernam, H. Wye, W. Halywell, T.
Bowyer, G. Searls, Edm. Hurst, Lion Couch, Rafe Iackson, John Deryfall, John
Routh, Elizabeth Pepper, Agnes George. eadem Subtlety of the Devil. ead. Two
women stand loose at the stake eadem Cardinal pardons certain condemned ead.
Roger Bernard 211 Adam Foster, Robert Lawson ead. A worthy answer of the
martyr eadem John Carlesse a worthy confessor 212 Julius Palmer, John Guin,
Thomas Askin martyrs. 213 Julius Palmer expulsed the college in King Edward
his time, for Papistrie. eadem Th. Thackha^ a false dissembling hypocrite 214
The mother threateneth her son Julius Palmer fire and faggot eadem Palmer at
the stake 215 Palmer diverse times in danger of burning 216 For whom its easy
to burn eadem The mother Katherine Couches, and the two daughters, Guillemme
Gilbert, and Perotine Massey, burned in Gernesey 217 Cruelty against the
mother, and her daughters. ead. Marvelous cruelty eadem Thomas Dungate, John
Forman, and mother Dree burned 218 Thomas More ead. Ioane Wast eadem Ione her
offer to the Judges. eadem Edward Sharp 219 Four at Mayfield in Sussex. eadem
A young man at Bristow. eadem John Horn, and a woman. ead. William
Dangerfield. ead. Great cruelty 220 The wife encourages her husband eadem A
shoemaker at Northampton ead. Hook eadem Five famished, and ten burned at
Canterbury 221 A witty, and godly answer of Alice Potkins ead. Put to death in
the fourth year of Qu. Mary, 84. persons eadem Sir John Cheek 222 The
university of Ca^bridge to be reformed 223 Inquisitors came to Cambridge eadem
S. Mary's, and S. Michaels churches in Cambridge interdicted eadem Kings
college refuses the Inquisitors 224 Kings college never without an heretic
ead. Robert Brassey M. of Kings college ead. Bucer and Phagius dug out of
their graves 225 Bucer and Phagius corpse burned 226 The holy commisioners
depart from Cambridge. ea. Peter Martyrs wifes corpse at Oxford 227 John
Philpot, W. Waterer, Steph. Kempe, W. Haydhith, T. Hudson, Matthew Brodbridge,
Th. Stephe^s, Nich. Final, W. Lowicke, W. Prowting burned. ea. Another bloody
commission. 228 Cardinal Poole merciful. ead. Tho. Losebie, H. Ramsey, T.
Tyroll, M. Hyde, Agnes Stanley 229 The valiant martyr eadem W. Morant, King, S.
Gratewicke ead. Unjust proceeding ead. Faith surely grounded. 230 John
Bradbridge, W. Applebie, Petronel, Ed Allen, K. his wife, I. Mannings, E. a
blind maid ead I. Fishcock, N. White, N. Pardu, B. Fynall, widow
Bradbridge, Wilso^s wife, Bendens wife ead Husband against the wife 231 Diet
of the Martirs in prison ead 3. Farthinges a day the martirs allowance ead
Alice Benden a constant martyr ead God sends the spirit of comfort 232 The
bishop will neither meddle with patience nor charity ead Ten burned at one
fire, Richard Woodman, G. Steuens, R. Maynarde, Alex. Hoseman, Thomasin a Wood,
Marg. Moris, Denis Burgis, Ashdons wife, Groves wife ead Father against son
233 Boner droonk with Philpots blood ead Quick dispatch 135 Simon Miller,
Eliza. Couper ead Elizabeth Couper repents her recantation 236 Will. Mount,
Alice his wife, Rose Allen ead A tragical dialogue betwixt Tirrel and Rose
Allen 237 Tirannie overcome with patience ead John Thurstone, and M. his wife
ead W. Bongeor, A. Siluerside, T. Benold, W. Purcas, H. Ewring, E. Folks,
prisoners in Colchester 238 Sharp answer of the martyr ead Eliz. Folks ead
Rose Allen condemned, song for joy 239 Notable speech of the martyr ead Geor.
Eagles called Trudgouer 240 Richard Crashfield ead Friar and G. Eagles his
sister, 241 Joyce Jews ead Satan troubles the martyr ead She drinks to all
that love the gospel 242 Rafe Allerton, James Austoo Margerie Austoo, Richard
Coth ead The courageous Martyr eadem They fear the martyr in prison 143 Agnes
Bongeor. ead. Margery Thurstone ead. John Knode ead. The martyr refuses
pardon. ead. John Noyes eadem Cecill Ormes 244 The constant martyr. eadem
Cecill Ormes at the stake. eadem Sixteen martyrs in Sussex. 145 Thomas
Spurdance eadem John Hollingdale 246 W. Sparrow eadem R. Gibson eadem Articles
for articles ead. Ioh. Rough ead. M. Mearing eadem Master Rough minister of
the congregation at London 247 More reverence to the pope, then to the bread
God. ead. Margery Mearings ready to suffer for Chrish 248 Cuthbert Simpson,
Hugh Fox, John Deuenish. ead. Cuthbert Simso^ racked twice 249 Boner commends
the patience of Cuthbert Simson eadem W. Nichol eadem W. Seaman eadem Tho.
Carman, Tho. Hudson. ead. W. Harris, Rich. Day, Christopher Gorge 251 A sharp
proclamation against godly books. eade^. Henry Pond, Rayn. Eastla^d, Robert
Southam, Mar. Richarby, Ioh. Floyd, Ioh. Holiday, Roger Holland. 252 A straight
proclamation. eadem R. Holland at the stake, ead. R. Milles, S. Wight, S.
Carton, I. Slade, R. Denis, VV. Pikes 253 Richard Yeoman 254 Thomas Benbridge.
eadem A notable conflict betwixt flesh, and the spirit of God. 255 I. Cook, R.
Miles, A. Lane, James Ashley eadem Alex. Gouch, Alice Driuer. ead. Alice Driuer
of an excellent spirit 256 Phil. Humfrey, John David, Henry David 257 Priests
wife eadem The wife persecuted of husband, and children ead. Christ the martyrs
husband. eadem A worthy martyr 258 Note eadem John Sharp, Tho. Hall. 259
Thomas Benion eadem John Cornford, Christopher Brown, John Herst, Alice Snoth,
Kath. Knight. ead. The martyr excommunicateth the Papists eadem The husband
accused by his wife 260 Balaams mark 261 Cruelty of Balaamites ead. N. Burton
burned in Siuell. Aue Maria after the Romish fashion eadem Mark Burges, W.
Hook. 262 John Dauies of twelve years old 263 The congregation in London eadem
The ministers of that congregation eadem Those that fled from Ipswich for
persecution 265 Ipswich a good town ead. The affliction of L. Eliz. 268 Lady
Elizabeth falsely accused 269 An hundred Northren soldiers watch the Lady
Elizabeth 270 The L. Eliz. had none other friends but God. 171 Lady Elizabeth
prisoned in the Tower eadem The Lord Chamberlayne hard to the Lady Elizabeth
272 Sir Henry Benefield eadem Lady Elizabeth to Woodstock. 273 L. Elizabeth in
great fear. eadem Tanquam ouis eadem Sir Henry Benefield presumptuous, and
uncivil. 274 The Spaniards against murdering of Lady Elizabeth. 275 L.
Elizabeth delivered out of prison eadem God delivers L. Elizab. 276 Elizabeth
prisoner ead. Gardener dies 278 Queen Mary dies ead. Popish prelates die
thick about the death of queen Mary 280 John Whiteman, a notable martyr 281 A
conference for matters of religion 282 Three propositions to dispute of eadem
The Papists fly from the agreement

