THE Mutable and wavering estate of France, from the year of our Lord 1460,
until the year 1595.

The great Battles of the French Nation, as well abroad with their foreign
enemies, as at home among themselves, in their civil and intestine wars:

With an ample declaration of the seditious and treacherous practices of that
viperous brood of Hispaniolized Leaguers.

Collected out of sundry, both Latin, Italian, and French Historiographers.

LONDON Printed by Thomas Creed. 1597.

To the right worshipful Master Julius Caesar Esquire, Doctor of the Civil
Law, master of the Requests, and of Saint Katherins, and chief Judge of her
highness Court of the Admiraltie, etc. a namelesse well-willer, wishes all
courses of happiness that can be named.
SIr, this Collected History, of the inconstant and mutable estate of France,
from the year 1460. until the year 1595. describing the great battails of
the French Nation, as well abroad with foreign enemies, as at home among
themselves, in their civil and intestine wars: also an ample declaration of
the seditious and treacherous practices of that viperous brood of Hispaniolized
Leaguers, during their bloody mutinies and attempts from time to time, with
whatsoever else so serious a discourse can or may afford, I offer to your
worshipful and most kind patronizing. Your ever known affable inclination to
study, and works of worth, makes me no way mistrustfull of gentle acceptance:
wherefore, in one balance poysing the Book, and in the other whatsoever
remaynes in me, always most ready at your worships service, I cease from
further troubling you with lines urging no delight, desiring, that as your
virtues are numberless, so your joys both in this world, and that to come,
may likewise be endless.

Though namelesse, yet always by your worship to be commanded.

To the Reader.
AS in a brief Chronicle, or short compiled History (gentle Reader) even so
in this work shall thou behold, the slipperie and uncertain estate of a
mighty Kingdom, of France, our near neighbor, whose wars, strifes, and
most troublesome contentions, as well at home in her own bosom, ^s abroad
with foreign and hostile enemies, during the space of these many years, from
1460, until 1595. the accidents of all which t^m^, this present volume do^th
truly acquaint thee withal: for out of sundry, both Latin, Italian, and
French Hist^riographers, has (...) been carefully collected, and being (for
thy sake) attired now in an English habit, familiarly tells thee that Monarchies
miseries, which when thou have advisedly considered on, and therewith compared
thy own Countries continual blessedness, I doubt not, but as in sorrowing
for the one, so thou will heartily pray for the other, that the afflictions of
France, may be Englands looking Glass, and their neglect of peace, our
continual labor and study how to preserve it.

Fare ye well.
THE MVTABILITIE of France.
CHAP. I.
Lewis son to Charles the seventh, King of France, is driven out of his
fathers Kingdom. He flies to Philip Duke of Burgundy. Returns. After his
fathers decease is made King. He falls out with Charles Duke of Burgundy. Is
suddenly stricken with a sore disease, and dies miserably.

AS the wavering and interchaungeable course, whereto every thing whatsoever is
continually subject, has been always heretofore daily observed, in the most
ancient, and renowned Monarchies that ever were. So has it appeared in these
latter days, Kingdoms and states full of change and mutabilitie in this age.
and that in a more lively manner, in the strange and wonderful alterations of
our neighbor countries: whose peace and prosperous estate, as it was the common
object of every man's eye: so are their unfortunate wars, and woeful
miseries, the usual subject of all men's speech, and nothing is more lystened
after, then to what end matters of so great weight and importance are
likeliest to tend. The most noble and renowned kingdom of France, which for so
many years flowed with milk and honey, and for the temperatenesse of the
air, the fertility of the soil, the civility of the Commons, the loyalty
of the Nobility, the dignity and magnificence of the Prince, was accounted
the paragon of all Nations, has especially tasted of this vicissitude, and
change: which so long as it was at peace with it self, and not afflicted with
any civil discention, the subject honoring the King with all dutiful
obedience, and the King tendering the welfare of the subject with a hearty and
loving affection, and both concurring in one for the advancement of the
Commonwealth, flourished in most beautiful manner, and appeared very pleasing
to the eye of all Nations round about: but after that it once began to nourish
turbulent spirits, and to harbor strange and unnatural humors, the Prince
following the dangerous proiects of young and corrupt counselors, who rather
sought their own private gain, then the public profit and utility of the
state, and the people being easily drawn by the persuasions of their
Governors to embrace in a manner any novelty that was propounded: then began
the commonwealth to be entangled in many dangerous mischiefs, and to be
encombred with sundry cares, wherewith for this long time it has been
exceedingly vexed, and tormented. And albeit there has often bin some
mitigation of pain for a while: and that by the great wisdom and skill of
such as sat at the stearne, and had the managing of the public affairs, the
ship, which was well near overwhelmed with boisterous waves, was safely
preserved from the wrack: yet, as though there were a fatal destiny, which
could not be avoided, it presently again fell upon the shelues, and plunged it
self a fresh into a vast Ocean of unspeakable miseries, wherein it has
continued floting up and down for these many years, and at this day is come
to that desperate pass, that although it be neither split upon the sands, nor
swallowed up of the fearful billows, yet does it serve as a perfect glass,
to view the unstable estate of these earthly things: and for an assured proof
of the variable change, and continual vicissitude in the most flowring
kingdoms and commonwealths. Which albeit it does evidently appear unto the
eye of every beholder, yet will it be far better discerned, if we consider
the reigns of sundry French Kings, in whose times there has fallen out most
strange and admirable accidents, themselves being especial occasions to prove
a mutual and an alternatiue course, in all things whatsoever.

Lewis the 11. K. of France, rebelled in his youth against his father
Lewis the eleventh of that name, King of France, and son unto Charles the
seventh, was in his youth (as Philip de Comins reports) allured by the
crafty persuasions of sundry seditious heads, to become chief of a
rebellious faction, and to bear Arms against his father, to his unspeakable
grief, and the imminent peril of the whole land: Philip Duke of Burgundy,
who at that present was a very great and mighty potentate, was most honorably
entertained, and furnished with all things necessary for himself and his
retinue: where he remained for a long time, notwithstanding, the duke was very
often and earnestly solicited to the contrary by the king his father. At the
last all the stormy tempests being blown over, and he upon the decease of his
father being called home to receive the Diadem and crown of France, Lewis the
11. K. of France.
he departed from the Court of Burgundy, where he had lived a stranger, and
under the co^trolment of others, toward his new kingdom, and natural
Country, which he found very peaceable, and flourishing in all wealth and
prosperity: where he was no sooner quietly established, but that remembering
some old injuries, Lewis the 11. reiec^e^h his fa^hers old counselors.
and disliking many of his fathers most faithful and trusty counselors) he
removed sundry out of their rowmes and offices, and imprisoned others, electing
new into their places, to the great grief of diverse of his best affected
subjects, and the exceeding coffeehouse of most of his chiefest Nobility:
whereupon ensued marvelous trouble to the common wealth, and unspeakable care
and vexation of mind to himself. The Duke of Britain, and sundry other of
the nobility rise against the King.
For the Duke of Brytaine, the Duke of Berry, the Duke of Nemours, the earl of
Saint Paul, the earl of Arminake, Beauleu, Albret, and many other great
Lords and states, being highly displeased with the King, and with his
government, banded together against him, and calling to their aid Count
Charolois, son and heir to Philip Duke of Burgundy, raised a mighty and
puyssaunt army, wherewith they approached Paris, and held besieged the chiefest
City of the land.

The King understanding the danger wherein the town stood, The K. marches
toward Paris.
and the resolution of his enemies, hasted by all possible means to put
himself within Paris, the safekeeping whereof would be most auayleable for
the advancement of his other affairs. Wherefore having gathered a strong
power, marched forwards on his intended voyage, not purposing to hazard his
fortune upon any advantage that should be offered, but only to defend
himself, and to amuse his enemies, until the time might minister some better
means to accomplish his desires: notwithstanding, The k forced to forsake the
field.
through the rash headiness of the Lieutenant of Normandy called Le Bressy,
who had the leading of the auauntgarde, the King was constrained to fight, and
to adventure to open his passage by force of arms. But being valiantly
resisted by his enemies, after a terrible and bloody fight, he was forced to
forsake the field, and to retire toward Corbeile, leaving the entyre glory of
that victory, to Count Charolois, and his associates.

As this good fortune puffed up the haughty mind of the Conqueror, making
him proud, disdainful, and highly conceyted of his own valor, which in the
end bred his own confusion and overthrow: The King reconcileth his subjects,
and makes peace with Count Charolois.
so did it teach the conquered to pull down his spirits, and with all
circumspect diligence and care, to provide for his future safety, in the most
politic manner that he might: and having (though with much adoo) made peace
with Count Charolois, an enemy that he greatly feared, and reconciled his
discontented Nobles, who were a long time as pricks in his eyes, and thorns
in his sides, and withal concluded a league with Edward the fourth King of
England, at Pikquennie, to his great advantage, there remained nothing that
might any way endaunger his estate, but only the greatness of Charles Duke
of Burgundy, who though he were at amity with the King, yet for that he had
a most turbulent spirit, and of all other could least abide to continue for
any long time together in peace, the King thought he had just occasion to
suspect him, Charles D. of Burgundy slain at Nancy.
and therefore howsoever in outward show he made much of him, yet in heart
he wished for nothing more then his confusion and overthrow: which appeared
most apparently by his secret practices against the Duke, and then could no
longer be hid, when as he heard of his discomfiture at the battle of
Nancy, where the said Duke was slain, his army put to flight, and the glory
of that noble house of Burgundy, which had flourished for the space of an
hundred and twenty years, in all pomp and magnificence, was utterly defaced
and obscured. For presently upon the news, the King was so exceeding joyful,
that he did not in a manner regard how richly and bountifully he rewarded the
Messengers of so glad and joyful tidings. Now began he to study for
nothing so much as how to dismember this poor afflicted Dukedom, and by all
means possible to tear and rent it in pieces.

K. Lewis of France gets a great part of Burgundy.
He first gained by liberal rewards, and fair promises, the chiefest of the
Burgonian Nobility, and likewise the Captains of sundry strong Towns, by
which means he gate Abbeuille, Peronne, Arras, Hesdin, Bollogne, Dyion, and
many other principal places, so that it seemed that the better part of the
Dukedom of Burgundy was now brought under the kings obedience, and annexed
to the rest of the Dominions of the Flower de Lis, By which means the
revenues of the Crown were greatly augmented, the land exceedingly
strengthened, the same and honor of the king wonderfully increased, all
things falling out in a manner as well as might be wished or desired.

But he had no sooner attained to so high a degree of happiness, but he was
presently crossed with new miseryes and afflictions, which in small
continuance of time did wholly bereave him of his former joys. For being at
dinner at a Village near unto Chynon, he was suddenly stricken with so
vehement a pain, The King stricken with a sudden disease.
that he lost his speech and senses, for the space of two days together, not
remembering nor knowing any that were nearest about him. And albeit, by reason
of those great means, which were used, his body was somewhat recovered, and
his mind much bettered, so that he seemed to come to some reasonable
understanding and knowledge: yet was he so weakened, and every part of him
so mightily decayed, that it was not possible to free him of his malady so
long as he lived. Besides, he grew so suspicious of all sorts, and so
jealous of his own son, and son in Law, that he was never at quiet, but
lived in such continual fear, least that honor and reverence which had been
for so long a time given unto him, should now be any ways diminished, or his
former authority impaired, that for the maintenance thereof he vexed
himself in most strange and pitiful sort. He would not at any time come
abroad, nor be seen but of some few, in whom he reposed a special
confidence.

His Court Gates were continually guarded, yea, his very Chamber Door so
surely watched, The misery of Lewis the 11.
as that it was impossible to keep a prisoner in more strayte manner, then he
kept his own self. And being a king, that in former times had taken his
delight in so many rich, beautiful, and flourishing Cittyes, and solaced
himself in so many stately Palaces, and pleasant Gardeyns, was now (to his
unspeakable torment) confined in a narrow rowme, sequestring himself from
all company, and every other thing, which might breed his delight, or
increase his comfort: and so continued in this miserable estate, always
languishing in fear, The death of Lewis the eleventh King of France.
until his death, which was in the year 1483. and having reigned two and
twenty years, left behind him a son, who succeeded in the kingdom, in
whose days fell out many strange and admirable occurrences, as shall appear
in the Chapter following.

CHAP. II.
Charles the eight inuadeth Italy, and conquereth Naples. Alphonsus and
Ferdinando fly into Cicilia: the Venetians and other Princes leuying a great
power, drive the French out of Italy. The battle of Tarro. The French king
dies suddenly.

ALbeit that Lewis the eleventh not long before his death, Charles the eight
succeeded his father Lewis in the kingdom of France.
had oftentimes, and that very seriously, advised his son Charles, who was to
succeed him in the kingdom, to maintain peace and amity with all his
neighbors round about, and by no means to enter into wars with any
foreign Princes, before he were grown to ripe years, and that the Realm
which had endured so many calamities and miseries, wherewith it was greatly
impouerished, should be grown rich again, and better provided to resist any
violence that should be offered: yet could not the grave and strong persuasions
of so wise and well experienced a Prince, take such deep rooting in the heart
of this young King, but that through his own ambitious desire to make himself
great, and the manifold reasons alleged by sundry of his aduisants, partly
to flatter him in his own honor, but more especially to serve their own
turn, they were quickly plucked up again, and he fully resolved to enter
into a war, which of all other was thought most dangerous, and which wrought
as strange effects, as much variety, and as singular alterations and
chaunges, as any other whatsoever. All which to the end they may be the
better understood, it shall be very convenient to rippe up the matter from
the beginning, and in as few words as may be, to show the original of so
great trouble, as afterward ensued.

Charles the eight King of France pretending a title to the Kingdom of
Naples, as heir to Reynard Duke of Aniow, Lewis Sfortia D. of Millan,
persuades Charles the eight to conquer Naples.
was no sooner settled in his kingdom, but he was forthwith enduced by the
colorable persuasions of Lewis Sfortia, who had not long before usurped the
Dukedom of Millan, to put in his claim, and with might and main to assay to
get so noble, so rich and renowned a Diadem. Notwithstanding, for that it
was a matter of no small importance, it was thought good to have it thoroughly
debated in Council, and to hear the opinions of the wisest and the best
experienced in the land, who when they had with great maturitie of judgment
pondered every circumstance: as the danger the king was likely to thrust
himself into, the infinite treasure that must be expended: as also what a
multitude of valiant men's lives that would cost, before so glorious a victory
could be atchiued, and the difficulty that would be in keeping that being
once gotten: The Kings Council disswadeth the King from the conquest of Naples.
they wholly resolved that it was an enterprise in no wise to be attempted.
Notwithstanding, the king who was young, and desirous to eternise his name by
some memorable attempt, could in no wise be diuerted, being moved as it were by
some divine instinct, and encouraged by sundry remonstrances of two of his
principal favorites, called Vere and Brissonet, both which were but mean
politics, and of all other most ignorant in military affairs. These two were
daily solliciters of the king, Vere and Brissonet encite the king to enter Italy
who otherwise was but too willing of himself, to provide all necessaries for
his intended voyage, and to set forward with as much celeritie as possibly
might be.

The younger sort of the French Nobility, and such as had least experience,
were likewise exceeding desirous to enter Italy by force of Arms, and to show
their valor and noble courage to foreign Nations. Al things seemed to
concur for the furtherance of this happy attempt, save that which was most
necessary and that was, wise and well experienced Captains, and store of
silver and gold, which are accounted as the veins and sinews of the wars.
There were men enough, but such as were most fit were most unwilling: the
Kings Coffers were empty, and nothing could be borrowed but upon great
interest and good assurance. Thus the lets were many, and the means to effect
any thing with honor, very small: and in the end, if the success were such as
was desired, yet should there be nothing gotten, (as Lewis the eleventh was
wont to say) but infinite trouble and imminent peril, and that with the
effusion of much French blood.

The King resolves to go to Naples contrary to the opinion of his council.
The King resolving to pass into Italy notwithstanding whatsoever could be
alleged to the contrary, made a league with Ferdinando King of Spain, with
Maximilian king of the Romans, and with Phillip Archduke of Austria, and Duke
of Flanders, as also with the King of England, least being occupied in his
wars abroad, he might happen to be molested at home by some foreign
enemy: and deferring his journey until the spring following, which should be
in the year 1493. in the mean while commanded that all things should be in a
readiness, which were requisite for the maintenance of his Army. All men of
understanding wondered at this strange resolution of the King, and the best
affected toward the Crown of France did maruailously fear the sequel of so
dangerous a journey.

The more to encourage the King, and to stir him up to prosecute his intended
voyage, The D. of Millan comes to Ast to the French King.
Lewis Sfortia, who usurped the Dukedom of Millan (as is already said) and
had been the first motioner of this war, did not only promise unto the King
all the aid and furtherance that might be, by his ambassadors, but also came
himself with the Duchess his wife, very nobly accompanied unto the King,
being at Ast: where, after some debating of the matter, and clearing of sundry
doubts, the king resolved to pass forward, and so came to Pauia, without any
let or interruption: from thence he went toward Sarzana, being a very strong
Castle, and belonging to the Florentines, which in the end was taken and kept
by the French. The French Kings prosperous success in Italy
The Citizens of Florence being not a little amazed at the Kings prosperous
success, thought it best to offer him all the favor and kindness that might
be, humbly desiring him to come and repose himself in their City, and to
refresh his Army in the rest of their territories, as Pisa, Lygournia,
Petrasancta, and Librafacta. Thus had the French gotten the whole state of the
Florentines into their possession: this bred a maruailous change in Italy, and
sundry Cities being weary of their governors, rebelled and chose them new
Lords. The Florentines r^bell against Peter de Medices their D. who in great
misery fled to Venice.
The Florentines themselves considering that the French were grown strong,
became their vassailes, and conspiring against their Duke, called Peter de
Medices, drove him out of the City, and took whatsoever he had, and reserved
it for their own uses. The poor distressed Duke fled to Venice, in very
miserable estate, where he had much adoo before he could be received. Thus was
the house of the Medices ouerthrown, which had flourished in great wealth,
power, and authority, for the space of 60. years: the King departing from
Florence came to Sennes, and so to Viterbium, and from thence to the Castle of
Brachana.

Although that Alphonsus King of Naples, Alphonsus King of Naples provides to
withstand the French.
was at the first but little moved with the coming of the French, yet to
prevent the worst, he had provided two great and puissant armies: that by sea
was lead by his brother Frederik: and the other by land, by his son
Ferdinando, with whom were these famous and renowned Captains, Virgilius
Vrsinus, Petilian, and the Lord of Treuoule. Ferdidinando was gotten into Rome,
and hoped to keep the City against the French King, but the Pope being
willing to follow the good fortune of the Conqueror, suffered him to enter:
The Pope yields to to the French.
whereupon Ferdinando was forced to fly away in the night, and with all
possible speed to retire toward Naples.

His father Alphonsus being wonderfully terrified with this heavy news, and
remembering the manifold injuries offered to the Neapolitans, both by his father
and himself, though he had been a very valiant, courageous, Alphonso
yields his Kingdom to his son, and flies into Cicilia.
and hardy Prince, yet he thought it best to yield to the time, and giving
over the kingdom into his sons hand, with a heavy heart and mournful
cheer, sailed into Cicilia, with the Queen his mother in law, who was
daughter to Ferdinando king of Castile. Before his departure he was continually
tormented with sundry imaginations, often crying out that the King of France
was coming, and that the very houses, trees, and stones in the streets were
all become French: The great fear of Alphonsus.
and so with a passionate mind forsook Naples: where by the way we may
observe one thing, which Phillip de Comins notes as a strange accident, and
that is, that in less then two years space there were five kings of Naples,
which were Ferdinando the father of Alphonsus, Alphonsus, Ferdinando his son,
Five Kings of Naples in less than two years.
Charles the eight, king of France, and Frederik the brother of the said
Alphonsus.

The young King Ferdinando made great preparation to withstand the French, and
having gathered a strong power, encamped at Saint Germin, in the frontiers of
his territories, resolving to stop the passage of the enemy at that place.
Notwithstanding, the French king marched on with great courage, taking Castles
and towns without any resistance: all things seemed to yield voluntarily unto
him, and to bend at his beck: yea, Ferdinando himself durst not abide him,
though he were strongly fortified and encamped in a place of great advantage:
For as soon as he understood by his espyals, that the French were within two
leagues, Ferdinando K. of Naples, flies from the French.
he fled in very disordered manner toward Capua, suffering the French King to
enter at his pleasure, and from thence hasted to Naples, fearing a revolt among
the Citizens, which indeed immediately ensued upon the approach of the French:
who coming to Capua, entered presently upon composition, and before they came
at Naples by three leagues, the Citizens sent Ambassadors to treat with them,
Naples yields to the French king.
being willing to receive the^ upon condition, that they should maintain their
ancient privileges which so terrified Ferdinando, that he presently took sea,
and fled to his father in Cicilia. Then was there a general revolt, and every
one made court to the French king, who was received with great acclamation and
applause of the people: yea, those who were in particular most bounden unto the
house of Arragon, and such as had been their especial favorites, were now in
an instant wholly turned French. All Calabria, Powilla, Laurentia, Turpia,
Encrenes, Tarentum, and Monopolis, set up the Flower delis. Thus did this young
King run as it were through Italy, without any stop or hinderance, The speedy
conquest of the French King.
never staying about the winning of any one town the space of one day,
insomuch as from his departure from Ast, until his entry into Naples, there
were but four months and ninteene days: so that he might say in regard of
his speedy conquest, as Caesar sometime said, Veni, Vidi, Vici.

The French King being entered into Naples, disposed of all things at his
pleasure, and seemed now to have attained to his wished end: there was
nothing to cross him, Charles of France crowned king of Naples.
or to stand in his way, but like a conqueror he commanded and it was obeyed:
whereupon he would needs be crowned King. Which being performed, and the French
not standing any longer in fear of any enemy, they began to be idle and
careless, and gave themselves wholly to riot and excess: The pride of the
French.
They seemed to contemn all others, and scorned the Italians as men of no
reckoning, supposing that now they were able to pass through the whole world,
and that no man durst abide them. So proud, arrogant, and disdainefull were
they become, by reason of this so prosperous and happy success.

When as the King of France was grown to this greatness, that he had in a
manner all the estate of Italy at his command: that he had gotten the
Kingdom of Naples, and was quietly possessed thereof, and thereby was climed
to the top of fortunes wheel, so that it seemed that nothing was wanting, to
the full accomplishment of all his desired happiness: when as indeed he was
most secure and careless, and supposed that he stood without the reach of any
misfortune: Sundry great princes conspire against the French.
presently the wheel began to turn about, and sundry secret practices were
set abroch, to cut short the French proceedings: and in the end a league was
concluded, which darkened the fair shining of the Flower delis, to prove the
variable and uncertain estate of all things whatsoever.

Although Alphonsus were driven out of Italy, yet did he continually fight
against the French, by procuring as many enemies against him as possibly he
might: he daily laid before the eyes of other Princes, how perilous a matter
it would be for them to suffer the King of France to grow so great, and sought
especially to stir the Venetians against him. The Turk on the other side
threatened them at the request of the Pope, if they would not declare
themselves open enemies unto him. The King of Spain began to fear the loss
of Sardinia, and Cicilia, and the Emperor grew jealous of his Empire. All these
Princes sent their Ambassadors to Venice, and in the end banded, with one
consent against the French. who being advertised hereof, began to bethink
them, The King o^ France hastes to get out of Italy.
how they might return into France. And resolving presently to retire from
Naples, set all things in as good order as might be, and so dislodged,
purposing to return by the same way that they came. Sundry Cities and good
Towns understanding of the league, began to revolt forthwith, and to pull
down the Arms of France, which not long before they had so hastily set up,
Sundry cities rebel against the French.
and to place those of Aragon in their stead. Thus begin fortune to frown, and
to look an other way, and to abandon the French on all sides.

Paris, as he was before to conquer Naples, marched toward Rome with some nine
hundred men at arms, and eight or nine thousand footmen, Switzers, Almaines,
and French. The Pope flies from Rome.
But the Pope hearing of his coming fled to Padoua, so that he entered without
any resistance: but he staid not long there, for intending to make all the have
that might be, he removed to Sennei, and from thence to Pisa, still passing
forward, though very slowly, by reason of the evil ways. By this time had the
Venetians gathered a strong power, wherewith they meant to stop his passage. And
having appointed Francis Gonzaga Marquis of Mantoua, for their general, The
Marquis of Mantoua, general of the Venetian forces.
with whom they joined two Venetian Lieutenants, or Prouiditori, Melchior
Creuisano, and Luke Pisano, commanded them to put themselves between home and
the French, and if it were possible to stay the King, and force him to pay the
Almendate for the harm he had done to the Italian Nation.

Gonzaga being a lusty young Gentleman, and desirous to win renown, by some
memorable act, having intelligence by his espials, that the French marched
toward Foro Nouo, sent his light horsemen before under the conduct of Nicholas
Annonio, a Sclauonian, to stay the enemy with light skirmishes, until he
might overtake them with the strength of his army: who readily accomplishing
the commandment of the general, hasted forward with great speed, and taking
the French auantgard at advantage, slew many of them, and forced the rest to
retire to their strength. The king ouertaking his vantgard, encamped at Foro
Nouo, hard by the river of Terro. The marquis was encamped on the other side,
right in the way that the French men should pass: so that the King seeing
there was no remedy, but that he must needs fight, The battle of Terro.
and open the way by the dint of the sword, disposed of his army in as warlike
manner as he could, and resolved as that day to try the uttermost of his
fortune. And being mounted upon a brave and lusty courser environed with 7.
young ge^tlemen of approved fidelity and prowes, armed in all points like unto
himself, rode about his ranks to encourage his soldiers, who with their
cheerful countenances seemed to assure him of the victory, and with the hazard
of their own lives, to defend him from the violence of his enemies. The
Bastard of Burbon in whom he reposed a special trust, The order of the French
army.
with Robinet Framesell, the valiant conductour of the Duke of Orleance his
men at Arms, environed him with their companyes of horsemen on both sides. The
Rerewarde was led by Foix, a Noble man of Guien, and Segnieur de Trimouille,
and with them was there a great troop of men at Arms. the Switzers and
Almaines, in whom consisted the strength of the battle, guarded the Ordinance,
which being drawn with equal pace close to the battaillon of the footmen, was
placed right in the front of the enemy. The Mareschall Guy, and Tribulzi a man
of great fame and experience in the wars, marched before with certain light
horsemen, to lead the way to them which followed.

The Marquis seeing the French come down from Foro Nouo, in array of battle,
The order of the Venetian army.
quickly arraunged his men, and dividing them into nine battaillons, as well
for the mutual succor each of other, as thereby to assail the French on all
sides, and intended to abide the coming of his enemies. In the first battle
was Petro Dodo, a Venetian, with six hundred Greek horsemen, and almost as
many Archers on horseback, who were appointed to compass the hills, and to
assail the enemy on the back. The second battle was led by the earl
Giazza, consisting of six hundred men of Arms, and three thousand Almaine and
Italian footmen. The General himself with his Uncle Radulph and Ranucio
Farnesi, with five hundred men of Arms, and as many Archers, with four
thousand footmen, took upon him to encounter with the middle battle,
wherein was the Kings own person. The fourth battle was assigned to
Fortebraccio de Montoni, who was commanded to charge the Rerewarde. Three
other battles were appointed to Anthony de Feltri, Annibal Bentiuoli, and
Galeazzo Palauicini, which should serve to aid and succor where there was
most need. The eight and ninth battle were likewise provided against all
uncertain chances which might ensue.

Each army being thus ready raunged, awayted the signal of the battle:
which was no sooner given, The hardy encounter of both armies.
but they ran together with great fury, the trumpets sounded, the drums
stroke up, the great Ordinance thundered from either side, and all sorts fought
very courageously. But the Estradiots, who had been repelled by the French
men of arms, espying the Kings baggage (which by counsel of Triuoltio had
been objected to the enemy, to the end that he being busy about the
spoil, a more ready and easy passage might be opened for the King) flung
out of their ranks, and fell to ryfling in most greedy manner. Which thing
(in the opinion of all men) turned to the great good of the French: who
otherwise had been in maruaylous danger to have been overthrown at that
encounter. The Marquis fought valiauntly, and pearcing through the midst of
the horsemen hard to the Ordinance, overthrew a great band of Gascons, which
were appointed to guard them. The French being encouraged with the presence of
their king, laid about them like men, and the Switzers being promised double
pay, like Tygres, tare and rent in pieces as many as fell into their hands.
And had not the earl of Petilia at that present escaped from the French, and
by coming to the flying Italians, with all the forceable reasons he could,
persuaded them to renew the fight, the whole power of the Venetians had been
utterly overthrown. Both armies being well wearied with a long and bloody
fight, The French K. loses all his baggage.
they sounded the retreat. The French had lost all their baggage, and the
riches of Naples, which was going into France, was taken by the Italian
soldiers: a great number of their brauest men were slain, and amongst others
the bastard of Burbon, a man of surpassing great valor. The King himself
having likewise lost all his plate and household stuff, was in extreme peril,
and had undoubtedly bin taken, had it not been for the excellency of his
horse, which was a cole black, with one eye. And although he gate the victory,
and remained master of the field, yet were his losses very great, and far
surmounted the gain he had gotten in that long and weary voyage. He was
constrained to lie the night following in a simple cottage, The distress of
the French King.
and all his great Lords were lodged round about him in the open fields, who
had nothing to eat, nor any change of apparel to put on: So that they
resolved to dislodge in the dead of the night, and with all speed to recover
Ast. The French run out of Italy.
The Army was sore afrighted and every man coueted to be in the Vauntgard,
supposing thereby to be furthest from danger, and nearest unto places of
safest retreat. And thus marching forward in tumultuous manner, with much ado
got to Ast, where they stayed not long, but went to Thurin, and so to Lions.

France, but all things went backewarde in Italy, The great alteration in
Italy.
all places revolted, and well was he that could first tear in pieces the
Flower de Lis. Whosoever had been friends before, now became enemies, and
nothing was so hastily gained, but it was as speedily lost. And the French
Nation, who not long before had been the terror of the Turk, the Pope, the
Emperor, the Venetians, and in a manner of al Europe, were now in nothing more
famous, then in their dishonorable flight out of Italy, leaving unto
posterity a notable example of the change and mutabilitie of these worldly
affairs. And as it usually falls out, if fortune begin once to change, it
never cease until it have thrown a man groueling to the ground: so it fared
with this king, who began to decline a pace, and to be crossed every day more
then other. His young son the Duke of Orleance, began to be desperately sick,
and so continued languishing, until at last he died, wherewith his father was
immesurably grieved, The death of the young D. of Orleanes.
and from that time forwards nothing thriued that he took in hand: his friends
forsook him, and his enemies daily increased, and almost all matters stood in
very bad terms. Evil news was brought from every corner, and the worst of
all other was this: death suddenly sends forth a messenger to summon him to
appear before him, and to give an account of his stewardship. For as he was in
a Gallerie at Ambois, looking upon such as played at tennis, The sudden death
of Charles the 8. King of France.
he was suddenly stricken with an Apoplexy, and lived not past some five or
six hours after, but yielded up the ghost, 1497. having reigned fourteen
years. And albeit he were a very mighty Prince, and had exceeding many goodly
Castles, beautiful houses, and statly Palaces, and had conquered so many
earledomes, Marquesats, Dukedoms, and Kingdoms: Italy to stoop, and bend at
his beck, had triumphed at Naples, and achieved so glorious a conquest, and
that so easily, yea, and almost without drawing of his sword, so that he was
now become one of the most redoubted worthies of the world, yet did he end
his days on the sudden, and died in a very miserable and beggarly place:
which shows the lamentable estate of all sorts, and that the most mighty
Potentates, are subject to a marvelous change and alteration.

CHAP. III.
Lewis the 12. King of France, enters Italy, conquereth Millan, takes the
Duke thereof prisoner. He joins with the Spanish King to conquer Naples, who
expels him, and keeps the kingdom for himself. The battle of Rauenna.
The Switzers drive the French out of Millan. The death of King Lewis.

AFter the decease of Charles, Lewis Duke of Orleance, Lewis D. of Orleance. K.
of France.
and next heir to the Crown, succeeded in the kingdom, who entitled
himself king of Jerusalem, Naples, and Cicil, and Duke of Millan, intending to
conquer the Dukedom, and for that purpose provided all things necessary, with
all the speed that might be. But by reason of the former kings expenses, he
found small store of treasure: so that for to furnish himself, he set to sale
all the offices of France, except such as were judicial: a dangerous
practice, and none of the least occasion, of that great confusion, which
afterward ensued.

Lewis D. of Millan forsakes the French king
Lewis Duke of Millan feared the Venetians more then the French, and therefore
joined with the Florentines, to recover Pisa. But he erred exceedingly herein:
for Lewis of France having made peace with other Princes, bent all his forces
against Millan, with whom also the Venetians joined in the end. Whereat the
Duke was maruellously astonished; and began to fortify his own territories,
so strongly as he might. But he putting those in trust, who were in most
favor, and not such as had the greatest virtue, and fidelity, (too common a
fault among great estates) lost one thing after another, and in a short space
all things going backewarde, Millan yields to the French.
he was forced to forsake Millan, and fly to the castle, by reason the City
was yielded to the French. Which joyful news being brought unto the King,
who was then at Lions, he determined forthwith to pass in person over the
Alps: The French K. goes to Millan.
and being in Italy, compounded with all the chief estates there, and did in a
manner whatsoever he listed.

The King having remained a while in the Duchy of Millan, and taken such order
for his affairs there, as he liked best, returned home, leaving the Cardinal
of Ambois for his Lieutenant in those quarters. But he was no sooner departed,
but the City began to revolt, and took part with their old Duke. Howbeit
the Switzers, in whom he reposed especial confidence, and by whose valor, The
D. of Millan taken prisoner.
he verily persuaded himself, he should be able to maintain his quarrel
against his enemies, betrayed him to the French, who sent him prisoner to the
King at Lions. Then there was a marvelous concourse of people assembled to
behold this captive Duke, who not long before in fame, dignity, and renown,
had been equal to any Prince in Italy: The King would not vouchsafe to see
him, but sent him to prison unto the Castle of Locces, The miserable end of
the D. of Millan.
where he continued for the space of ten years, and there in very
miserable manner ended his life. And thus was this Noble Duke an other argument
of the mutabilitie and change of froward fortune.

Now was the French King wholly set upon the conquest of Naples: and least he
might any ways be hindered, he thought it convenient to procure Ferdinando
King of Spain to join with him, The French and Spanish Kings join for the
conquest of Naples.
who was easily drawn thereto: and the better to countenance the matter,
pretended a title whereby he would prove himself rightful heir to the
Neapolitan Crown. Ferdinando King of Naples, being wonderfully dismayed
heerewith, yielded upon composition to the King of France, and so his
Kingdom was divided between the French and Spanish Kings: which two Princes
could not long agree, but falling at dissension between themselves, there were
many sharp bickerings, the French still going by the woorst. Monsieur de La
Palissa, and diverse others were taken prisoners, and Monsieur de Nemours was
slain by the Spaniardes, under the leading of the great Consaluo, who, albeit
there were a treaty of peace, and an abstinence of war concluded, yet would
he take no knowledge thereof, but proceeded still in the wars, The
Spaniniards drive the French out of Naples.
and so brought the whole Kingdom of Naples under the Spanish yoke.

Lewis of France hearing of all this, was not a little grieved in his mind:
but there was no remedy but patience, nor any ways to do any good, but by
force. Whereupon he sent new armies into Italy, with a purpose to repair his
former losses: but a composition was made, and all the war began to be
diuerted toward the Venetians, who were brought to marvelous great
extremities. But by reason the Pope began to grow jealous of his own, he
forsook the French, and joined with the Venetians, taking them into his
protection. The Pope takes the Venetians into his protection
Whereupon the French king thought it best, to desist from any further
proceedings: and so entering league with the Pope, returned hom. Notwithstanding
he quickly smelling out the fetches of his late reconciled enemy, joined
again with the Emperor, and sends Monsieur de Chaumont into Italy, with a
strong power: who with the Prince of He^ault overthrew the Venetians, and took
Legnague, Mountsilice, and many other places. Not long after, by reason of the
death of Monsieur de Chaumont, Gaston de Foix, a valiant young Gentleman, was
sent into Italy to be General over the French forces: who having
intelligence that the power of the Spaniardes was coming down to succor
Mark Anthony de Colonna, whom he besieged in Rauenna, fearing the irruption
of those within the Town, brake up his siege, and withdrewe his forces three
miles of, toward the army of his enemies, with whom for that he intended to
fight, he marshalled the troops as follows.

The vauntgard wherein was seven hundred men of arms, The battle of Rauenna.
besides the Almaines footmen, was led by the Duke of Ferrara, and the
Seneschal of Normandy. Near unto them were arraunged the footmen of the middle
battle, Monsieur de Allegres. The Rereward was composed of five hundred
Italians, over whom commanded Frederick de Bosuolo. This battailon was flanked
both by the archers on horseback, and by the light horsemen, being in all three
thousand. Behind al these esquadrons, which were so placed as they rather
resembled a croysant, or new Moon then any thing else, were six hundred men of
arms, led by Seigneur de la Palaice, and Cardinal Sanauerino. Monsieur de
Foix had made choice of no peculiar charge for himself, but taking out some
durtie of the valiantest Gentlemen, purposed to have an eye to every place,
and to be ready to help, where most need was. In this warlike manner he
marched toward his enemies, whom he found strongly encamped by a Rivers side:
who being certified of the approach of the French, had thus raunged their
battles. In the vauntgarde were eight hundred men of Arms, and six thousand
footmen, under the leading of Fabricio de Colonno, high Constable of Naples. In
the middle battle were six hundred men of Arms, flanked with four thousand
footmen, whose principal leader was the Viceroy himself, and with him were
the Marquis of Palude, and the Popes Legate, called John de Me^^^. The
Rerewarde was conducted by Caruaiall a Spaniard. In which battle were four
hundred men of Arms, and four thousand footmen. The light horsemen commanded
by Daualos the Marquis of Pescara (a very young man, but of passing great hope)
who guarded the right side of the footmen. Peter de Nauarro the General of the
Spanish footmen would not tie himself to any certain place, but determined to
help where most need required. And in this order they expected the coming of
their enemies, who by this time were advanced very near, and the skirmish
began to grow hot on both sides. The fight continued long, and many were
slain: but the Spanish troops being maruaylously torn, The Spaniards
overthrown at Rauenna by the French.
and scattered with the French Ordinance, could not endure before the men of
Arms of France. For Fabritio de Colonna being taken by the Soldiers of the
Duke of Ferrara, the Viceroy, and Caruaiall never stayed any further trial of
their fortune, but fled amain, leaving the Marquis of Pescara, and the Marquis
of Palude, at the mercy of their enemies. Although the horsemen were
overthrown, yet the Spanish footmen fought valiauntly, and with incredible
fierceness maintained the battle for a long time: but being wearied in the
end, and not able any longer to endure, they began to give ground, Nauarro
taken prisoner.
yet so, as they rather seemed to retire, then to be driven out of the field:
which Nauarro beholding, rather desired to die, then live. and therefore not
departing out of the battle, he suffered himself to be taken prisoner,

Gaston de Foix general of the French army slain, after he had gotten the
victory.
But when as Monsieur de Foix could not abide to see Spanish footmen to go away
in such souldier-like manner, with their ranks unbroken, he in a great fury
charged them in the tail, with a troop of horsemen: but being overthrown
from his horse, was presently slain with a Pike, which was thrust into his
side, and so died most unfortunately, when he had gotten a most glorious and
honorable victory. The Lord Lautrech (his cousin German) being hurt with
above twenty wounds, lay besides him almost dead, but being succored in
time, was afterward recovered. The number that was slain on both sides, were
well near ten thousand persons: the third part of which were French men,
whose loss was far the greater by reason of the death of Foix, with whom the
courage, strength, life and fierceness of that army was in a manner utterly
extinguished: howbeit they entered Rauenna, which they sacked and spoiled,
Rauenna sacked and spoiled.
and took sundry other Cities, raunging up and down at their own pleasure.

But presently they began to be afflicted with new crosses: for the Switzers
passing the Alps, and joining with the Venetians, The Switzers expel the
French out of Millan.
took Cremona and Bergamo, and approaching Millan, Triultio being without hope
to defend the City, secretly stole away into Piemont: and upon the news of
his departure, Parma, Placentia, Bologna, and almost all Romagna returned to
the Pope, and Geane likewise revolted from the French, choosing Fregosa, who
had been general of the Venecian army, for their Duke. Thus the French Kings
affairs began to be quailed in Italy: and by reason the king of England was
now ready to enter France, he was compelled to look to the defense of his
own country, The death of Lewis the twelfth king of France.
and to suffer the Switzers to take their pleasure in Millan. But the French
King reconciling himself with England, married the Kings sister, with whom he
lived not three months but died at Paris, 1514. after he had reigned
seauenteene years, and was buried at Saint Denis.

CHAP. IIII.
Francis the first, King of France, wins Millan from the Emperor. His great
virtues. he besieges Pauia, and is taken prisoner. He is sent into Spain. A
league made against the Emperor. The French King is delivered, and falls out
with the Emperor. He dies at Rambouillet.

LEwis the twelfth was no sooner deceased, Francis the first King of France.
but Francis Duke of Angolesme succeeded in the Kingdom, who continuing the
former quarrel for the Dukedom of Millan, and kingdom of Naples, left no
stone vnroled to bring his desires to pass: but forthwith there approached many
impediments, and sundry blocks were cast in his way, which maruailously
altered his course, and extremely crossed al his designements: for the
Emperor Maximilian growing aged, and being weary with the burden of the
Empire, sent Ambassadors to the Electors, and to the Pope, to desire them to
choose Charles of Austriche and king of Spain, for their Emperor: Maximilian
died: The King of France laboreth to be Emperor.
whereupon the French and Spanish kings became earnest competitors, and each
endeavored to win the Goal from other: The French King was put in some hope by
the fair promises of the marquess of Brandenburge, one of the electors:
howbeit, in the end Charles of Austriche was chosen, which spited Francis to
the heart. Charles K. of Spain chosen Emrour.
And now he daily picked quarrels at the Emperor, and at last fell flat out
with him: for being a Prince of great courage, wise, industrious, rich, and
ambitious, he in a sort disdained that the young king of Spain should be
preferred before him, and therefore he presently hired Switzers, who for money
became his mercenaries, and sent Monsieur de Lantrech to besiege Millan, which
was valiantly kept by Prospero Colonno. The rumor whereof being spread beyond
the Alps, The great commendation of Francis the first.
caused Antonio de Leua to fortify Pauia: so that now all Italy began to be
in an uproar, and the French kings coming was greatly feared: for that he was
a Prince universally furnished with all royal virtues, and fit to enterprise
great matters: And understanding that the Imperial power had not only
expelled the French men out of the Duchy of Millan, The great commendation of
Francis the first.
but were entered France, and by besieging of Marseiles in Prouence, seemed to
dare him within his own dominions, he gathered a strong power, and marched
toward his enemies with all speed: who hearing of his coming, brake up
their siege and hasted to Italy: whom the king pursued so fast, The King of
France takes Millan
that the emperials were no sooner entered into Millan, but that he was hard at
the gates: where he stayed not long, but that the City was yielded unto him,
the imperial forces forsaking it, and flying to Lody after a very tumultuous
and disordered sort.

Pauia, The K. besieges Pauia.
wherein was Antonio de Leua, with five thousand Lansquenets, five hundred
Spanish footmen, with two cornets of horsemen. The king encamped before the
town, and besieged it very straightly: the emperials being advertised
hereof, gathered all their forces together, and having an army wherein were
seven hundredth men of arms, and as many horsemen, a thousand Italian
horsemen, and above sixteen thousand footmen, Spaniardes and Almans: they
set forward from Lody with a full resolution to remove the siege or to
fight with the French, and hazard all upon a battle. The King was no sooner
certified hereof, but that sending for all his Captains and men of war, he
fully determined to continue his siege, and to expect the coming of his
enemy, whatsoever could be alleged to the contrary, often affirming that
he had rather dye then to stir one foot before he had taken the City.

The imperial Captains being driven into great necessity for want of money
and other necessaries, and having much adoo to pacify their soldiers, The
Emperials enuade the french Kings camp.
thought it best to use expedition, considering that it was impossible for them
to continue long, their men growing mutinous for want of pay: and thereuppon as
those that stood in very desperate estate, hasted to invade the French, who
prepared with great courage to meet them: they were exceedingly encouraged by
the presence of their King, who should be an eye witness of their valor and
prowess. The marquess of Pescara with three thousand Spanish footmen
assailed the French trenches, where he slew five hundredth men, and poisoned
three pieces of great ordinance.

This unexpected accident dismayed many of the French soldiers, and the
rather, for that the Admiral, who carried the chief sway in the Army next
unto the king, was hurt in the thigh with a shot, and was carried to
Placentia to be cured of his wounds.

Six hundred Grisons were called home to defend their own territories.
Much confusion began now to grow among the Kings Soldiers, and many of his
mercenaries or hired soldiers, departed before the battle, being called
home for the defense of their own Country: and the number which was least,
was far less then indeed it was reported unto the King* so that the
Emperialles spying their advantage, set forward, and with surpassing courage
invaded the Kings Camp in the dead of the night, having covered their armor
with whole shirts, the better to discern one another. Their army was divided
into four Battailons, the first consisting of six thousand Almains,
Spaniards, and Italians, was led by the marquess of Guasto, a valiant young
Gentleman, and of great towardness in the wars. The second consisting wholly
of Spaniards, was conducted by the Marquess of Pescara, who commanded as
principal in the army: in the third and fourth battles were the Dukes of
Burbon and Lanoy, who went as resolutely to the charge as any others.

The King being certified of their approach, and having ordered his troops in as
warlike manner as might be devised, courageously prepared himself for the
encounter: both armies were no sooner met, The great valor of the King.
but the fight grew very terrible on both sides, each party doing his best for
the glory of their nation, and for the obtaining of an entire victory. The
King like a valiant captain and noble soldier, fought courageously, and
forced the marquess of Pescara to give ground, whereas he being endangered to
loose all, sent to the Vizroy: who had the leading of the foremost battle, to
come to his succors, who understanding in what danger the marquess was,
furiously set on the Switzers, who that day answered not the kings expectation,
and breaking their array, wholly defeated them in a moment. Then appeared the
misery of the French, and the king himself was forthwith in imminent peril,
albeit he fought manfully, and was seconded with a valiant troop of French
Nobility, who did their uttermost for their own security and honor of their
country: yet having the marquess in his front, and Antonio de Leua, The King
of France taken prisoner.
who was now issued out of Paua with all his forces, on his back, after he had
been sore wearied and grievously wounded, both in the face and hand, and had
his horse killed under him, he was forced to yield to five common Soldiers
which knew him not: but shortly after the Viceroy passing by, the king called
unto him, and making himself known, was with great reverence received, as
Caesar's prisoner.

Thus was the French king, who not long before had been in so flourishing
estate, commanding not only over al France, but also a great part of Italy,
being so mighty, rich, and puissant, that he was dreaded of all his neighbor
princes, subjected to a maruailous change and alteration, The King of France
sent prisoner into Spain.
being made first a prisoner to common soldiers, and conuaied from one place
to another, until at length he came into Spain, having left all his army to
the mercy of their enemies, who slew of them well near to the number of
10000. and among them there perished twenty of the greatest of the French
Nobility, as Boniuet, Chauany, Monsieur de la palissa, Tremoile, Obigny, and
sundry others of especial account, The great slaughter of the french Nobility.
as Henry the king of Navarre, Renee the bastard of Sauoy, Duke Memorancy,
Francis of Burbon Earl of Saint Paul, Biron, Imbercourt, Floranges Colonel of
the Switzers, with a great number of especial account were taken prisoners.
The Duke of Alanson escaped this bloody conflict, and recovered France with a
mighty troop of men of arms, who served for messengers of this woeful news.

The emperials lost not past some 700. men, and among them no man of any
especial account, but only Ferdinando Castriota, the marquess of Saint
Angelo. The Spaniards were maruailously enriched with this victory, for never
had so few soldiers so great a booty. The gold, silver, and precious
moueables of the French Nobility, were that day divided among their enemies,
and every Spanish bisoneos seemed to walk in a world of wealth, brauing it
out in most superbious manner, with the spoils of the Flower de lis.

All Europe was mightily dismayed with the news of this victory, and all
estates began to grow jealous of the Emperials greatness. The Venetians of
all others thought themselves most nearly touched therewith, The Pope, the
Venetians and other potentates, make a league against the Emperor.
and therefore they offered to join with the Pope, and to hire a ten thousand
Switzers to defend Italy against the Emperials, hoping that the Lady Regent of
France, the Duke of Ferrara, and many other Princes would join with them
against their common enemy. In the mean time the King of France was (as is
already declared) transported into Spain, and sent up into the Castle of
Madrill. This was no doubt a bitter receipt, and a sharp corrosiue to this
magnanimous prince, who had not been used to be confined in so narrow a room:
but patience with hope was his best comfort, for the Emperor would not see
him, much less minister any matter of consolation in that his woeful
distress, neither yet did he seem to show any external signs of joy for so
glorious a victory: The moderation of Charles the fifth.
he prohibited bonefires, ringing of belles, and such like accustomed
solemnities, saying that it might be seemly to use outward reioycings for
victories against the Turks, Sarrazins, and other infidels, but not against
christian Princes.

The Emperors Council were long before they could well tell what to do with
this prisoner, they being distracted into diverse opinions: but in the end it
was fully concluded to make as great a gain of him as might be, and therefore
they earnestly pressed him to yield over all his claim and title, to Burgondy,
Millan, and Naples: besides, he was bound to pay a huge sum of money for his
ransom, The agreement between the Emperor and the french King.
and to condescend to sundry other things, and those so great, that no man of
judgment thought he would be so good as his word. Yet for assurance the King
was contented to marry the Lady Elynor the Emperors sister, and to grant that
his two sons, the Dolphin and the Duke of Orleance should be left in hostage for
the better performance of the conditions. Now was France brought to a low
ebb, and the ancient splendour and glory thereof mightily obscured: yea, that
renowned Kingdom, which had been always accounted the parragon of all
Europe, and had been a terror unto the Roman monarchy, sat as a desolate
widow that had lost her husband, in weeping, wailing, and great lamentation.
But shortly after this afflicted country began to be recomforted, and as it
were revived, after it had felt the pangs of death, for the king being once set
at liberty and gotten into France, solicited other Princes, as the Pope, the
king of England, the Venetians, and other states to join with him, and made a
strong league, and fell flat out with the emperor afresh, notwithstanding all
the promises which had been made. Then presently ensued new wars, and all
Europe was in a sort infected with this contagious humor. Fortune which had
so extremely crossed the French designements, began to be more favorable, and
to behold the king with a smiling countenance, for the Lord Lautrech being
sent into Italy, took Bosco, Genes, Alexandria, and Pauia from the emperor,
maruaylously aduauncing the French affairs.

The emperor being vexed at the heart with these news, complained grievously
of the king, offering him the Combat, The Emperor offers the combat to the
french King.
calling him forsworn and perjured prince; the King gave him the lie, and
affirmed that he would make it good upon his body, when and where he durst.
Thus did these mighty potentates fight a far off with their tongues, and
their armies in Italy, and other where sought to ruinate and overthrow each
other by all possible means. After many conflicts, wherein sometime the
emperials, and sometime the French as it were alternatiuely had the better,
there was a peace concluded for ten years: in which time the Emperor in
very freendly and loving manner, A peace between the Emperor and the French
King.
passed through France, to repress certain tumultuous outrages committed in
Flanders. This peace being expired, they fell again into new broils, but they
were soon ended: and now began France to be scourged with the English, who
having gotten Bulloigne, wasted their country round about. The French king
being very desirous to impale the English forces, The death of Francis the
first, king of France.
and to keep them from forraging after their woonted manner, raised certain
forts round about in the most convenient places: but whilst he was earnestly
busied herein, he suddenly fell sick and died 1546. at a place called
Rambouillet, having reigned 32. years, leaving his son to succeed him in
all his territories and dominions.

CHAP. V.
Henry the second makes war against the Emperor, and takes Metz and many
other towns. The Queen of Hungary inuadeth France. The great army of the
Emperor for the recovery of Metz, which was kept by the Duke of Guyse. The
Emperor raises his siege. Teroanneis besieged by the Emperials. The King
raised a great power to withstand the Emperor. The cruelty of the French in
Henault. The battle of Reuty. The King and the Emperor break up their
armies. Charles the fifth yields over his empire. Rome besieged and taken.
King Phillip of Spain besieges Saint Quintins, which he takes after he had
overthrown all the power of France. The original of the Huguenots in France.
Callis besieged and taken by the Guyse. Count Egmond overthrows Monsieur de
Terms the Captain of Callis. Phillip King of Spain marryeth the French Kings
daughter. At whose marriage the King of France is slain by Montgommery.

HEnry the second of that name, King of France, Henry the second King of France.
was not only heir of his fathers Kingdom, but also of all royal virtues,
and princely qualities. In the beginning of his reign he maintained the Scots
against the English, The king of France bends all his forces against the
Emperor.
he bent all his forces against the Emperor, who at that time made war
against the Princes of Germany, and having gathered a strong power, wherein
were 2500 french footmen, 7000. Lansquenetes, 1200. men of arms, besides 2000.
horsemen, and as many harquebuziers on horseback, under the leading of the Duke
of Aumaile, ordaining the admiral Annebaut his Vizgerent in France, Metz taken
by the french
commanded the Conestable to march before with the vauntgard, who advanced
toward Metz. The town was quickly yielded, upon such composition as pleased
the king, and so became annexed to the crown of France. From thence the king
went toward Strasbourg, where the French would gladly have entered, but the
Citizens would in no wise permit them: howbeit they offered what provision they
were able to spare, but that would hardly sati^fie: notwithstanding,
considering the City was very strong, and the people resolutely bent to
defend themselves, the King turned toward Hoguenan and VVisbourg, where the
Ambassadors of the imperial princes met with him, and desired him that he
would enter no further into Germany: with which message although the King was
nothing well pleased, yet he made a fair show, and seemed to take all things
well, and returned toward France.

The Queen of Hungary leuieth an army to invade France
The Queen of Hungary the Emperors sister, understanding of the retreat of the
French, devised all the means that might be to impeach them, and to cut of as
many as she could catch at any advantage: and having leauied an army to the
number of twelve thousand footmen, and three thousand horse, under the leading
of the Count Mansfeild and Martyn Vaurosh, entered the fair fields of the
Flower de Lys, which they spoiled very pittiously. The King being advertised
hereof, marched with all speed to relieve his distressed subjects: but the
emperials hearing of his resolution, retired speedily, whereupon the King began
to cast about how he might conquer the Duchy of Luxembourg, and having taken
a Castle called Rock, he laid siege unto Saint Iehan, Solieure, and Danuill,
all which were forthwith yielded unto the King. Yuoy a place of great
importance held out for a time, but in the end it was glad to hearken to a
composition: for albeit that the valiant Count Mansfeild had put himself
within the Town, and had fortified it very strongly, with a resolution to
defend it against all men, yet by reason of the cowardlinesse of his
Soldiers, he was forced to yield to the Conestable, and he with sundry others
of especial account, were carried prisoners to Paris. Then ensued the taking
of Momedy, Luzembourg, and the Dukedom of Bouillon, by the mareschall of
Sedan: Cimets was likewise taken, and the spoil thereof given to the Soldiers.

Thus the French king prospered, gaining many Towns, Castles, and strong holds
from the Empire, The French King breaks up his army.
without any resistance: but his soldiers being wearied and diseased, he was
forced to break up his camp, and lay them in garrisons, and to expect what
course the Emperor would take, to recover his honor and to regaine his
towns: who by reason he was occupied in the wars with certain of the
German princes, could not hinder the French proceedings. Maurice, and the
rest of the Protestants, employed all his counsels how to recover that which
the French king had taken from him: and having persuaded with the German
potentates to aid and assist him in hs intended enterprise, The preparation of
the Emperor against the French king.
caused al his old bands which were in Italy, as well Italians as Spaniards, to
repair to him with all speed: who with the troops of Lombardy and Piemont
passed over the Alps, and joined with the imperial army, which was assembled
in Germany, consisting of Bohemians, Hungarians, Polonians, Almaines,
Wallounes, Cleueners, Flemmings, The great army of the Emperor.
and Burgonians, to the number of 50000. footmen, and 20000. horsemen, with
incredible force of artillery, and all other warlike provision.

The king of France understanding of the resolution of the Emperor, which was
to recover Metz, and the rest of the towns, The Duke of Guise sent to keep
Metz against the Emperor.
which had been taken from the empire, dispatched the duke of Guise, a man of
good experience in the wars, with commandment to put himself within the
Town, to fortify it, and to furnish it with all necessary provision, the
better to endure the siege, and appointed the Rendeuous, or place of assembly
for the rest of his army at S. Michael, a little town in Lorraine, where there
met with him the Conestable, the Duke of Neuers, the Count Anguien, the Prince
of Conde, the Prince of Contie, the Prince of Aumaile, the Vicont of Rhohan,
the Mareschall Saint Andrew, Chastillon Collonell of all the French infanterie,
the Count Villiars, The French Kings army.
Bourdillon one of the Mareschals of the Camp, the Rhinegraue, and Reiroc,
with their Regiments of Launcequenets, and many other noble Lords and
captains. In the whole there were some thirty thousand footmen, French,
Almains and Switzers: and about seven or eight thousand horsemen. The Emperor
being troubled with the gout, lay long before he attempted any thing, so that
October was half past, insomuch as the French King seeing the year so far
spent, supposed that he would do nothing, especially against Metz, which was
a place of very great strength, and plentifully stored with all necessaries.
And the rather for that his principal captains, and chieftaines of greatest
experience dissuaded him all that might be, from enterprising any further,
until some better opportunity. Notwithstanding, the emperor would not hearken
to their counsels, nor be diuerted by any means, but with all possible speed
planted his army before the town, in this manner following.

The Duke of Alua was sent before, with the choicest of the imperial army,
The siege of Metz.
who passing the river of Seille, emcamped as near the town as he could, and
bestowed sundry of his forces in the strongest forts adjoining. The Spanish
companies were lodged at Saint Arnold, and Saint Clement. Certain troops of
the Almaines were placed at a Bridge called Magny. Don Lewis, D' Auila,
captain of the Spanish Horsemen, was appointed at the Hospital. The
Seneschall of Morauia, with the Bohemian Horsemen, encamped at Blery, and the
rest at Ollerie, Saint Preich, and other places near abouts. All things being
in a readiness, the emperials began to beat the Town with their great
Ordinance, in very furious sort, and in all hostile manner to annoy the
defendants. The battery continued long, and yet the harm was but small,
neither could the breach be made sufficient for an assault. Whereupon they
removed the Canon to another part of the City. And falling to mining, supposed
to overthrow some piece of the wall with Gunpowder. But the Duke of Guyse
understanding the drift of his enemies, caused countermynes to be made,
wherein they had not travailed long, but they might hear the noise and
stirring of the Spaniardes, and so were their devises easily prevented. This
was no small discouragement to the Emperials, seeing they prevailed not,
neither by one means nor other. Besides the season of the year grew extreme
cold, insomuch as the Soldiers which lay in the fields, The emperials weary
of the siege.
were sore pinched, and many dyed for want of necessaries: so that all sorts
began to wax weary of the siege, and inwardly desired to be dismissed. The
Almaines themselves began to quail: yet as men that would win some honor,
they instantly craved of the Emperor, that he would command a sufficient
breach to be made, and they would either enter, or loose their lives, for th y
were not able to keep the fi^ld any longer. Then began he to before grieved,
foreseeing the miserable end that would ensue, of that his rash and
inconsiderate enterprise, yet would he in no wise consent to raise his siege,
but with great persuasions animated his soldiers to persist, promising that
if he could not make a sufficient breach before the new year, he would break
up his army, and license every man to depart.

This satisfied them for the time, and made them to temporise, and expect their
better fortune. And to the end they might all be assured of his great care to
perform this: he privately commanded the Duke of Alua to continue the mines
with all diligence. Which charge was so willingly accepted, and so carefully
performed, that the pioners ceased neither day nor night. But the season of
the year was so contrary, and so repugnant, that nothing could be
accomplished as was desired. Besides, the French who were in the Town, with
their often sallying forth, did exceedingly endomage them, and slew many. So
that what with the cold, The emperor resolves to depart from Metz, the 10. of
December. 1553.
and extremity of the winter, and the courageous attempts of the French, the
Emperors army daily diminished, and yet nothing to the purpose performed.
Which when with intolerable sorrow and vexation of spirit he considered, he
resolved to depart. And sending away his great Ordinance before, with his
other weightiest and most troublesome carriages, himself followed with the
rest of his army, which was so feeble, and so weak with famine and
sickness, that they were scarce able to go. The Duke of Neuers was left by
the King, to attend the Emperor, and to watch him at every turn. Who
carefully executing his masters commandment, followed the emperials in the
tail, and cut off sundry as they strayed from the gross of the army.

The miserable estate of the imperial army at their departure from Metz.
Chastellon Lieutenant to Captain Bourdillon, was sent to discover, and to
bring some certainty of the emperors retreat. Who coming to Pont Camonson,
found that the Count Egmond with his regiment was departed, and had left
behind him a most pitiful spectacle of maimed and diseased persons. From
thence he passed on toward Metz. But the Duke of Alua and Brabancon, were
departed with a great part of the army dislodging in a very strange and
disordered manner, without sound of drum, leaving many of their tents with
sundry barels of powder, and much warlike provision behind them, besides an
incredible multitude of lame, sick, diseased, and impotent persons, as
testimonies of their hard fortune.

The French king being certified by the duke of Guise, of all that had passed,
was exceeding joyful, and seemed to triumph over the emperor, who being a
Prince that could not well brook any indignity, fought still to be revenged.
Whereupon assembling a new army as soon as the time of the year permitted, he
besiged Teroanne. The emperor purposes to besiege Teroanne, which Pauuilliers
is commanded to defend.
Which the K. understanding, commanded Pauuilliers to levy what forces he
thought convenient, and to keep it from the enemy. Whereupon Francis Memorancy,
eldest son of the Constable, accompanied with many valiant captains, and
gentlemen of good quality, his followers, repaired to Teroanne, purposing by
their heroycall and noble acts, to win themselves honor and renown. The town
being defended with so strong a garrison, and sufficiently provided of all
necessaries, was thought to be tenable against the strongest enemy that was:
and therefore the emperials were suffered to do what they listed. Who endeavoring
to effect some notable exploit, labored night and day, and made their
approches without any empeachment, placing their battery upon a little mount,
from whence they might annoy the defendants at their pleasure. They had brought
with them all warlike provision, as powder, shot, and all sorts of great and
small Ordinance, from sundry towns and castles of Flanders. For this place was
so odious unto all that inhabited near unto it, that as soon as it was
besieged, not only the women and little children, ran thither to behold so
gladsome a sight, but in token of their ioies, they sung songs, with dancing
and leaping, and brought into the camp, corn, beer, bread, sheep, and
beeues, in great abundance.

Their battery being once planted, The furious battery of Teroanne.
they began to beat the town in such furious sort, that the besieged were
exceedingly endaungered, no place being free from iminent peril.
Notwithstanding, like men of valor and courage, they resolutely defended
themselves, often issuing forth, and fighting with the emperials in their
trenches, killed many of them, and poisoning some of their great Ordinance,
drew other some into the town in despite of their enemies. And albeit the
emperials were much endomaged herewith, yet were they so readily relieved from
other places, and all their wants so diligently supplied, that they easily
amended as much in a day, as the French had marred in a week. So that wanting
nothing that might either help themselves, or hurt their enemies, they ceased
neither day nor night, but thundering continually with the Canon, beat down the
walls, and ouethrew the Towers and Bulwarks, leaving nothing in a manner under
which the besieged might shroud themselves. The courage of the besieged.
Howbeit they labored continually to repair the breaches, and as men desperate
and careless of their own security, they would be most busy where the Canon
was most furious, bringing earth, dung, fagots, and such like necessary matter
for defense. Which continual travel did maruellously weaken the defendants,
and by reason they were no great number, they were forced to be both soldiers
and pioners, to watch in the night, and fight in the day, always in action
without ceasing or intermission. In the midst of these great extremities, there
entered into the town one called captain Greille, with a hundred Carabins.
Captain Greille enters Teroanne with 100. Carabins.
Who forcing the enemies Corpse degard, with the loss of a few of his men, was
readily received by the French, who attended his coming with great devotion.

The assailants were nothing discouraged herewith, but plied their battery
more hotely then before, shooting for the space of ten days together. And
having beaten down all their flankers, and other places of defense, and
therwithall made a reasonable breach of sixty paces in breadth, prepared to
give an assault Collonell, which the French resolved to abide. Then stroke up
the drums, the trumpets sou^ded, the ensigns were displaied, and the emperials
marched on, with crying, showting, and after their manner making a terrible
noise and approaching the breach, striued to enter with marvelous fury. The
French on the other side valiantly resisted, and with equal courage defended
themselves. The emperials are repulsed.
The fight continued long, and many were slain on either side. But in the end
the emperial captains, seeing the great mortality of their men, caused them to
retire, having lost many of their brauest, and most forward soldiers.

The King of France understanding of the noble valor of his men, albeit he
feared not the loss of the town, yet the more to animate them, he sent a new
supply of three hundred, Breuit and S. Romain enter Teroanne with 300 fresh
soldiers.
under the leading of Captain Breuit, and Saint Romain: who with great hazard
and peril gat into the Town. They without still continued their siege, and
what with raising forts without, and with undermining within the ground, they
endomaged the besieged more the^ before. And having after much ado enlarged the
breach, and made the ascent so easy, that a man of Arms might pass out and
in at pleasure, they cried to a new assault. The French beeng greatly dismayed
herewith, and knowing they wanted all necessaryes to defend themselves any
longer, demanded a parlee, Teroanne surprised by the emperials whilst the
French are talking of a composition.
whereto the emperials yielded. But whilst they were talking, the Almaines and
Burgonians entered in sundry places, and the Spaniardes approached the great
breach. And so was the Town taken without any resistaunce. The Almaines and
Burgonians enraged against the poor French, committed many barbarous factes,
and strange cruelties, killing and murdering who^ soever fell into their
hands. Francis Memorancie hardly escaped, and was led prisoner to Binecour,
lieutenant to the emperor. Martigues, Dampier, de Losses, Bandiment, Baylet,
Saint Roman, and sundry other great captains, yielded themselves to such as
would take them. The town was sacked and spoiled: whatsoever was worth any
thing, Teroanne is dismanteled.
was carried away by the emperials: the emperor commanded it should be
dismanteled, and the houses fired: so that in short time it was utterly spoiled
and defaced.

When as the French King understood of this loss, he was wonderfully grieved,
and fearing least the emperor, (who was on the other side as ioifull for the
good news) would follow his fortune, The French K. gathers a great power to
resist the Emperor. Hedyn besieged and won by the Emperials.
and besiege Hedyn, he gathered a strong power of French and Switzers, and made
all things ready, with as great celeritie as might be, to stop the enemies
proceedings, if need required: but it was so long before his troops could be
assembled, that the emperials under the leading of the Prince of Piemont, were
gotten before the town, which they straightly besieged, and battered on all
sides. And for that it was not very well fortified, it was quickly gained.
There were slain on the French part, Horatius Farnelius duke of Castres,
Martigues, Monuille, Cizieux, Lusignan, Dampier, and diverse other captains and
commanders. The duke of Bouillon, Riou, the Count Villars, with the baron of
Culan, were taken prisoners. The King was more and more inwardly vexed to see
himself thus thwarted. Wherefore assembling his army near unto Amiens and
Piquenny, under the leading of the Constable, he waited his opportunity to be
revenged of his enemies: who after the taking of Heyden, spoiled the frontiers
of France, without pity or mercy. The French espying their advantage, The
French kills seven or eight hundred Emperials.
set upon them on the sudden, and slew seven or eight hundred, and took the
duke of Askot prisoner, and almost five hundred others. This loss somewhat
abated the pride of the imperial soldiers, and encouraged the French to
attempt greater matters: for they presently marched toward Baupalme which was
very well manned, and sufficiently appointed of all necessaries, and encamping
before the town, straightly environed it on al sides. There were with the
Constable, the duks of Neuers, of Vendosme, Anguien, Montpensier, and the
admiral Chastillon, with their regiments, amou^ting to the number of 8. or 9.
thousand men. the Rhingraue was colonel of the Lancequenets, with whom was
Reisberg, This wh^le ^^my ^o s^^d ^f 275^^. (...) men, and fiu^ thousand
h^rsme^.
both which had also 4. regiments, divided into twenty ensigns, being in the
whole sum 12000. besides four companies of Scots, and two of English, in all
not past 1500. men. The Nobility and Gentlemen made well near three thousand
horse, under the conduct of La Fail. Sansac was captain of the light horse,
being in all two thousand, reckoning the four hundred English, who were very
valiant soldiers, and of great courage. Monsieur d' Esire was master of the
Ordinance, whereof there were in all about a hundred pieces.

This mighty army besieged Baupalme, which place was as odious to the French as
Teroanne was to the Burgonians. The Conestable vieweth Baup^lme but seeing the
resolution of the defenda^ts marches toward C^mbray.
The Constable taking with him 4000. horsemen, and as many footmen, first viewed
the town, as well to see the countenance of those within, as to make choice of a
convenient place to encampe in. Hausimont was governor for the emperor, a man
of very great account, having with him some twelve ensigns of footmen, and
four hundred horse, who upon the approach of the French, thundered from the
town with their great Ordinance, and fallying forth at their gates, skirmished
very valiantly. The French seeing the resolution of the defendants, and finding
an exceeding want of water, which could not by any means be supplied, were
enforced to depart, and to defer their siege until some other time, having
first spoiled and wasted all the country round about, and so marched toward
Cambray, where having summoned the town, and seeing he could not be suffered to
enter, he fired the suburbs, and using all kind of hostility toward them,
took certain little castles and holds near adjoining. And albeit the emperor
being certified of all this, had commanded the Prince of Piemont, to aid
those of Cambray, and to relieve them by all possible means: yet the French
did in a manner what they listed, and being masters of the field, held the
emperials very short, who for that they were not able to encounter them, kept
themselves within their strengths, and would not be drawn to adventure their
fortune upon any occasion which was offered.

The king considering that the emperor did procrastinate, seeking by delays to
spend the time, until either the extremity of winter should approach, or his
soldiers be wearied with continual toil and travail, having wonderfully
indomaged his enemies by sacking, burning and spoiling all the country over,
The K. breaks up his camp.
and braued the emperor at home at his own doors, thinking he had sufficiently
revenged the former wrongs, and performed al things with great honor and
renown, resolved to break up his army, and to license his nobles to depart,
and to recreat themselves after so long and tedious trauail, placing strong
garrisons in sundry fro^tier towns, the better to bridle the enemy if he should
attempt any thing in his absence.

The emperor was not a little vexed with these French brauados, and envying the
glory of the King, sought for nothing so much as for revenge, wherefore casting
about how he might best effect his desire, he first compassed a marriage
between Marie Queen of England, and his son Philip King of Spain, The
French King gathers three new armies.
thereby to strengthen and fortify himself, the better against France.
Which when King Henry understood, he again gathered his forces, with all
convenient speed, purposing indede to prevent the Emperor, or at least to
meet with him as soon as any opportunity served. His whole forces were
divided into three Armies: the first, which consisted of nine thousand
footmen, three hundred men of arms, and six hundred light horse, with as many
harquebuziers on horseback, was sent into Picardie, under the leading of the
prince de la Roch sur Yon. In the second were five and twenty ensigns of
French footmen: two regiments of Almaines with their Coronels, the Rhingraue,
and Reisberg: and five and twenty ensigns of Switzers, four hundred men of
Arms, and two thousand light horse, over whom the Conestable was appointed
general. The third army was led by the Duke of Neuers, wherein were twenty
ensigns of French footmen, drawn out of the garrisons of Metz, Verdune,
Thoule, d' Anuille, Yuoy, and Momedie: two regiments of the Count Rakendolph,
and of the Baron of Frontenay, three hundred men of arms, eight hundred light
horse, two hundred Pistoliers under the leading of the Prince of Conde.

The fortunate success of the Kings armies.
These three armies entered the emperors dominions at three sundry places,
burning, spoiling, and making havoc after a strange and cruel manner. The
Duke of Neuers took Ardennes, Lincbante, Villarcy, besides many other strong
Castles, and well fortified places. The Conestable marched toward Auannes,
and caused it to be bruted, that he would besiege it: but understanding that
there was but a slender garrison in Mariambourg, he secretly dispatched the
Mareschall of Saint Andrew, with the Switzers, and certain companies of the
French footmen, who approaching on the sudden, environed the town, and kept
those within from receiving of any new supply. Wherewith they being greatly
terrifyed, yielded unto the Conestable upon the first summaunce. From thence
they passed forth toward Dinon, where the Duke incorporating himself with an
other strong power, brought by the King, laid siege to the Castle, which for
that it was very strong, would not condiscende to any composition: whereupon
the battery was planted, and the walls were continually beat with thirty
Canons, wherewith the French overthrowing the Towers, Bulwarks, and whatsoever
might serve for any defense, made a sufficient breach, Certain Captains
cassierd for their cowardlinesse.
and gave a very hot assault, but they were repulsed, by reason of the
cowardlynesse of some leaders, who therefore were presently cassierd, and
discharged of their places, and pronounced villains, to their perpetual
infamy, and disgrace. Yet those within being not able to hold out, yielded at
last to the kings mercy, and suffered the French to enter peaceably.

de la Roch sur Yon, with his forces prosper exceedingly, and was very
terrible to the emperials, by winning of towns, castles, and strong holds, and
by burning and defacing all things without pity, or mercy.

The Emperor rayseth a great power.
The emperor being at Brussels, and hearing of the proceeding of the French,
raised a great power, over which he made General his Nephew the Duke of
Sauoy, who suspecting that the French King would besiege Namure, put himself
in the way between the town and the King, in a very strong and well fortified
place, purposing to divert the enemy, if possibly he might: which indeed was
the cause that the King turned toward Henault, The cruelty of the French in
Henault.
where the French entered with such fury, that they put all to fire and sword,
sparing neither man, woman, nor child, to the unspeakable horror of the
inhabitants, who fled on all sides from this violent and outrageous tempest.
The duke of Sauoy followed them at the heels and endamaged them so much as
might be, but could not effect any great matter: for the French king still
marched forward into the Country, and took the most delectable and pleasant
Castle called Marymont, Marymont taken and spoiled by the french.
which was a house of pleasure, and belonged to the Emperors Sister, Mary
Queen of Hungary. The King commanded it should be rased, and utterly defaced
in a revenge of the displeasure she had done him, in burning of his Castles of
Foulembray, Tragny, Baines, Reux, and Bauet. besides, many other places were
taken by the French, to the utter undoing of many thousands of the poor
inhabitants.

Whilst these broils continued thus hotly between the emperials and the
French, the marriage between Phillip of Spain and Queen Mary of England The
marriage of Phillip king of Spain, with Marie Queen of England.
was agreed upon, and immediately after he arrived in England very nobly
accompanied with the Duke of Alua, the Counts de Padille, Rigomes, Egmond, the
Admiral of Castill, the marquess de Languillare, and many other great
estates. The King of France seeing well enough to what end all this tended,
thought it best to stand upon his guard, and to have all things in a
readiness: and therefore he reuiewed his armies, mustered new Soldiers,
gathered money and all other necessaries, drawing his forces toward those parts
that he most suspected should be invaded: and surprising many Castles and
strong holds, The battle of Reuty.
continued his course without any interruption, until he came before Reuty,
which for that it was a place of very great importance, he determined to win
it, and the emperor resolved to keep it. The French having planted their
siege had so bet the town, that a convenient breach was made, and they ready
to give an assault: which when the emperor understood, he made all possible
speed to relieve the^, purposing rather to hazard his fortune, then to suffer
the French to have their wills: wherefore having chosen out four thousand of
his best shot, with a convenient number of pikes to back them, and about four
thousand horsemen, besides four field pieces, he commanded them to march
toward a wood which was near adjoining, which he coueted to take if possibly
he might. The whole cauallery was led by the Duke of Sauoy, and the
harquebuziers by Don Fernando de Gonzaga. There marched also a battailon of
Almaines along by the wood side, under the conduct of Count John of Nassau, and
the mareschall of Cleue, which was flanked with a great Hot or squadron of
Reisters, to the number of two thousand horse, under the leading of the count
Vuluenfort, The vain brag of count Vuluenfort.
who had promised the emperor to march upon the bellies of the French
Cauallery, and to trample them under his feet: at whose back were some
thousand two hundred light horse, with other four field pieces. These
harquebuziers were no sooner entered the wood, but they encountered four hundred
French shot, between whom and the emperials there began a very hot and
furious skirmish.

The Duke of Guyse who had taken upon him to keep that quarter, seeing with
what courage the emperials maintained the fight, supposed they were well backed,
whereupon he presently sent word to the King, that he imagined the emperor was
coming with all his forces, and that there was great likelihood of a battle
as that day: upon which advertisement the king forthwith arranged his troops
in as warlike manner as he might, and sent word to the Guyse, that if
opportunity served he should accept of the journey, and he would be ready to
assist him. Then began the Duke of Guyse to encourage his soldiers, and to
animate them with the best words he could devise: and putting himself in the
front of his Regiment, waited his best opportunity to assail his enemy. In
the mean while the Conestable passed over a little river, with certain
companyes on foot, and the whole battle of the Switzers, who were
wonderfully encouraged with the presence of the King, that had promised to live
and die with them.

By this time the Emperials were so far advanced, that they had beaten the
four hundred shot out of the wood, The french charge the Emperials.
and appeared full in the face of the foremost battailon of the French, and
being favored by their Reisters, approached within two hundred paces of the
Duke, who presently commanded to charge them. Whereupon the Duke of Nemours
with his Regiment of light horse, set upon the Reisters in the front, and
sent Forges the guydon of his company, and Tauannes to assail them in the
Flank. So there ensued a hot and furious combat: but in the end the French
were repulsed with the loss of many brave me^. With which happy success the
emperials were wonderfully encouraged, persuading themselves that they had
gotten an entire victory. Count Vuluenfort overthrown.
But the Duke of Guyse and Tauannes calling their troops, and joining with the
Duke D' Aumale and the whole cauallery of light horse, charged the Emperials
afresh, and that with such fury, that the Count Vuluenfort was wholly defeated,
and his Pistoliers quite overthrown, who while they hasted to save themselves,
ran upon the battle of their Almaines, who by that means were exceedingly
disordered: so that the Duke of Neuers who was placed with his Regiment toward
Reuty, espying a passage laid open, entered as it were at the breach, upon the
Spanish shot, and with such resolution followed his point, that he defeated
them in a moment, driving them to run toward the wood to save themselves.

There were taken seauenteene ensigns, five Cornets, and four field pieces.
The French pursued their victory, and slew to the number of some six or
seven hundred of these runnawaies, chasing them hard to their trenches. Thus
did fortune still favor the French kings proceeding, and crossed the Emperor
almost in all his enterprises.

After this victory the Emperor would no more be drawn to fight, but kept
himself with all his forces, emparked within his strength: which the French
king perceiving, he determined to retire toward Monterell, to refresh his
weary army, leaving Reuty as a thing that would not be gotten in haste:
where he stayed not long but removed toward Champeigne, The king and the
Emperor dissolve their armies.
and having fortified Bouloin, and sundry other frontier Towns, brake up his
Army, and licensed every man to depart: but this was no sooner known to the
Emperor, but he taking the opportunity, sent his forces to spoil the
frontiers of France, where there was made a pittious spoil in a short time. At
length the Emperor likewise dissolved his troops, and stuffing his Towns with
strong garrisons, thought it best to expect some better opportunity to
accomplish his desires.

Winter was no sooner past, but that the French king, who was somewhat puffed
up with his former victories, and finding himself grieved with new injuries,
made great preparation for new broils, and for more bloody wars then before:
The Emperor and the French K. would not be reconciled.
and understanding that the confines of France were sore anoyed with the
Imperial garrisons, sent Mareschall Saint Andrew and Bourdillon with a
convenient number, to stop the course of the insolent enemy, and to enterprise
further as occasion should be offered. And albeit there was great means made
to reconcile these two mighty potentates, yet nothing could be effected: for
the french King required Naples, Millan, Burgundy, Piemont, Navarre, and many
other places: and the Emperor would part with nothing, so that the treaty
being broken off, war presently ensued: for the Emperor having a power in a
readiness under the leading of Martin Ronsare the bastard of Cleue, invaded
the territories belonging to the Flower de Lis, burning, spoiling, and wasting
in most outrageous manner: but this stormy tempest continued not long, for the
emperials began to fall sick of many diseases, and to want victuals, so that
they were forced to retire, having lost their general and many others of
especial account. Thus did the Emperor stand still in fortunes disgrace, and
nothing seemed to prosper that he took in hand, until mid August following,
that she began to return her favor toward him, by giving him as it were
some good words, after so many sharp and bitter checks. At which time
Hansimont governor of Baupalme, Hansimont overthrows the French, and takes
their general prisoner.
understanding that a great power of the French were entered into his masters
territory, under the leading of La Faille, setting upon them on the sudden,
slew many of them, and took La Faille prisoner, with sundry other of good
account, in so much as the emperials bosted, that they had taken the French
Nobility in gross, and not by retaile, and that they never wayed them, but
took them upon their words.

Picardy, their armies under the leading of the mareschall Brissack and the
Duke of Alua, sought to anoy each other in Piemont. Casal surprised by Captain
Saluoyson.
Captain Saluoyson surprised Casal in the dead of the night, being one of the
strongest and best fortified places in all those quarters: wherein were taken
Figuerot governor of the Town, and the Count Ladron, general of the Almaines,
and maruailous store of all necessary provision for the wars. Monsieur de
Terms prevailed mightily in Italy, and overthrew the emperials at Senes with
great slaughter and mortality: but he being called home, Strozzi was appointed
Leiutenant in his place, Strozzi overthrown by the Emperials.
who fighting with the emperialles was wholly defeated: and Clermont, Moulbazon,
Blaise with the Colonels of the Switzers were slain, with sundry others, to
the number of three hundred: and five hundred were taken prisoners.

Thus fortune seemed to play with these two mighty Princes, and to sport her
self in the interchangeable favor which she bestowed upon their armies,
until winter approaching, they were forced to forsake the field, and draw their
soldiers into garrisons, expecting the spring of the year to make an end of
their bitter contentions.

But the emperor now growing sickly and weak, and waxing weary with tossing
and tumbling in these worldly affairs, considering the variable change and
mutabilitie to which they were subject, yielded up his kingdom of Spain,
Charles the fifth yields over his empire, and betaketh himself to a monastery.
and all other his dominions, and that absolutely unto his son Phillip, and
spent the rest of his days in a monastery which he had builded for that
purpose.

Phillip King of Spain being somewhat terrified with the rumor of the coming
of the Turk, and partly solicited by his wife, who was loath to have him
encombered with the wars, was contented to hearken to a peace, which the
French king refused not: whereupon, after long debating on either side, a
league was concluded for five years, but it could not be kept half the time:
for the Pope and his Cardinals falling at discention, and the Spanish king
taking part with the one, and the French king with the other, the wars
began again afresh in It^ly between these two late reconciled enemies. The
Pope besieged by the Spanish forces.
The Duke of Alua was sent against the triple Crown of Rome, who with the aid
of the Duke of Florence, took many Castles and holds belonging to the Pope,
whom they besieged within Saint Angelo. The Duke of Gu^se, though contrary to
the Counsel of Ann de Memorancy, and his Cousins Olet and Iaspar Coligny,
called Chastillon, was sent to raise the siege, who accompanied with the Dukes
of Aumaille and D' Elbenfe his brothers, The Duke of Guyse sent to raise the
siege.
the Duke of Nemours, the count D' Eu, the Vidame of Chartres, and sundry
other great Captains, marched forward with all possible speed, purposing to
relieve the distressed Pope who was well near famished in Rome.

While the Duke was hasting on his way, mareschall Strozzi took Ostia with a
Castle near adjoining belonging to the Spaniardes, and likewise Vico Valerio,
which was sacked, and the spoil given to the Soldiers. As soon as the Duke
of Alua and the marquess of Pescara, the two chief commanders of the Spanish
forces, The siege is raised, and the Pope set at liberty.
understood of the approach of the French, they forthwith left Rome, and retired
the one toward Naples and the other toward Millan, so that now the Pope was
almost set at liberty again, saving that the Duke of Florence did somewhat
restrain him: but he fearing least he should draw all the war upon
himself, was willing to compounde with the French, who were now grown strong
in Italy, and prospered maruailously: but many thought it would not be long,
for that the Spanish king made very great preparation, both to with stand the
French abroad, and also for to find them occupied at home, and the rather
because a third army under the leading of their Admiral Chastillon, governor
of Picardy, invaded Art^oise, wasting and spoiling the Country exceedingly.
Thus was the league which was so solemnly sworn, and so necessary for all
Christendom, broken again by the sinister counsels of the Guyse, and the
wars began afresh between these two mighty Princes.

King Phillip prepares a great army to besiege S. Quintines.
King Phillip being highly discontented with the French King for so many
injuries and indignities offered, having gathered a great army wherein was
thirty five thousand footmen and twelve thousand horse, besides some eight
thousand English, under the leading of the Earl of Penbrooke, purposed to
besiege Saint Quintines in Vermandoise, Chastillon puts himself within S.
Quintins.
which the Admiral Chastillon suspecting, put himself within the Town with
such power as he had in a readiness, and fortified it as strongly as he
could: the French king likewise prepared to withstand the Spanish invasion,
and having provided an host consisting of eighteen thousand footmen,
Almaines and French, The Conestable sent to relieve Saint Quintins.
and some five or six thousand horse, sent the Conestable of France to front
the enemy, and to keep him from entering into the fat fields of the Flower de
Lis. But before this power could be in a readiness, the prince of Piemont,
general of the Spanish forces, had invested Saint Quinsines, Saint Quintins
besieged.
and planted his siege before the Town, which he watched so narrowly, that it
was impossible for any succors to enter, without apparent danger. The
Conestable notwithstanding, espying a convenient time, conuayed certain troops
of footmen and horsemen into the Town, under the favor of a skirmish,
maintained by the Duke of Neuers, and the Prince of Condy: The Conestable of
France releeueth Saint Quintins, and retireth.
which being performed he began to retire as not willing to hazard his
fortune at that present: which at the first was not discerned by the Spanish.
But after that the victuallers and pages of the French Camp perceived the
retrait of their Army, and how far they were engaged, they began to run
after in great haste, and with their yelling and crying, gave such evident
proof to the enemy of their exceeding fear, so that the Count Egmond, Count
Egmond charge the Conestable.
who first discovered the French dismarch, having advertised the prince,
commanded the trumpets to sound Dedans, dedans, and with two thousand horse
charged them on the side. The Count Henry and Ernest of Brunswick, each of them
having a thousand, being backed with the Count Horn, who hasted on with
great fury, did likewise assail them at one instant, who in their retiring
turning head, received them with equal valor.

While the French were thus assailed in the flank, the Count of Mansfeild,
Dostrate, and Gueldres, with three thousand horse ran upon them in the front,
and that with such a furious feast, that having overthrown their foremost
rank, the rest were soon defeated and compelled to fly away. The Conestable
is overthrown and taken prisoner with a great number of the French Nobility.
John of Burbon Duke of Angolesme was dismounted at the first encounter, and
being horsed again, was slain at the second. Francis de la Tour vicount of
Turin, Saint Gelais and above a hundred and twenty Gentlemen of good account,
beside six hundred common soldiers died at that battle. The Conestable
being wounded in the hippes, was taken prisoner and brought to the Prince, and
so were the Dukes of Montpensier, the mareschall Saint Andrew, Lewis prince of
Manfona, the Ringraue Rochfaucont, Saint Heran, Burdillon, Mouy, Montsales, and
many other of the Nobility of great reckoning and reputation. There were also
above three hundred Gentlemen of Mark taken prisoners, and many of the footmen
being slain, the rest were taken to mercy, and driven away by troops, as if
they had been flocks of sheep, and presented to King Phillip with their
ensigns and colors, as monuments of his glorious and triumphant victory.

The King of France was wonderfully astonished with this overthrow, and the
rather for that Paris (the chief City of his Realm) seemed to be straightly
terrified, that sundry of the principal Citizens began to fly, The great
fear of the Parisians after the overthrow at S. Quintins.
and to withdraw themselves toward the uttermost bounds of the land, fearing
the coming of the enemy, who had now liberty to do what he listed.
Howbeit having borrowed thirty thousand pounds of the Parisians, he presently
hired fourteen thousand Switzers, and sent to the Duke of Guyse, who was in
Italy, to repair into France with all expedition, and to bring with him all
the forces he could make. Thus was the King driven to an exigent, and he who
not long before had sent the Guyse to anoy other men, was now glad to call
him home again to defend himself, The Hugonots took their name of a gate in
the City of Tours, called Hugon, because th^se of the reformed religion being
greatly persecuted, did many times in the night assemble near that gate, where
they had preaching and other exercises, so that in the beginning in the way of
mockage they they were called Hugonots: which name being carried from one to
another, at length became a common name, and used of al sorts.
who stood almost in a desperate state, and lay open to the invasion of his
enemies. In the mean time the King was earnestly busied in gathering of
another Army, sending out his proclamations into all quarters, fortifying
Paris, and appoynting the Duke of Neuers (who by great hap escaped at Saint
Quintins,) to be his Lieutenant, and to empeach the enemy from entering any
further into France.

The number of those who were called The Hugonots persecuted in France.
Hugonots began to increase, and were dispersed in a manner over all the land,
and because the affairs of the state went thus backward, and almost nothing
prospered that was taken in hand, one of the principal men about the king,
persuaded him that God was angry and punished the land, for that such sects
and heresies (as they termed them) were suffered to increase and multiply in
a manner without controlement, and that the King to pacify the wrath of GOD,
must take a more severe course in punishing such as were offenders herein, who
had been the principal means to pull down the wrath of God upon the
King, and the whole Land. Whereupon there immediately ensued horrible
crueltyes toward the poor Hugonots, and infinite multitudes were put to
death in a short time, so that the rage of persecution grew very great,
supposing thereby as by an expiation, to turn away the hand of the almighty,
which was so heavy upon France: but they were exceedingly deceived herein,
for by applying a wrong medicine, the disease daily increased, and God seeing
them wilfully repugne his truth, augmented their sorrows more and more: for
the Prince of Piemont did now more narrowly besiege Saint Quintins then
before, and having strongly fortified his Camp, and stored himself with all
convenient necessaries for to maintain the siege, raised his mounts and
planted 45. pieces of great ordenance, wherewith he battered the walls in
most furious manner.

The Admiral would not hearken to a composition.
The admiral who was a very valiant, pollitike and wise chiefetaine, would not
hearken to any composition, but repayring the breaches, resolved to keep the
place in despite of the enemy: the Prince on the other side plied the battery,
and having with much adoo made a sufficient breach, disposed his bands, and
gave order for the assault: the first place was assigned to Captain Cazares
master of the Camp, and to Lazaro Collonell of fifteen hundred Almaines. The
second to Captain Navarre, with certain bands of Spaniards, and to count
Meigue, with his Wallones, the third to Julian Romero with 3. ensigns of
Spaniards, and 2000. English: and the fourth to captain Carronnellet, with 3.
ensigns of of Burgonians, all which being in a readiness valiantly approached
the walls. Saint Quintins taken by assault.
The Admiral had likewise determined how to receive the enemy, and putting
himself into that place where he supposed most danger, with great hardiness
expecting the coming of the Spaniards: but there was not the like resolution
on all hands, for the soldiers being discouraged with the late overthrow,
and the inhabitants being timorous, as men not accustomed to such dangers,
made small resistance, so that the enemy entered at his pleasure, which when
the admiral to his unspeakable grief beheld, he was enforced to seek to
save himself, by yielding to a common soldier, The admiral yelde^h himself to
a common s^uldior.
who brought him to captain Cazares, by whom he was led prisoner to the prince.
Dandelot his brother was likewise taken, but he found the means to escape by a
desperate adventure, to recover his liberty. Irnac. S. Remy. La Guard, Cuzneux,
Moulins, Bruell, Bretanie, Rambou^llet. S. Romain, S. Andre, Linieres, and
Soleil, did likewise remain prisoners. Fayet le Iaune, Salleuert, Oger,
Vignes, la Bar, Estang, Gourds, and many other brave men were slain. The
whole town was sacked, and spoiled, and a marvelous mass of wealth gotten,
and carried into the low countries.

The French king, was all this while providing his forces, and devising by what
means he might best make head against his enemy, fearing indeed the Prince
would follow his good fortune, and proceed further into France, by reason that
he had sent the Count of Frembarg with 1000. horse, and 3. regiments of
Lancequenets, containing 14. ensigns, and 20. pieces of battery, to besiege
Castellet, a place of very great strength: yet was it soon taken by the
enemy, the French not daring to abide the Canon, so exceedingly were they
afrighted with their former losses. In the midst of all these mischiefs,
there fell out one thing which turned to the great advantage of the French
king, A mutiny in the Spanish camp.
and brought no small hinderance to the Spanish kings proceedings, and that was
the mutiny among the Almaines and Spaniards, who falling at dissension about
their booties and spoils gotten at S. Quintins, and the ransoms of their
prisoners, were the occasion of much trouble and tumult in the army. Which when
the French king understood, he practiced in such manner with sundry of the
Almain captains, that their oath being expired with King Philip, they were
contented to be reclaimed by him, and to serve against the enemies of the
Flower de Lis.

Guise come out of Italy, and being made the Kings Lieutenant, was sent with a
strong power toward Amiens, with a secret commandment to enterprise against
Calice, if occasion served. The duke finding the town slenderly provided,
suddenly planted his siege about it, The duke of Guise besieges Calice and
wins it.
and that in the midst of winter. And first assailed a fort called Nieulay,
which was easily gained. From thence he sent part of his army along the downs
to Risebank, which he likewise took without any great resistance. The duke
having gotten two principal places, and that in one day, planted his battery
against the town, wherein was governor the L. Wentworth: who seeing the
unexpected success of the French, and how fortune favored the D. in all his
dessignes, disposed of all things as well as he might, and endeavored to remove
the French out of their trenches: but that was impossible, for the duke was so
strongly fortified, and had gotten such places of advantage, that he could not
be forced by any means whatsoever. The duke having planted 15. Canons, began
his battery against the old castle, and that with great fury. And for that the
walls were ruinous, and easy to be pierced, the breach was soon made, and
assault given, but the French were repulsed at the first, with the loss of
their forwardst men: notwithstanding they being encouraged with their former
success, continued their enterprise, and at last gained the Castle, which the
Duke did forthwith cause to be strongly fortified. This was a very great loss
to the English, for that from thence the French might shoot into the town at
their pleasure

Now was Calice narrowly besieged, and all passages were stopped in such sort,
that it was impossible to convey in any succors, or to send forth any to give
advertisement of the distressed estate of the inhabitants. Which when the Lord
Wentworth perceived, and how that for want of necessaries, he was not able to
keep the town any longer, he was content to parle with the Duke, and to yield
upon composition. Whereto the Duke of Guise willingly assented: so that after
much debating on either side the town was yielded upon condition, Calice
yielded to the D. of Guise.
that the inhabitants might safely depart without impeachment whither they
listed, and the lord Wentworth with diverse others to the number of fifty of
the chiefest, to remain prisoners.

Thus was Calice in less then seven days recovered by the French (which had
bin besieged by Edward the third, king of England, by the space of a whole
year, and which had remained in the English men's hands for the space of 210.
years) to the incredible joy of the French. And as it was lost under Ph^lip of
Valois the French King: so was it regained by the French, in the time of Philip
king of England. The duke following his good fortune, did forthwith besiege
Guines, wherein commanded the valiant lord Gray, who albeit he did stoutly hold
out for a time, abiding the planting of the Canon, and a furious assault, yet
was he forced in the end to yield, and to resign his office to another man.
Which when the garrison of Hams understood, they abandoned the fort, and
withdrew themselves to a place of greater security. The French king was not a
little joyful to hear these news: wherefore longing to see that, which he
had so often wished and desired, he posted presently to visit his new conquered
town: whither he was no sooner come, but that he gave order for the repairing
and fortifying thereof, and leaving Monsieur de Thermes governor, withdrew
himself again toward Paris, commanding the Guise to besiege Herbemont, a
place of some importance: which was yielded at the first summance. Thus did
fortune begin to turn her countenance toward the French, and as it were
alternatiuely, and by course favor the Kings desigments.

The French K: intending to prosecute his wars against the Spaniards, thought
it good policy to strengthen himself with some foreign alliance and therefore
contrived a marriage between Mary the young Queen of Scots, and Francis the
Dolphin of France. Francis the Dolphin of France marryeth Marie Queen of Scots.
Which marriage was solemnized at Paris, in most royal and magnificent manner,
the 14. of April 1558. About which time there began some motion to be made, as
touching a peace between Spain and France. The principal procurer whereof was
the Lady Duchess and dowager of Loraine; and cousin to King Philip. But by
reason of sundry impeachments, there was nothing effected: so that the French
king having all things in a readiness, sent the Duke of Guise, accompanied
with the Dukes of Neuers, and Nemours, the Marshall Strozzi, and Bourdillon,
with a great power to besiege Theonuille. Who making their approches, raised
their mounts, planting their Ordinance, and beat the town with 35. pieces of
artillary. Which when Count Horn understood, he marched thither in the dead of
the night, with certain old bands of Spaniards, purposing to force the Corpse de
guard of the enemies: But the Count being not able to effect that which he
desired, by reason he found the French very strongly encamped, was forced to
retire with loss of many of his men.

The Duke still plied his battery, The (...) Guyse ^^^geth Theouille.
and for that he could not well discern whether the breach were reasonable or
not, and what flankers remained to endamage the assailants: as also to see the
countenances and resolution of the besieged, sent about midnight five hundred
of his most hardy and best experienced soldiers, under the conduct of Cipierre
S. Estef, Mellas, Sarlabos, and Jacques, to give a false assault, with express
commandment not to advance further, then only to discover the breach,
unless they should be drawn thereto by some apparent advantage: who approaching
the walls, and crying, scale, scale, as though they would have given a
general assault, so terrified those who guarded the breach, that part of them
shrinking away for fear, and the rest not able to resist, gave leave to the
French to ascend to the top of the Rampart, and had the soldiers followed
their leaders, with equal courage, the town had been gained at that instant.
But the alarm being given, the French were soon repulsed, with the loss of
many of their principal and most forward men: the besieged were much dismayed
with this unlooked for accident, and the remembrance of their manifold wants
made them to doubt of the sequel of the siege, whereupon Caderobbe who was
governor of the town, knowing he was not able to hold out for any long time,
sent a trumpet to demand a parle, offering to yield upon reasonable
conditions: which when the Duke had assented unto, and the articles were fully
agreed upon, the place was given up the 22. of June 1558. unto the French, who
entered with great triumphs, and repairing the battered walls, made them as
defensible as they could.

This and the like prosperous success somewhat cheered the French nation, and
made their name seem terrible to the Spaniards, who had for a time been
exceedingly crossed in most of their affairs. But now the world began to
change, and fortune which is ever instable, frowned upon the French, First of
November.
by crossing the designs of Monsieur de Terms, the captain of Calice. Who
desirous to do some especial service for his late preferment, invaded the
confines of Flanders, with an army of 9000. footmen, and 1500. horse, and by an
assault took Dunkirk, Monsieur de Terms inuadeth the low countries
leaving Graueling on his back, with a purpose to enterprise against that also
if opportunity served, and so passed forth hard unto Newport, cruelly wasting
with fire and sword, whatsoever was in his way. For the repressing of whose
furious and barbarous rage, Count Egmond assembled a power of 12000. on foot,
and 3000. horsemen: of whose approach when Terms was ascertained by his espials,
he began to retire with all speed, being indeed not able to encounter with so
strong and resolute an enemy: wherefore using the benefit of a low water, he
marched away in the dead of the night along by the sea, hoping to deceive the
count, and to free himself from the danger of the Dutch. But the count Egmond
understanding of the retreat of the French, suspecting that they hasted to get
out of his hands, crossed the country by a nearer way, and put himself between
them and home, meeting them in the front not far from Graueling. He was no
sooner in view of the enemy, but he caused the signal to be given, Count
Egmont overthrows de Terms, and takes him prisoner.
and like a general of surpassing courage, went resolutely to the charge. The
French who stood in a desperate state, received the shot with equal valor:
and at the first seemed to have the better, committing marvelous slaughter
with their great Ordinance upon the foremost ranckes of the Burgonians, whom
when the French saw so broken and dismembered, supposing the day had bin theirs,
they cried out victory, victory. But this acclamation lasted not long: for
the Count Egmond arriving with a great Hot of Reisters, and Flemings, so
furiously charged the French lances, that they were wholly defeated and
overthrown.

Amids these bloody broils happened a strange chance: A strange chance.
for at the same time, certain English ships passing by, and descrying this
encounter, made toward the shore, and with their shot beat the flanks of the
French army, which on this side lay open to a full battery: wherewith they
being sore dismayed, and not able to endure the fight any longer, turned their
backs and fled amain. There were some 1500. slain in that place. And the
greatest number of such as escaped, were killed by the boores and women of the
country who made havoc of as many as fell into their hands. Monsieur de
Terms, D'annebault, Senarpont, Meruilliers, and sundry others of the
principal captains remained prisoners. Moreover they lost all their Ordinance,
ensigns, munition, bag and baggage, and all their rich booties which they had
gotten in Flanders. This sinister chance did not a little vex the French King,
who fearing a further mischief if it were not timely prevented, sent forth
presently for his Bannes and Arierbannes, The French K. mustreth new forces.
with a straight commandment to all his ordinance and men of arms, to
assemble themselves at Pierreport in as warlike manner as might be, there to
attend his further pleasure, and to be in a readiness to be employed as
occasion should be offered.

King Philip of Spain, had likewise gathered a very strong power, and al
things were provided by these two mighty Monarkes, as though they meant to
determine all their controversies by some one cruel and bloody battle. But God
who rules the hearts of princes, disposed of their intentions far otherwise
then their blind affections led them. For upon the sudden, their hard hearts
began to be mollified, and each party inclined to peace: so that the place
being appointed, and the deputies on both sides agreed upon, they met about the
midst of October following at Cercam, between Artoys and Pycardy. There were
many complaints on both sides, and a commemoration of sundry indignities
offered on either part. Each defended others doings, neither was there any
likelihood of better agreement: Peace concluded between France and Spain.
both princes dissolved their armies, and licenced their men of war to repose
themselves until the next year. But before that time, by reason of new
occurrences, there was a general peace proclaimed between these two nations,
and each linked with other with very strait alliances: For King Philip (whose
wife Mary Queen of England was lately deceassed) was contented to take in
marriage Elizabeth the eldest daughter of Henry the French King, and Pilebert
Emmanuel duke of Sauoy, was affianced unto madame Margaret his sister: so that
by reason of these new co^iunctions, there insued much quietness to all
Christendom, but especially to these two kingdoms, who now had made an end of
all their quarrels and contentions, and seemed to study of nothing but how they
might honor and solemnise in most royal manner these new marriages.

There was exceeding sumptuous preparation against the appointed time: all the
Nobility of France were assembled at Paris, to attend the king, and to honor
these espousals. The lady Elizabeth was co^ducted by the king her father to our
Lady Church at the day prefixed in most pompous and stately manner, and there
married by the Cardinal of Burbon, to the Duke of Alua, was who constituted
Procurator of the king of Spain his master. The Duke of Alua marries the
French kings daughter for his master the king of Spain.
There were all the princes of the blood attending in their order, and many
chief Prelates, and all the officers of the crown. The Duke of Alua was
accompanied with the Prince of Orange, Count Egmond, and sundry other very
honorable personages. The marriage being finished, there was exceeding
feasting, banqueting, and cheering, with dancing, masking, and all other
pastimes that could be imagined, both to delight the eye and please the ear.
The king rejoiced to see his daughter so honorably advanced: the Nobility and
commonaltie were maruailously glad to remember what ease, peace, and
tranquillity they should enjoy by this new affinity: and all sorts seemed to
triumph, hoping there would be a perpetual league and corespondency between
these two Nations: but now behold a woeful mishap and lamentable mischance,
wherewith all this mirth and iollity was turned into weeping, wailing, and
great sorrow: so enterchangeably do these two accompany each other, and so
certainly do they follow one another. The French king, who had bin the
principal challenger at tilt, assisted by the Duke of Guyse, Alphonse the
Prince of Ferrara, and the Duke of Nemours, having borne himself very nobly
that day, and broken many staves to his great honor and high commendation,
would needs in the end run a course with count De Mont-gommery a valiant
gentleman of France: who at the first refusing, The French King slain with
running a course at ^^lt.
yet commanded by the king accepted the condition, and offered so freely, that
their staves flying in pieces, some of the shiuers getting in at the sight of
the beuer, pierced into the kings head, and grievously wounded him, that he
died within eleven days after, to the immesurable grief of his subjects,
after he had reigned twelve years, three months, and ten days.

CHAP. VI.
Francis the second the French King. The Guises authors of all the confusion in
France. The Guises join with the Queen mother against the King of Navarre.
The King of Navarre yields to the Queen mother. The Duke of Guise made
Lieutenant for the King, and Henry Cardinal of Lorraine, made L. Treasurer of
France. They incense the King against the princes of the blood. The enterprise
of the Lord of Renaudie. The hatred of the Guises toward the three
Chastillons. The Prince of Conde being discontented, goes from the Court. The
order of the States of France. The Admiral presents the supplication of the
Hugonots to the king. The Prince of Conde committed to prison, and is condemned
to die. The death of the King.

THe Kingdom of France had for many years together, been very well
acquainted with the variable and changeable estate of inconstant fortune, and
under Charles the eight, Lewis the twelfth, Francis the first, and Henry the
second, had by woeful experience found, how subject the most flourishing
estates, kingdoms and co^monwealths are to a continual change and alteration:
and therefore having by long observation perfitly learned, that the best means
to maintain her self in her wonted grandeur and glory, was to be leagued with
her neighbor Countries, and to be at peace and unity at home, began to have
a flexible heart, and to incline to quietness as much as might be: so that
having ended all quarrels, and buried all wrongs and indignities in the pit of
oblivion, and by a near conjunction with the Spanyard her ancient and mighty
enemy, (in the opinion of most men) procured her self a perpetual peace,
began as it were, to clap her hands for joy, and seriously to triumph in so
incomparable a benefit. But the fatal and inevitable mishap of this most
noble kingdom, which had flourished for so many hundred years, and had been
the paragon of her neighbor nations, could not (as it seems) be avoided, but
that it must needs take place, and wanting foreign enemies to work her
overthrow, must needs hatch a viperous brood, which by gnawing out the belly
of their own mother, have most unnaturally sought the destruction of her, who
have most tenderly fostered and brought them up.

The house of Guyse, the principal cause of all the sturres in France.
The principal cause to produce so lamentable an effect, and the only means in
a manner to hatch so horrible a mischief, was the immesurable ambition of that
haughty and aspiring house of Guyse: who albeit they were strangers, and no
natural French men, yet fortune so favored their attempts, and made some of
them so gracious with their sovereigns, that they did not only contend for the
superiority with the greatest Princes of the blood, but at length (as ambition
has never any end) striued with their liege Lords, and through their
rebellious counsels and most traiterous plottes, assisted by a multitude of
Guysards and Hispaniolized French, drove their sovereign Lord out of his
chief City: and not contented to offer so great indignity to so mighty a
potentate, never left practicing, until they had most wickedly murdered him,
whose life in all duty should have been unto them more precious then their
own: and with their devilish sorceries, have so bewitched and sotted sundry
of the French nation, that at this day, to their perpetual shame and ignominy,
they will not be reduced unto any dutiful obedience under their most lawful
and liege Lord.

Francis Duke of Guyse, and Charles Cardinal of Lorrain, the two firebrarnds of
France.
One of the most notorious plotters of so many mischiefs, was Francis Duke of
Guyse, who with his brother Charles Cardinal of Lorrain (as proud, subtle, and
as ambitious a prelate as ever was) grew to that height, through the benefit of
their good fortune, that they commanded all France, and brought the greatest
Princes of that nation to be their underlings: and by reason of a marriage
between Francis the second, with Mary the young Queen of Scotts their niece,
they bare themselves so loftely, and so egerly strove to advance their house,
that they turned all France topsy turuy, so changing the government and
altering the state, that it seemed in a short time to be a mere Chaos, and
confusion. For after the death of Henry the second, and that Francis his son
was crowned King, these two so craftily handled the matter, that joining with
Katherin de Medices, the Queen mother of France, (who contrary to the ancient
laws and ordinances of that Realm, which permit not women to rule, sought to
have the government of the young King, and to exclude Henry of Burbon King of
Navarre, and chief Prince of the blood) after infinite troubles to themselves,
and unspeakable misery to their own Country, they gat the government into
their hands, and swayed every thing after their own likings.

And albeit the state of that kingdom had begun long before to be much
afflicted, and through the horrible persecutions of those whom they termed
Hugonots, maruellously decayed and weakened, by reason of a secret division bred
in the hearts of infinite multitudes, who once dissenting in Religion, could
never after well agree in matters of state: yet was the land at peace within it
self, and every one seemed to be enclinable to their princes pleasure,
choosing rather to endure any affliction, then by seeking to defend their lives
and liberties by force of arms, to bring in any intestine wars, the most
devouring plague and sharpest punishment of all other: but after that the house
of Guyse began to rule, and that their factious devises cloaked with a zeal of
mainteining the Catholic cause, had once stirred the coals, the flame
presently brake forth, and finding convenient matter to nourish it withal,
spread it self in a short time over the face of the whole kingdom of France,
to the consuming of infinite multitudes of all sorts, and the extreme
impouerishing of the whole land.

There were sundry and diverse means to hasten this so wonderful and
lamentable alteration in France, but the principal of all other, was the
unexpected death of t e late King, The Queen mother, the King of Navarre and
the Duke of Guyse, contend for the government during the noneage of the King.
who albeit he very severely punished all such as were accounted Protestants,
and that principally at the instigation of the house of Guyse, yet did he so
politikely carry himself, that during his reign, he kept that ambitious
monster in some reasonable good order, and the whole land from tumult and
rebellion: but he was no sooner dead, but that all things began to hasten to
a confusion, and the whole common wealth to be daungerously infected with
sundry fearful diseases, the original whereof arose in this manner.

In the beginning of the reign of Francis the second, being but sixteen
years old, there grew a controversy between Katherin de Medices the Kings
mother, Henry of Burbon King of Navarre, and Francis of Lorraigne, Duke of
Guyse, touching the government of the young King during his nonage. The
Queene-mother alleged many reasons to strengthen her claim, as the laws of
Nature, which would that the mother should have the bringing up of her
children, as one having a most tender care over them, and most willing of all
others to do them good, the customs and vsages of sundry nations, and the
ancient order of the land, which made the mother Gardien of her child: and
so by consequent gave her the Regency of the kingdom. The king of Navarre on
the contrary affirmed, that he ought in right to be governor of the young
king, for that he was the next Prince of the blood, and nearest of kin unto
him: besides that there were fundamental laws of that nation, which did not
only shut out all strangers, (by whom he understood the house of Lorraine and
of Guyse): but also disabled the Queen mother, by reason of her sex, which
the Salique law did expressly exclude from all regency, and succession to the
Crown. The Duke of Guyse had also diverse reasons for the aduauncing of his
own title, as that he was the kings uncle: that by his service the whole
state had been in a manner maintained, and the land from sundry imminent
perilles delivered. Besides he excepted in a sort against the king of Navarre:
for that he and his brother the Prince of Condy, gave evident tokens of their
liking of the Gospel, and their hatred of the Romish Religion: so that if
Navarre should have the government of the King, it was to be feared (said
he) that the whole land would fall into heresy.

Thus did these three contend with might and maine for the superiorite, each
of them devising all the reasons they could imagine for the furtherance of their
cause.

But in the end, the Queen Mother, and the Duke of Guise doubting that they
should not be able nor sufficient to prevail, and also fearing least that
the King of Navarre (by reason of the great pre-eminence and authority that
the princes of the blood should by right have, besides his just title) should
in the end prevail and get the better against them both, thought it best to
join together against the King of Navarre, The Queen mother, and D. of Guise,
join together against Navarre.
and either by force, or by policy and fair means to win him unto their
wills, and by some devise or other to make him surcease from his just claim,
and interest.

The better to effect this, the Duke of Guise seysed upon the king, whom he
conducted and brought to the Louure in Paris, with the young Princes his
Brethren, and with the two Queens, leaving the Princes of the blood, the
Conestable, the Mareschall, the Admiral, and sundry other noble and great
personages attending upon the dead Corpse of the late king Henry.

When they had prevailed in their purpose thus far, then was there such
watch and ward kept about the King, that no man might speak unto him, but in
the presence of some of the Guyses: and the matter was so well handled in the
end, that the Cardinal and the Duke of Guyse ruled and gouourned all things,
and had the king in a manner at their will and commandment.

Then began they to bring into the kings Council men of their own faction,
and to procure the kings displeasure unto such as they disliked. The rulers
and governors of the Cities, Towns, and Provinces were at their appointment:
the Princes of the blood were employed in business far from the Court.

The Prince of Conde was sent into Flanders to treat of the league made
between France and Spain: the king of Navarre, the Cardinal of Burbon, and
the Prince De la Roch sur Yon were sent to conduct the kings Sister into Spain.

There were many devises and fetches to move the king of Navarre to give over
his claim and title which he made to the Regencie of the young King, and many
fair promises were procured out of Spain, conditionally that he would so do.

The proud letters of the K. of Spain.
And among others there were letters sent to that purpose, wherein the Spanish
king promised that if he would be ruled herein, he would restore him the
kingdom of Navarre, of which he held nothing but the title auerring further,
and that very imperiously, and with threatening words, that if he did
otherwise, he would take upon him the protection of his brother in law himself,
and spend all that ever he had, yea, his own life and the lives of forty
thousand others, whom he had in a readiness in maintaining the quarrel.

Thus partly with fair promises, and partly with threats, the King of Navarre
began to be cold, and in a manner quiet, and clean to give over the matter.
The king of Navarre gives over his claim.
When the Guyse perceived this, then did he proceed further, having the
countenance of the young King, and being backed so strongly with the Spanish
king, so that now he put out and in whom he listed, The pride of Guyse.
and incroched upon the offices of other men* he would not stick to meddle
with the Conestableship and great master of France, arrogating that unto
himself which of right belonged unto others. The high courts of Parliament
were full of his followers, and whom soever he suspected not to favor his
designs, these were by some one sinister information or other, presently
disgraced, insomuch as those few good men that were in place, considering the
rough handling, and severe usage of sundry well affected persons, and the small
good that ensued by complaining unto the King were content to be silent, and
not to meddle in such dangerous times.

The Cardinal of Guyse was appointed over the Kings finances: the Duke of
Guyse hi^ brother was made Lieutenant general, The Card^nall of Guyse made
Lord treasurer, and the duke his brother Lieutenant general for the King.
and had the direction of all matters appertaining unto the wars, and all
Captains, governors of towns, and other officers were commanded to obey him,
as the King himself. Thus had these two gotten the sole authority into
their hands, and although the Queen mother was at the first the means to
procure them so great place, and to make them so near about the king, yet not
long after she repented her thereof, and sought many ways to curb them, and
to keep them as short as she might: yet she being a most uncertain and
inconstant woman, and ever inclining to the worst, still rather held with them,
then with the princes of the blood, who began to wax weary of the
intolerable pride of the Guyse, and the burning, murdering, and injurious
dealing of that bloody house. The Guyse no sooner suspected that their hearts
were alienated, but that he studied day and night how to overthrow them, and
to cause the King to embrew his hands in the blood of his own kindred. While
these mischiefs were thus in platting, and many outrageous parts played
tending to the strengthening of this factious house, and the utter overthrow of
the ancient Nobility of France, infinite multitudes grew maruailous
discontented, and both by word and writing showed their mislike of the present
government, exclaiming against the sore persecutions of those of the reformed
Religion, and the intolerable wrongs and injuries offered unto sundry of the
Kings best affected subjects.

There were many supplications presented unto the Queen mother, to the King of
Navarre, and others of greatest place and authority, The Guyse sets the
King against the princes of the blood.
tending to the reformation of these miseries, but they were little or nothing
regarded: for the Queen mother favored not the Protestants in her heart,
though often in the beginning made some show thereof, and gave some help to
the persecuted Hugonots. The King of Navarre was timorous, and would not
prosecute the cause with such a courage as he ought to have done: besides, he
was besotted with the persuasions of regaining the kingdom of Navarre, if he
would still remain a Catholic: which conceived hope so stacke in his mind and
made so deep an impression in the bottom of his heart, that of a zealous and
earnest professor, he became key cold, and in the end proved a bitter enemy
to the cause: so that the Guyses did still what they listed, and no redress
was to be expected, for new Edicts and proclamations were made, and those more
severe then before: such as were known or suspected to be Protestants, were
apprehended, and either forced to recant, or else were burned. This barbarous
usage of so many natural Frenchmen, and outrageous cruelty toward all sorts,
bred by little and little a commiseration in the hearts of sundry, in whom
there remained some sparks of humanity, so that banding together and opposing
themselves against the proceedings of that time, they endeavored by all possible
means to reform the common wealth, and reduce the decayed estate to some
better order: and albeit that sundry personages had showed their liking of a
reformation, as the K. of Navarre, the Prince of Conde, the conestable, the
Admiral, Dandelot, and many others, yet no man attempted, but strained
courtesy (as it were) who should begin: which procrastinating sundry of good
place not being able to endure any longer, combined themselves together,
having for the principal and ringleader of their actions, one called Godfray
de Berry, Lord of Renaudy, The Lord of Renaudy with sundry others attempt
against the Guyse.
a wise, valiant and well experienced Gentleman, who notwithstanding wi hout the advice of six counselors, and 20. captains, might not attempt any thing.

This company consisting of mere polliticks in the beginning, and such as
sought for nothing but a reformation in the common weal, were in process of
time assisted by a multitude of those who were termed Hugonots (as it is the
manner of discontented persons, how different so ever the occasion be, to join
rogether in hope of fortunes accidents) who allied themselves with the rest,
the more willingly, for that it was in a civil cause, and such a thing as
tended to the honor of the King, and general good of the whole state.

Monsieur de Renaudy having acquainted many of good account with this great and
weighty enterprise, as the Baron Chastellnaw, Captain Mazeres, Vaillay,
Bressay, Chesnay, Chiray, S. Mary, Coqueuille, Chateaunef, and sundry others,
resolved with all possible speed in as close and secret manner as might be, to
draw near the Court, which was then at Amboyse, and on the sudden with some
five hundred Gentlemen, The enterprise of the Lord of Renaudy discovered.
to seize upon the Guyse and the Cardinal of Lorrain his Brother, and having
once caught them to put them to death for an exemplarie punishment to all other
seducers of the King, and disturbers of the common wealth. This enterprise
could not be so closely kept but that it came to the ears of the Guyses: who
understanding after sundry examinations, the drift and scope of the whole
project, and how that most of those who had complotted together, had long
since shaken off the Popes yoke, devised straight to publish so notable a
conspiracy, and to make it seem as odious as might be to the eyes of all
men: they declared how that they of the reformed Religion had conspired
against the king, the Queen mother, the kings brethren and Princes of the
blood, and sought to bring in their doctrine by force, to overthrow the
monarchy of France, and to reduce it to a popular estate and government, and
by depriving the king of his crown, to pull down the church, to root out the
ancient Catholic faith, and to infect the whole land with all kind of
impiety and irreligion, and having by sundry proclamations declared the
heinousness of the fact, fearing that a matter of such consequence was not
attempted without the priuitie of some great ones in the land: they fortified
themselves very strongly, mustered soldiers, gathered forces, and gat all
things in a readiness, to withstand any attempt that should be made upon the
sudden.

Being thus provided, they forthwith apprehended such as they suspected, and
proceeded against them with all rigor. Many of them who were taken were
executed, and the rest committed to several prisons, saving some few that by
their good fortune escaped their hands. At length diverse of the meaner sort
were set at liberty, fearing (indeed) that if all should be punished, so
great severity would alienate the hearts of many, who were nothing well
affected already. And although that the King of Navarre, the Prince of Conde,
the Admiral nor Dandelot could be charged with the maintaining or abetting of
any of these attempts, yet did the Guyses strongly suspect them, and
especially the three Chattillons, The three Chattillons of all other most hated
the Guyses.
whom of all other they feared most: notwithstanding, they thought it good
policy to give them fair speeches for the time, and to entertain them in
all plausible manner, until they had gotten their forces about them, and had
provided a strong army in a readiness: which was no sooner performed, but
they began to speak big words, and to deal more roughly: and first of all
they dealt with the Prince of Conde, who was commanded not to depart the Court
without license, while in the mean time they practiced to catch matter against
him, and to that purpose sundry with fair promises and rewards were
subborned to prove him the chief of that seditious tumult at Amboyse. They
daily whispered in the Kings ear, The Guyses incense the King against the
Prince of Conde.
that so long as Conde were at liberty, and suffered to countenance such as
already were discontented with the present government, the whole land would
never be at quiet, nor the kings person in safety, as appeared by the last
rebellious and tumultuous practice. The only way to prevent so many and so
great mischiefs, was to bring the Prince to his answer, and by apprehending
the ringleaders, to keep the meaner sort in order and due obedience. Whereupon
the king being by these sinister informations mightily incensed against the
Prince, commanded La Trousse, the steward of his house, to attach sundry of
his servants and to have them in safe keeping, and to command the prince
himself to come unto his presence the next morrow: and to the end there might
be some matter found against him, his house was searched, and all his papers
ransacked: the Guyses had also sent to search the Chamber and study of the
king of Nauarres Secretary, hoping that something would be found to minister
matter against these great personages: for now they might do what they listed,
seeing the king approved whatsoever they did, and did speak as it were with
their tongues.

As soon as the Prince was informed of the kings pleasure, The Prince of Conde
brought before the king.
he readily obeyed, and coming before him, did so clear himself, and
answered with such courage and alacrity, that it was thought good to dismiss
him for that present, without any further trial: whereupon the king showed him
very good countenance, and the Guyses seeing the time served not to accomplish
what they had purposed, cloked all in as covert manner as might be, and each
departed from other as good friends. But the Prince seeing his life was sought
for, thought it wisdom to look to himself, and for that long since he
favored the Gospel, he supposed it to be best to go to his brother the King of
Navarre, The Prince of Conde leaves the court and goes to the King of Navarre.
where he should be out of all danger, and might use his conscience freely.
Many wondered at this strange dealings with the Princes of the blood, saying,
that if they could not live without peril of their lives, that it would
shortly come to pass, that all true and natural Frenchmen should be
accounted enemies, and no man be in security but the house of Guyse and
Lorrayne, who being but strangers themselves, durst notwithstanding attempt
such practices against the kings best affected subjects, as were in no sort to
be endured. Hereupon great rumors were raised, and infinite multitudes grew
grieved with these injurious proceedings.

To prevent the mischiefs that might ensue hereof, the Queen mother with the
rest of the Kings council, sought by amiable letters and smoth words, to
content such as most complained, and where they did fear most danger, thither
did they send such as were most gracious with the people, to keep them in
their obedience. The Admiral, who for his wisdom, integrity, and experience
in all politic affairs, was not inferior to any of that age, was sent into
Normandy, The Admiral sent into Normandy to pacify the Country,
where there was thought to be the greatest number of discontented persons,
with a straight commandment to consider of all good means, for the quiet of
the land, and freely to signify unto the court, the occasions of their
dislike, and the best way how to reform those things which were amiss: The
cause of the coffeehouse in France.
which he from time to time very faithfully performed, aduertising the Queen
mother, that the cruel handling of those of the reformed Religion, and the
injurious dealing with all such as seemed to favor them, or any ways to
countenance them, and that under an unlawful authority, usurped by strangers,
without the approbation of the Princes of the blood, and the chief officers of
the land, and that while the King was in his minority, to the great prejudice
of the Realm and dishonor to the Crown of France, was the cause of so many
mischiefs, and was like still to draw on more dangerous consequents, if there
were not some speedy course taken to prevent them. Many such aduertisements
were sent from all quarters, and sundry evident signs appeared of civil
wars. Whereupon it was thought good to assemble all the Princes of the blood,
the Nobility, the officers of the Crown, and all men of place and authority,
to devise of the means how to pacify these troubles, which were likely to
ensue: which when the Guyses understood, albeit they liked not to hear of the
assembly of the States, The assembly of the States.
and therefore inwardly hated this motion of the Admiral and the Chancellor,
from whom it especially proceeded, yet were they outwardly contented therewith,
hoping by this means to draw the King of Navarre, the Prince of Conde, the
conestable and others to the Court, who otherwise could not so easily be come
by, and then to rule them well enough: assuring themselves that the greatest
multitude of the Knights of the order, and others of the Nobility which should
be there assembled, were at their devotion, and therefore that nothing could
pass in prejudice of them, but rather that all should tend to their further
profit and advancement. This resolution being taken, sommonances were sent
into all quarters, and particular letters written to the king of Navarre, to
request him to come to the Parliament, which was assigned at Fountainbleau, and
to bring his brother the Prince of Conde with him. The treacherous cou^se^^ of
Descari and Bouchart.
But when the Guises had with more maturitie of judgment considered of this
weighty subject, fearing that if Navarre, Conde, and the Constable, with all
their adherents should meet together, they should be ouermatched, and not be
able to make their party good, they practiced with Descars the Lord
Chamberlain, and Bouchart the Chancellor, two of Nauarres principal servants,
and those indeed upon whose counsels he principally relied, corrupting them
with great sums, and promising them mountains, if they would use the means
to dissuade the K. their master from that assembly. Which two, put so many
suspicious matters into Nauarres head, and used such forceable reasons to
divert him from his intended voyage, that notwithstanding the earnest entreaty
of the Constable he would not be induced to be at the Parliament at the time
appointed, The King of Navarre would not be at the council of estate.
which treacherous counsel of theirs, gave such a blow unto the whole realm of
France, that it feels the smart thereof until this day. For Navarre being
withholden by this their wicked advise, the whole government still remained in
the hands of the Guises, who fortified themselves more and more to their own
advancement, and the extreme peril of the whole state.

The day prefixed being come, there presented themselves most the greatest
personages which had bin summoned, so that the 21. of August 1559. this
honorable company were assembled in the chamber of the Queen mother, and
every one placed according to their degrees. First the K. under his cloth of
estate, then the Queen mother, the kings wife, and the kings brethren. Next to
these were the Cardinals of Burben, of Lorraine, of Guise, of Chastillon. The
Dukes of Guise and Aumaile, duke Memorancie Constable of France, Monsieur
d'Hospital the Chancellor, the two Mareschals, S. Andrew, and Bressac,
Chastillon the Admiral of France, The order of the estates of France, as they
sit in their Parliament.
Marillac the Archbishop of Vienna, Morbillier Bishop of Orleance: Mouluc
bishop of Valence, Mortier and Auancon, all of the Kings privy Council. The
Knights of the orders, the masters of the requests, the secretaries, and the
rest of the kings officers had likewise their places assigned them. The order
of the estates of France, as they sit in their Parliament.
All things being disposed after this manner, before any were commanded to
speak, the Admiral rose up, and with a Supplication in his hand went to the
king, The Admiral presents the supplication of the protestants to the King.
to whom (after due obeisance done) he declared, that according to his
Majesty's commandment at his going into Normandy, having as diligently as he
could looked into the causes of these troubles which sprung up daily in the
land, he in his opinion coniectured, that such as found themselves most
grieved, intended no harm against his royal person, or the state, but that
their greatest coffeehouse arose of the extreme persecutions of such, as
were termed Hugonots, without any judicial manner of proceeding: especially
seeing they offered to have their doctrine tried by the scriptures, and were
willing to conform themselves to the order of the primative church, and
therefore he thought it a thing very agreeable to his majesty's liking, to take
their humble petition, and present it unto his highness, to the end that he
understanding their grief, might devise with his council in so honorable a
presence, somespeedy means to relieve his distressed subjects, and to set his
kingdom in some better quietness, assuring him, that in his opinion, there were
infinite multituds in France yt sighed after a reformation, seeing there were, as
he was told, fifty thousand in Normandy, who would willingly have subscribed
unto that supplication. And so beseeching the King to have some regard hereof,
and favorably to enterpret that which he had done, with humble reverence he
returned to his place. When as this supplication was read, and the contents
understood, whereof some were that there might be public places appointed
for the Protestants to meet in, and that their preachers might be permitted to
teach the people without peril, many wondered at this bold part of the Admiral,
considering the manifest danger he had cast himself into, by taking the
cause of such odious persons into his hand, and present it unto the K. who was
so exasperated against them. The King seemed to take this action of the
Admirals in very good part, giving him very gracious words, and an
honorable testimony of his good service, commanding every one to speak his
opinion in order, and as the case required.

In this assembly there were three which spoke excellently to the purpose,
laying open unto the view of all men the naked truth: and as men resolute in
their countries cause, not daunted with the faces of any, openly reproved that
course which was taken in the administration of the Commonwealth, and the
affairs of the land. And those were Moluc Bishop of Valence, Marillac the
Archbishop of Vienna, and Chastillon the Admiral. The eloquent speech of
Mouluc, did somewhat warm the Guises, and Marillac with his hardy and learned
discourses, did make them as hot as a toast. Mouluc, Marillac, and the Admiral
worthy of immortal praise for their free speech.
Both concluding, that to prevent so many miseries as were likely to ensue, it
were convenient to assemble a general Council: or if that could not be
accomplished, then to refer the deciding of those controversies to a
national Council, and in the mean time to deal more mildely with such as
were of the reformed religion. But when the Admiral came to speak, he made
them stark mad, he so touched them to the quick. The Admiral touch the
Guises to the quick.
For having first approved that which had been said by Mouluc, and Marillac,
he insisted upon the new guard which the Guises had set about the king which
(said he) was a matter of perilous consequence, to nourish the K. in a
diffidence and evil opinion of his subjects, and in time might draw on the
hatred of the people toward their prince, who seeing themselves suspected,
would be suspicious again, seeing their king and sovereign armed against them,
and in stead of free access, to impart unto him their griefs and doleances,
to be utterly secluded from his presence, by a multitude of armed soldiers.
And for his part he could not conceive what reason there was, why the French
king should be so guarded: for he would pawn his honor, his goods, yea, and
his life to, that there was no harm meant against his person. If any of his
principal Officers were afraid of themselves, it were good to cut off all
occasions of offense, which arose especially of the disordered government of
such as had the managing of the public affairs.

The duke of Guise highly offended with the Admiral.
The Duke of Guise was in an extreme rage with the Admiral for these speeches,
and from that day forward grew to be his mortal enemy. And albeit that he
and the Cardinal his brother, labored to cross these good motions before
remembered: yet was it agreed upon by the King, with the assent of all the
Nobility, that there should be another assembly of the estates at Meaux, and
there these points to be more fully resolved of: and in the mean time that
every one should repair into their Countries, to learn the state of them, the
better to acquaint the King at the next assembly with their plaints. While
these things were thus in handling, there were many enterprises of the
Mal-contents, tending to the surprising of sundry towns: which occasioned the
Guises to send out proclamation in the Kings name, and to levy soldiers, to
withstand (as they said) the attempts of the seditious, and perturbers of the
state. But the truth was, that having their forces in a readiness, they might
send on the sudden for the Prince of Cond^, who was still with his brother the
King of Navarre: and if he would not come, then to fetch him by force. But
first they assayed after a mild manner, to accomplish their devises, causing
the king to write unto Navarre, in friendly sort to request him to come to the
Court, and to bring his brother Conde with him, or otherwise he should be
compelled to fetch him, for that there were so many, and so evident accusations
against him. But Navarre, and the Prince answered so wisely, and with such
courage, that their enemies thought it not good to attempt any thing against
them by violence. Whereupon they caused the king to send an other Messenger,
by whom they were required to come to his Majesty, The Guises cause the K. to
falsify his word.
assuring them in the word of a Prince, that there should no injury be
offered them, but that they should return at their pleasure: only he
desired to be satisfied from the Prince of Condees own mouth, touching such
matters as he was charged with: Whereupon, these two Princes relying upon the
kings faithful promises, 1560
repaired to the Court, whither they were no sooner come, but that the Prince
of Conde was committed to Chauignie, The Prince of Conde committed to prison.
Captain of the guarde, and by him clapped up in prison, where no man might
speak unto him. The king of Navarre had no further liberty, then to walk
from his own Chamber to the king, and no man might speak with him but such as
pleased the Guise, who set spies enough about him, to observe his doings. The
mother in Law likewise of the Prince of Conde, and Sister to Chastillon the
Admiral, was sent to prison, and very narrowly looked unto. Her Closet and
all her house was ryfled, to find some matter against her. This rough dealing
with the chief Princes of the blood, and other such of great quality and
calling, made many muse what would be the issue of such outrageous designs.

The Prince had not been long committed to prison, but there was a priest sent
unto him to say Mass in his Chamber. But he commanded him to be thrust out
by the head and shoulders, The Prince thrusts a Mass priest out of his
doors by the head and shoulders.
willing him to tell the King that he would not suffer any such idolatrous
service in his presence: as also that he would not to save his life offend
the Majesty of God in so high measure.

When his enemies had gotten this advantage against him, they so incensed the
King, that he forthwith commanded his process to be drawn, and sentence of
death to be pronounced against him, The prince condemned to die.
with commandment to hasten the execution as speedily as might be. But while
they were earnestly busied about this matter, and thought even now to have
attained to the full period of their desires, the king fell dangerously sick of
an ulcer, The K. falls sick.
growing in his ear, which increasing more and more, and the physicians
despairing of his recovery, the Princes execution, (which should have been the
morrow following) was respited for a time, until they saw what would become of
the king, who every day waxing worse and worse, notwithstanding all the means
that could be devised by the Guises, their solemn vows to the saints in
Paradise, and their public processions, with earnest prayers for his health:
yet he died the fifth day of December, The death of the French King.
1560. after he had reigned 17. months, to the exceeding grief of the
Catholics, and the great terror of the D. of Guise, The horror of the Guises.
and the Cardinal his brother, who had carried themselves so proudly and
arrogantly during all the time of his reign, that they were extreemly hated of
all that were of any virtuous and humble disposition, and therefore were now
maruellously afraid, least they should endure some scourge for their former
outrageous doings, and that horrible confusion which they had brought into the
Commonwealth.

CHAP. VII.
Charles the ninth, the French King: the Prince of Conde set at liberty. The
coffeehouse of the Princes of the blood. The King of Navarre made the Kings
Lieutenant. The Conestable bandeth with the Guises. The King of Navarre
forsakes the Protestants. The Triumuirat. The murder at Vassie. The beginning
of the first civil wars. The death of the King of Navarre. Dandelot brings
forces out of Germany for the succor of the Protestants. The battle of
Dreux. Poltrot kills the Duke of Guise. Peace proclaimed.

FRancis the second was no sooner deceased, and that Charles the ninth was come
to the Crown, but all seemed to be cast in a new mould: especially the state
of the Prince of Conde, was incontinenly altered: for whereas before he was
accused and condemned of high treason, and should have been executed, had not
the malicious purposes of his enemies been crossed, by the sudden death of the
King: now he was cleared of all the former accusations, and declared innocent
of those pretended crimes, and restored to his dignity and place. The Prince
of Conde set at liberty.
The Guises his mortal enemies began in all submisse manner to seek his
favor, and never left the Queen mother, until she had accomplished their
desires: which was the more readily brought to pass, for that they had caused
the late King, a day or two before to speak lovingly unto the King of Navarre,
and to affirm that the Guises never attempted any thing, either against him,
or his brother, the Prince of Conde: but that whatsoever was done, was at his
commandment, and that contrary to their counsel and advice, he had caused
the said Prince to be imprisoned: and therefore he desired them, for the
love they bare unto him, that they would not conceive hardly against them, or
any of theirs.

Albeit Navarre did not believe this, yet as one loath to raise new stirs, he
was content to temporise and dissemble the matter, supposing in deed, that now
their pride was abated, and that they would no more carry themselves so
hautily as they had done in times past. But they no more able to change their
natures, then then the Leopard her spots, still aspired to have the government
in their hands: and it seemed the Queen mother was well content to give them
some countenance, fearing tha^ if they should be altogether kept under, by
the Princes of the blood, her authority would likewise in short time be
limited: which was a thing that she could not endure by any means. Which
being noted by the King of Navarre, he complained to the Queen mother, The
King of Navarre complains to the Queen mother, of the Guise.
that those of Guise were again too much favored, and that they had too great
countenance, being preferred before him, who was the chiefest Prince of the
blood, and who by the ancient laws ought to have the government of the Realm,
during the nonage of the King: and that he could not endure to see them
advanced, who had always been his mortal enemies. And although he were
contented to bear much in regard of the love and duty he bare unto her, The
Princes of the blood depart from the Court greatly discontented.
yet there was no reason why his kindness should be so hardly requited. And if
it were, he would not endure it: and further, if the duke of Guise were so
near about the King, he must and would be further of.

The Queen mother sought to content Navarre with fair words, but yet she did
not satisfy him as he desired: and therefore the next day, he with most of
the Princes of the blood, the Conestable, his sons and Nephews of
Chastillon, departed from the Court toward Paris, highly discontented with the
Queens answer. The Queen mother, who extreemely grieved to see this
accident, sent for the Conestable to come and speak with her: to whom she
caused the King to say, and that in the presence of two Secretaries of estate,
The Conestable commanded by the King not to depart from Court.
who were ready to record what was spoken, that seeing he was the chief
Officer of the Crown, and one of whose presence he stood in need of at that
instant, he commanded him not to forsake him, as he would answer it at his
peril. Which word took such place, and made such an impression in the
Conestables mind, that albeit he were often summoned by the King of Navarre,
to stand to his promise, yet he could not be drawn from the Court, but kept
him still with the King: whereupon it was presently voiced, that the Queen
mother maintained the Guises against the King of Navarre, and the rest of the
Princes of the blood.

But least Navarre and his associates should be too much discontented with
this cross dealing, it was thought good to practice some new atonement
between them and the Guises, and to declare Navarre the kings lieutenant
general throughout all his dominions: The King of Navarre made lieutenant
general for the king.
which was accomplished by the means of the Conestable: so that now Navarre
was highly honored, and the Guises made Court unto him. This gave some comfort
unto the persecuted Hugonots, and caused all men to hope for some better
government then had been of late time: and the rather, for that Navarre told
the Ambassador of Denmark, that within one year he would cause the Gospel to
be preached throughout all France.

It was a wonder to hear what joy there was generally, throughout the whole
land, and how exceedingly the number of the Protestants were increased in a
short time, by this little countenance which was given them. In so much as they
could hardly find convenient places to receive the multitudes, which flocked
to the Sermons. Now as there were many who used this benefit wisely, and with
great reverence: so there were others, who indiscreetly abused it, exceeding a
mean, and hastily running from one extremity to another, supposing they
stood upon a better foundation then indeed they did, began to use too much
liberty, to eat flesh, and that upon such days as were forbidden, to
condemn festival days, and many ceremonial vsages, to pull down images, and
deface altars, contrary to that which had not long before been expressly
commanded: which was that the ordering of these things, should be referred
either to a general, or national council.

The Constable alienated from the Admiral by the practice of the Guise.
This boldness and rash dealing of many of the reformed, and the daily
informations of such like pranks played in many corners of the land, brought
the Conestable (who was a very devout and a religious Papist) into a marvelous
dislike with such as were termed protestants, especially when he saw them at
Court eat flesh in Lent, and that there were preachings in the Prince of Condes
chamber, and likewise in the Admirals, and free access for all men to come unto
them. Which when the Guises perceived, they likewise under the pretext of
religion joined themselves unto the Conestable, exasperating him against the
Admiral his cousin, for his embracing of the Gospel, and set the Marshall S.
Andrew to whisper him in the ear, that the motion which was made, as touching
the calling back again of those excessive donations, given by the late King,
was a devise of the Admirals, to keep him being his uncle in awe, and by that
practice to cause him to change his Religion. Sundry others (as Madame
Madalyne de Sauoy his wife, the Duchess of Valentinois, and the Count
Villiers, put to their helping hands to whet him on: who altogether alienated
by these practices, notwithstanding all the remonstrances of the Marshall
Memorancie his son, banded against his own kindred, and associated himself
with the Dukes of Montpensier, and of Guise, who with their leagues and
confederations robbed the king of his subjects, The league.
and brought into that noble kingdom all disorder and confusion.

The Guises having got the Conestable to join with them, began to lift up
their heads, and secretly to spread abroad many infamous things against the
Admiral, whose confusion of all others they most earnestly desired, whereupon
many grudgings arose, and it was vehemently feared, that some tumultuous
accidents would ensue: for the preventing whereof, there was an Edict made at
Fountainbleau, The Edict made at Fountainbleu
and sent abroad into all parts of the land, whereby it was forbidden to use
any opprobrious words to any of the Kings liege people, and especially that
one should not call another Papist, Guises could not endure that this
peaceable course should be taken, The Guises labor to overthrow the kings
Edict.
and therefore (as those who thought it their best to fish in troubled waters)
they devised with the Court of Parliament at Paris, to frustrate this
Proclamation, and by many reasons to show the inualiditie thereof, and
especially for that thereby was tolerated two religions: which (said they) was
not to be endured, considering that by this means, the whole state was
endangered, nay that it was impossible for that common wealth to endure long,
where there were such co^trarieties considering that there can be no agreement
betwixt god and belial: and a kingdom divided within it self could not continue
for any long time. Besides, the Cardinal of of Lorrayn made many grievous
complaints against those of the Religion, The Cardinal of Lorraine complains
of the assemblies of the Protestants.
saying that their assemblies and conuenticles waxed greater every day then
other, that there were foul and villainous disorders committed by them in their
nocturnall meetings: that they were people without order, without conscience or
any civil humanity, and that they neither feared God nor the King.

These and the like complaints much moved the Queen mother, and gladly she
would have repressed these assemblies, if she had known how. But the
countenance of the King of Navarre, the Prince of Conde, the Admiral
Rochfaucont, Dandelot, and diverse other of the Nobility, did encourage many to
persist, and drew on others by their examples, with great earnestnes to embrace
the gospel, in so much as at length they finding themselves very strong, and
well countenanced by great estates, seized upon sundry of the Catholics
Churches, and preached publicly in the view of all men, and that in Paris, the
principal City of the whole land: yea, the Gospel prevailed so mightily in a
short space, that it was found by the diligent inquiry of the Admiral, that
there were 2150. congregations that made profession thereof: 2150. congregations
of the protestants in France.
which vexed the Guyses to the heart, who by their cunning handling of the
matter, had by this time brought the Conestable in such hatred therewith, and
with his cousins the three Chastillons, that both he and the Guyses with all
their fauourits, departed the Court in a great chafe, for that they saw such
favor showed to the poor Hugonots.

While the Protestants were thus graced at their princes hands, and that all
things seemed to go well with them, there fell out a strange accident to cross
that happy course of the Gospel, and a most deuilish policy was used to
overthrow the reformed Religion, well near established in most of all the
princicipall Cities, and cheifest villages of the Realm: and that was this.

The King of Navarre, albeit he favored the Religion, and countenanced the
professors thereof in very good sort, and that for a good while together: yet
being a man easily seduced, and almost of no courage or resolution in any
thing that he took in hand, was led by others, and by fair words carried
hither and thither at every man's pleasure: which the Guyses and their
associats perceiving, practiced sundry ways to draw him to their faction,
assuring themselves that if he might be gained, their side would be strong
enough: and that Conde, the Admiral, and all the rest of their confederates
would be made to stoop whether they would or not. The better to effect this,
they practiced with the Cardinal of Ferrara, the Popes Legate, and with the
Cardinal of Turnon, The Cardinals of Ferrara and Turnon turns the K. of
Navarre from the Gospel.
who having by rich gifts, and large promises, gained two of his principal
servants, did in the end likewise win the master, by a notorious and deep
dissimuled devise. They put into his head a fantastical conceit, assuring him
that if he would become a Catholic, and continue in the Apostolic Roman
faith, that the King of Spain would give him the kingdom of Sardinia, which
was four times so good as Navarre, and that the Popish and Spanish galleys
should be at his commandment for the defense thereof against all men: some
also went about to persuade him to divorce himself from his Wife, and to
marry with the Queen of Scots, a young, fair, and beautiful widow, The King
of Navarre councelled to deuorce himself from his Wife, and to marry with the
queen of Scots.
the daily soliciting of such as were employed in this business, and their
manifold remonstrances, took such place, that his whole mind was set upon
Sardinia, whatsoever could be said to the contrary by any friend he had. The
Queen of Navarre understanding this, sought by all means to divert him,
setting before his eyes his many and solemn promises both to God and man, and
that if he should now abandon his friends, all the world would cry out of
him. But all was in vain, for he began to decline every day more then other,
and in short time did utterly forsake his profession, combining himself with
the Guyses, his mortal and sworn enemies.

The Queen mother plays on both hands.
The Queen mother did all this while very cunningly carry her self, and
became (as it were) a newter between both, enclining rather to the Catholics,
purposing (in deed) howsoever religion went, to take the strongest part, and
therefore she entertained the prince of Conde and the admiral with fair words,
promising them wonders, and for a better show countenanced the preachings all
that might be: howbeit, she favored the Catholics in her heart, and began to
make but light of the daily complaints of the protestants.

The league which before had bin made between the Conestable, the Guyse, and
the mareschall Saint Andrew, afterward called the Triumuirate, The Triumuirate.
having gained the king of Navarre, became very strong, insomuch as they hasted
to Paris, there to fortify themselves, and to procure so much as they might,
an abolishment of those Edicts and proclamations which had been published in
favor of the reformed Church. The king of Navarre began to frown on his
cousins of Chastillon, and to speak a loofe off unto them: which made them to
forsake the Court, and to retire to their own houses, for fear least there
should be some quarrel picked against them. The prince of Conde complained
maruailously of those strange fashions of his brother, and resolutely stood in
the favor of the protestants: and the better to prevent all inconveniences,
put himself within Paris, there to provide for the countenancing of the
reformed Churches, and to see that the Kings edicts should be executed, and
peace maintained so much as might be.

Triumuirate being well acquainted with all these proceedings, and knowing the
courage and magnanimous mind of the Prince, which would not be daunted with
words, thought it their best to come strongly appointed, and either by fair
means or by foul to seize upon the person of the King, and the Queen
mother: which if they might once effect, they doubted not but the rest of their
devises would be accomplished well enough.

The Duke of Guyse, desirous to be with the foremost at this audacious
enterprise, forgot not to join with his associats at the appointed time, and
passing by Vashy with a great troop of armed men, The murder at Vashy by the
Duke of Guyse.
understanding that there was a Sermon not far off, where many of the
Hugonots were assembled, suddenly set upon them, and in most cruel and
outrageous sort, put them all to the sword, sparing neither man, woman, nor
child, to the great horror of the beholders of so pittious a tragedy, and to
the high dishonor of the King, by whose edict not long before, they were
allowed their preachings and liberty of their conscience. After which
barbarous fact he hasted to Paris, there to effect the rest of his diabolical
devises. The news of this horrible murder (being quickly blown abroad) came
no sooner to the ears of the Protestants, but they began to lay their wits
together, and to provide for their safety. Many of the nobility which had made
profession of the gospel, repaired to the prince of Conde, who was in Paris,
there to take advise what course were best to be used in so perilous and
dangerous times: where it was concluded, that before they would rise in arms,
they would first seek for justice by the ordinary course appointed: whereupon
they complained to the King, the Queen mother, and the King of Navarre,
desiring that the Duke of Guyse, The prince of Conde asks for justice against
the Guise, but cannot be heard.
who was now up in arms and marching toward Paris, might be commanded to
come in more peaceable manner, and to answer those grievous complaints made
against him, and his contemptuous and disobedient proceedings against the Kings
laws. The Queen mother seemed to hearken unto them, but the king of Navarre
flatly answered, that he which touched the little finger of the Duke of Guyse,
touched his whole body, and that he would not endure that he should be wronged
by any.

By this time was the Duke of Guyse come to Paris, accompanied with the
Conestable, the Duke of Aumaile, the mareschall of Saint Andrew, Randan, and
with a great troop of other his associats, where he was received with the
acclamations of sundry other his supposts, Viue Guyse, Viue Guyse, The Guyse
received with great acclamations into Paris.
as if the K. himself had entered. There likewise repaired to the Prince of
Conde great numbers of his friends and followers: so that the City was full
of armed men, divided into two contrary factions. The Citizens fearing that
there would be some uproar, and that some dangerous accident would ensue among
so many enemies and discontented persons, besought the Prince, that for the
love and favor which they had always borne to the Princes of the blood, and in
especial to the house of Conde, it would please him to have compassion upon
the Parisians, who now stood in great fear of their lives and loss of their
goods, if any tumultuous stir should hap, by reason their City swarmed
with a multitude of soldiers, whom they knew not how to be rid of, unless
it might please him whom they had always known to be of a very mild and
peaceable nature, to withdraw himself and his troops to some other place:
which course as they were assured, it would be the safest for their City, so
they doubted not but it would be most honorable unto him, and an evident
argument unto all the world, of the religious care he had to save so many
men's lives, as at that instant seemed to be in assured peril.

Whereto the Prince answered, that he for his part was very willing to leave
the City, if the Guyse would do the like: which thing being promised that it
should be performed, The prince of Conde leaving Paris at the request of the
Parisia^s, the Guyse seiseth upon it
the prince was no sooner departed, but there were strong guards set at the
gates to keep him from reentring: and so was the Prince expelled, and the
Guyse remained master of the City: This being brought to pass, the
Triumuirate presently marched toward the Court, The Triumuirate seiseth upon
the K.
and there took the king, the Queen mother, and the Kings brethren, whom
they brought to Paris, and forthwith determined to proclaim wars against the
Prince of Conde, The beginning of the first civil wars.
and all his associats. The Prince being informed of these proceedings, sent
Dandelot brother to the Admiral, to seize upon Orleance, which (though with
some difficulty) he accomplished: whether Conde forthwith repaired, and
took possession of the Town to the kings use. Paris, where nothing was more
common then murdering, spoiling, and pilling the poor Hugonots: yea, such was
the rage of the barbarous Catholics, that the Princess of Co^de passing
through a village called Vaudray, was set upon being in her Coach and great
with child, and by hurling and throwing of stones by sundry of the townsmen,
The Princess of Conde assailed in her Coach by the Papists.
at the instigation of a popish priest, put in hazard of her life, wherewith
she was so terrified, that she was delivered before her time of two twins
shortly after, and at length with much adoo, arrived at Orleance with her
eldest son the marquess of Conty: where she found the Prince of Conde, the
Admiral, Dandelot, and many other principal persons of the Religion, who were
busied in gathering forces, and providing al necessary means to withstand
their enemies. There were letters written to the Emperor Ferdinando, and the
Princes of the Empire, enforming them of the occasion of their bearing of
arms, and of the usurped authority of the Guyses and their adherents,
earnestly beseeching them to have some commiseration of the King, who being a
Child, was held in captivity by their tyranny, and al things likely to be
brought to a woeful desolation throughout the realm of France.

The Prince had no sooner gathered a great power about him, and was grown
strong by reason of a supply brought unto him out of Poictou, Conde takes
certain towns upon the Loyre.
and Xantoigne, of three or four hundred horse, by the count Rochfaucont, but
that it was thought best to be doing, and to employ some of his forces in
getting of certain strong towns and other well fortified places near
adjoining: and thereupon certain troops were sent down along by the River of
Loyre, who took Mun, Baugency, and others, wherein they placed certain
garrisons, to keep them from being regained by the enemy, who now sought
continually to anoy the Prince, and to take the advantage that was offered.

Sundry Cities in France, as Angiers, Tholous, Lymoux, with many others,
wherein there were thousands of the reformed Religion, seeing that the Prince
was grown strong, and very able to confront his enemies, began to show
themselves openly, and to stand with the rest of their confederates:
whereupon forthwith there ensued a mortal hatred between them and the
Catholics, each seeking the overthrow of others by all possible means. Then
immediately followed robbing, spoiling, rauishing, murdering, and massacring,
in most outrageous manner, The misery of the civil wars.
with a maruailous confusion in every corner of the Land. No man could well
tell whom to trust, or where to dwell in safety. The chief Cities were
fraught with garrisons, the small villages were sacked and burned by such as
cared neither for God nor the devil, but only how to enrich themselves.
Infinite were the miseries in all quarters, and nothing almost heard of but
weeping, wailing, and lamentation, and no hope of any redress of so
incomprehensible mischiefs.

The Prince of Conde and his associats pondering in their minds the woeful
desolation that was like to ensue, if there were not some present remedy for
these diabolical proceedings, wrote diverse letters to the King, the Queen
mother, and the King of Navarre, beseeching them to take some commiseration
upon the poor and desolate people, and that by suffering the subject to use
his conscience so long as he lived in obedience and according to the kings
Edict, France might enjoy her former peace, and not be brought to that horrible
desolation, which does inseparably accompany civil and intestine wars* but
the Guyse (who in deed with the Cardinal his brother ruled the roast) could
not endure to hear of any peace, but daily and hourly cried out, The Duke of
Guyse cries out for war.
to muster men, to gather soldiers, to send for the kings bannes and
arierbannes, and with fire and sword to persecute the poor protestants. And
having by their damnable practices gotten an army, marched toward Orleance
with great fury. The confederates being daily advertised by their espials of
the approach of the Catholics, thought it best to meet them by the way, and if
opportunity served, to give them battle, being especially moved thereunto by
the continual persuasions of the Admiral, and the courageous resolution of
all in general.

Whereupon the prince took the field the nineteenth of June, 1562. with three
Regiments of footmen, amounting to the number of 33. Ensigns, The Prince of
Conde takes the field.
whose Colonels were Gnamont, Fontenay, the youngest son of the vicont of
Roham, and Iuoy brother to Genlis, with two thousand horse encamped at
Vausoudun, near unto Orleance, and directly in the way toward Baugency. The
Catholics having not as yet al their forces in a readiness, thought it best
to amuse the Prince with a parle of peace, in which action the Queen mother
was thought the meetest to be employed: who so handled the matter, that the
Protestants (who longed after nothing so much as quietness) were readily
drawn to hearken thereto: only they required, that before any thing was
talked of, the Conestable, the Duke of Guyse, and the marquess Saint Andrew
should withdraw themselves to their houses, and then the Prince of Conde should
come to the King to treat of that, which especially tended to the peaceable
state of the common wealth, and the welfare of every particular man.

This was no sooner moved by the Protestants, but it was accepted by the
Queen mother, so that immediately those three principal Catholics departed
from the Court, and went as far as Chasteaudan, where they stayed to expect
the sequel of their secret councels. The Prince understanding of their
departure, went presently unto the K. putting himself into the hands of the
Queen mother, and other his enemies: Conde puts himself into the hands of
his enemies.
but he was no sooner come to the Court, but he forthwith repented of his
haste, and being advertised by sundry, of his imminent peril and danger,
pollitikely obtained of the Queen mother, that the principal men of his Army
might likewise come to know her further pleasure: which being granted, he
wrote a secret letter unto them of his estate, A polliticke devise of the
Prince.
desiring them to hasten, and to come strongly accompanied.

The next day early in the morning there came the Admiral, Dandelot,
Rochfaucont, the Prince Portian, Rohan, Genlis, Gramont, Soubize, Piennes, and
many other lords and Captains, with a far greater retinew then the Queen
expected: so that now she thought it best to make fair weather, and to sooth
them up, considering (in deed) that she was not able to detayne the Prince any
longer then he himself listed, and therefore in very gracious manner she bad
them al welcome, and openly in the presence of all the Nobility, she gave
them great thanks, for their true and faithful service toward the king,
assuring them that she (for her part) did think very honorably of all their
proceedings, and did not doubt but the King her son would be mindful
hereafter to recompense so many deserts, The Queen mother allows of the
proceedings of the protestants.
seeing it was very apparent that both his estate and her own was maintained
by their royal services. They again humbly thanked her majesty for her good
opinion, beseeching her to continue their gracious Lady, and to be a means
that there might be an end of those miseries, which now so fearfully
threatened the crown of France, promising for their parts to be most ready to
employ their whole studies, yea, their goods, and lives, and whatsoever other
means they had to assist her majesty, in so good and laudable an action, so
that they might enjoy a peace, with a free exercise of their Religion,
according to the Kings edict.

They further declared unto the Queen mother, the manifold greeuances of the
kings subjects, with a means to remedy so many and so lamentable disorders,
to al which and sundry other remonstrances, albeit she seemed to give some
allowances, yet for that she stood so stiffly against the free exercise of
Religion, and would needs urge the Prince to depart the Realm (as indeed he
had promised, rather then he would be any occasion of the continuance of
civil wars, albeit presently upon better and more mature consideration he
repented him of the speech) there could be nothing concluded. Whereupon the
Prince returned to his camp, The Prince of Conde returns to his Camp and
prepares for war.
exceeding glad that God had delivered him out of the snares of his enemies,
and resolved with all, for his forces to fight it out, and to hazard his
fortune as soon as any opportunity was offered. With this resolution he
dislodged and marched toward the Catholics, having in his army ten thousand
five hundred footmen, and a thousand horse. Now when he approached the enemy,
having disposed his troops in very warlike manner, he twice presented the
battle, but the Catholics refused, The Catholics refuse to fight.
for that all their forces were not as yet assembled.

The Prince seeing he could not draw them out of their strength, having
braued them in the faces, and maintained some light skirmishes with them,
retired toward Orleance, sending abroad into all quarters to provide all
necessaries for the wars: and for the more speedy accomplishment hereof, it
was decreed that Soubize should be sent to Lions, Rochfaucont into
Xaintoigne, Duras into Guyen, and Briquemault into Normandy, and so into
England, to procure both men and money, and as many friends as might be
gotten. Dandelot was likewise sent into Germany, to hasten such succors as
were promised by the Princes Protestants. Conde, and the Admiral, with the
rest of the Captains and Gentlemen, with two and twenty ensigns of footmen
remained still in Orleance.

By this time were the forces which came out of Germany to the aid of the
Catholics in a readiness to march under their Collonelles, Forces sent out of
Germany to aid the Catholics.
Rokendolf, Frewlich, and the Ringraue, who besides certain Cornets of
Reisters, had likewise twenty ensigns of Lansquenits. These were no sooner
arrived at the camp, but that the Triumuirate thought it best to employ them
with all the rest of their forces against the Hugonots, and that before they
should have any aid come out of Germany. For the hastening whereof, Dandelot
had assayed all possible means, and had so pollitikely handled the matter,
that notwithstanding all the practices of his enemies, he procured great aid
for the strengthening of the cause.

The Catholics were long in suspense whether they should besiege Orleance, or
Rohan, The Catholics besiege Rohan, and take it.
the principal City in Normandy: but at last, they resolved to assay their
forces against Rohan. Where having first gained the fort of Saint Katherins,
which commanded the town, through the treachery of the captain, who was
corrupted with money and fair promises, they forthwith entered by force,
killing, spoiling and murdering the inhabitants in most cruel and horrible
manner, and making havoc of all things without pity or mercy. Augustine
Marolat, Marlorat hanged.
a famous learned man, and chief Minister of the Town, was there hanged, with
Mautreuill the president of the Parliament, besides sundry other of special
account. The Catholics lost many of their brauest men: and amongst others the
King of Navarre who being shot with a Harquebuz in the left shoulder, as he
was making water in the Trenches, dyed the seventeenth of September following:
The King of Navarre wounded to death.
never attaining that Marittime Kingdom, the hope whereof had so bewitched
him, that he forgot wife, children, kinsfolks, friends, Religion, yea, and God
himself, and thought of nothing but of the Sardinian Crown: being happy in
nothing but in this, that he dyed in the beginning of the Civil wars, and
never lived to see the misery of his own Country, whereof he had been a
chief and principal cause.

The loss of this City being a place of so great importance, was a maruailous
discouragement unto many, who stood but faintly to their tacklings before, and
had (no doubt) wrought a more dangerous effect, had not this breach been
repaired, or at least well amended, by the surpassing care and provident
circumspectnesse of Dandelot, who so plied his friends in Germany, Dandelot
brings forces out of Germany to the aid of the Protestants,
that he had gathered about 3300. horse, and 4000. footmen, with whom there met
the Prince Portion at Strausbourge with 100. French horse. The ioiful news of
which power encouraged the confederates to hold out, in hope of their future
help, and maruellously animated such, as before were exceedingly daunted with
the remembrance of their former losses. These new supplies marched toward
Lorrain, and passing over the river of Seine, trauersed the country by Yonne,
Creuen, and Montargis, and arrived at Orleance, in despite both of the duke of
Neuers, and the Mareschall S. Andrew, who were sent to stop their passage, with
14. companies of men of Arms, 16. cornets of Argoletters, 25. ensigns of
footmen, 9. companies of lances, and 13. of light horse, besides the old
troops of Picardie, under the leading of Pauan, Monsales, Giury, Crenay, and
many other Chieftaines. This noble and valiant Dandelot, gained a very
honorable report, even of his enemies, for so wise and politic a conduct,
insomuch as he was not only reputed a Gentleman of surpassing courage, and of
an undaunted spirit in greatest perils, but also a leader of excellent skill,
Dandelot esteemed for an excellent captain
and deep foresight to prevent all dangers: About the same instant there met
with him also Rochfaucont, and Duras, with some three hundred horse, and a
thousand five hundred footmen, al which were no sooner assembled at Orleance,
but that the Prince determined to take the field: and having provided all
things in a readiness, departed toward Phiuiers, and so to Baugencie* both
which places were quickelye gained from the Catholics, with the strong Town
of Estamps: where was found great store of provision, as Corn, Wine, Powder,
shot, and all necessaries for the wars.

The Prince after some small stay to repose his wearied troops, marched on
toward Paris, The Prince of Conde marches toward Paris.
which he no sooner approached, and that the bands under the leading of the P.
Portian, and Mouy, had given in so far as the suburbs of S. Victor, but that
all the City was in an uproar, and every man at their wits end: so
wonderfully were they daunted with the sight of the Princes army, albeit they
were not past eight thousand footmen, and some five or six thousand horse.
Whereas there were within the City at the least, a hundred thousand able to
bear arms, having the Constable, the Duke of Guise, the Duke of Neuers, the
Mareschals, and in a manner all the brave leaders of France, for their
chieftaines and commanders. But such was their timorousness, that they kept
themselves close, albeit the battle was presented unto them twice at the
least, and only amused the Prince with certain conditions of peace, about
the which there were many meetings. In the end all being found to be but mere
delays, and only to gain time, until the coming of the Spaniardes, the
Prince resolved to assail the enemy in his Trenches: but the same night,
which was appointed for this exployte, and immediately before it should have
been put in execution, Genlis a principal man among the Protestants,
secretly fled to the Catholics: which unexpected accident quite altered the
council of the Confederates, supposing that now there was some advertisement
given of their intended enterprise: Genlis flies to the Catholics
and therefore they deferred the execution of that project, until some other
time. But by reason of the wants that were in the Army, as the penury of
victuals, and other necessaries, as also a secret coffeehouse among the
strangers, for that they lacked their pay, it was agreed to stay no longer
before Paris, which was not so easy to be gotten, nor in so short a time, as
was requisite to supply their present necessity, but to dislodge and to
retire toward New-hauen, The prince leaves Paris and marches totowards New
haven.
there to attend such succors as were expected out of England. By the way the
Prince took Galardon, a town of good importance, where he stayed to give some
breath to his wearyed troops, and to accommodate his army of such things as
were most necessary.

The Catholics coasted him all the way watching to catch him at some
advantage: howbeit nothing was attempted until both the camps were come unto
Dreux, where they approached so near, and either party had so far engaged
themselves, that there was no remedy, but they must needs fight: so that now
each General began to bethink of all good means for the strengthening of
himself, and the weakening of his enemies. The Catholics had made choice of a
very strong place to encampe in, being near unto Dreux, The battle of Dreux,
wherein there was a garrison of their associates, and likewise adjoining unto
a wood, which was a very fit and convenient place, to effect diverse
stratagems. There was a large and spacious plain, through which there ran a
little valley, serving as it were for the bounds and limits of both armies. The
Constable having gotten this advantage, presented himself in battle array, at
the head of the village, upon the top of a little hill, having placed two
strong battaylons of footmen in the town, which should guard fourteen
Cannons: so planted, that they were ready to play upon the army of the
confederates, as soon as the signal should be given. Each battaillon was
flanked with certain troops of horse, as it were for a mutual succor one
for another, with their Enfans perdus in their fronts, and those of the
choysest of all their regiments. They had the River Eureux at their backs, and
espying that they were likely to come to a trial of their fortune, they
forthwith emparked themselves between two villages, in a place of more
advantage then before.

The Mareschall S. Andrew led the auauntgard, The Catholic army.
which was composed of nine companies of French lances, thirteen ensigns of
Spaniards, with as many French, and eleven of Almaines, with four field
pieces: all which were aranged on the left side of the Conestable, who led the
maine battle, further advanced then either the Mareschall, or the Duke of
Guise, wherein were seventeen Cornets of men of Arms, and three of light
horsemen, with two and twenty ensigns of Zwitzers, seventeen of French and
Britons, and eight pieces of great Ordinance. The Duke of Guise led the
rerewarde, which seemed to flank the battle of the Conestable on the right
side, with a strong troop of horsemen, and two esquadrons of Spanish footmen,
with sundry others his followers, men of especial account, and much renowned
for their valyantnesse.

The prince had so araunged his battles, that the horsemen wherein they
ouermatched his enemies, were in the foremost ranks, The Protestants army
and taking unto himself Rochfaucont, with certain light horsemen of Guries
company, with some other Cornets led by Mouy, and Auarell, besides a troop of
Reisters, all which served as flankers for his battailon of footmen, resolved
to encounter the Conestable, who seemed to be ready to give the charge.

Each general having disposed of all things in this warlike sort, the great
artillarie began to vomit out their deuilrie, and the Conestable prepared to
assail the battle of the Prince, which hasted in like manner to the
encounter, and that with so stately and superbious a dismarch, that it gave
evident testimony, that it was led by a general of noble courage, and great
experience. The Prince charged the Zwitzers, who valiantly endured the first
shot, and stood to it very manfully. The Prince of Conde charge the
Switzers, and overthrows them.
But at length by reason of the small shot which hailed upon them without
ceasing, and somewhat cleared their ranks, they began to give ground, which the
valiant and courageous Mouy espying, incorporating his troops with Monsieur de
Daneret, set on them with such fury, that he made them fly amain. And being
seconded by the Prince, wholly defeated them, as renowned Pykemen as they were.
The Reisters, who followed the Princes good fortune, gave in with great
courage, committing a marvelous carnage and mortality upon their enemies. At
the same instant the Admiral charged the Conestable, and that so lustily, that
his men began to shrink, and he himself being wounded in the face with a
Curtelas, and sore bruised with small pistol shot, was forced to yield to
Vezines. But the Reisters passing by at that instant, took him away by force,
and carried him to the Prince, as a prisoner of their own. The Conestable
taken prisoner.
The rest of the Conestables battle was quickly defeated, and no hope left
for the Catholics, had not the Duke of Guise reserved his forces, whole and
entyre, and with a sudden charge crossed the happy course of the victorious
Prince: whose battaillons of footmen being bared of their horse, could not
endure the furious assault of the Guisards, but fled as fast as they could to
save their lives: notwithstanding all the encouragement used by Dandelot, who
persuaded them all that he might to abide their enemies.

Moreover Danuille one of the sons of the Constable, espying the princes
horsemen disordered with pursuing their victory, charged the^ before they could
be rallied afresh, and having first wounded Conde in the hand, and then slain
his horse, the red crosses so pressed on him on all sides, before he could be
remounted, that he was constrained to yield himself prisoner, Conde taken
prisoner.
to the immeasurable grief of all the confederates. The Admiral gathering
together so many as possible he might, of his dispersed troops, gave a fresh
charge upon the Guise, where there was a sore and cruel fight: but for that
he was not able to match his enemies, after the death of many brave men on both
sides, Dinothus says, that there were 10000. Catholics slain The Marshall
S. Andrew slain.
he retired to Neufuil, leaving the honor of that journey to the Guise. At the
last encounter were slain the Mareschall of S. Andrew, Monbrune, the
Constables son, the Lord Picues, Annebaut, Brossy, Giury, and many other
leaders. The Duke of Aumaile was grievously hurt, and likewise the Duke of
Neuers, who dyed shortly after. The principal prisoners which were taken, were
the Constable, who was forthwith sent to Orlean^e, with Orayson, Rochfort,
Esclauoles, and sundry other Gentlemen of good account. Dinothus reports.
The principal of which were, the Baron of Arpaion, Saux, Shandeu, Liencourt,
Fredomere, Carliere, Rongnac, Mazelles, Saint Germier, al which for the most
part were of the Cornet of Mouy, who was taken prisoner at this last conflict.

The news of this battle was very uncertain: each side supposing, yea, and
constantly reporting their own overthrow. But upon more certain
intelligence, how that both Generals were taken, and that they had parted in a
manner with equal loss, each faction began to rowse up themselves, and to
hope for better success in their future wars: whereupon they resolved to choose
them new Generals, until the old were again restored to liberty. The duke of
Guise was thought the meetest to command over the Catholics, The D. of Guise
chosen general over the Catholics, and the Admiral over the protestants.
and the Admiral over the confederates, who pondering their harms lately
received by the death of so many brave men, and their want of many necessaries
requisite for to keep the field, thought it best to retire, the one to Paris,
the other to Orleance, and there to repair their broken armies.

The Duke of Guise lay not long idle, but assayed to recover certain towns
from the Confederates, as Pluuiers, Estamps, and some others. The Admiral on
the other side, being as careful to maintain head against the enemy,
besieged Selles in Berry, which was yielded upon composition: where he found
good store of gold and silver for the payment of his Reisters. Rochfaucont
took S. Agnan: and the Prince Portian, entered Monrichard. The gayning of
which Towns greatly countenanced the wavering estate of the Protestants. Thus
did these two armies flote up and down, each seeking to encroach upon other
so much as might be. At length the Admiral espying the drift of the Guise,
which was to inuest Orleance on the sudden, put himself with all his forces
within the City. Where notwithstanding upon better advice, he remained not
long, but marched toward Normandy, to meet with the Englishmen, The admiral
goes toward New-hauen, to meet with the Englishmen.
whose landing was daily expected at New-hauen, which was the place appoin- for
that purpose, and that by the consent of the confederates.

The Queen mother being advertised hereof, labored to stop his intended
voyage, by propounding a parle of peace: but the Admiral being well acquainted
with such stratagems, would in no wise hearken thereto, but followed his formed
project, and so with some 3000. horse passingly well furnished, and far better
then at the battle of Dreux, held on his course. And being a man of great
experience, and singular expedition in all his enterprises, he surprised on the
sudden sundry places, which proved afterward of no small moment, for the
advancing of the affairs of the confederates.

The duke of Guise having his army in a readiness, and understanding of the
Admirals departure from Orleance, leaving Dandelot his brother for the guarde
thereof, until his return, thought it best to besiege them who were there
assembled, while the Admiral with the flower of all their troops was busied
other where is. With this resolution he dislodged, and planted his siege about
the town, The Duke of Guise besieheth Orleance.
which he so sore battered, and courageously assailed, that the City was in
imminent peril, and all the confederates were in a wonderful fear, least it
should have been taken. Yea, the Duke so assured himself thereof, that he
wrote to the King and Queen Mother, that he hoped now to extirpe the race of
the Hugonots, who had for so many years troubled the whole land, and that he
would send them news thereof within four and twenty hours. But while he was
thus in his ruff, firmly persuading himself that all was his, bebold, there
fell out a strange and unexpected accident, which brake the neck of all his
devises.

There was a poor Gentleman named John Poltrot, The story of Poltot that
killed the Duke of Guise.
one of very little stature, but full of spirit and life, and generally
reputed of such as best knew him, to be somewhat a rash headed fellow, and
very indiscreet, and one that durst attempt any thing. Who being brought up
for a long time in Spain, had learned the language very perfectly: And for
that both for his color, complexion, and stature, he was so like unto them of
that nation, he was commonly called the little Spaniard.

This fellow serving sometime under Soubize, who commanded at Lions, would
often vaunt, that this was the hand (stretching out his arm) that should
kill the Duke of Guise, and deliver France from that monstrous and cruel
Tyrant. And this he usually uttered in great bravery: so that as many as
heard him, knowing the humor of the man, laughed at his folly, little
imagining that he meant as he said, for if he had, then it was lykely he
would have kept his purpose more secret, and not have been so open mouthed.
It happened so, that immediately after the battle of Dreux, Soubize sent this
Poltrot with a Letter to the Admiral, who was now at Selles in Berrie:
whither he was no sooner come, but that Feuquieres, whom he had served in
former times in the wars in Pycardie, knowing him to be a man of service,
commended him to the Admiral, saying: that he was a fit man to be employed to
discover somewhat of the enemies proceedings about Orlean^e, for that he
should be taken for a Spaniard, and so a favorer of their designs. Whereupon
the Admiral gave him twenty Crowns, and sent him to Orleance: where he
continued not long, but having got as good intelligence as he could, returned
back to do his message.

The Admyrall lyking the man well for his diligence, and secrecy in matters of
such importance, gave him an hundred Crowns, and bid him buy him a good
Horse, that he might with more celeritie dispatch his business. With this
money Poltrot bought him a very excellent Spanish Genet, and leaving the
Admiral, went back to the Guises Camp, where he awayted some opportunity to
put in execution his intended purpose. Which shortly after fell out: for he
espying the Duke somewhat late in the evening ryding toward his Tent upon a
little Nagge, only attended on by a Gentleman Usher which went before him, and
an other which talked with him: he approached as near as he could, and
discharged his pistol upon the Duke, hitting him in the shoulder, wounded him
very sore, and so turning his horse, fled as fast as he could. And having
ridden all that night by by-ways, for fear of those who pursued him, he not
knowing which way he went, wandered up and down, and in the end came again
almost to the place where he committed the fact. Which when he perceived, he
rode all the day following, with as much speed as possibly might be, to get out
of the danger of his pursuing enemies. But having with continual travel
wearied both himself and his horse, he rested at a farm house, where he was
taken upon suspicion, and committed to safe keeping for his further trial.
Being examined, and found culpable, he was adjudged to be drawn in pieces with
four horses: Poltrot drawn in pieces with horses.
to have his head cut off, and his torn body to be burnt to ashes.

This sudden blow did maruellously dismay the Catholics, and the rather for
that it appeared to be deadly, and not possible to be healed: For he waxed
worse every day then other, and died very shortly after, The Duke of Guise
died within seven or eight days after his hurt
to their unspeakable grief: who had reposed their whole confidence in him,
and to the great rejoicing of the confederates, whose deadly and sworn enemies
he was always accounted. And this was the end of that turbulent spirit, and
ambitious Guise, who as he had massacred many: so he in the end was murdered
by others, and that even then when he thought least of any danger: nay rather
fully persuaded himself well near to have attained to the full period of his
wished desires. So uncertain is the state and condition of the greatest, and
most mighty personages in this variable and changeable world.

The Guise was no sooner dead, but there ensued a present alteration: and those
conditions which had been before propounded, were forthwith fully agreed upon,
and so was there a peace proclaimed the 19. of March following at S. Memen, in
the camp before Orleance, Peace proclaimed in the Camp before Orleance.
wherewith all sorts in general seemed to be maruellously well contented,
hoping to be freed from those horrible miseries, wherewith they had bin
afflicted for so many years. And indeed albeit this pacification held but for a
while, yet did the whole land reap great fruit thereby, and acknowledged the
gracious goodness of the Almighty, in that it had pleased him to give them
some respite, and to make an end of their Civil wars. But this blessed peace
could not continue long, by reason there fell out many occasions of
coffeehouse to either faction, by means whereof they were soon entangled
afresh in their former sorrows and vexations.

CHAP. VIII.
The seditious humor of the Cardinal of Lorraine. The Admiral accused for
the death of the Duke of Guyse. The complaints of the Protestants. The League
made at Bayon. The King refuses to hear the Protestants. The second civil
war. Paris besieged by the Protestants.

THe Cardinal of Lorraine, The Cardinal of Lorraine seeks new occasions of
strife.
and brother to the deceased Duke of Guyse, the especial instrument of all
these calamities which had continued for so long time in that noble kingdom
of France, inwardly vexed to see such a peaceable estate, knowing full well
that it did not stand with his commodity and profit, to see the Princes of
the blood to be favored at the Court, neither yet the Nobility and Gentlemen
to live in peace and amity one with another, and all sorts as brethren to live
euenly together, devised a way to set all men again together by the ears, and
to embarke themselves into new troubles. He therefore with the assent of his
associats, spread abroad diverse calumniations, and slanderous rumors of those
of the reformed Religion, and being a gracious man with the Queen mother, for
that their humors were but too agreeable and consonant each to other, he
persuaded with her, that if she should countenance the chief Princes and
Lords of the Religion, and suffer them to be near the Court, and bear a sway
in matters of State, they would draw on many followers after them, and
peradventure gain the young King and the Princes his brethren to be their
friends, and then Conde being a man of courage and of that proximitie in blood
would look to have his place: which if he might peaceably enjoy, her
authority would be quickly in the dust, and the Burbons, Memorancies, and
Chastillons would rule all: and as it was most likely, she should be called
to an account for her former government, during the Kings nonage: and by
drawing on the hatred of the Catholics, of the Pope, and of the King of
Spain, loose al her credit and reputation.

The Queen mother being jealous enough of her estate before, and now
encouraged by the Cardinal to role every stone rather then to loose one jot
of her authority, discountenanced all that she might those of the Religion,
and to be rid of the Admiral, whom for his wisdom, integrity, valor,
and uprightness of all his actions she could not abide, it was devised that
he should be charged to have hired Poltrot to kill the late Duke of Guyse: and
to color the matter withal^ there was a counterfeit deposition of Poltrot
exhibited, and the young Duke of Guyse was animated to demand justice of the K.
for the death of his father. The young Duke of of Guyse set on to accuse the
Admiral of the murder of his father.
But when this devise came to the prince of Condes ear, Lord how exceedingly
was he offended, protesting, and that openly at the Council Table, that he
would spend all that ever he had, yea, and his own life too, before the
Admiral whom he knew to be innocent, should be so injuriously handled: which
speech of the Princes, with some other considerations, was the cause that this
pursuit ceased for that time, and a reconciliation was made between the
Admiral, and those of the Guyse, at Moulins, immediately before the King was
about to go in progress to Bayon.

Albeit the Admiral was no further troubled at this instant, yet it was a
means to make him hated and detested of all the Catholics, and a principal
cause of sundry quarrelles between the Papists and the Protestants, which in
the end proved so great, that they drew on a second civil war: for there
grew daily complaints, each charging other with the breach of the Kings Edict,
and many accusations were broached on both sides. The Catholics complained,
that the strong Towns and fortresses were not yielded to the kings obeisance,
that there were many preachers which were not allowed of by the Edict, and that
they preached in sundry places expressly prohibited, The complaints of the
Catholics and Protestants.
that they were disgraced with many approbrious and scandalous speeches, and
that there were secret practices for the leuying of Soldiers in Germany and
other places, which should be in a readiness upon the first sommance.

The Protestants alleged that they were rigorously handled, and could not have
justice when they complained: that the insolency of the garrisons which were
placed in sundry protestant Towns, was intolerable and could not be endured:
that there were daily murderers of the reformed in every corner of the Land,
and nothing so common as robbing, spoiling, rauishing, pilling and poulling the
poor Hugonots, and no punishment inflicted upon the Authors and abbettors of
such horrible and derestable villainies.

These and the like complaints being often reiterated on both sides, and each
faction nourishing their suspicions, upon every small occasion: their rancour
grew greater and greater, and those small sparks which for a while lay covered
in ashes, brake out at last into a furious and raging fire. For the Catholics
had no sooner gotten all things in a readiness, exacted their cittadels into the
protestant Towns, placed their garrisons, sworn their associations and
leagues (which were termed the confraternities of the holy Ghost) and that
under the color of viewing the state of the Land, the king was gone to Bayon,
The league made at Bayon among the Catholics.
there to make a confederacy between himself and the Spanish king, and the
Duke of Alua, to root out all the Hugonots, but that a Million of injuries and
indignities were offered to the poor protestants. There was an Edict made at
Rousillon, The Edict of Rousillon.
which was termed a declaration or an exposition of the edict of the
pacification: but this was so contrary to those articles which had been
agreed upon before; that al men might see they had fully resolved to break
their promises with the Protestants. Then did there follow immediately after,
most barbarous cruelties and tyrannical oppressions of all sorts which made
any profession of the Gospel, though it were never so little: which when the
Protestants (to their unspeakable grief) beheld, and that after so many just
complaints there was no redress to be hoped for by fair means, but that
their usage was likely to be worse and worse, for that the six thousand
Switzers were still retained in a readiness to be employed against them upon
the sudden, as they vehemently suspected, they thought it high time to look
about them, and to study how they might best prevent so imminent perils.

Whereupon they wrote letters, The Protestants begin to provide for themselves.
and sent their secret messengers into al quarters, to advertise their
associats, to use all the speed that could be made, and to come and attend the
Prince of Conde, Rochfaucont, and the Admiral, Dandelot, and others who were
their principal cheefetaines. This could not be so closely kept, but the
Queen mother had intelligence thereof, who with the King lay at Meaux, a
place not far distant where the said Prince of Conde with his confederates
were assembled, and had purposed to hasten to the Court strongly accompanied,
Conde with his associats go toward the Court.
to see if they could bring their enemies to any better reason, or more equal
and even conditions. As soon as the Queen mother understood of the dismarch
of the Prince, and that he came directly toward the King, she resolved at
midnight to dislodge, and to hasten to Paris, The King flies to Paris.
leaving the Constable with the battailon of Switzers and some eight or nine
hundred French horse, to stop the course of the Protestants: who seeing
themselves ouermatched, and that they could neither by fair means nor by
foul be admitted to the speech of the King, who was by this time gotten within
Paris, they retired toward Clay, expecting the rest of their forces, which
daily repaired unto them out of Picardy, Champaigne, Poictou, Guyen, and
sundry other places of the Land: where they stayed not long, but marched
toward Saint Dennis, which was a little village some two leagues distant from
Paris.

Now began there to be as it were a general combustion through out France,
and the wars which had ceased for a time were forthwith open on all sides:
The second Civil wars.
there were with the Prince of Conde the Cardinal of Chastillon, the Admiral,
Dandelot, Rochfaucont, Ienlis, Clermont, Amboise, Saux, Bouchart, Bouchauanes,
Piquigni, Lysy, Money, Saint Phale, Esterny, Mont-gommery, the Vidame of
Chartres, La Noue, Lauardin, and all their retinewes. These being assembled,
sent their humble letters to the King, unfolding their manifold greefes and
dolours, beseeching his majesty that they might be heard, and suffered to
enjoy their liberties, and to have the free exercise of their Religion,
according to the Edict of Pacification, made before Orleance: but answer
being returned that the Edict was but prouisionable, and made for the
necessity of the time, and that the King to satisfy them would not fall out
with all his neighbor Princes, by tollerating any other besides the Romish
Religion, they determined to gather as great forces as they could, and to
besiege Paris.

It was not long before they had gotten some 2000. horse, and 4000. footmen,
The Prince of Conde besieges Paris
with which power they first took Estamps, Dourdan, Orleance, and sundry
other places of good importance, so that stopping the auenues, and blocking the
city on all sides, they determined either to obtain a peace with better
conditions then before, or else to famish the Parisians, who could not long
endure without relief from other places. The Catholics were not idle, but
daily enterprised upon the Protestants, fighting and skirmishing with them
upon every advantage, and understanding that their forces were severed, (
Dandelot and Mount-gommery being sent away with five hundred horse and eight
hundred footmen to surprise Poysy and Ponthoise: La Noue to take Orleance,
Rochfaucont: and Mouy to conduct the troops which came out of Guyen and
Poictou, to the succors of the Prince:) they thought it not convenient to let
slip so fit opportunity, and therefore having all their forces in a readiness,
the Constable issued forth of Paris the tenth of November 1567. The conestable
issues forth of Paris.
with three thousand horse, and about seauenteene or eighteen thousand footmen
all very well armed and appointed for the Combat, and were aranged in this
manner.

CHAP. IX.
The battle of Saint Dennis. The death of the Constable of France.

The Army of the conestable.
HIs whole army was stretched out in length, more resembling a hedge then any
thing else, on the left side whereof were placed the battalion of Switzers,
flanked with a good number of harquebuziers, all which stood to assure
fourteen pe^ces of great ordinance, which were planted in the mouth of
Auberuilliers, toward which he caused his whole army to turn head: on the
left side of the Switzers he appointed a regiment of Horse, and before them
another very strong troop likewise of horsemen, whereof was Captain the
mareschall Memorancy his eldest son. There were also on the same side the
regiments of the Dukes of Nemours, Longeuille, the Count Retts, Chauigny,
Thore, Lansac, and many others: close to these stood a good troop of
harquebuziers on foot: behind all these stood the battle of the Parisians
bravely shining with armor, pikes, and halbards, hiding almost the side of the
army Catholic, wherein was the Constable with his Switzers: on the right side
were the regiments of the Count Brissac and Strozzi, and somewhat higher those
of the marshall Cossy, Biron, Auely, Riuiere, with some others, behind whom
stood the Duke of Aumaile, and marshall Danuill, strongly guarded with two
troops of horsemen, for the better assurance of the Switzers and French
footmen.

The Army of the Prince
The Prince being advertised hereof by his espyals, and knowing that that day
would not pass without a fight, marshalled his battalions as follows.

The Admiral assisted with Cleermont and his two sons, Re^ty, six cornets
of horse, and four hundred harquebuziers on foot lead by Vallefeniere, stood
right in the face of those that guarded the side of the Constable. Genlis
accompanied with Lauardin, Vardes, Bressant, Besancourt, with five or six
cornets fronted the mareschall Cossy, Biron, and the rest before mentioned. The
Prince of Conde, the Cardinal Chastillon, Sechalles, the vidames of Chartres,
and of Amiens, the Counts of Saux, La Suze, Esternay, Conchauanes, and Stuard,
who commanded over certain Scots, with four hundred harquebuziers stood
lower in the form of a battle, covering Saint Dennis, faced the Conestable
and them who were before him, so that their form of battle resembled a
Croysant or new Moon.

These generalles had no sooner disposed of their battailons in this warlike
manner, but their great ordinance began to thunder, and their Enfans Perdus
to attach the skirmish: Genlis seeing the Catholics approach toward his
quarters, ranged his men close together, and having desired them to go
resolutely to the charge, and to enter succor one another, advanced to receive
them, who changing their pace into a trot, reencountred them with such fury,
that it hasted the death of above fifty persons at that instant. The Admiral
who was an old Fox and beaten to the wars, could quickly epsy his
advantage, seeing the state of the battle, caused his harquebuziers to amend
their march, and to put themselves further forwards, and being seconded by
the Prince and by the rest of the Army who were ready to receive their part
of the blows as well as others, gave in so lustily and so courageously charged
the red crosses, that he overthrew them, making them run headlong upon the
Parisian bands, The red crosses b^gan to run.
whom they exceedingly disordered and affrighted.

The Mareschall Cossy seeing many of the Catholics disbanding themselves, and
the Confederates wholly pursuing them, crying Victory, Victory, sent word to
the Mareschall Danuill, and the Duke of Aumaile, to accompany him to the
charge. Now was the Prince hastening to encounter the Constable, upon whom
he ran amain, and with such fierceness assailed them whom he met, that
he quite defaced them who were much dismayed before with the fearful flight
of their companions, whom the Admiral had chased already, and made such a
breach in their great battailon, that the Conestable being abandoned by above a
thousand runnawaies, finding himself hurt in the face, The Constable wounded
to death.
and pressed to yield by Stuard a Scot, could not for choler answer otherwise
then with blows of his sword, with the pummell whereof he gave Stuard such a
blow on the Iawe bone, that he smote out two or three of his teeth, and loosed
many of the rest, which when another Scotte espied, he shot him into the
reins of the back with his pistol, for that he wore but a very thin and
light harness, being a man above four score years of age. Now were the
Switzers maruailously astonished, and ready to take their heels as well as
others, had they not been reassured by the Duke of Aumaile and the Mareschall
Danuille, who promised to live and die with them, and likewise by the hardy
onsette of the Mareschall Memorancy, who by overthrowing certain of the
Princes troops of Horse, made most of his footmen to fly, and had not the
night so fast approached, he had utterly discomfited all the rest: but the
darkness which presently ensued, caused each to return, and to draw toward
those quarters where they heard the cries of their Generalles, the Protestants
to the Prince of Conde, who playned of his horse which was sore hurt and
wounded, insomuch as he began to fail him, and he was no sooner alighted,
but he fell down stark dead besides him. The Catholics went toward the
Constable, who was wounded to death, and seeing all things standing in so badde
terms, never pursued the Protestants, contenting themselves with the honor
of the field, and the liberty to bury their dead. The number of the slain.
The Prince retired back again to Saint Dennis, having lost the vidame of
Amiens, Piquigni, Saux, La Suse, Saint Andrew, Garennes with three hundred
horsemen, and above fifty Gentlemen of Mark. The Catholics with their
general, left behind them dead in the field, the Count De Chamne, Hierom of
Turin, and above forty chieftaines and commanders, beside three hundred common
soldiers, and a great multitude of maimed and wounded men.

CHAP. X.
The Prince of Conde leaves Paris. Rochel yields to the Protestants. The
Duke of Aniou made the Kings Lieutenant. Cassimer brings aid to the
Protestants. The siege of Chartres. Peace proclaimed in France.

The Prince raises his siege before Paris.
THe next day after the coming of Dandelot (who was exceeding sorry that he
came not time enough to have been at the battle) the Prince presented
himself again with all his whole power before Paris, but his enemies kept
close within the walls: wherefore after he had braued them for a good space,
and had wasted and spoiled hard to the suburbs, seeing that no man durst
appear to impeach his proceedings, considering that victuals and other
necessaries for his army waxed scant, and that the Catholics hourly
reenforced themselves, as also understanding that Cassimer was coming with a
great army to his aid, he dislodged then from S. Dennis the fifteenth of
November, and went toward Lorrayne to receive his Almaines. Being on his way
at Montargis, he received letters from Truchares, who was a little before
elected Mayor of Rochell, that if he would send some especial man of account
to be Lieutenant in his absence, they would yield the town to his devotion.
The Prince was wonderful glad to hear this good news, knowing that to be a
place of no small importance, and therefore he forthwith dispatched Saint
Hermin his Cousin with letters to the Mayor and Shriues of the town, giving
them hearty thanks for their great favor and kindness, with a request to
remain constant, and to receive his Cousin as his Lieutenant in his absence.

Rochel yielded to the Protestants.
This gentleman was very welcome to the Rochelers, where he arrived the tenth
of February, 1568. and so Rochell being a maruailous strong place, accomodated
with a goodly haven, by which means it was grown very rich, remained ever
after at the devotion of the Confederates.

The troops of Poictou. Xaintoigne. etc.
By this time were there new troops levied in Poictou, Guyen, Xaintoigne,
Angolesme, and Gascongne, under the leading of Saint Cyre, Soubize, Puuiant,
Pills, and other chiefetains, amounting to the number of eighteen Cornets of
horse, and twenty leaven ensigns of footmen, who marching to join with the
Prince, took by the way Dorat, Lusignan, and Pont Sur Yon, where they joined
with the vauntgard, led by the Admiral Chastillon: from thence passing by
Sens, they took Bray, Nogent, Montereau, and Espernay. Thus did the
Protestants still advance their affairs, the Catholics being not able to
impeach or hinder them, notwithstanding all their practices and devises.

Monsieur Duke of Aniou made the Kings lieutenant general.
Now was Monsieur the Duke of Aniou, brother to the King by reason of the death
of the Constable, proclaimed Lieutenant general over all his brothers
territories and Dominions: who being assisted by the Prince de Nemours,
Longauille, the Mareschall Cossy, Tauannes, Martigues, Carnaualet, Losses, and
sundry other great Captains, was commanded to bridle the Protestants as much
as might be. The Duke of Aumaile was sent into Lorraine, to join with the
Marquis of Baden, who had raised a power of some three thousand horse, for the
service of the King: and the Duke of Alua sent the Count of Aremberg, with a
thousand and two hundred horse, and two thousand footmen Spaniards, and
Burgonians, who should join with Monsieur against the Prince of Conde, The
marquis of Baden, and the Duke of Alua send forces to Monsieur.
and the rest of the Confederates. The young Lonsac was sent to the Count
Palatine, to hinder the levy of the Reisters, made by his son Cassimer, and
now ready to march for the succor of the Protestants. Thus was there great
preparation made on all sides to continue the wars, and to consume France
with the flame of civil broils.

The Prince being advertised of all this, hasted to meet with his Reisters,
and with much adoo being followed in the tail by the Catholics, at length
arrived at Saint Michaell: where he passed the River of Meaux, and so entered
into Lorraine, still proceeding forwards until he came as far as Mouso^,
where he met with Cassimer, and his Almaines, The Prince of Conde meets with
Cassimer, and his Almains.
who accompanied with the two young Countes of Barbie, the Count Holo, the
Mareschall of the Palatinate, Scomberg, and many others of great reckoning and
account, had long expected the coming of the Confederates. After some stay
made for the refreshing of their wearied troops, they determined to return
toward the pleasant and fertile fields of the Flower de Lis, there to assay
if they could bring their enemies to any honest, and reasonable conditions.

Monsieur had speedy intelligence of the return of both Armies, wherefore he
sent great numbers, both of horsemen, and footmen, to stop all the passages,
and amongst others, commanded the Duke of Neuers with his Italian bands to
defend the Rivers of Merne, Seyne, Yon, The Duke of Neuers appointed to stop
the passage of the Almains into France.
and sundry other places. And that if he could not hinder their course, yet
he should annoy them by all possible means, to the end that beeng wearied and
wasted so much as might be, his excellency might fight with them afterward
in gross, with more advantage.

The Protestants minding not to forslowe their business, dislodged from
Chalons, and marched toward the head of the River of Meuse, and so leaving
Comercyon on their right hand, passed over at Marne, and went toward
Chastillon, where they were assailed by certain troops of Italians, and
French, who set upon the tail of the army, to cause them to hasten their pace.
But Scomberge, Certain Italian troops overthrown by Scomberg
being sent with part of his own Regiment, assisted by some few of the
French, gave them such a furious charge, that he wholly defeated them, and
brought their colors to the Prince. The army was forthwith advanced, and
marching through Hurepoise, by Bleueau, and Montargis, arrived at last in
Beausse, and encamped before Charters, which they determined to besiege, for
that it was very rich, and well able to relieve the army with many
necessaries.

The coming of this great power encouraged diverse* who had kept them selves
close, to put forth their heads, and to attempt many things in favor of the
Confederates. Those of Languedocke, Prouence, and Gascoigne, were presently up
in arms under their leaders, Sipteres, Montbrun, Mo^^ans, Senas, B^urinq^et,
Rapin, Montacut, and sundry other Chieftaines, and suddenly surprised Nismes,
Montpellier, Saint Marcell, Saint Esprit, Saint Iean, Boue: all which they
fortified for their greater profit and security. The Catholics were not
idle, but sought to catch whatsoever they could come by, which might any way
tend to their advantage. Montaret governor of the Country of Burbonois, with
Terride, La Valette, and Monsales, surprised certain troops of the
Protestants, whom they quickly defeated and put to flight. Mascon was taken by
the Duke of Neuers. Mouluc likewise took certain Isles in Xainctoigne, and
prepared all necessaries to besiege Rochell, one of the principal retreates of
the Protestants. The Count Martinengo, Richleu, and sundry others, besieged
Orleance. Thus were they in every corner of France up in Arms, and no man
knew where to be safest from the violence of the soldiers, and men of Arms.

Now were all things in a readiness for the siege of Chartres, Charters
besieged.
so that having raised their mounts, and planted their artillarie, they began
to beat the City, in very terrible and furious manner: and having overthrown
their Towers, battered their houses, and made a sufficient breach, they were
ready to give an assault, and to assay the getting of the Town by maine
force. Ligneres one of the Knights of the order, was Captain of the Town, who
endeavored by all means to keep the same in despite of the Confederates, and
with great celeritie repaired in the night, whatsoever had been broken, and
thrown down in the day: and so wisely and politiquely prevented all the
stratagems of his enemies, that it was not possible for the Prince to effect
his intended purpose. But the King understanding that they could not long hold
out, and being not able to remove the siege, thought it best to offer the
Prince a peace: which after many meetings was at length concluded. The
principal effect whereof was, The King offers a peace, which is accepted by
the Prince.
that every man should quietly enjoy his Religion, and from thenceforth never
be troubled for their consciences. This being agreed upon, (though contrary
to the liking of many of the Princes best friends, and principal Captains,
who still cried out, that the King would break his promise, as soon as he
espied his advantage) and proclaimed in the Camp before Charters, the Army
brake up, and every one was licenced to depart home into his own Country.

CHAP. XI.
The third civil wars. The battle of Bassac where the Prince of Conde is
slain. The Prince of Navarre chosen General of the Protestants. The death of
Dandelot. The death of the Duke of Deux-ponts. A great victory of the
Protestants. Monsieur dissolueth his army. The siege of Poictiers.

NOw was France once again reduced to a quiet estate, and who would not have
thought, but that after so many bastonados, The third civil wars.
every one would have bin glad to have nourished the same by all possible
means, and to have learned by their former miseries to beware, how they entered
into new troubles. But such were the wicked counsels of some turbulent spirits,
that they could not endure any quietness, but gave daily occasions to fill the
whole land full of new broils and vprores. The two late reconciled factions
were continually very jealous each of others proceedings, one blamed the other
for not accomplishing such conditions as were agreed upon, and so solemnly
sworn on both sides. The Catholics alleged that the Protestants had not put
all their strong towns into the kings hands, according to the tenure of the
Articles of the peace lately agreed upon: that Rochell did fortify it self,
and would not receive the Catholics into their former offices and dignities:
The complaints of the Catholics.
that they rigged ships, and made themselves strong at sea, and that without
the kings knowledge: that Coqueuille levied many soldiers for the aid of the
prince of Orange, contrary to the pacification made before Chartres. All which
things could not be attempted without the knowledge of the confederats: and
that which was most strange of al, they practiced to leuy soldiers in Germany,
and other places.

The Protestants complained, The complaints of the Protestants.
that they could not be permitted freely to use their consciences, according as
it was conditioned. That the Catholics did still retain the Switzers, and the
Italian bands, and placed sundry strong garrisons in those towns which were of
the Religion, and that such which had lived in exile, could not return to
their houses without imminent peril of their lives. Alleging withal, the
horrible murders, robberies, and other execrable facts, committed upon the
persons, and goods of those of the reformed Churches. These with some others
were the reasons which animated both parts to stir coals, and to begin the
wars afresh.

The Catholics knowing Rochell to be a very strong place, sought by all
cunning devises to make themselves masters thereof, and with fair promises
intermingled with threats, labored to persuade them to receive a garrison of
the Catholics, but they would in no case agree thereto, but still drove them
of with new delays. Tauannes was commanded to surprise the Prince of Conde,
The prince of Conde in danger to be taken by Tauannes.
who was then in Noyars. But he being advertised thereof, departed in great
haste, with the Princess his wife, the Admiral, and some hundred horse: and
passing over the Loyer, went into Poictou, where increasing his forces, by the
coming of Verac, Soubize, Anguilier, Saint Cyre, and Puuiant, at last arrived
at Rochell, in despite of all his enemies, whither not long after came the
Queen of Nauar, Conde comes to Rochel, whether the Queen of Navarre also
repaireth
with the young Prince of Barn her son. Where there was forthwith a Council
held for the managing of their future actions. The rest of the Protestant
Captains, as Dandelot, Mountgommery, La Noue, and others, being advertised of
all these sturres, gathered what forces they could, and marched toward
Rochell, with great speed, taking by the way, Partenay, Niort, and Maile,
which proved afterward very aduantagious for the Confederates. Angolesme,
Pons, S. John d' Angely, and Tallebourg, were likewise surprised by those of
the reformed Religion, so that now many good towns were again at their
devotion and commandment.

Monsieur made lieutenant for the King his brother.
The King being advertised of all these designements, declared Monsieur the Duke
of Aniou his brother, his Lieutenant general: who dispatched forthwith Letters
and Messengers into all parts, to assemble Bannes and Arierbannes, and to
command all gentlemen, and others to be in a readiness at the time appointed,
at Estamps, where he had proclaimed the Rendeuous, there to attend the further
pleasure of his excellency. The protestants assembled soldiers on all sides,
especially in Languedoc, Prouence, and Dauphiuy, under the conduct of Colonel
Acier, Montbrun, and Saint Romain, who had gathered some sixteen or seventeen
thousand footmen, and seven hundred horse, and were marching toward the Prince,
who expected their coming at Chalons. This new supply did maruellously
strengthen the confederates, and encouraged them to proceed on in their
enterprise, and to seek their enemies, who now were grown to an head, and
ready to march under their leaders and conductors. After many attempts on
either side, and that both the Armies had endomaged each other, by the taking
of sundry towns, and afflicting the poor Coun^ry, with a thousand miseries,
both Generals resolved to try their fortunes by an entire battle, as soon
as occasion was offered. With this resolution Henry Duke of Aniou, having
intelligence, that the Lord Pills was coming toward the Prince of Conde,
with a new supply of soldiers, led his army through Poictou, Lymosin, and
the Country of Angoumois, and descended along the River of Charente, as
though he would take Chasteaunef, there to pass over the water, and to bar
Pills from joining with the Prince. Which when the Confederates understood,
they passed Charente at Cognac, with purpose to prevent the Army of the
Catholics: Chasteaunef, repaired the Bridge, which was in the possession of
the Protestants, and made an other with Boats.

The battle of Bassac.
The Admiral being appointed to impeach the making of these new bridges
considering he was not able to effect that which he desired, retired unto
Bassac, ordayning Soubize, Puuiant, and other troops of Poictou, to favor his
retreat. The Prince (all things being well considered) was not willing to
resolve of a battle, and therefore willed the Admiral to dislodge with the
auauntgarde, and to be with him at Farnac the next morning by the break of
the day. Which in no wise could be performed by all: for the companies led by
Puuiant, could not march so speedily, the Catholics being at their tail, and
so strongly pressed them, that they could not be disgaged, but with the
hazard and peril of all the Protestants. For the footmen of his excellency
having passed a River, doubled their pace to gain a little hill, which was a
place of some advantage: from which they discovering how small a company the
Admiral had, advanced still forward, knowing that he could not retire,
without the entire loss of all his troops. By this time Puuiant was so far
engaged, that had not La Noue, and La Love, who made the retreat of the
Auauntgarde with forty Harquebuziers, speedily come to his succors, he had
remained at the mercy of his enemies. But when as they had with all their
deuoir succored them in their need, they were forthwith compelled to defend
themselves upon the bay of a pond, where they were so lustily charged by
Martigues, Malicorne, and others to the number of five of six hundred horse,
that La Noue, and La Love were taken prisoners, La Noue and La Love taken
prisoners.
and all their bands entirely broken, and defeated. Puuiant having charged, and
finding himself too weak, retired to the rest of the footmen. During these
hot skirmishes, sundry of the Catholics were advanced forwards, whereof some
two hundred came hard to the village: who^ when the Admiral and Dandelot
discovered, being ignorant of the overthrow aforesaid, for that the village
hindered their sight, they resolutely charged: and Dandelot being foremost with
his cornet, gave in so furiously, that he made them all to run amain, Dandelot
makes the Catholics to run.
leaving behind them Monsales, and thirteen others dead upon the place.
Dandelot pursued them hard to the village, from whence he was no sooner
returned, but those Catholics being backed with 1200. harquebuziers, reentred
more strongly accompanied then before. Whilst things passed on after this
manner, all the rest of the troops of the Catholics began to show themselves,
every regiment taking his place for the last encounter.

The Prince of Conde being advertised of all this, and of the danger that the
Admiral with all the Auauntgard was in, if they were not speedily succored,
advanced himself with those few horsemen of his battle, which he
tumultuously assembled in that uproar, the rest being dispersed into several
quarters here and there, hasted to the rescue with all the speed that might
be. Each General began now to seek his advantage, and to prepare himself
to the fight. The Admiral espying that Monsieur came fast on upon the left
hand, which was the means to enclose the Protestants between the river, and
the army of the Catholics, commanded La Touer to bring the companies of the
Auantgard further forwards: which he did, and bare himself so, that his horse
being overthrown, he was taken, and being known to be the man that had
slain captain Carry at Paris, was killed forthwith, La Touer slain.
besides many others, who had no better fortune.

The army Catholic still stretched it self forth upon the left hand, toward
the troops of Soubize, Languillier, Puuiant, Cressomere, and the rest of the
Chieftaines of Poictou: who thinking it not convenient to expect any occasion
for a better charge, seeing the enemy reenforce himself more and more,
assailed the foremost Troops with such fury, that they made them recule: but
by reason of new supplies which were sent continually, Soubize, and
Languillier were taken prisoners, Soubiz, and many other taken prisoners.
Mesauchere, Brandamere, and many others were then slain. In the mean time
his excellency desirous to break them on all sides, brought a great part of
his army an other way, purposing to enclose them, who kept the bay of the
ponde, and to assail them on the back. But this pretense being espied, the
confederates, who had maintained the advantage of the ground a good while,
thought it best to retire into a place of greater safety. Whilst the fight
was thus hotely continued on either side, the Prince of Conde with three or
four hundred horse, gave a hot charge upon the Catholics: and being chaufed
to see his men in rout, and the whole army to bear it self no better, flang in
with such fury, that he bare to the ground, or made to run all that were before
him, until such time as his horse being wounded, he was overthrown, and not
able any longer to do any thing for the blows he had received: and because
he was not succored with a fresh horse in time, seeing his enemies to press
sore upon him, he yielded unto Argence, and Saint Iean, who promised to save
his life: but Montesquion (as some say) passing by at that instant, shot him
into the head with a pistol, whereof he died forthwith. The prince of Conde
slain.


Now was the disorder exceeding great among the Protestants, who having lost
their General, began to fly as fast as they could, and to get out of the
danger of their pursuing enemies. The Admiral and Dandelot, seeing the fight
irreparable, and the affray so marvelous, retired with a few of the nobility
unto S. Iean d'Angely, and from thence to Xanctes, The admiral and Dandelot
fly to Xanctes.
to the young Princes of Navarre, and Conde. There dyed in this journey of
Bassac, besides the Prince, La Touer, young Chasteliere,, Portant, Chandemer,
Mesauchere, Brandaniere, Tabariere, Barette, La Mesteray, and above fifty
other Gentlemen. Stuard a Scot was slain with a dagge, and diverse other died
shortly after of their wounds, Puuiant, Soubize, Languillier, Corbeson brother
to Montgommery, La Noue, La Love, and Guerchy the ensign bearer of the
Admiral were taken prisoners. But shortly after Soubize found the means, to
deceive his keepers, La Noue, was exchanged for Sessac Lieutenant to the duke
of Guise. Corbeson and Guerchy were set at liberty, upon their faithful
promises. The whole number of the Protestants that were slain in this battle
were almost four hundred, and some two hundred Catholics, The number of those
who we^e slain at the battle of Bassac.
and among them were Monsales, the Barons Ingrand, and Prunay, the Count de la
Mirande, de Morette, Mo^canure, Linieres, and certain others of mark.
Monsieur sent the King word forthwith of the victory. Who presently
advertised the Pope thereof, sending him some of the ensigns, who caused them
to be set up in Saint Peter's Church, from whence he went in procession with all
his Cardinals to the temple of the holy Ghost, to give thanks for so joyful
success: and so did likewise the Venetians, and duke of Alua: thinking that
all the Protestants in France had been wasted and consumed.

But the Admiral with the principal of the confederates, gave them quickly to
understand, that the matter was likely to be far otherwise then they
imagined. For they gathering together their dispersed forces, fortifyed Cognac,
Angolesme, Pos, Saint Gean d'Angely, and other places, wherein they planted
strong garrisons to amuse the army of the Catholics, until the coming of
the Duke of Deux Ponts, who was already marching with a great power, to the
relief of the confederates. And having chosen the young Prince of Navarre for
their General (who promised to spend his life in defense of their cause, The
prince of Navarre chosen general of the prot^stants after the death of Conde.
and never to abandon them, until an assured peace were established) reuiewing
their troops, which amounted well near to forty thousand horse, besides their
footmen, provided all necessaries to begin the wars afresh, and if it might be
to repair their former losses. Dandelot was sent into Poictou, to view the
strength of their forces in those quarters, and to gather as much money as
possibly he could, for the payment of the Soldiers: where after he had very
wisely and pollitikely advanced his business, and gotten good store of gold and
silver for the maintenance of the wars, in his return fell into a burning
fever, Dandelot d^eth of a burning fever.
whereof he died shortly after at Xaincts, to the unspeakable grief of the
Admiral, and all those of the reformed Churches. He was very valiant
pollitike, and passing skillful in all warlike affairs: provident to foresee
all dangers, courageous and hardy in all his enterprises, liberal, The praise
^f Da^delot.
courteous and affable, and therefore wonderfully well beloved of his soldiers,
who thought themselves able to encounter with any whatsoever, so long as they
had him for cheefetaine and commander: and therefore they bewailed the loss of
him as of their father.

The Duke of Deux Ponts, who was hasting to the aid of the Protestants, The
Duke of Deux Ponts comes to aid the protestants with a great power
had in his army seven thousand and five hundred Reisters, and six thousand
Lansquenetes, with whom were joined the Prince of Orange, the two Counts
Ludouicus and Henry his brethren, with a small band of their followers: besides
Moruilliers the marquess of Revel, Fequieres, Cleruant, Mouy, and Esternay,
with certain culuerings, six field pieces, and a good number of Musqueters:
with those companies he got forward as fast as he might, still gayning ground,
and approaching the territories of France, notwithstanding all the hindrances and
lets which were given by the Duke of Aumaile, who with a great power was
appointed to stop the passages, and to bar this Almain Duke out of the
fertile country of the Flower de Lis: but that could not be, for still he
passed forth, and at last rested himself before La Charity, a town of great
importance, La Charity besieged and taken by a composition.
and situated (as it were) in the heart and bowels of France. The Town was
very straightly besieged, and planting his battery, he beat the walls in such
furious manner, that those within being not able to hold out, and dispairing
of any succors in time, yielded upon composition, to have their lives saved,
and so was it sacked and spoiled by the Lansquenetes. La Charity sacked.
The taking of the town was no small advantage to the confederates, as also
the loss thereof did much hinder the fortunate course of the victorious
Catholics, who now began to consult how to impeach the two armies, that they
should not meet and unite themselves together: but do what they could the
Duke still advanced forwards, passed through Lymosin so far as Cars, where
falling sick he dyed of a quartaine Fever, tothe exceeding grief of all his
friends and followers.

The Princes being advertised of the coming of the Duke, and the taking of La
Charity, hasted to meet them, leaving La Noue Captain in chief over Poictou,
Rochell, and other places under their obedience: and joining with the Germans
at length near unto Cars, were not a little glad in their hearts, albeit
they were mightily crossed by the death of their principal and cheifest
leader. The death of the Duke of Deux ponts.


The Protestants had in their army some ten or twelve thousand horse, and
twenty thousand foot men.
When all the confederates were joined together, they first sent a
supplicatication to the King, desiring a peace: but when they could not be
heard, nor those miserable wars which had so long tormented poor France,
could have any end by fair means, they proceeded on, and purposed to assay
if by fine force, they could compel their enemies to any honest and reasonable
conditions: the better to effect this, they determined to get as many strong
towns as they could into their hands, as well in the Country of Lymosyn as
other where. But the Army of his excellency was now so strongly reenforced
with the troops of the Duke of Aumaile, as also with one thousand and two
hundred horse, and four hundred footmen, all Italians, and under the conduct
of Saint Fior, nephew to the Pope called Pius Quintus, that they did
continually coast them, and maintained sundry brave skirmishes with the
confederates, barring them from executing many of their enterprises, and at
length each Army meeting together near unto Rockabeuille, had almost tried
their quarrel by an entire battle: for Monsieur having encamped upon a
goodly plain, and entrenched his army round about in most defencible manner,
saving at one corner, placed there a strong Corpse du guard (composed of the two
Regiments, sometimes commanded by the valiant Count Brissac, and now led
by the two Captains La Barthe and Goas, who still lamented the death of their
generous collonell) to defend that quarter from all sudden invasions of the
Protestants. This Guard was quickly espied, and the Admiral advertised thereof,
who was very desirous to remove them further off: but for that he did not
well know their strength, he thought it good to deal warily, and to go with all
his whole forces to this exploit, being a matter of so great importance,
purposing to enterprise further if occasion served. Whereupon all the troops
were forthwith arranged and put in battle array: the Admiral assisted by
Beaunois, La Nocle, Briquemant, Soubize, La Noue, Teligny, and others, led the
vantgard followed by their several Cornets, and a great Hot of Reisters,
conducted by Count Ludouic, brother to the Prince of Orange, who were flanked
with the Regiments of Beaudisne and Piles, and on the left hand with Rouuray
and Pouille: a strong battailon of Lansquenetes backed the auauntgard, which
carried in the front eight field pieces. The battle marched after, led by the
Prince and Rochfaucont, with the aid of the Prince of Orange, Count Henry his
brother, and the Count Mansfield, flanked likewise with another battailon of
Lansquenetes, which guarded the rest of the field pieces.

Thus went the Protestants very well appointed to assail the two Regiments,
who being advertised by their Vedetes or espials of their approach, prepared
themselves against the invasion of their enemies. It was not long before the
Enfans perdus of either side began the game, and were followed very lustily
by the rest of their associats.

A great victory of the Protestants.
Though the Catholics were but a few in respect of the Protestants, yet
remembering their former honor (for they were esteemed the brauest and
valiantest bands of all the whole Army) and being animated by the Collonell
Strozzi, did lustily maintain the fight, and would not give an inch of ground,
thinking to be succored in time by his excellency. There was a long and
terble fight, and many were slain on both sides: but this Corpse du guard being
ouercharged with the multitude of Confederates, was (in the end) wholly
overthrown and put to flight. Collonell Strozzi was taken prisoner, Strozzi
taken prisoner.
having lost his Lieutenant La Loup, with the choysest men of the Regiment, and
50. men of Mark at the least, and some four hundred common Soldiers.
Monsieur not minding to hazard his fortune at that time, suffered the
Protestants peaceably to enjoy their victory, and being counseled to break
up his Army, and to distribute them in the garrisons until the 15. of August
following, every one retired to their appointed places, Monsieur dissolueth
his army.
leaving the confederates to range up and down at their pleasures, who
forthwith got Tiuieres, S. Sulpice, Confolant, S. Genais, Chatelerand,
Lusignen, and many other places, so that now fortune began to smile upon them
more then at any time before, and maruailously to favor their proceedings: and
seeing themselves masters of the field, and that there was no man to make head
against them, they resolved to besiege the strong Town of Poictiers. The
Protestants besiege Poicters.
With this determination they marched forwards, and encamped before the chief
City in Poictou, seeking to add that likewise unto the rest of their
conquests.

His excellency being advertised hereof, sent forthwith the new Duke of
Guyse, The Duke of Guyse sent to defend Poictiers.
commanding him to put himself within the Town, and in any wise to keep it
from the Protestants, who accompanied with the marquess De Main his brother,
Ruffec, Onoux, and sundry others his followers, entered Poictiers, where after
he had viewed the walls, and considered of all necessaries requisite to
endure a siege, he fortified the Town with the advice of the Count Lude, the
Governor of the Country, as strongly as could be devised, the better to
maintain it against the enemy, who not long after approaching, first gained
the suburbs, and sundry other places of advantage, notwithstanding all the
impeachments given by the Guyse and other Catholics. Then raised they their
forts, cast up their mounts, entrenched themselves, mounted their Ordenance,
and beat the Walls, Towers, and Bulwarks, in all terrible and furious manner
that might be. Those within stood valiantly to their defense, and by often
sallying forth and skirmishing, endomaged the assaylants exceedingly, who by
reason they were men of courage and resolution, they maintained their own for
a long while. But in continuance of time, after the loss of many of their
forwardest Soldiers, they began to keep in more close, and were content to
hold whatsoever was within the Walls, and for that victuals began to wax
scant, by reason all the passages and ways were so stopped, that nothing could
enter for the relief of the besieged, they thrust out many of their
unnecessary people, and spent their victuals among the rest as sparingly as
might be: and yet for all that they were brought to that extremity, that they
were forced to eat their horses, asses, and dogs, Great penury of victuals
in Poictiers.
and to fill their hungry mawes with many course meats, yea, such was their
misery, that they thought it impossible to hold it for any long time, and
therefore were ready to yield up the Town, had they not been dissuaded by
the Duke of Guyse, the Count De Lud, and some few others, who vowed to spend
their goods, lives, and whatsoever they had, rather then by yielding unto
their enemies, to blemish their honor and reputation: but all this served to
little purpose, had not Bidolier the youngest brother of the Count De Lude, by a
witty and ingenious devise, The ingenious devise of Bidolier.
stopping the Channel of the River, caused it to disgorge it self over all
the low meddowes which lay on the side of the City, by which means the
confederates were utterly disappointed of their hope, and that at such time as
they thought all had been theirs.

Now began the affairs of the Protestants to go backwards, and every day to
be crossed more and more: for shortly after their victuals failed them, and
great multitudes of their armies fell sick, and no small number were grievously
wounded and hurt: the Admiral himself fell into a desperate disease, The
Admiral dangerously sick.
and all men thought he should never have recovered. Rochfaucont, Acier,
Briquemant, Beauuoise, La Nocle, and others of special account were so sickly
and weak, that they were forced to remove from the Army, so that not one of
them (except the Admiral and Acier) were able to be at the battle of
Montcounter.

All these miseries being considered, as also the coming of Monsieur to raise
the siege, The Protestants raise their siege before Poictiers.
the Admiral with the advice of all the principal men in the Army, resolved
to discampe, and to leave Poictiers, to the great comfort and rejoicing of all
the Catholics: and to watch the Army led by his excellency, who was now
marching toward Chatelerand, to the end to gain it from the Protestants. His
whole power consisted of 10000. footmen, 3000. Reisters, one thousand Italians,
and two thousand French horse: with these forces he besieged Chatelerand,
Monsieur besieges Chatelerand
which he so beat with his great Artillery, that the breach being found
reasonable, every man cried to the assault. The Italians who had the honor to
advance first, went very bravely forwards, and made countenance as though they
would have entered at that instant: but the valiant and noble La Love, one of
the Mareschalles of the Camp, and an especial man among the confederates,
having the keeping of the Towns, gave him such a welcome, that after the
daughter of many of their forwardest leaders (as Fabian de Mont, Octauian de
Montalto, Malatesta a Collonell, and above two hundred others) they retired in
haste to free themselves out of such perril. Monsieur being dismayed with this
loss, Monsieur raises his siege.
and understanding that the Admiral with his whole army was at hand, thought
best to remove his siege, and to depart to a place of more security, and
there to stay until he had assembled the rest of his troops. The protestants
being quickly informed hereof, pursued him at the heels, and often
skirmished with him by the way, until they came to a convenient place, and fit
for an entire fight, where they presented the battle: but his excellency
refused, reserving himself for a more fortunate time.

CHAP. XII.
The Battle of Montcounter.

The battle of Montcounter.
AFter some small reposing of his wearied and tired bands, and that his Army
was reenforced by the coming of fresh Soldiers, so that he thought himself
able to match the Confederates, he again returned toward them, purposing to
try it out by some bloody fight, as soon as any opportunity was offreed. The
young Princes, the Admiral, and the rest of the cheifest Protestants, were
quickly advertised of his intent, who for that the advancement of their
affairs consisted principally in celerity and expedition, as also in assailing
their enemies, whereby they did the better maintain their honor and
reputation, and likewise the importunate desires of the Almaines, who were
continually crying upon the Admiral that they might fight, determined to
accept the journey, as soon as it was offered in any fit and convenient place.

They had not marched long, but they came to the plains of Saint Clear, not
far from Montcounter, which his excellency understanding, caused his troops
to amend their pace, purposing to stop their course, and to compel them to a
general combat, which was a thing that he much desired.

The Admiral who commanded all, by reason the Princes were but young, The order
of the Protestants battle.
finding the plain (before said) to be a convenient place to darrain the fight,
arranged his battails in the most convenient ground he could choose, and there
expected the coming of his enemies: and having sent Mouy and Saint Auban with
certain Cornets to discover the Catholics, he in the mean time lodged his
Ordinance upon certain little hills, and made the battle which was led by
Ludouick Count of Nassau to advance more on the right hand, to whom were
delivered three Cannons and one Culuering. The aduauntgard was on the left
hand, led by the Admiral himself, assisted by Puygreffyer, La Noue, Teligny,
and certain others, backed with the Count Mansfeild, and a great battailon of
Reisters, besides the Lansquenets conducted by Cranuilliers. All which having
kissed the ground after their accustomed manner, swore to succor each other,
and to die in the place rather then to give one jot of ground to their enemies.
These were likewise flanked on both sides with tne Regiments of the French
harquebuziers, led By Pills, Rouuray, Briquemant the younger, Amb^es, and
Chellar: the whole army consisted of 6000. horse, 8000. harquebuziers, 4000.
Lansquenets, six Cannons, two culuerings, and three muskets.

His excellency with the direction of his best aduisants, The order of
Monsieurs battle.
divided his whole forces into a vantgard and a battle: the aduantgard was
composed of Frenchmen, Almaines, and Italians, led by the Prince Dauphin, the
Duke of Guyse, Martigmes, Chauigny, La Valette, the Count VVestemberg, the
Reingraue Bassompier, Saint Fior, Paul Sforza, Disci, Santelle, with well near
three thousand horse: The gross battailon of Switzers which consisted of four
thousand, was led by Collonell Clear, flanked with five Regiments of
harquebuziers, Frenchmen and Italians, under the conduct of La Barthe,
Sarlabois, Onoux, and sundry others: over all these commanded the Duke of
Montpensier. The battle was composed of the Dukes of Aumaile and Longauille,
the Marshall Cossy, Tauannes, the Marquess of Villiers, etc. with three
thousand horse, and another Count Mansfeild cousin to the Protestant, and five
Cornets of a thousand or a thousand and two hundred horse. The marquess of
Baden had well near a thousand horse under his leading: these were flanked with
the Spaniards and Burgonians, which the Catholic K. had sent to the aid of
his brother. All these had their Enfans Perdus in their front, who carried
death engrauem in their foreheads, as well for themselves, as for whomsoever
they first attached. All this Army which consisted of above nine thousand
horse, 17. or 18. thousand footmen, and 15. pieces of great Ordenance, was
commanded by his excellency, Duke Montpensier charge the Protestants.
and being ready arranged, awaited when the sign should be given, but first
they fought a far off with their great shot, which for that it was
skilfully directed by the Cannoneres, made a sore slaughter on both sides. This
thundering and terrible noise was no sooner ceased, and the Artillery retired,
but the Trumpets sounded Dedans, dedans, and the Duke Montpensier, went
resolutely to the Charge, and gave in so hotly upon Mouy and his Regiment,
Mouy with his bands defeated.
that he being abandoned by his two Cornets of Reisters, who were appointed to
second him, was forced to get him as fast as he could out of the danger, and to
save the greatest part of his troops among the footmen: who being mightily
dismaide with so pittious an accident, lost their hearts, and disbanding
themselves, ran all away for the best game. Now began the Duke of Guyse
with his associats to come lustily forwards, and in their appointed quarter to
charge their enemies: who received them with equal courage, so that there grew
a very warm fight on both sides. The harquebuziers whom the Admiral had
interlaced among his French Lances, played the men, and set of the Catholics
at their pleasure, knowing they were well assured by their horsemen, who served
to guard them at their need.

The Admiral, who by reason of his great experience in the wars, both at
home and abroad, The princes withdraw themselves from the battle as secretly
as they could.
and the diligent marking of so diverse events as had run before his eyes,
judging of the sequel by this unfortunate beginning, counseled the young
Princes to retire as covertly and with as small a train as they could: but many
whose eyes were prying about, and glad to take any occasion to be gone,
espying the retreat and coveting to enfranchise themselves from so great peril
as was present before their faces, would needs accompany them whether they
would or not, so that they had quickly more attendants then either they
expected or desired.

By this time was the rest of the aduauntgard which was led by the Admiral and
Acier, hotly charged by the Reisters Catholics, who so furiously encountered
them, that many ended their days at that instant. The Admiral himself was in
such danger, The admiral hurt, and in danger to be taken.
that he was hurt in the face, through the default of such as should have
covered him, and was so far intermedled among the Catholics, that had not
Count Mansfeild with four or five cornets of Reisters disgaged him, he had
undoubtedly fallen into their hands who loved him but a little.

While these bloody broils were continued between the aduantgards, his
exellency caused his maine battle to dismarch, the right wing whereof, in
which was the Duke of Aumaile, and the marquess of Baden with all his
Reisters, gave in so far before the rest, that the marquess was there slain,
The marquess of Baden slain.
and many others for, companions of that mortal charge: and Monsieur himself,
albeit he marched full upon the discovery of the great Artillery, made such
haste, that he left the Switzers under Collonell Phiffer, and their general
Memie, with the other battailon very far behind: which when the Protestants
troops discovered, they casting themselves desperately into his esquadron,
breaking in even hard to their Cornet, made them that followed his excellency
to abandon the place: notwithstanding, all the deuoier of the Duke De
Longauille, Touannes, Carnauallet, Villars, and others, who endeavored with all
their might to repel the insisting confederates: in a word, this charge was so
terrible, that the most assured Ensigns began to turn head, and had not the
mareschall Cosse with his Switzers hasted apace, the battle had quickly been
at an end.

Count Lodowicke seeing the Mareschall advance, thrust in very lustily with
his troops of Almaines and French, who sought it out most courageously. By
this time had the Mareschall Biron rallyed diverse dispersed troops, and with
his own, which as yet remained unbroken, and the Switzers, went directly
toward the Lancequenets: A great carnage among the Lancequenets.
but they being abandoned by their horsemen, and shrewdly galled with the
harquebuziers, were exposed in a manner to the cruelty of the Switzers, their
ancient enemies, who entering in as it were at the breach, committed a
wonderful carnage and mortality among them. Of four thousand there escaped
not past some two hundred, or there aboutes. And the same misfortune had fallen
upon three thousand Frenchmen, which were arraunged with them, had not Monsieur
of a generous and noble nature contenting himself with the honor of so
glorious a victory, commanded to save their lives.

And this was the end of this great battle, where both the French men,
Almaines, Italians, Burgonians, Switzars, Flemings, and Lancequenets had
leisure to try their valors at the full. The Protestants lost at this
encounter, three thousand Lancequenets, and a thousand five hundred Frenchmen.
The number that was slain on both sides.
There perished also of men of name, Tauigny, Pugreffier, Dantricourt, Biron
brother to the Catholic, and Saint Benet, the ensign of the Admirals
company. La Noue, and Acier, were taken prisoners, and their Reisters lost all
their Wagons. Of the Catholics there perished some five or six hundred
horsemen, and twice so many were grievously hurt, whereof the most part lived
not long after. The Count Reingraue the elder, the Marquis of Baden, and
Cleremont of Dauphinie, were slain. The young Reingraue, the Earls of Issi,
and Santelle, Italians, with the Duke of Guise, Scomberg, Bassompcer, and de
Maille, were sore wounded, but afterward recovered.

CHAP. XIII.
Saint Iean d'Angely, besieged and taken by the Catholics. The king offreth a
peace, which is refused by the Protestants. Monsieur de Bellegard is slain.

THe loss of this battle gave a marvelous check to the affairs of the
Protestants, A great alteration in the Protestants affairs.
who now were driven to forsake the Champaigne, whereof they were masters not
long before, and sundry of their followers began to shrink, thinking that
all had been lost, and many good Towns which before favored their
proceedings, fell quite from them in devotion, and followed the good fortune of
the victorious Catholics. So mutable and chaungeable are these earthly
matters, and are set in so fickle an estate and condition, that one would
think, that even God himself, who guides and governs all with the eye of
his providence, were delighted with an alternatiue course, and continual
change in all things.

Albeit the affairs of the Protestants stood but in a desperate estate, yet
like men of great courage, wisdom, and policy, they would not shrink from
the cause, but sought as it were to begin the game afresh, and by all means to
maintain their honor and credits with all their associates. And (if it might
be) to repair their losses, or at the least, to keep that which remained in
their possessions. Whereupon they fortified sundry towns, as Niort, Angolesme,
Saint Iean d'Angely, Rochell, and others, with assurance that the worst of
these were sufficient to stay the Catholics, if they should happen to attempt
them, until they had gathered some new forces. They also wrote letters, into
all quarters, to assemble new troops, and left nothing unattempted, which
might any way tend to the advancement of their affairs.

His excellency following his good fortune, took forthwith sundry good
towns, as Parthenay, Niort, Lusignen, Fontenay, and some others, all places
yielding unto him of their own accord: so that he never stayed his course
until he came before Saint Iean d'Angely, S. Iean d'Angely besieged by the
Catholics.
whereof the Lord Pills was Governor. And having summoned the Town, and
they within returning an answer that lyked him not, he forthwith planted
his siege, and placed his Cannon, and with maruaylous fury plied the battery.
And for the greater terror of the besieged, the King, the Queen mother, the
Cardinal of Lorraine, The K. and Q. mother comme to the camp.
accompanied with a great troop of Nobles and Gentlemen their attendants, came
to the Camp, who were saluted with a thundering peale of Ordinance,
intermingled with sundry vollies of small shot, besides many fireworkes, and
warrelike devises, as well to welcome their Majesty's, as to daunt and dismay
the besieged Protestants. But they as men resolute to maintain their lives and
libertyes, encouraged each other valyauntlie to abide the fury of the
Catholics, and labored day and night to repair the breaches. Yea, they
resolutely stood to their tackeling, and so Souldiourlyke bare themselves,
that after many hot skirmishes, and desperate assaults, being men of noble
valor, and commanded by a generous and courageous Chieftaine, S. Iean
d'Angely yielded upon condition
the King was content to take the town upon composition, and to offer them
honorable conditions, promising them leave to depart with bag and baggage,
with their ensigns displayed, and to be safely conducted whither soever they
would. But before the King could bring them to this pass, 1570
he had spent a long time, lost the valiant Martigues, Def, fans one of the
masters of the Camp, with many other most singular and brave leaders, and
well near ten thousand common soldiers. So that this siege gave the
Catholics as shrewde a check, as that of Poictiers did the Protestants.

The King inclines to a peace.
The King being greatly wearyed with these broils, began of his own
accord to incline to a peace, supposing in deed, that those of the Religion
would accept of any conditions. But they being too often before beguyled with
fair words, would not hearken thereto, least the world should think, that
they were no longer able to maintain their cause: a special plotte (said
they) to discountenaunce the rest of their proceedings. The Protestants refuse
a peace.
VVhereupon both the Catholics, and Protestants, still continued to vex each
other in all hostill manner. The Count de Lude, and Puygalliard, recovered
Marans, Browages, and many other Islandes from the Confederates, which were
again regayned by La Noue, and strongly fortifyed for the further
advancement of the affairs of the Protestants. Who prevailed also very
mightily by Sea, taking many great pryses, which were no means to further
their designements.

Whilst things fell out in this manner about Rochell, the Princes, the
Admiral, and the rest of the chiefest of the confederates, had greatly
increased their forces, and hasted to join their troops with Montgommerie,
Moubrune, and other Chieftaines, who had gathered a great number of
harquebuziers, to supply those bands, which had been broken at the battle of
Mountcounter. And having thus reenforced their army, they marched toward
Lorrain, there to attend the coming of their Almaynes. And as they passed
through Languedocke, and came near unto Mountpellier, La Love, one of the
Mareschals of the camp was slain, as he was fast asleep in the dead of the
night, through the great negl^gence of the Sentinels,, La Love slain through
the negligen^e of the Sentinels.
who being suddenly surprised by the garrison within the Town, were the cause
of the death of this brave Chieftaine, who for his valor, courage, and noble
conduct, was highly commended of all the Protestants.

Many towns were gained by the Princes in these quarters, as Lunell, Nismes, ^
Margarite, Saint Ambrose, Saint Iean, Saint Priu^te, Bezouze, Castillon,
Al^ts, with sund^y other of good importance: by which happy exploits, the
confederates did begin afresh to countenance themselves, and to recover much of
their former honor and renown. When as the K. was advertised of all their
designs, and how that they daily increased their forces, surprised many
castles, and strong holds and were now almost joined with their Reisters, with
whose aid they resolved to return again into the heart of France, and
peradventure once more to besiege the capitol of all the Kingdom, he
dispatched forthwith the Mareschall Cossy, with an army, wherein were 4000.
Switzers, 6000. French harquebuziers, some 3. or 4000. horse, and twelve great
pieces of Ordinance, with which forces he marched toward the princes,
Marshall Cossy sent against the Princes.
who were encamped at a place called Saint Iean, in Burgundy, with some 2500.
harquebuziers, 2000. horse, and eighteen cornets of Reisters. These two armies
came no sooner in view each of other, but that their Enfans perdus began the
game, so that there was a hot skirmish on both sides. The Prince of Berne, and
Conde, were there in person, each of them in the front of their Regiment, and
resolutely bent to go to the charge, and there to make the first trial of
their fortune. The fight continued long, and many were slain: but the
Catholics having the worse, after they had lost Monsieur de Bellegard,
Monsieur de Bellegard slain.
one of the Knights of the order, besides diverse others of good account, were
forced to suffer the Protestants to pass, who hasting on their way, after
great trouble, and a long and painful journey, having in a manner rounded all
France, at the last they drew near to La Charity, Sancerre, Antrin,
Vezelay, and other Towns of the Religion, where they defended themselves to
their maruaylous comfort and contentation. Now was the treaty of peace before
mentioned reiterated, and earnestly pursued by diverse, who persuaded the King,
The King persuaded to a peace.
that these intestine wars consumed none but his Subjects: that the
murders, robberies, burnings, and such like miseryes, would be the confusion
of the whole state, and that who so ever gained, yet he lost, to the great
impouerishing of the Crown of France, and the utter destruction of that noble
kingdom, which had been the paragon of all Europe.

These and the like reasons induced the King at length to condescend to a peace
which was accepted by the confederates, and published in the year 1570. to the
great comfort of all the French, and exceeding quiet of the whole land: where
we may see the strange and wonderful mutabilitie of men's minds, which as they
are not long contented with one and the self same estate: so do they seldom or
never like the better, before they have been well scourged with the rod of
their own folly, and taught by woeful experience how to discern between
good and bad.

CHAP. XIIII.
Peace proclaimed in France. The marriages of the King, the Duke of Montpensier,
the Duke of Guise, and the Admiral. The Queen of Navarre goes to the Court.
The Admiral goes to the Court. The death of the Queen of Navarre.

Peace proclaimed.
THe kings Edict for the establishing of a peace was no sooner published, but
that the forces on both sides were forthwith licenced to depart every man to
his own house, which he had not seen for a long time before, to the
unspeakable joy of the protestants, and no small comfort to the better and
honester sort of the Papists, who as mariners that have escaped some dangerous
and troublesome tempests, and are arrived safely in their wished port, held up
their hands to heaven with giving thanks for so unspeakable a blessing, and
earnestly entreated the almighty, that they might spend the rest of their
days in peace and quietness.

The Princes with the Queen of Navarre, and sundry of the chief of the
Protestants, as the Admiral, the Count Lodowick of Nassau, Teligny, La Noue,
and diverse other withdrew themselves to Rochell, for their greater security,
until they might see how the kings Edict would be executed. Now began there a
great alteration in the minds of the French, and all men's actions were suddenly
changed (as a man would have thought) after a strange and wonderful manner. For
where as not long before there was no talk, but of hatred, wrath, murder,
bloody broils, and most cruel and unnatural wars, now was there nothing so
much spoken of, as love, amity friendship, and making of marriages. The King
was espoused to Isabel the second daughter to Maximilian the emperor, The King
marries.
whose nuptials were solemnised with great pomp and magnificence. Lois of
Burbon and Duke of Montpensier, married with the Duke of Guises sister, Duke
Montpensier marries.
and the Duke of Guise matched with the widow of the late Prince Portion, D.
of Guise marieth.
one of the principal of the Confederates* The Mareschall Cossy, and Prontiere
one of the Secretaryes of estate, were sent unto Rochell, to treat with the
Queen of Navarre, as touching a marriage, between the Prince of Barn her
son, and the Lady Margaret the Kings sister: a thing in show highly
tending to the honor of the Prince, and the establishing of a perpetual peace
and amity with the Confederates. The Prince of Conde was married to Marie de
Cleues, The prince of Conde marries.
the youngest daughter to the Duke of Neuers: the Admiral with the daughter of
the Count of Entremont in Sauoy, The admiral marieth.
and the young Teligny with Lois of Colligny, the Admirals daughter: thus was
there nothing but feasting, banqueting, singing, reuelling, and making of
love, throughout all the parts of France.

Navarre to come to the court, The Queen of Navarre goes to the Court.
both he, the Queen mother, the Dukes of Aniou, and Alenson, the Kings
brethren, did intertaine her in most loving and friendly manner, making her the
best welcome that might be imagined. Count Lodowicke, brother to the Prince of
Orange, who attended her, was likewise very honorably received by the King,
who promised him to aid the Prince his brother against the Spaniard, and for
that purpose had commanded preparation to be made both by sea and land, as
though he had intended to begin the wars with all speed: so that the King
desired nothing more then to advance the affairs of the Protestants. The
marriage of the young Prince of Barn, and the conquest of the low Countries,
were the things that the King seemed to affect most. And because the Admiral
was a very wise man, an old Soldier, the best experienced Captain of all
France, and most skillful in warlike affairs. The King sent the Mareschall
Cossy, to Rochell, to persuade with him to come to the Court, and to assist his
sovereign in so honorable an enterprise, the Admiral at the first was very
unwilling of himself, and had daily aduertisements to dissuade him from that
voyage. The admiral goes to the Court.
But after many persuasions used by the Mareschall, sundry friendly messages
from the King, and his fatal mishap (as it were) leading him thereunto, he
suffered himself to be gained, and to be wooed, by those who indeed loved him
but a little.

He was no sooner come to Paris, but the people flocked together to see him,
His entertainment.
as to see a wonder. The King received him with much kindness, giving him
great honor, calling him father at every word. And when the Admiral
kneeled, the King arose and took him up, protesting that he was the most
welcome man living: and that never any day was more ioiful unto him then that,
wherein he did see the end of so many miseries, and the beginning of peace and
quietness for the whole land. And among many other speeches, he chanced to
utter these words. Now we have once gotten your company, you shall not depart
from us: and this he uttered with great laughter, as a token of much joy and
delight. The Queen mother, his excellency, the Duke of Alenson, and all the
principal Courtiers welcomed him, with far greater honor then he expected:
and that which was more: all these courtesies were accompanied with the great
liberality of the Prince, who gave him an hundred thousand pounds in
recompense of his losses sustained in the former wars, besides the revenues of
the benefices which were belonging to his brother Odet the Cardinal of
Chastillon, who was lately deceased in England. He was also admitted into the
Kings privy Council. His son in law Teligny, was very much honored.
Cauagnes was made one of the masters of the requests: and to be short, all the
Admirals friends tasted of the kings liberality, to the great contentment of
the Protestants, and the marvelous grudging of the Catholics.

as the most rested secure, reposing themselves in the faithful promises of
their prince: yet many suspected that all was but holy water of the Court, and
alluring baytes to catch the poor Protestants, and afterward to dispose of
them as should be thought for their most advantage: following (said they)
herein the old maxim in policy, which is that where the skin of the Lion
will not serve, there it is best to put on the foxes coat. The Queen of
Navarre was earnestly dissuaded by sundry letters from many other friends, from
giving her consent to the marriage. The Admiral was likewise advertised by
secret messengers, that in no wise he should go to Paris, nor come within the
reach of his enemies: but all would not serve, so desirous were they of the
young princes preferment, and so maruellously blinded at that instant. But
whilst the Queen of Navarre was at Paris busied in providing for the marriage
of her son, she suddenly fell sick and died the 10. of June, The death of Joan
of Albret Queen of Navarre.
1572. to the great grief of those of the reformed religion* who exceedingly
bewailed the death of so virtuous and constant a Lady, and one that had been a
most noble maintainer of the truth all her days.

CHAP. XV.
The Massacre at Paris.

THe sudden death of this Queen, bred a sore suspicion, that she was poisoned,
and withal brought some delay the to marriage: but at length all doubts being
cleared, and both parties agreed, the time appointed for the solemnising of the
nuptials being come, the young King of Navarre and the Lady Margaret were
affianced with great solemnity, in our Lady Church in Paris, by the Cardinal
of Burbon, the 18. of August, 1572. in the presence of the King, The marriage of
the King of Navarre.
the Queen mother, the Duke of Aniou and Alenson, the Prince of Conde, with
all the principal protestants. The marriage ended, there was nothing but
banketting, chearing, tilting, and all the devises that might be to please the
eye, and delight the ear, and to set forth all things in most royal and
magnificent manner. All old rancour and malice seemed to be buried in the pit of
oblivion, by reason of this new alliance, which confirmed the hope of a most
blessed peace in the time to come. But in the midst of all this joy and
solace, there fell out a sudden accident, which astonished some, and made
others to bethink themselves, and to suspect the worst, and that was this.

The admiral shot with an harquebuz.
Upon the 22. of August, as the Admiral was going from the Court toward his
lodging, he was suddenly shot with a harquebuz out at a window of the
house, where Villemus (who had been schoole-maister to the Duke of Guise) did
usually lodge, and sore wounded with three Bullettes, as he was going a soft
pace in the street, and reading a Supplication, which had been delivered unto
him a little before. One of the Bullets stroke off his fore finger, and with
the other he was wounded in the left Arm. The Admiral poynted to the house
from whence the piece was shot, and willed some of his Gentlemen to go search
who was within: sending Captain Pills, and Captain Monius, to advertise the
King of his hurt.

Whilst he was led home by the lord Guerchy and another gentleman: the door,
of the house being broken open, the harquebuz was found, but the harquebuzier
was fled out at a back gate, and finding a spanish Gennet which was there
provided in a readiness, galloped away with all speed, crying as he went,
that now there was no Admiral in France.

Captain Pills finding the King at ^ennis with the Duke of Guyse, The notable
dissimulation of the King.
related unto him the Admirals hurt, which he no sooner understood, but he
leaving his play, threw down his racket, and looking very pensiuely, went to
his Chamber: the king of Navarre, the Prince of Conde, the Count Rochfaucont,
and many other Lords, knights and Gentlemen of the Religion, being informed of
this mishap, went presently to visit the Admiral. The King taking with him the
Queen mother, The king goes to visit the Admiral
his two brethren, and most of the principal Catholics went likewise to
comfort him, showing many signs of great sorrow for his harm, complaining
that indeed the Admiral felt the harm, but the dishonor was done to the
King, upon whose faithful promise he was come to the Court, and therefore
both he that had committed the fact, and all that consented thereto should be
most severely punished, to the example of all other villainous and notorious
malefactors: whereto the Admiral answered, that he would leave the revenge to
God, and the execution of Justice to the King, but as for the author he was
known well enough, and because he could not tell how long he had to live,
he besought the king that he might talk with him in secret, touching things
of very great importance, and such as were most necessary for the state of the
Kingdom. The King seemed to be willing herewith, but the Queen mother by a
devise brake off their talk for that time, so that there was no further
conference: and because the king of Navarre, the Prince of Conde, and diverse
others, moved the king that they might have leave to carry the Admiral to his
house at Chastillon, which was some two days journey from Paris, as to a place
of greater quiet and security: the king not willing to condescend thereunto,
answered, that so long a journey would very much endanger his health: and
therefore he thought it better to have him lodged in the Louure near unto his
own person, where he should be safe from all peril: furthermore he willed all
the chief of the Protestant Nobility, to place themselves as near him as
they could, in case that if there were any need they might be ready to succor
one another, and appointed the Mareschall Cossy with a band of harquebuziers to
guard his lodging. The wolf appointed to keep the Lamb.
Upon the Satterday, which was the twenty three of August, the council sat
about the examination of certain witnesses touching the fact, and sundry
other suspected persons, taking great pains (as it seemed) to boult out the
truth, as though they meant to punish the offender with all rigor and
severity. With these and the like apparances, the protestants held themselves
well satisfied, never suspecting that all was but dissimulation and that so
great mischief did hang over their heads.

The same day there was a sudden rumor over all the City, that the king had
sent for the Mareschall Memorancy, commanding him to come to him with all the
forces he could make, and therefore the Parisians were best to stand upon
their guard: but all was found in the end to be utterly false. Teligny being
given to understand by the Admirals trumpetters that there were six cart
loades of Armor brought into the Louure, answered that he did not like that
men should be so suspicious without cause: for his part he was well assured
of the Kings good favor, and wished other men were so likewise, seeing it was
not possible that there should be any harm intended toward them whom the
king had honored so many ways. and had oftentimes so solemnly sworn to
remain their gracious and loving sovereign.

But the king with all those of his secret counsel, seeing that they had now
brought all things about even as they had desired, and that the Admiral was
taken in a trap and all his principal associats, so snarled in their nets that
it was impossible for them to get out, thought it high time to put in
execution that which they had purposed so long before, and at that instant to
finish the days of all the Protestants. Whereupon a signal was given in the
dead of the night by the touling of a Bell in the Louure: which was no sooner
heard by Cossy, who (as is already said) with a band of harquebuziers
guarded the Admiralles lodging, but that he commanded his men to break open
the doors, and to kill as many as they sound in their ways. The Admiral
hearing the noise and fearing some seditious enterprise, willed one of his
Gentlemen to call to the guard which was appointed him by the King, little
imagining that it was they that came to offer him such violence, and arising
out of his bed, put on his night gown, and kneeled down to pray.

By this time were sundry of the murderers gotten in, and had slain such as
they found in the house. The first that entered into the Admirals chamber was
one Besme an Almaine, a desperate ruffian, one of the Duke of Guyses household
servants, who with his drawn sword in his hand, said: Art thou the Admiral?
who answered with great constancy, So I am called. Which he had no sooner
uttered, but that Besme run him through with a sword, and another called
Atinius, The Admiral murdered.
shot him into the breast with a Pistol, and the rest as Causius and Sarlaboix,
stabbed him with their daggers, and threw him out at the window, to the Duke of
Guyse and Aumaile, and the Cheualier of Angolesme (who was King Henry his
bastard) all which stood crying out to make a quick dispatch, and would not
depart thence until they were assured of his death, and for that he was so
bloudied about the face by reason of his wounds upon his head, that it was
hard to know him: the Guyse kneeled down and wiped away the blood with his
handkercheffe, and seeing it was he whom they looked for, cried out, that they
had made a happy beginning, willing them to proceed for it was the Kings
pleasure, and that the K. commanded them to spare none of the Hugonots: and
this he uttered very often and with a loud voice. A certain Italian cut
off the Admirals head, and having embaulmed it, sent it to Rome as a present to
the Pope. The Admirals head sent to Rome.
Some cut off his hands, and others his secret parts, and having trayled
his body through the streets, hung up his dead carcass on a gibbet at
Mountfaulcon: and this was the lamentable end of this noble Gentleman, The
great commendation of the Admiral.
who for his wisdom, policy, courage and constancy in the profession of
Gods truth, and maintenance of the same, was one of the most excellent and
famous men that ever was bred and brought up in France.

The same day that the Admiral was hurt, the king advised his brother in law
the king of Navarre, to cause some ten or twelve of his trustiest friends to
lodge near him, the better to defend him if the Duke of Guyse (whom he
termed a shrewd boy) should happen to attempt any thing against him. These
Gentlemen and some others who were lodged in the king of Nauarres outer
Chamber, after the death of the Admiral, and that they were disarmed by Nancy,
having their swords and daggers taken away, were brought to the gate of the
Louure and there were murdered before the kings face. Then were the king of
Navarre and the Prince of Conde brought before the king, The k ng of Nau^r^e
and the prince of Conde brought before the king.
who told them that he would not suffer any more Religions in his Land then
one, and therefore if they loved their lives, they must now become Catholics
and go to mass, for he meant not to bear with them any longer. The king of
Navarre made a very submisse and humble answer: but the Prince of Conde, who
was of more stout and courageous nature, replying otherwise then the king
expected, was threatened with the loss of his head if he relented not within
three days, and so was sent to prison, being first called obstinate,
seditious, and rebellious traitor, and the son of a rebellious traitor.

Now began the Courtiers with the kings guard, who were appointed to
massacre the Protestant Nobility, to kill and murder all sorts in most
outrageous manner. The Count Rochfaucont Count Rochfaucont.
so greatly beloved of Henry the second for his conceited and pleasant humor,
adorned with so many excellent graces and noble virtues, fit for a perfect
courtier, was forced to yield up his life to these merciless wretches, who
saluted him with this pittious godmorrow. Teligny de Montreuill, Teligny.
the Admirals son in Law, and for his humble and mild spirit, graced with a
singular dexterity in the mannaging of all public affairs, very dear unto
his Wife and prudent Father, was seen of many, but no man was so hardy as once
to touch him, until at last a stranger that knew him not, ran him through
with a Rapier, as he was bewailing the death of so many brave men. The Barron
of Pardaillon, The barrons Pardaillon.
the Barron of Pills, Pills.
Soubize, Soubize.
and Puuiant, Puuiant.
all very famous and worthy men, having been commanders in Chief, and well
worthy for their rare virtues of better fortune, were there murdered after a
most disloyal and treacherous manner. The marquess of Revel The marquess of
Revel.
was hotly pursued as he fled in his shirt toward the River side, and there
was slain by Bussy of Amboise his near kinsman. Monsieur the kings brother,
at the request of Archan, the Captain of his guard, who was amorous of the
Lady Chasteneray, sent certain soldiers to kill La Force her father in law,
who had thought that they had likewise slain both her brethren: but there was
but one found dead, and the other being very sore wounded, escaped by reason
he was covered with the dead body of his Father, where he remained until the
evening following, and then secretly conveyed himself into the lodging of the
Mareschall Biron his kinsman: which when his sister Chasteneray understood,
being sorry that she could not be heir as she earnestly desired, she went to
the Mareschals house, fayning that she was maruailously glad that her brother
had so escaped, desiring to see him, that she might comfort him: but the
mareschall smelling her intent, would not bewray where he was, and by that
means saved his life.

By this time was the signal given to such as commanded over the common
people, to make dispatch of the rest of the Protestants, who being in a
readiness, and encouraged by the Duke of Guyse, Aumaile, and Neuers, slew
every one that fell into their hands: yea, they so greedily thirsted after
innocent blood, that in a short time they had made such a maruailous carnage
and butcherie, The carnage and butchery in the City.
that the streets seemed to be paued with dead carcases, and Carts were laden
with the bodies of men, women, and children, which were thrown into the River:
death and desolation walked about in every corner of this City, and that in
most ghastly and grievous manner, to the extreme horror and dread of every
beholder. There was nothing but weeping, wayling, and lamentation, and a most
woeful and fearful cry throughout the whole City.

About the break of the day, the Duke of Guyse, Neuers, and Aumaile, brethren
in evil, The Protestants in saint Germans escape by flying away.
and the cheifest authors in that pittious tragedy, went to awake sundry of
the Protestant Nobility, who were lodged in the suburbs of Saint Germain, as
the Vidame of Chartres, the Count of Mont-gommery, the Lord of Fountenay,
Caumont, Columbiers, and many others, who being advertised of that which had
happened, supposed at the first that it had been some uproar of the people and
therefore purposed to have gone to aid the King, fearing there had been some
danger toward his person: but on the sudden they discovered 200. armed men,
and those of the kings guard, who cried, kill, kill, shooting at them, and that
in the kings sight, who also (as is reported) took a harquebuz, and swearing
and blaspheming in most heathenish manner, cried out, shoot, shoot, The king
helps to murder the Protestants.
Gods heart, they fly, they fly. As those of the reformed Religion saw this,
they fled with all possible speed, leaving whatsoever they had behind them,
being pursued by those three Dukes before remembered. The Bastard of Angolesme
and diverse others (who wounded some, and had killed many, had they not been
hindered by the negligence of the Porter, who mistook the keys of the gates
where they should have issued forth) was the occasion that the Protestants
had some little time given them to provide for their better security.

They were no sooner gone, but the Switzers of the kings guard, and sundry
courtiers spoiled their houses, killing whomsoever they found, and cruelly
murdering both man, woman, and child: all that day, being the 24. of August,
1572. was spent in massacring, rauishing, and sacking, so that there perished
by this turkish and barbarous villainy, above 10000. persons, as well noble men
as Gentlemen, The number of Protestants slain in Paris.
presidents of courts, councellers, advocates, scholars, preachers,
physicians, proctors, merchants, artisans, women, maids, and children. All
places were full of dead carcases, the thresholds, gates, and posts of the
kings palace were painted with the blood of the slain: yea, the channels
ouerflowed therewith, and the water in the River was turned into a red color:
such and so horrible was the slaughter and butcherie which was made upon the
poor Hugonots. The king, the Queen mother, the kings brethren, with many
Lords and Ladies of the Court, went out in the evening to view the dead bodies,
and among others the Queen mother would needs see the nakedness of Soubize,
The shameless fact of the Queen mother.
for that she had been informed that he was notable to get any children.

The king not satisfied with the slaughter of so many brave men within Paris
sent letters to the Governors of all his principal Cities, as Orleance,
Tours, Meaux, Angiers, Bourges, Tholoux, Lions, and diverse others, that they
should likewise kill all the Protestants within their jurisdiction: which
commandment was forthwith put in execution, and a most horrible slaughter
followed in all places, The number of protestants slain in other places.
which bereaved above a hundred thousand of their lives within the territories
of France, in so much as that it was verily thought that all that were of the
Religion were either slain, or else fled into foreign Countries.

CHAP. XVI.
Rochel holds out against the King. The beginning of the fourth Civil wars.
The siege of Rochel. The siege of Sancerre. The Ambassadors of Polonia come to
the camp before Rochel. Monsieur raises his siege.

WHo would not have thought but that now the Gospel had bin utterly
extinguished in France, and that the Catholics by this execrable devise,
should have attained to the full period of their desires, no man of name
remaining to make head against them, or to cross their fortune which now
seemed so mightily to favor their designs: and indeed the king was verily
persuaded that at this present he might have accomplished whatsoever he would,
and that not any durst have showed themselves to favor the reformed Religion.
The K. deceived in his expectation.
Whereupon he wrote letters to sundry Protestant towns, commanding them to
receive popish Garrisons, and to live after the Catholic manner, but they
utterly refused to satisfy the king herein, and would not be induced to
condescend unto any such thing, by all the persuasions that could be used, but
fortified themselves as strongly as they could, purposing to die, rather then
to yield and abjure their Religion.

The King, partly by threatening and menacing the king of Navarre and the
Prince of Conde, and partly by fair promises, but especially by the wicked
ministry of Rosier, Rosier being a minister and of great credit with the
Prince of Conde, had recanted his Religion, and by his persuasions caus^d the
Prince likewise to deny his.
who of late was become an apostate, had caused them to abjure their Religion,
and to conform themselves to the rites of the Romain church, and thinking them
to be fit instruments to gain sundry strong Towns, who otherwise would not
open their gates but by force of Cannon: caused them to write their letters to
such as he thought meet, and to use all the seasons that might be to draw
them to his obedience, by which devise some relented, and were content to
follow the example of those great Princes, seeing they had no hope to maintain
their cause, having lost all their cheefetaines and principal commanders. But
Rochel, Sancerre, Montauban, Nismes, and some other held out, standing upon
their guards, and providing to fortify themselves in all defensible manner
that might be. Many persuasions were used to gain Rochel, Rochel and sundry
other towns hold out against the King.
which of al other was the place of greatest importance, and that which the
king most desired, as being the principal retreat of the Protestants. Diverse
messengers were sent thither, who promised golden mountains: and Mareschall
Biron endeavored by all means to put himself within the Town, but they
utterly refused to accept of any other Governor then their Mayor, purposing to
maintain their Religion, customs, and liberties, and that with the loss of
their lives. When the king was advertised hereof, and that he evidently
perceived that fair means would not prevail, he resolved to besiege the
Town, and by force of Arms to bring them under his obedience. Whereupon he
commanded Biron to gather a great army, and to inuest the Rochelers with all
speed, who did not only by themselves cross the designements of the
Catholics, but were the occasion that many other towns in Gascogne,
Languedock, Quercy, Poictou, Auergne, and Dauphony began to pluck up their
spirits, and to oppose themselves against the kings proceedings.

The beginning of the fourth civil wars.
Besides the forces that the Mareschall brought by land, there was a great navy
of ships appointed to keep the seas, and to stop up the haven that no
victual or other necessaries should be conveyed in by water, nor any be
suffered to go forth to give any aduertisements to their confederates. All
things being thus appointed in a readiness both by sea and land, Rochel
besieged.
the Duke of Antou the Kings brother, and his Lieutenant general throughout
all his dominions, departed from Paris the tenth of January, 1573. accompanied
with the Duke of Alenson his brother, the king of Navarre, the Prince of Conde,
the Du^e of Montpensier, the Prince Dauphin his son, the Duke of Longauille,
of Bouillon, of Guyse, of Aumaile, and of Neuers, the marquess of Maine, the
mareschals of Cossy, Retts and Biron, the Count Rochfaucont, Chauigny, Mouluc,
La Valetta, Mauleurier, Pau^y, Puygalliard, Clermont, Du Gas, Cosseines, with
many other Lords, knights, and Gentlemen, who no sooner arrived at the Camp,
but they were saluted with a thundering peale of great Ordenance, and all the
battailons of footmen stood ready arranged, who likewise welcomed him with
their whole vollyes of small shot, to the high contentment of his excellency.

Monsieur understanding that there were a great number of very valiant and
resolute men within the Town, who were all commanded by the noble and
pollitike chiefetaine Monsieur de la Noue, La Noue.
of whose wisdom, courage, and valor he had often times before made good
experiment, thought it best to assay if with smooth words and fair promises
mingled with some threats, he could induce the Rochelors, The Rochelors would
not trust the fair promises of Monsieur.
to submit themselves wholly under the Kings obedience, assuring them, if they
would so do, the king would deal most graciously with them, and requite their
loyalty with such favor, as they should have good cause to hold themselves well
contented: but if (on the contrary) they stubburnely refused to condescend
hereunto, and like a rebellious rabble, wilfully reject, and undutifully
contemn so great grace offered by their sovereign, then they should look for
no favor hereafter, but for all the extremity that might be, and that he
would not desist from persecuting them both with fire and sword, until he had
taken their town, and seen such punishment inflicted upon them, as the nature
and quality of so traitorous a fact required.

Those within being taught by other men's harms to beware, and having learned
by woeful experience not to trust any fair promises that came from the Court,
seeing the king and all his Courtiers had so notoriously falsified their
words in former times, thought it best to stand upon their guard, and not to be
beguyled with such alluring baits: which when his excellency perceived, he
commanded his army to approach nearer the town, to entrench themselves, to
raise Mounts, to plant their Ordinance, and to annoy those within, as much as
might be. The Canon was no sooner placed, but that it forthwith played upon the
Town very furiously, and to the great terror of such as had not been
acquainted with the like sport. Those of Rochel were not idle, but provided all
necessaries to stop such breaches as should be made, and answering the
Catholics with such shot as they had, often issuing out, and skirmishing with
their enemies with notable courage and alacrity. Yea the women, maids, and
children would expouse themselves to al hazard, The courage of the women
and adventure forth among the soldiers, carrying them wine, comfers, and such
like: maruailously animating such as fought with their cheerful words, and
hardy examples. And one among the rest so far aduenturing that in the hotest
of the skirmish, she seeing one of the Catholics slain, ran unto him and
took away his sword, and harquebuz, which she carried into the town with great
triumph, and reioying, said, that she had adorned herself with the spoils of
her enemies.

The third of March, those within discharging a Minion from the Tower of S.
John Evangelist, pierced one of the enemies gabyons, and encountering Claud of
Lorraine Duke of Aumaile, peer of France, and Lieutenant for the King in the
Duchy of Burgundy, The Duke of Aumaile slain.
stroke him stark dead, to the great grief of sundry of the Catholics, of
whom he was very much beloved, for his many excellent and commendable virtues.
And being incensed against the Rochellors for this fact, seeing they could get
nothing with open force, thought it best to assay what they could do by a more
secret means: whereupon they fell to undermining, and spent a long time in
digging, and deluing under the ground, endeavoring to blow up their walls, and
to overthrow their towers and bulwarks, with gunpowder. But they within so
nobly and valiantly defended themselves, and so politikely prevented all their
stratagems, that they could not by any means accomplish their desires. Yea,
they seemed so little to regard all their endeavors, that upon May day, in great
ioylitie and triumph, they decked their walls, and towers: and with trumpets,
drums, flu^ts, and other musical and delightsome instruments, seemed to spend
the day in mirth and solace, as though they little or nothing cared, for their
enemies.

Many, who secretly favored the religion, seeing the great courage of the
Rochellors, and their happy success in holding out so long a time again such a
mighty power, began to pluck up their hearts, and openly to show themselves: So
that now great numbers were up in Arms in Poictou, Xanctogne, Quercie, (...),
Dauphiny, and sundry other parts of the land: so that the Catholics, who
thought that they had destroyed all the Protestants in their Parisian murders,
found themselves maruailously deceived, and many signs appeared of new civil
wars, and those as troublesome and dangerous, as any others before (...).
For now the King, and all the French Catholics, were grown so odious, both at
home and among foreign Nations, that all the World spoke shame of their
barbarous and strange cruelties: and such Protestant Towns as were strongly
fortifyed, would not yield by any persuasion* (...) distrusting in the kings
word, who had so often and so notoriously falsified his (...), to the great
dishonor and stain of his princely dignity, and perpetual stain of the
French nation.

Whilst his excellency with a mighty power besieged Rochel, the Marshall
Danuill lieutenant for the king in Languedocke, The marshall Danuill in
Languedocke.
was sent to reduce all those quarters under the Kings obedience: but he found
it a matter of more difficulty then he at the first imagined, for albeit he
entered the country with a strong power, purposing to besiege Nismes, a place
of the greatest importance of all the rest, and by force to constrain it to
stand at the devotion of the Catholics, yet was he in the end after some
loss, at the least of thousand of his best soldiers, before a petty village
called Sancerre, compelled to give over his enterprise, and to disperse his men
into garrisons, the better to relieve them, and with all diligence to muster
new forces to repair his broken troops. Which when those of Sancerre
understood, The siege of Sancerre.
being notably encouraged by the surpassing valor of their Confederates, they
resolved to endure the uttermost attempts of La Chastre, and all the
Catholics, and therefore, whereas by reason of their long siege all vittailes
began to be scarce, The great famine in Sancerre.
necessity (the mother of all fine inventions) taught them to make many hard
shifts, and to devise new and strange meats. For after that they had first
eaten up all their Horses, Asses, Dogs, Cattes and such like, they devised to
make meat of their Skins, roasting, seething, and broyling them upon
Girdirons, as if they had been Tripes, Mice, and Rattes were accounted dainty
delicates, and well was he that could get them. And being still pressed with
hunger, they devised to make meat of old shoes, horns, horses and bullockes
hooues, which had lien hid in the dunghils for many years: the little children
would broyle and roast their girdles to to fill their empty mawes. Roots,
herbs, and barks of trees, served in stead of iunketting dishes: whatsoever
had any moisture. taste, savor, or smell, were it never so unwholesome, they
eat it with greediness. And albeit they were often showed of the danger
thereof, yet would they not take heed: for the belly had no ears. Yea, so
intolerable was the famine, that they eat the very dung, especially of
horses, which was accounted indifferent good, and therefore raked it together,
as a thing of much price. The father and mother eat their own child, The father
and mother eat their own child.
which was pined to death with hunger, and for so horrible a fact were both
burned. It is incredible what misery was in that town, and yet they would not
yield, nor commit themselves to the mercy of their enemies. But at length the
famine still increasing, and having not past 400. soldiers left, and those for
the most part sickly, weak and wounded, and seeing no hope of any succors from
any their confederates, were content to hearken to a parle, which was offered
unto them by La Chastre, and so by composition to render the town, with the
castle into the hands of the Catholics, Those of Sancerre yield upon
composition.
who had spent at the least 5914 canon shot, for the gayning of the place, and
lost some 1200, or 1300 men, besides a great number that were wounded and sore
hurt.

Albeit that the Rochellors had now for a long time very valiantly born
themselves, and with their often skirmishes and sallyings forth maruailously
annoied the assailants, insomuch as that besides the loss of a many common
soldiers, and sundry of good account, his excellency had likewise been
undoubtedly slain, The example of a faithful servant.
as he was going to view the Mines, had not one of his Gentlemen, whose name
was Vius, espying the fyring of the piece, by putting himself before his
master saved his life, by receiving the bullet into his own body: yet their
provision being well near spent, and the famine increasing very sore, they
began to be maruellously dismayed, fearing some mutiny among the people:
and the rather for that they had sound them very desirous to come to a
composition with the enemies. But God did miraculously help them in this
extremity, Rochel miraculously relieved.
by sending into their haven an exceeding multitude of muscles, cockles and
small fishes, wherewith they plentifully stored themselves in despite of all
the Catholics.

As this extraordinary provision did mightily encourage the inhabitants to
hold out: so did it not a little dismay their enemies, and made them much more
enclinable to peace then before: for they having besieged the town for a long
time, and endured much hunger and cold, hoping at last to gain it, as a
recompense for all their labors, did now despair thereof, seeing it was so
extraordinarily victualed, and as it were relieved from heaven. Besides, the
Catholics themselves began to fall into want and penury, The miserable estate
of the Catholic at the siege of Rochell.
their soldiers waxed sick, and many did daily drop away: their wounded and
hurt men were so many, and so negligently looked unto, that it was a most
pitiful spectacle, to behold so many lazers and maimed persons in one place,
who for want of necessary attendance grew incurable: yea, the lice did so
abound among them, that sundry were even eaten and consumed with them, and the
rest became so filthy, that they would have loathed any to have seen them.

About this time came the Ambassadors of Polonia to the camp, The ambassadors
of Polonia come to the camp.
to signify unto his excellency, that he was chosen king of that country.
Which dignity they humbly desired him to accept of, and with as great speed as
might be, to hasten thither, and to take the government of them, who with all
duty and obedience were willing to receive him as their king and sovereign.
Monsieur being exceeding glad of this good news, and extremely weary of the
siege, which had wasted so many of his brauest men, desirous to see an end of
the wars in France, and to take possession of the Polonian Diadem, which he had
so long thirsted after, was content to offer such reasonable conditions as the
Rochelors liked of: Monsieur raises his siege before Rochel.
so that both parties being (contrary to al expectation) suddenly agreed, the
peace was proclaimed in the later end of July, and the siege presently raised,
to the unspeakable comfort of all those of the reformed religion. Wherein
sundry have observed, and not without good cause, the variable estate of this
inconstant world, which is ever wavering, and cannot continue long without
change and alteration. For those who thought that every man would have bowed
at their becks, and that the strongest towns in all France durst not once have
made so much as any show to resist their power and puissance, did now see
themselves in a manner overthrown by a handful of men, who not long before
were at their wits end* and all their councels brought to naught: so that they
were forced (after the loss of many brave soldiers, and valiant captains,
besides the expense of many thousands of Crowns, having lien before a little
village seven or eight months) to depart with dishonor and disgrace, having
gotten nothing but blows, wherewith they wasted and wearied themselves, and to
seek some better place to refresh their weak and diseased troops.

CHAP. XVII.
Those of Quercie and Languedocke refuse peace. The Mareschals Memorancie and
Cossy committed to prison. Mareschall Danuill joins with the protestants,
Montgommerie landeth in Normandy. Is taken and beheaded at Paris.

BY the narration of that which is already past, every one may understand the
enterchangeable course, and vicissitude, both of the Catholic and Protestant
affairs.

Although that many, as well Protestants, as Papists, were very glad of this
late reconciliation, and with joyful hearts thanked the King for their desired
peace: yet those of Quercie, Languedocke, Those of Quercy and Languedock,
refuse the peace.
and (in a word) all the Provinces toward the Leuant seas, were not satisfied
therewith: for that (said they) their enemies, and the authors of those
execrable Parisian murders, were still the Kings principal fauourits, and
nearest about his person: and therefore they were little assured of any
security, but rather had cause to fear an other massacre, considering the king
was ruled by such bad counsel. And further, that there had bin many as strong
Edicts, and as solemnly sworn as that at Rochel, and yet they proved but words
without effect, and served but as nets to catch the poor Protestants: that
with fraudulent and subtle devises, they had ever prevailed more then by open
force: and therefore now it stood them upon (after so much schooling) to take
better heed unto themselves, and to beware of the practices of those, who
thirsted for nothing so much as for their blood, and the utter abolishing of
their Religion, which they had for many years maintained with the danger of
their lives: adding withal, that this last pacification was made but with some
particulars, without their consent, and therefore that they were not bound to
keep it, further then they liked of it.

These and the like reasons were alleged by a great number of the Confede:
rats, who having bin often deceived, would not now so readily give ear unto
fair promises, but meant to stand upon their gards, and as warily as might be,
to watch the Catholics at every turn. And to the intent they might the better
maintain their reputation, and with greater dexterity manage their affairs,
they first assembled at Millaua in Rouergne, The assembly of the Protestants.
and afterward at Montaubau, where after long and mature deliberation, they
established an orderly course for the rest of their proceedings. And having
gotten sundry strong towns, forts and castles into their hands, they flatly
refused those conditions of peace, which the Rochellers had accepted, and
fortifying themselves with a new association and league, began to annoy the
Catholics with open war.

The mareschals of Memorancie and Cossy committed to prison.
The King being about this time incensed against the Mareschals of Memorancie
and Cossy, committed them to prison, and suspecting the Mareschall Danuill, to
be of their confederacy, deprived him of his Lieutenantship in Languedo ke,
and gave it unto the Prince Dauphin, son to the Duke Montpencier. Which when
the Mareschall understood, he aranged himself with those of the Religion,
seizing upon sundry strong towns, as Montpellier, Beucary, Lunell, and
others, Marshall Danu ^l ^oyneth with the Protestants.
fortifying them with sufficient garrisons, and all other necessaries. There
were also great numbers of the Catholics, who receiving small favor at the
Kings hands, neither were so rewarded for their services as they expected, grew
maleconts, and seeing Monsieur the Kings brother was departed into Polonia,
they thought it now fit time to take their advantage, and by leaguing
themselves with the Protestants, to reform the policy of the land, and to
reclaim the king, who (said they) was wholly misled by the wicked counsels of
such, as were strangers and enemies tothe Crown of France.

They had also practiced with the Duke of Alenson, the Kings youngest brother,
to take part with them, and found him not unwilling to become their leader, and
general in this so hautie an enterprise. And where as the Rochellers would not
for a long time be drawn to join with the rest of the Protestants, Rochell
joins with the rest of the Protestants.
and malcontents, at last through the dexterity and politic inducements of
La Noue, a man of great credit among them, they were contented to be embarked
into that action, and to provide all necessaries, for the maintenance of the
future wars.

The Confederates having all things thus in a readiness, attended the
departure of the Duke of Alenson, The Duke of Alenson dissuaded from going in
the Protestants.
the King of Navarre, and the Prince of Conde, from the Court, and for their
better safety had sent some two hundred horse to Saint Germain in Lay: but the
King being made privy hereof, and his excellency diuerted by La Moly, the
proceedings of the Protestants were mightily crossed, for the time: howbeit,
like men of courage, and resolution, they went forwards, and openly invaded the
Catholics, both by sea and land. Montgommerie, who for a long while had been
in the I Will of Gersey, landed on the sudden in Normandy, Montgommery landeth in
Normandy
joining with the Columbiers, and incorporating himself with the Norman
troops, made sharp war upon the Papists, getting many towns and
fortresses, which were very aduantagious for the Protestants.

Great preparation was made by the King, to withstand these proceedings, and
proclamation was sent out into all parts to assemble the Bannes and
Arierbannes, and such was the diligence used herein, that there was quickly
gathered together a sufficient number to make two armies, which the King
presently divided, sending the one into Poictou, under the conduct of
Montpencier, against La Noue, and the other under the leading of Mategnon into
Bas Normandy, against the Count Mongommerie, who prevailed mightily against
the Catholics, seizing upon sundry their best towns, and strongest holds,
and raunging every where at his pleasure. But at last the Count coming to
Donfron, was suddenly besieged by his enemies: where he was taken prisoner,
being shamefully forsaken by his soldiers, and so was led away to Paris, and
there had his head stricken off, Montgommery taken and beheaded,
the 26. of June, to the great rejoicing of the Parisians, and the exceeding
grief of the Confederates.

CHAP. XVIII.
The King waxes sick. Makes a peace with his subjects. Ordains the Queen
mother Regent of France, in the absence of the King of Polonia. His death. The
end of the fourth civil wars.

The King waxes sickly
Whilst the Duke Montpencier besieged Fontenay, the King, who had now for a
good while been sickely, and diseased, began to wax worse and worse, insomuch
as the Queen mother fearing, that if he should die upon the sudden, there
would be marvelous hurly burlies at court, thought it best to send for the
Duke, Duke Montpensier returns to the Court.
whom she commanded to repair unto the kings presence withal speed: who
thereupon brake up his siege, licensing his army to depart, and he himself
hasted to the Court. There he found a strange Metamorphosis, for the king was
now very desirous to end the wars, and to make a peace with the Protestants,
and would have them favored and protected as well as his other subjects: The
king desirous to make peace with his subjects.
desiring, and that very instantly, all sorts to put to their helping hands,
and to show themselves furtherers of so laudable a work. Commanding likewise
his Lieutenants and governors in all his Dominions, to cause his former Edicts
to be diligently observed, and to punish with all rigor and severity, who
soever refused to obey this his commandment. The Queen mother did likewise
labor very earnestly herein, The end of the fourth civil war.
and seemed desirous of nothing so much, as to establish a peace and quietness
throughout all France.

The King did still decay, and death hasted his pace to overtake him: so that
notwithstanding all the means that could be imagined to escape so hot
pursuit: yet there was no remedy, but needs he must be arested, and called to
account for his former actions. Which when with great perplexity of mind and
sorrow of heart he perceived, having ordained the Queen mother for Regent
(during the absence of the King of Polonia, The Q. mother made Regent of
France.
to whom the crown of France as next heir did appertain) he yielded up his
life the 30. of May, at Bois de Vincens, 1574. in the 13. year of his reign,
and in the 24 of his age, having bin the most bloody and cruel Prince, that
ever did wear the French Diadem, And as he continually thirsted after the
blood of the poor Protestants, so did he never cease vomiting and belching
out of blood, all the time of his sickness, with most horrible swearing and
blaspheming, until his last gasp, after a most strange and fearful manner. And
this was the end of Charles of Valois, and King of France: The death of Charles
the ninth, King of France.
who being by nature wicked, by education irreligious, and by ungodly and
wicked counsel easily drawn into all kind of impious and barbarous actions,
began with injustice, continued with cruelty, and ended in misery, leaving
that noble kingdom so torn and dismembered, the Nobility so divided, and
discontented, and the communaltie so oppressed, and impouerished, that the
whole state, having lost the ancient splendour and dignity, was mightily
shaken, and in a manner brought to a Chaos, and confusion, and hasted (as it
were) a maine pace to a lamentable change and alteration.

CHAP. XIX.
Henry the third King of France and Polonia. The Queen mother labors for
peace, which is concluded for three months. The Prince of Conde goes into
Germany. Lusignen dismanteled. The King of Polonia steals away into France.
The first Ciu ll wars. The Mareschall D'Anuill joins with Protestants.
Cassimer comes to the aid of the Protestants. The Duke of Alenson departs
malecontent from Court. The end of the first civil wars.

KIng Charles being dead, and his brother Henry king of Polonia, Henry the the
King of France and Polonia.
declared heir to the Crown, during whose absence the Queen mother (as is
already said) was proclaimed Regent: the Catholics began to insult more
then ever before over the Protestants, and to use them in most outrageous
manner, presuming upon the accustomed good fortune of their new king, and the
resolute course of the Queen mother, to root out all those of the Religion,
and to expel them out of the territories of the Flower de Lis. The
consideration whereof did maruailously dismay many of the Protestants, and
caused sundry who inwardly favored their proceedings, to pluck in their
heads and keep themselves close, and to expect what would be the sequel of
these new occurrences. There was great dissension at Rochell about these
matters, and long it was before they would fully determine what to do: howbeit,
at length through the manifold remonstrances of La Noue, they fully resolved
to continue the wars, both by sea and land, as they had done in former times.

The Queen mother knowing that the best way to pacify these tumults, and to
restrain the Confederates from any further proceeding in the wars, was to
use them gently, and by smoth words and fair promises to keep them in, until
the coming of the new king, sent the Abbot of Gadagny to Rochell with letters
to La Noue, The Queen mother writes to La Noue.
in which (among other things) he exhorted him to live peaceably like a good
subject, and not to vex the land with new troubles, in the absence of the
king, who peradventure would be revenged thereof at his coming, although she
knew that naturally he was a very mild and merciful Prince, and one that
would maintain his subjects both of the one and the other Religion, in peace
and amity, so far forth as possibly he might, and had already signified
the same as well to her self and the principal officers of the Crown, as to
sundry the greatest and cheifest Cities of the land. These letters with
sundry persuasions used by the Abbot, enduced the Rochelers to conclude a
truce for three months. The Rochelors conclude a peace for three month^


Mention was made before of the purpose of the Duke of Alenson and the king of
Navarre to depart the Court, and to join with the Confederates, which albeit
they attempted not, being diuerted there from by the council of some of their
friends, yet the late King had them in great jealousy, and therefore kept them
(in a manner) as prisoners, setting spies to watch them and their actions: and
for that he suspected the two Mareschalles of Memorancy and Cossy to be of
their confederacy, he imprisoned them in the Bastile within the Louure, and
discharged the Mareschall Danuill brother to Memorancy of his Lieutenantship in
Languedock, giving it to the Prince Dauphin, son to the Duke Montpencier: and
albeit the Prince of Conde, Meru, Thore, the vicount of Turin, Montagu and many
others, were secret favorers of his excellency in this action, yet for that
they were not discovered, the king suffered them to remain at their liberty,
and sent the Prince of Conde into Picardy to look to the government of that
Country, The Prince of Conde sent into Picardy, from whence he secretly
conveyed himself into Germany.
who being advertised of that which had passed at Court, touching the Duke and
the King of Navarre, and that there was a purpose to clap him up likewise,
secretly conuayed himself into Germany, and forwith made profession of the
Religion, and so practiced with the Princes and the rest of his friends in
that Country, that he leauied a great power of Reisters for the aid of the
French Protestants, which when the Mareschall Danuill understood, he began
to draw near to those of the reformed Religion then he was accustomed to
do, and finding many discontented pollitikes ready to join with him,
resolved from that time forward to follow the matter with more earnestness,
and to further their cause all that ever he might.

Henry of Burbon Prince of Conde, accompanied with many of the Nobility of
both Regions, being at Heppenhem in Germany, and seriously busied in
gathethering of forces to enter France for the relief of his associats, was
informed of all the Proceedings, as well of the Protestants as of the
Mareschall Danuill, and the rest of the discontented pollitikes, and
understanding that he was chosen general over both sorts, accepted thereof,
promising to employ all his credit, power, and authority to maintain them
against all their enemies, under the obedience of Henry the third of that name,
King of Poland and of France. Which when the Queen mother understood, she
thought it best to offer a treaty of peace, and to hold all sorts in
quietness, until the coming of her Son out of Polonia, whose presence she
supposed would be a sufficient weapon to fight against all these practices and
devises. Hereuppon she wrote letters to the Confederates, and especially to the
Rochelors, to move them to embrace this negotiation of peace, whereby they
themselves might live in greater security, The Queen mother moves a peace.
and the whole Land be freed from civil and intestine wars.

They returned a dutiful answer, desiring her majesty to deal with the
Prince of Conde, who was elected the chief of the reformed Churches, and to
whom under the Kings obedience they had submitted themselves: and in the
mean while furnished their Cities with all necessaries for their better
safety. With which answer the Queen mother being nothing well pleased, sent
the Duke Montpencier into Poictou with very great forces, who having taken
Maraus, Noille, Noue, Charante, and diverse other strong places, planted his
siege before Fontenay, a Town of very great importance, which in the end he
took by composition, and so gained all base Poictou, to the exceeding
prejudice of the Confederates. He likewise besieged Lusignen, which being
valiantly defended by the Lord of Fontenay, held out for a long time, yet
yielded at the last upon reasonable conditions, after it had been besieged
three months and twelve days, having lost some three and twenty Gentlemen,
and two hundred common soldiers: Lusignen dismanteled.
the Catholics spent seven or eight thousand cannon shot, and left some
eight hundred of their men dead before the Town, to make satisfaction to the
inhabitants. The Towers and the Bulwarks were overthrown, and the walls
dismanteled: and so in a short time one of the most beautiful and strongest
holds in Europe was utterly rased, and remained as a perpetual monument of
the Princes heavy indignation and displeasure.

The king of Polonia being advertised of his brothers death by letters from the
Queen mother, and that he was now become heir to the Crown of France, albeit
he was quietly established, and a king over a mighty kingdom, which was
every way both very profitable and honorable unto him, yet (as the nature of
all men is, to love their own natural country more then another) he
presently resolved to return home again, and as shortly as might be, to
behold the goodly and pleasant fields of the Flower de Lis: but the great
love and reverence which the Polonians bare unto him, (who having understood
that the disease wherewith his brother Charles was afflicted was incurable, and
that peradventure the Crown of France would quickly intyce him out of Polonia)
made them watch over him with so vigilant an eye, and to observe him so
narrowly, that it caused him to doubt what course he should take to escape
their hands: and being (indeed) induced by sundry strong presumptions, to
think that they would in no wise condescend to his departure, and that it were
but lost labor, yea, peradventure much harm to acquaint them with his intended
voyage, determined to accomplish his purpose as closely and as secretly as he
might, and to leave them his reasons in writing, of so sudden and hasty
departure. Wherefore having disposed of all things which were requisite for the
furtherance of this project, he first publicly dismissed Bellieure the French
Ambassador, sending him home as one who seeing his master was dead, was now
to be discharged of his office, and with him he sent the choysest Gentlemen
about him, and the cheifest and principal Jewels that he had. This being
done, he made an exceeding sumptuous banquet to all the great Polonian Lords,
and the Gentlemen in the Court, which being finished, and every man departed
to his rest, the king himself went likewise to bed, as though he had purposed
to have slept until the next morrow: but he had not rested long, The king of
Polonia steals away into France.
but rising again and putting on disguised apparel, he passed through the
watch with Halde one of the Gentlemen of his chamber, and mounted upon his
horse which was ready for that purpose, and posted away from Gracouia with all
speed, and shortly arrived in Austria without any let, notwithstanding all the
extreme pursuit made by the Count Christophe, the Count Tancy, and many other
Polonian Lords, and coming to Vienna was royally received of the Emperor, by
whom he was conducted to the territories of the Venetians, who likewise
entertained him in most honorable and magnificent manner, and so passing by
Padoua, Ferrara, and Cremona, entered into Piemont, and so into France, where
he was no sooner come but he found all the country full of troubles, tumults,
and dissentions, and almost no corner free from cruel and bloody wars. The
beginning of the fitf civil wars.


The Mareschall Danuill and his designs.
The Mareschall Danuill began to stir coals in Languedocke, and daily to
enterprise upon the Catholics, and to advance the affairs of the Prince of
Conde and his associats, all that ever he might. The king finding such
troubles in every corner of the Land, seemed to be very sorry, and sought by
all means to establish a peace, and to that end wrote to the Prince of Conde
and the Mareschall Danuill, who were the principal men among the Confederates,
that they should signify unto him the causes of their coffeehouse, and
then he would (as their king and sovereign) see them satisfied so far forth
as might stand with equity and justice: whereupon both the Prince and the
Mareschall sent their deputies unto the king and Queen mother, by whom their
majesty's were certified of all their greefes and doleances, The Prince of
Conde and the marshall Danuil send their deputies to the king.
and the reasons that moved them to take Arms, which was (said they) to
defend their religion, their lives, and liberties, and to maintain themselves
both against their own enemies, and the sworn adversaries to the Crown of
France, who being but strangers, ruled all at their pleasure, offering the
greatest wrong and indignity that might be, and that unto the Princes of the
blood, and cloking their actions with a colorable show of Religion, set the
whole Land in a combustion intending indeed the utter desolation thereof,
unless they were speedily prevented, and some good course taken to stop their
turbulent proceedings.

The King incensed to wars by the persuasions of his council.
The king seemed to give them a favorable hearing, as one willing to make a
pacification among his subjects, whom he would have to live in love and amity
one with another under his obedience: but by reason there were certain
articles propounded by the confederates, which could not on the sudden be
agreed upon, the peace was deferred, and the wars continued, whereupon there
were new associations and leagues, and both parties stood resolutely bent to
annoy one another as much as might be. Those of the Religion were animated by
the comfortable letters of the Prince of Conde, who promised the^ speedy aid
and assistance, and having recovered Saint Iean D'Angely, with sundry other
places of very good importance, they gathered some five hundred pistoliers, and
a thousand two hundred harquebuziers, led by the valiant La Noue, wherewith
they stopped the roades of their enemies, who had a long while harryed and
wasted tne Country without pity or mercy.

The king as it seemed, was of himself very inclinable to peace, and in a sort
contented that the protestants should freely enjoy their consciences, and have
public places allowed them for their preachings: but he had no sooner
entertained the councellers of the late king Charles, but that he was
forthwith cast in a new mould: for albeit he were very earnestly solicited
by the Ambassadors of the Queen of England, the Duke of Sauoy, and the
Switzers, to yield to some good agreement with his subjects, yet would he not
be drawn thither with all the persuasions that could be used, but still
maintained the wars, and in all hostill manner invaded those of the reformed
Religion, persecuting them with fire and sword, with a full purpose to bring
them to utter ruin and desolation: and being advertised of the great leauy of
Reisters which the Prince of Conde made in Germany, which amounted to the
number of seven thousand and five hundred horse, and three thousand footmen,
under the leading of the Duke John Cassimer, Duke Cassimer comes to aid the
Protestants.
son to the Elector Palatine, he sent Mareschall Biron into Lorraine
toward the frontiers, to stop their passage, and to attend the coming of
the Duke of Guyse, who was mustering of men, and gathering of forces, and that
very busily for the same purpose.

As the king was thus devising how he might best withstand the Reisters, new
troubles ensued, and a maruailous likelihood of greater and more dangerous
sturres then at any time before, if they were not wisely and speedily
prevented: for the Duke of Alenson the kings only brother and the second
person of France, suddenly departed from the Court, The Duke of Alenson
suddenly departs from the Court, to the aid of the confederates.
and went to Dreux, being highly discontented with his straight keeping, which
he accounted no better then an imprisonment: to whom the^e daily repaired great
numbers of the nobility and gentlemen, both Papists and Protestants, and there
openly showed himself a favorer of the Confederates. The king of Navarre
escapes out of prison.
The king of Navarre who had likewise been shut up for three years, having
liberty on a time to go to hunt in the Forest of Saint Germain in Lay,
accompanied with the Duke of Espernon and many other Lords and gentlemen, so
persuaded with them that they were not only willing to suffer him to go
whether he would, but many offering their service to bring him on the way,
never left him until he came to Samur, where he continued not long but he
grew to that strength, that he cared little or nothing for his enemies. These
two unexpected accidents did maruailously astonish the Court, and made the
wisest of them well near at their wits ends: But the Queen mother, who
earnestly desired to see some good agreement between her children, The Queen
mother reconcileth her children.
accompanied with some of the Princes of the blood, the principal officers of
the Crown, and the two Mareschals of France, Memorancy and Cossy, who were now
delivered out of prison, went with all speed toward Monsieur, and never left
him until she had first made a truce for nine months, and afterward having
granted unto him the Dukedomes of Berry, Touraine, and Aniou, for his better
maintenance, besides many other things done in favor of the Protestants, the
wars ceased, and a general peace was proclaimed thorowout the land: which
the Protestants hoped would be more permanent then any other of former times,
for that it was granted by the king, who as yet had not violated his promise,
The end of the fifth civil wars.
and therefore they had no cause to doubt of him, especially considering that
as one exempting himself from being culpable of the breach of the former
pacification, he commanded that this should be termed by the name of his
Peace, and therefore in all likelihood meant to have it duly kept and observed.

CHAP. XX.
The ambition of the Guyses. The house of Valois and Burbon condemned at Rome.
Monsieur forsakes the Protestants. The beginning of the sixth civil wars.

HItherto thou may perceive (gentle Reader) a maruailous strange alteration,
and as it were a continual vicissitude in these French affairs. The original
and progress, with the variable effect and incredible accidents, occasioned
through the continuance of these woeful civil wars, are as it were in a
glass, very lively represented before thy eyes. The due consideration whereof,
and m^st needs make every one in whom remains any piety to tremble at the
secret judgments of the almighty, and to be moved with a fellow feeling and
commiseration of the woeful estate of our afflicted brethren in foreign
Countries: so ought it to work an exceeding rejoicing, joined with most
humble thanks, in the hearts of those, who enjoy a quiet estate and blessed
peace, under a most gracious and merciful prince, with a continual invocation
unto him who is the giver of so rich a treasure, not only to pour down (and
that in most plentiful manner) such graces as are requisite for the
beautifying and garnishing of so high a majesty, but also to assist her with
such Religious, wise and peaceable Councellers as abhor a covetous humor,
wherewith many have been possessed for the enriching of themselves, and
detesting an ambitious and aspiring mind (a vice oftentimes but too much
inherent in the natures of great personages) as are zealously adicted to the
setting forth of Gods glory, the service of his sovereign, and the peace and
prosperity of the Commonwealth. The want whereof, as it has evermore been
the bane of many most flourishing nations, so has it been the principal
motive of such lamentable desolation as has spread it self, and that in most
outrageous manner, over the face of that noble Kingdom of France: where,
albeit that some of the latter Kings have not been so virtuously disposed as
were to be wished, which notwithstanding may peradventure in some sort be
executed in regard of their mynoritie and want of good education: by means
whereof they have the more easily been enduced to give their allowance to many
most wicked and ungodly proceedings: yet is it out of question, that the
gratest mysteries which have there fallen out, have been hatched and brought
forth by the deuillish and pestiferous practices of sundry Councellers, who
through the benefit of their good fortune and favor of their Princes, have
attained unto great places, and had the managing of the whole state.

The great ingratitude of the house of Guyse.
Among others the house of Guyse (as it is notoriously known unto the whole
world) have faulted herein, in the highest degree that may be, who abusing
those notable gifts which had made them commendable in the sight of their
sovereigns, and highly esteemed of the people, and therefore ought to have
drawn on an honorable ^^^^yage of themselves toward all sorts, but in more
especial toward that house which had so honored them above all families in
France, have rendered evil for good, and sought by all unlawful and
treacherous means to subvert those who have been but too ready to procure
their honor and advancement. Which intolerable ingratitude of theyrs, though
it were prophesied on long before, by the great King Francis the first of (...)
saying: The prophecy of King Francis.
That they would (...) into their dublets, and his subjects into their shirts:
yet such was the careless security of the offspring of that prudent Prince,
that they would not take (...) unto those aspiring heads, but by giving them
countenance and authority have mightily empaired their (...) royal dignity,
and (...) of this sharp and bitter prophecy.

Francis Duke of Guyse, assisted by the councelles of that (...) associate
Charles his brother, Cardinal of Lorraine, Francis D of Guise aspireth to the
Crown of France.
had long since laid the plot, and cast in his mind how to effect this
diabolical device, and to that end had set all France in a combustion by
sowing division between the King and the Princes of the blood, and incensing
the sovereign against his most obedient and dutiful subjects. And being
grown very gracious among the French, by reason of his fortunate success in
the wars, caused it to be secretly spredde abroad among the people, that
he was descended from Charlemaine, and therefore had some right and title to
the Crown of France. And as though he meant one day to put in his claim,
had so ordered the matter, that great numbers of the Nobility, and sundry of
the principal Cities of the land, were wholly at his devotion: but he was
cut off in the midst of his hope (as is already said) before Orleaunce,
and all his devices came to naught, saving that he left behind him a son, as
hautie, as aspiring, and as ambitious as ever was the father, Henry duke of
Guise his ambitious and turbulent nature.
and one that attempted greater matters then ever did any of that line.

This man being grown into great credit with Charles the ninth, and likewise
with Henry the third, so advanced himself by their favors, that he gave
the law to France, and did every thing as he lysted. And practicing those
rules which his father and uncle had left him, was evermore devising how to
trouble the state, and to hold the King at continual strife with his
subjects, as the readyest and speedyest way to compass that, which that
factious and turbulent house had so greedily gaped after for these many years.
VVhereupon he pondering with himself, that if this late reconciliation which
was made between the King and his subjects, should continue, that the King of
Navarre, and the Prince of Conde, with their adherents and associates, would
quickly grow mighty, and so with their power and authority, easily
overthrow all his councelles, and that in such sort, as he should never be
able to accomplish and fulfill his intended purpose, thought it best and most
expedient for his advantages, to begin new broils and sturres, and with a
sixth civil war to bring France again into a Chaos and confusion.

Paris, and a certain Advocate called David, as crafty, as wily, and as
wicked a fellow as any lived in those days, should be sent to Rome, The
Bishop of Paris and the advocate David sent to Rome.
to have the direction of the Pope, and his Cardinals, how it were best to
begin, and afterward most circumspectly to proccede and go forwards in so
hautie and weighty an enterprise.

There were many bitter complaints, and sharp accusations framed against
Henry the third the French King, against Monsieur his brother, the king of
Navarre, the Prince of Conde, against the race of the Valoises, the Burbons,
Accusations against the houses of Valois and Burbon.
all the princes of the blood, and the ancient Nobility of France: they were
all either heretics, or favorers of heretics, and by their late
pacification, intended the utter subversion of the holy Church of Rome. There
it was showed, to make the King and all his Princes the more odious, how the
house of Capet, had always withstoode the Bishops of Rome, and had in old
time maintained the Valdensis and Albigeons, and now were either Hugonots, or
else great favorers and abettors of them. But on the contrary, that the house
and lynage of Charlemaine, (which was wrongfully dispossessed of the Crown)
had a special grace given them by the Papal benediction, to support and help
holy Church, and that yet there were some of that offspring left, and those
stout maintainers of the Papal dignity (meaning those of Guise) and such as
had always like notable Champions valiantly defended the Roman faith: and
therefore it was expedient, nay most necessary for the preservation of the
Catholic Religion, to root out the houses of Valois, and Burbon, and to
restore the offspring of Charlemaine, which was endewed with all excellent
virtues, and thoroughly furnished with most notable gifts, requisite for the
execution of all commendable, and honorable attempts.

The Council holden at Rome for the rooting out of the blood Royal of France.
And for the more speedy accomplishment hereof, it was resolved, that the
Guises with their partakers should procure new commotions in the land, and
nourish the wars by all possible means that might be. That they should
league the Nobililtie by oath to persecute the Gospel, and to choose for their
head and principal of their league, Henry Duke of Guise, whom the King
should be counsayled to let alone, and suffer him to proceed as he liked
best, seeing he was a man of that judgment, that knew well enough what he
had to do. The Queen mother likewise should be sent to persuade Monsiour her
son to beat the assembly of the States, which should be holden at Blois.
Whither the king should solicit the king of Navarre, and Prince of Conde to
come, by all the fair words that could be devised. And in the mean while
there should be sundry cunning fellows, and such as were most devoted to the
league, sent abroad into the several provinces, who should secretly labor,
that such Deputies might be chosen, as would further the designements of the
Leaguers all that might be. During which privy practices, the Friars and
Jesuits shall incense the people against the Hugonots, by their seditious
Sermons. The priests in their parish churches shall secretly take the names of
all the able men for the wars, and in their shriuings, shall charge them to
provide them of all such weapons as shall be appointed them by their captains.
The States shall swear to observe and obey whatsoever shall be concluded. And if
Monsieur, the king of Navarre, the prince of Conde, and the rest of the princes
of the blood, do not appear at the said assembly, they shall be condemned as
rebels, and likewise all other that shall any way oppose themselves against the
proceedings of the said States, who shall swear their obedience to the Sea of
Rome, and to observe the Council of Trent: and withal a request shall be made
to the king, that if any man shall resist and refuse to give his allowance
thereto, that he shall appoint the Duke of Guise his general, and give him
authority to pursue him to the death: who having so great forces, shall cause
them to be in a readiness to march toward Blois, as soon as the assembly of
the states is begun. All things being thus contrived, there shall be certain
commissioners chosen, to enquier of the life and deeds of Monsieur, and
certain judges appointed to condemn him, for joining himself with the
Heretics, and so his process shall be drawene forthwith after the godly
example of the king of Spain, who put to death Charles of Austrich his
natural son.

As soon as Monsieur is condemned, then shall the forces march to strengthen
the execution, and shall set upon all the Hugonots, and put as many of them to
the sword as they can come by: and the Duke of Guise being so strongly
appointed, shall seyze upon the persons of the King and Queen mother, and by
the permission of the sea Apostolic shall put them into some monastery, as
Pepin dealt with Childeric. And by this means the Crown shall be set upon
his head, and so return to the blessed stock of Charlemaine, and he and his
successors from thenceforth shall have their kingdom of the Bishop of Rome,
and shall abolish the prerogatives of the French Church.

Rome, the Guises with their adherents fought by all possible means to break
the peace in France, and by grievous oppressions and wrongs, to force those of
the reformed religion, to put themselves in arms to withstand so injurious
proceedings. Monsieur forsakes the Protestants, and goes to the Court.
And albeit they were but too forward to blow the bellows of sedition before:
yet now upon the return of David from Rome, they went eagrely forward, and
with great earnestness endeavored to put those rules in practice, which came
from their holy father. There were leagues and associations made, and those as
strong as could be devised. The states were summoned, and by the collusion of
the King, none admitted to be at that assembly, but such as were utter enemies
to the Gospel. Monsieur, by the earnest entreaty of the Queen mother, was
brought to the Court, and having made his benefit of the favor of the
Protestants, left them when they had most need of him and associated himself
with their sworn enemies.

The King likewise began to interpret his Edict after a strange manner, The
complaints of the Catholics.
and far otherwise then was expected by the confederates. Some articles were
strained, and racked out to the uttermost, and other some snipped and
curtailed, that they seemed metamorphosed, and changed into a new nature, as
far differing from their former, as might be imagined. Many infamous libels
were printed, containing most villainous matter against the Protestants: and a
rumor was spread abroad, that they had surprised sundry Towns and fortes in
Poictou, Languedocke, Guyen, Xantoigne, and Dauphine, and therefore that it was
impossible to hold in the Catholics any longer, who with so manifold
injuries (said they) were mightily incensed against those of the reformed
Churches.

Those of the Religion were exceedingly troubled with this strange kind of
dealing, and knowing that it proceeded of a mortal hatred, and that it did
evidently argue, that there was a secret purpose to catch them at advantage,
and then to make havoc of them, and to root them and their Religion out of
France, they began to look about them, and to provide for their own
security, especially considering how the Catholics were leagued together,
and were ready (as it were at an instaunt) to invade them on all sides.
VVhereupon seeing that Monsieur after he had gotten the Dukedom of Berrie,
Touraine, and Aniou, (as is already said) had forsaken them, Navarre was
chosen chief of the Confederates, and the Prince of Conde seysed upon Bowrage,
Marennes, The beginning of the sixth civil war.
and other Islandes, being places of great importance, and very available
for the advancement of the Protestant affairs. Thus the peace having endured
but a small time, the sixth civil war ensued immediately, upon the report that
it was concluded by King in the assembly of the states, that there should be no
other, but the Roman Catholic religion, tolerated within all his territories
and dominions: for then began the wars to be open on all sides. The
Catholics seysed upon Du Pont, S: Espirit, Merpin, Tallemond, Bordeaux, and as
many other towns as they could get. The Protestants surprised Pons, Royan,
Reole, and Cinray, and making a counterleague among themselves, courageously
withstood the attempts of their enemies: and foreseeing the stormy tempest,
which threatened the ship of their safety, likewise Pilots, and skillful
Mariners, they stoutly stood to their tacklings, endeavoring by all possible
means to save their beaten bark from drowning, and to bring it to some safe
port, and quiet harborrow.

Each side alleged sundry reasons for the justification of their actions: the
Catholics laid all the blame upon the Protestants: saying, that they were men
that would not be satisfied with any indifferent favor: but espying their
advantage, had forced the King to yield to unreasonable conditions. Besides,
that the Edict was but prouisionall, and might be disanulled at the Kings
pleasure: and that it was now determined by the Estates general, that no other
then the Roman religion should be tolerated within all the French Dominions.
The Protestants alleged, that they were murdered and killed in every corner,
and no punishment inflicted upon the malefactors. The complaints of the
Protestants.
That the Catholics did daily break the Kings Edict, which had been made by
the consent of all the noble personages of the land, who had solemnly sworn
the observation thereof: and that if such Edicts were accounted prouisionall,
who would repose any trust hereafter in the Kings word and promise, seeing he
held it lawful to break his oath when he lysted. And as concerning the
estates general, they said, they were not lawfully assembled, and therefore
they protested of the nullitie of them, and of whatsoever thing they concluded.
These and many such reasons were objected on both sides: and they had not long
contended in words, but they fell to blows, and each endomaged other all that
ever they might.

The King of Navarre, and Prince of Conde, withdrew themselves to Rochell, and
having gotten some 3000. footmen, and 400. horse, they daily enterprised upon
their enemies. The D. de Maine, The duke de Maine general of the Catholics.
accompanied with Puygall^ard, Ruffec, Roches, Baritand, and many others, to
the number of seven hundred horse, besides a strong power of footmen, did
continually vex and molest the Protestants, by spoiling their fields, and
burning their houses: and being masters of the Champaigne, couped in the
Confederates very narrowly, and having all things in a readiness, planted
their siege before La Charity, which in the end they gained. Yea Rochell it
self began in a manner to be besieged, enduring maruaylous losses by the
continual roades of the Catholics, who wasted all without pity or mercy.

La Charity.
The Protestants being so hardly used, offered the like measure, where they
prevailed, dealing very rigourously with such as fell into their hands. The
Duke de Maine following his good fortune, The prosperous course of the Duke de
Maine.
took Tonnay Charentie, and Rochford, which yielded unto him upon the first
summance: and so far he prevailed that he made himself Lord of all the
River of Charente, in less then five days: and using great expedition, got
Marans from the Rochellors, who were sore grieved with the loss of a place of
so great importance.

Now, as the nature of most men is, to band with the stronger, and evermore to
judge of the end, according to the beginning: so many at this time began to
slip their necks out of the Collar, and to run to the Catholics,
supposing that it was impossible for the Confederates to hold out for any
long time. For besides that they were ouermatched by land, they were likewise
hardly handled at sea, and had much adoo to keep the Isle of Re, and Chese de
Bay, from Lansac, who was Admiral over the navy Catholic. Lansac beaten at
sea by the Protestants.
But at last they rigging forth certain ships, commanded by Cleremont of
Amb^is, so scoured the coast, that no enemy for the time durst appear in
sight of their warrelike Fleet, wherewith they were maruellously well
recomforted. But their joy lasted not long: for the Duke de Maine approaching
Bro^age, so furiously assailed it, that Manducag, who was governor of the
Town, was forced to yield upon composition, being destitute of all
necessaries requisite, to withstand so great a puyssaunce. By this time also,
Lansac having repaired his beaten Fleet, The Protestant^ beaten at sea by
Lansac.
put forth to sea afresh, and meeting with the Confederates valiantly set upon
them, and putting them to the worse, burnt their Admiral called the Prince,
and took an other vessel called the Floressante, to the exceeding grief of
the Protestants, who had reposed no small confidence in their sea forces.

Besides all these unfortunate chances, there fell out an other cross, which
did very much grieve and disquiet the Rochellors, and that was the death of
their Mayor Bobinean: The death of Bobinean.
who for that he was accounted a wise, valiant, and politic man, one who of
all others did wonderfully affect the good of his country, and tendered the
welfare of all in general, was maruellously lamented of all sorts, and
especially of the Rochellors, The great d stresse of the Rochellors.
who in a sort were amazed with his death, and as men astonished with so many
crosses, had fainted under their burden, had they not been recomforted with a
sudden report of a new pacification, which was earnestly solicited by the
Duke Montpencier. Whereto the king was the more inclinable, both for that there
was a mighty power of Germans ready to enter France, and also for that he
wanted money to maintain so great charges. Whereupon the Queen mother was
employed to make the composition with the king of Navarre, and the rest of the
Protestants: The end of the sixth civil war.
which after much running up and down, was agreed upon by both parties, and
proclaimed with great joy and triumph, both at Rochell and other places, in
token of the earnest desire they had to live at ease, and to spend the remnant
of their days in rest and quietness.

CHAP. XXI.
The death of Monsieur. The seditious and treacherous practices of the
Guisards. The beginning of the seventh civil war, called the leaguers war.
The Prince of Conde goes toward Angiers. His great distress and admirable
delivery.

Guises and the rest of the confederates, perceiving how the King, with great
numbers of his nobles, and common subjects began to take some delight in peace,
and that there was an intention to reform many abuses, which were crept into
the state in the time of the civil wars: to restore the nobility to their
ancient dignity, and to unburden the people of sundry charges, wherewith for
a long while they had bin grievously oppressed, were inwardly vexed at the
heart, to consider that their former councels took no better effect, and
therefore they fell in hand with new practices, and those more pernicious,
pestilent, and more dangerous then any others that ever they attempted before.
For they considering that the condemnation and execution of Monsieur the kings
brother could not so easily be brought to pass as they desired, and that the
king of Navarre, and prince of Conde, did so prudently provide for their own
security, that it was a very hard thing to entrap the^, and bring their persons
within danger, thought it best to go secretly to work, and by some privy means
to work their ruin and overthrow, against whom they could not preuail by open
force and violence. They therefore hired Salcedo, a Spaniard to kill Monsieur,
Salcedo a Spaniard hired to kill Monsieur.
and promised him 6000. crowns for his labor: but he failing of his purpose,
they procured a certain Gentlewoman, with whom his excellency was but too
familiarly acquainted, to give him such a receipt, as never left working, till
it had wrought the life out of his body: so that he died the 10. Monsieur
thought to be poisoned. His death.
of July, 1582 to the great reioising of the Guises, who now began to triumph
to see so fortunat success and happy advancement of their affairs. And
considering that by the death of this great prince, who^ they feared more then
the King, their side was maruellously strengthened, they began to stir coals
afresh, and sought by all means to fill the land full of new broiles and
hurli-burlies. And the time fast approaching, which was appointed for the
bringing forth of that monster, wherewith they had travailed for a long time,
they had many secret conferences with the duke of Parma, The conspiracy of the
Guise and the rest of the leaders.
Bernardine Mendoza the Spanish ambassador, and Giouan Bardach no, the King of
Spain his Corriero. There was the bargain made to sell Marseiles, Bordeaux,
and the Dukedom of Britain, to the King of Spain their master, and an
appointted time made, that the Duke of Sauoy should invade the Marquisate of
Saluces, thereby to occupy the King, and to disperse his forces into diverse
and sundry places. And being strongly supported by the favors of many of the
Nobility, and sundry of the chief Cities, they first required that the Edict
of pacification should be revoked, that the K of Navarre, and prince of Conde,
with all those who made profession of the gospel, should be exiled the realm, or
else forced to abjure their religion, and that continual war should be
denou^ced against the protestants.

The King was advertised of all these treacherous practices, as well from
sundry the Princes of Germany, as also from the King of Navarre: but he would
not believe any thing, but took them to be but slanderous reports, raised up
by the Hugonots, and therefore lightly regarded them: but still countenanced
the Guyses and their adherents, The seditious practices of the Guyses
who having gotten the King to join with them, and to yield to their requests,
they hired the Monks and Friars to stir up the people to their seditious
ceremonies, shriuings and private conferences, to band with them and the rest
of the Leagues, and to persecute those of the Religion with fire and sword, and
to root them and theirs out of the territories of France.

They caused sundry infamous Libels to be spread abroad, and gave out that the
king of Navarre and the Protestant Princes had sworn to root out the
Catholic faith, and to deprive them of the Romish Church of all honor,
dignity and authority: that the murder at Paris should be revenged, and that
three of the principal Burgesses of every City and town, should be put to
death in revenge of the said murder. These with many other notorious untruths
were openly declared in their pulpets wherewith the common sort were mightily
enraged against the Protestants, and desired nothing more then their utter
subversion and overthrow. The Guyses having likewise obtained good store of
Spanish pistolets, corrupted diverse great personages, The beginning of the
seventh civil wars, called the wars of the Leaguers.
and had hired sundry Captains to take their parts. Having laid this
foundation, and provided all necessaries that could be devised for the rest of
their building, about the fourth of March, 1585.

This audacious action seemed very odious in the eyes of many: which the Guyses
perceiving, they drew in the Cardinal of Burbon by sundry fine devises, to
ioyn with them, whose credit and countenance served their turns in many great
attempts. And because sundry of the Kings Councellers were either the Guyses
creatures, or by some one way or other devoted unto them, The king betrayed by
his Council.
the king was never duly informed of the danger of the League: for they told
him that it was nothing but an inconsiderate zeal of some few, who fearing the
innovation of Religion, were grown somewhat passionate, and sought for nothing
indeed but to maintain the people in their obedience to the holy church, who if
he should but once frown upon them, they would all come and fall down at his
majesty's feet, and vow their goods, their lives, and whatsoever means they
had to do his majesty service, and therefore he need not fear them who
were so good and devout Catholics, but rather had cause to animate them in
their Religious proceedings, considering that they opposed themselves against
none but such as were termed Hugonots, the kings sworn enemies, and such as
had been the occasion of all those miseries which had continued in France for
so many years.

The King was brought into such a security of his estate by this wicked
Council, that he did not only reject such aduertisements as were sent to him
from time to time, both from the King of Navarre, Duke Cassimer, and other
Princes, touching the monstrous conspiration of the Leaguers: but also as one
that knew not what he did, he made great preparation against them of the
reformed Religion, and suffered the Leaguers in the mean time to grow and
fortify themselves at their own pleasures, until they were become so mighty,
that they thought themselves able enough, if need were, to go through with
their intended course, whosoever should say nay. Which was no sooner effected,
but that they set the Kings Councellers on the sudden to enfourme the king
of the great power and puissance of the Leaguers: how that quite besides their
expectations there was an universal consent of all his good subjects, to
restore the Catholic Religion, that great numbers of his Nobility and
cheifest Cities highly commended the zeal of the Leaguers, and were resolved
in their defense: and therefore that it were good for the king, considering the
time, not to make any resemblance to call any of them to account for any of
their actions, least he should give some suspicion that he was a fauorer of
the heretics, which might breed a grudging in the hearts of his people, whereby
some commotions might rise to the imminent peril of his royal person, and the
extreme danger of the whole state.

The King makes peace with the Leaguers.
The king being maruailously amazed with these and such like remonstrations,
thought it best to make peace with them, and to countenance them as his best
subjects. They were glad that they had brought him to that pass: and now
seeing they had found him so submisse, they meant to make further trial of his
courtesy, and therevppon they required that all their former actions might be
ratified by the kings authority, as good and lawful, and done for his service,
and that whatsoever had passed in prejudice of the Leaguers, should be revoked
as wrongful and unjust, and for that they saw the king was willing to
gratify their small requests, they were bold to proceed further, and to entreat
him, that the Duke of Guyse, the Duke de Maine, the Duke of Aumaile, the
Cardinal of Guyse, the Lord Brissac, the Lord Antragnes, the Lord Chastre, and
the rest of the principal Leaguers might have the government of sundry the
strongest places of the land, The Leaguers require to be made governors of the
principal holds in France.
as of the Cittadell of Metz, the Castle of Di^^n, Rhemes, the strongest holds
of Picardy, Orleans, Caen, Aniou, Bourges, Lions, and many others of like
importance. They further persuaded with him to proclaim open wars against
the Protestants, and to declare the king of Navarre, the Prince of Conde, and
all others who had been infected with heresy (as they termed it) to be for
ever incapable of any office in France, and that they should pack out of the
Country with all speed: and for the better countenancing of all their
proceedings against these great States, they procured Pope Sixtus to
excommunicate them, thereby to make them more odious with the people.

As soon as they had gotten in a manner whatsoever they desired, and had made
themselves as good masters as the King, they with sundry and most cunning
devises gained great multitudes to join with them, and every man either for
fear or for love, was forthwith at their will and command. They mustered
great forces, and gathered mighty armies, to invade the king of Navarre and
the rest of the Protestants, who seeing themselves abandoned of their king, and
exposed to the fury of their merciless enemies, stood upon the defensive, and
resisted the rage of the League as well as they could.

The Prince of Conde growing strong, determined to besiege Brouage, The Prince
of Conde besieges Brouage.
which was kept by the Lord Saint Luc for the Leaguers: where, after he had
spent some time in gayning many of the principal forts, he departed toward
Angiers, leaving al his footmen to continue the siege: and albeit the Prince
used great expedition, laboring with all speed to relieve those who had taken
the Castle of Angiers, The Prince goes toward Angiers.
yet could he not come time enough, for by reason that Captain Rochmort, who
had surprised the said Castle, was slain with a shot out of the Town as he
was leaning in his chamber window, the Castle was rendered again upon
composition, and made sure for the League, as it was before time. The Prince
being ignorant hereof, passed the Loyre with all his troops, which were some
eight hundred horse, and almost a thousand and two hundred harquebuziers on
horseback, conducted by the Lord of Nemours, Lauall, Trimouille, Bo^lay, Saint
Gelais, Aubigny, Ouches, Rohan Touch, Flesche, and sundry others. The Lord
Clermont had likewise gathered a great company of horse, and encamped himself
with the Prince near unto Angiers. These companies approaching the Town,
expected some signal from the Castle, whereby they might understand that it
still held for the king of Navarre but they were certified that the said
Castle was yielded the day before into the hands of their enemies, and
therefore that it was lost labor to stay there any longer. Which news grieved
the Prince exceedingly, and made him with the rest of his council, to fall to
consultation, how they might safely get back over the Loyre, and free
themselves out of that danger which then appeared before their eyes: and for
that they knew well enough that both the kings forces and the Leaguers were up
in all quarters, and hasted by all possible means to encounter them, they
retired toward the Loyre with a purpose to return the same way they came. The
Lord Lauell being the foremost, got over without any danger: but before the
coming of the Prince, all the passages were seized by the enemy, and the
prince was advertised by many messengers, that either he must resolve to open
his way by the sword, or else to hazard himself at al adventure through the
Country of Beause.

The Prince approaching the danger, The great distress of the Prince and the
rest of the Protestants that were with him.
and thinking that in either of these there was but hard choice, called a
Council: but by reason of the diversity of opinions it was long before any
thing could be concluded: at length it was agreed to pass through Beause. Then
every man prepared himself toward that desperate journey, and marching
toward Luche in Aniou, purposed there to pass over the Loyre upon the Bridge:
but the River was so risen, that there was no passage without imminent peril.
From thence therefore they went to Lude, and so to Prillay, Vandeloyre, and S.
Arnol, where they heard news that the Duke of Espernon and the Mareschall
Biron were at Boneuall in Beausse, with great forces, ready to fight with the
dismayed multitude: that the Duke De Main, as on the other side of the Loyre
near unto Bloy, ready to cut off such as should fortune to pass that way,
and that all the Country was full of strong garrisons attending with great
devotion to make a pray of the Prince, and that handful of men which did
accompany him, so that it seemed the further they went the nearer they
approached their destruction and having with their long and laborious marches
wearied themselves and tired their horses, they did utterly despair of any
good success. In this great agony they iourneyed on, and every day received
more uncomfortable news then other, wherewith many supposing that all was
lost, secretly disbanded from the gross of the Army, and repaired to such
friends as they had in the Country.

The Prince and the rest of the Nobility were wonderfully perplexed, and knew
not what course to take: at length they resolved to divide themselves into
several companies, some going one way and some another: the Lord Rohan with
many Gentlemen in his retinew, went toward Britain, Saint Gelais went toward
Vandosme, the Prince, the Lords of Trimouille and Auantigny with some of their
principal servants, betook them to their fortune as well as the rest, and
hasted to get into some place of greater security. The laborious and tedious
travail of this noble Prince, his wearisome courses, his long Caualcados, his
great and perilous dangers he escaped before he gat to that Island of Gernsy,
would require a long discourse, and were sufficient for a whole volume. As
soon as the cheefetaines were thus dispersed, the common soldiers were
quickly scattered, some took their way toward Orleance some toward Nomandy,
and some toward Main, and to be short, every man went which way he liked
best, travailing in exceeding great fear, having as they imagined, neither
means to escape nor force to resist, but were ready every minute to fall
into the hands of those who did wholly pursue them, The Prince of Conde with
the cheifest of hi^ troops arrived at Rochell much about one time.
and thirsted for nothing more then for their blood: but when all hope failed,
God did miarculously deliver them, and so deli^ered them in their iourneyes,
that having avoided a million of more then apparent perils, they all arrived at
length at Rochell, and that much about one time, to the exceeding comfort of
themselves, and the wonder of all France.

CHAP. XXII.
The cruel Edicts of the King against the Protestants. The number of the
Popish Armies which were overthrown in one year. The villainous deal^ng of the
Guyse. The battle of Coutras.

WHilst the Prince of Conde and the rest of his distressed Army, made this
hard shift for themselves, the Duke de Maine, The Duke de Maine made captain
general over the for^es of the Popish Clergy.
whom the League had procured to be appointed general by the Kings authority
over a mighty power, maintained at the cost and charges of the Clergy of
France, bestirreth himself, and seeks to annoy the protestants as much as
might be: but by reason the Vicount of Turin opposed himself against his
proceedings with an army of six thousand men, he did no other harm but gat
some few Towns which were of no great importance The League not prospering so
fast as they desired, by force of Arms, caused the king who was now sold
over to work his own confusion and the utter ruin of his Realm and States,
The cruel Edicts of the king.
to make many cruel Edicts against those of the Religion: notwithstanding all
the pacifications and graunts of former times, and they were commanded to
avoid the Realm within fifteen days, otherwise there was liberty given to
persecute them to death, to seize upon their goods, lands and linings, and to
employ them to the kings use.

The king of Navarre knowing that all this was done by the procurement of the
League and the Popish Clergy, seized likewise upon all the Lands, and goods
of such as were either Leaguers or favorers of that factious and rebellious
multitude. The severe proclamations made by the king against those of the
Reformed Churches, wrought many lamentable effects in the Land. Some who made
profession of the Gospel recanted, and turned to Popery, and because they
would not be suspected on any dissimulation, they became earnest persecutors
of their poor brethren. Others hid themselves in secret corners and lived most
miserably and in great wants. Infinite numbers fled away, some into England,
some into Germany, others to Sedan, The miserablee state of the p^rsecuted
Protestants.
Geneua, and such places as were free from persecution. It was a most pitiful
sight to behold the dissipation of so many families, who were now turned
forth of the doors naked and comfortless, and forced to shift for themselves
in strange Countries.

The Duke de Maine did all this while what he could to any the Protestants,
and to gain as many Cities and towns (through very secrecy) as he could to
join with the League, and to make that faction strong against the King, by
seducing his subjects under the color of maintaining the Catholic Religion.
Which being suspected by sundry his followers, they disbanded themselves, and
some for want of pay refused to serve any longer.

The Duke de Maine by reason of these unexpected crosses, was not able to make
head any longer, and therefore wrote to the Guyse his brother in what bad
terms things stood, who fearing that if there were not new provision, that
his brother the Duke de Maine, would come shortly to ruin, and be utterly
overthrown, advised the king to make four several Armies, Four new armies
appointed to invade the Protestants.
and to invade the protestants in diverse places at once, which (said he) was
the only way to weaken them, considering that their forces should be severed
and disioyned.

This policy was no sooner allowed as the best, but the Mareschall Biron was
appointed to go into Xainctoigne, the Duke Ioyeuse into Languedocke, the Lord
Foynse his son into Auergne, and the Duke of Espernon into Prouence. La
Chastre should be ready with a fleet upon the coast of Britain, to
enterprise as time and opportunity served.

The king of Navarre was forthwith certified of this preparation, which made
him fortify such places as were of importance as strongly as he could, and
understanding that the Mareschall Biron intended to besiege Browage, with a
power of one thousand and two hundred horse and four thousand footmen, he did
so carefully provide for the defense thereof, that after that Biron had bin long
before the town, and had done little or nothing, saving that he was content to
make a composition with the Protestants, he brake up his camp, and sent his
companies, some into Poictou, and some into Aniou to refresh themselves, and
thus was this Army dispersed without doing of any thing. Duke Ioyeuse passed
into Languedocke, where he took Lodere, Saint Pour, Montesquion, and
Maruei^lx, and having committed infinite sorts of most horrible villainies and
strange cruelties, The armies of the Popish Leagueri overthrown in less then
one year.
after he had lost above thirty of his best Captains, and five hundred others
at the least, before a palterie town called Saint Puels, brake up his army,
and returned home in far worse case then he went footh. The savage rudenes
of this rabble made many of the Nobility, who before favored the League, to
forsake such an association, wherein there was nothing but robbing, spoiling,
whooring, swearing, and blaspheming, and that after a most beastly and brutish
manner: the young Ioyeuse following rather his pleasures then the wars, made his
progress throughout Auuergna, where he did no other harm but spend and
waste the Kings treasure: and when that was done, retired to the Court to see
if he could be trusted with any more. And thus were all these armies brought to
confusion, vanishing away as a little smoke, notwithstanding all their great
brags.

The Leaguers considering that all these five Armies had spent great store of
treasor, and all other warlike preparation, and yet had rather hindered then
furthered their secret purposes (for by reason they sped no better they were
forsaken of many, The Queen mother offers a parley of peace.
and grown into contempt with others) devised with the Queen mother, whom
they knew to favor their designements, that she should offer a parley of
peace: which she did, and sent to understand of the king of Navarre, if he
would hearken thereto, who tendering the good of his country refused not the
motion: whereupon there was an interuiew between the Queen mother and the
said King at Saint Brice, the thirteenth of December, where there was much
adoo, and many words spent to small purpose: for the Queen would not
condescend to the excuse of the Religion, and the king of Navarre would make no
peace, seeing that was the principal cause of bearing arms: howbeit, in the
end the Queen understanding of the great leauie of Reisters that were coming
to the aid of the Protestants, and growing in suspicion that the Dukes of
Guyse and de Maine, and the rest of the Leaguers would enterprise somewhat
against the King, she concluded a peace for three months, and so returned to
the Court.

1587 The Guyses treacherous dealing to discredit the King.
The Duke of Guyse intending to discredit the king with his subjects every day
more then other, sent abroad sundry his supposts, and caused them to spread a
rumor, how that the evil success of all those armies which had been employed
against the Hugonots, was for that the king being led by wicked council,
would not permit that they should be sufficiently provided for with money,
munition and other necessaries, that he had intelligence with the heretics,
that he had war (indeed) in his mouth, but in his heart he meant nothing
less, and that by such fraudulent dealing the good Catholics were betrayed,
and the Heretics encouraged, and that therefore there was no good to be done
so long as there was such packing and false play. The Domestical enemy was
first to be overthrown, before the foreign enemy could be vanquished. These
and such like sinister informations, were given out among the multitude, by
Friars, Priests, and Jesuits, in their Sermons, and many busy headed
fellows were set a work to spread these, and such like defamatorie
speeches, with much vehemency and earnestness, in Alehouses, Tauerns,
Markets, and all other places of greatest assembly. By reason of which
s^aunderous and bad reports, there grew much murmuring amongst the people, with
no small dislike of the present government. The King notwithstanding (as a man
bewitched with the deceitful dealing of his mother, and the treacherous
practices of such counselors, as he most favored) either understood nothing
of all this, or else was forced to wink at it, as wanting leisure or means to
sift the matter more narrowly. For the rumor of the coming of the Germans,
the fortunate success of the Lord Digueres, in Dauphinie and Languedocke, the
counter-league of the King of Navarre, the Prince of Conde, and a great number
of very Noble and honorable personages of the land, with a full resolution
to maintain the reformed Religion, did so occupy his mind, that he could
not have leisure to look into the rebellious driftes of the Leaguers, who
continually incensed the King against the Hugonots, and after the confusion
and ruin of all his former Armies, persuaded him to assail those of the
Religion in Guyen, with new forces, under the conducting and leading of Duke
Ioyense, for that it was thought, that the Mareschall Biron was of too mild a
nature, and had dealt somewhat too favorably in his late voyage.

Thus Duke Ioyense being armed, with the Kings authority, The Duke Ioyense
sent against the Protestants.
and aided with a mighty power, invaded Guyen, where he took sundry towns,
as Mote, Saint Cloy, Saint Mexent, Tonnay, Charauty, Maylezay, and some others:
but the plague increasing among his soldiers, he was forced to break up his
camp, and to disperse his forces, and he himself posted to Paris, to the
rest of the principal Leaguers.

The King of Navarre understanding of his retreat, set upon his straggling
troops, killed many, took sundry prisoners, and in a short space recovered
all that had been lost. Thus the Leaguers had caused the King to spend much
money about naught, intending thereby to weaken him, and strengthen themselves:
for by this means they were still in authority, and did in a manner what
soever they lifted, empouerishing their enemies, and enriching their friends,
as the readyest way to effect that, which they had long before determined to
accomplish.

About this time were the Germains ready to march toward France: The great
preparation of the King to withstand the Germans
whereof the King being advertised, he prepared three several Armies, with the
which he meant both to defend himself, and to offend his enemies. The du^e of
Guise was made general over the first, wherein were 23000. French men, besides
400 Lances, 2000. Italians, and six hundred light horse, sent to him out of
the low Countries by the Duke of Parma. All which were appointed to bar the
Germans out of Lorraine, if it were possible, or else to hinder them, that
they should not pass through Champaigne. The King led the second army into
Berry, wherein was 88. companies of men of Arms, ten thousand French footmen,
12000. Switzers, 4000. Rutters, 12. double Canons, and 2000. pioners, with
which power the King determined to keep the Loyre. The duke Ioyense conducted
the third army against the King of Navarre, to keep him occupied, and to
withhold him from joining with the Germans.

The battle of Contras.
The King of Navarre gathered as great forces as he could, and being accompanied
with the prince of Conde, Count Soyssons, the Lord Trimouille, the vicount of
Turen, and many other honorable estates, hasted to incorporate himself with
his strangers, and using great speed gat over the river of Droune, where the
duke Ioyense had intended to stop his passage, and so marched forward,
purposing to lodge at Contras. The duke supposing that the advantage was his,
for that the king of Navarre was weak in power, and enclosed between two
rivers, so that he could not escape without fighting: as one desirous to do
some notable exploit, resolved to try his fortune by some general fight.
Whereupon he took his place for the battle near unto Contras. The King of
Navarre was glad of the Dukes resolution, and having disposed all his troops
in very warlike manner, waited his best opportunity to begin the battle. About
eight of the clock in the morning the Artillarie on both sides began to play.
And for that the king of Nauarres Ordinance was commodiously placed, it did
maruellously endomage the Dukes men of arms, which stood at his right hand, as
also the regiments wherewith they were flanked for their better assurance:
wherewith when many were rent and torn in pieces, the rest resolved rather to
charge then to die so miserably without any further fight. The harquebuziers
came no sooner in reach each of other, but they powered out their shot as thick
as hail, each party endeavoring to do well, and to annoy one another to their
uttermost.

The king of Navarre had divided his horsemen into four squadrons the first
was led by himself, the second by the Prince of Conde, the third by the Count
Soysons, who stood on the left hand of the king, and the fourth by the vicount
of Turenne, who was at his right hand, equally advanced with the foremost.
These standing still, beheld the skirmish of their footmen, until the duke
hasted to the general onset: then these three Princes of the blood, every one
in the front of their regiment, began to change their pace into a trot, and so
into a gallop, giving such a furious charge upon their enemies, that they wholly
defeated them, and having killed a great number, the rest betook them to
flight. The footmen seeing their horsemen overthrown, lost courage, and ran
away for company: then was the mortality great: for the Protestants pursuing
them, committed a maruailous carnage among them that fled. There was slain the
Duke of Ioyense, D. Ioyense sl^ine, and his army overthrown.
general of the army, and Saint Suuer his brother, Bressay, Rousay, count
Suxe, Count Ganeto, Count Aubiyon, Fumel, Rochford, Neufny, Gurats, Saint Fort,
Tercelin, master of the camp, Chesner and Vallade, besides many other Lords
and Gentlemen of mark. Bellegard, Saint Luc, the Marquis of Prennes, Count
Mo^soreau, Sansac, Cipierre, Santray, Montigny, Villecomblim, Chasteaurenauld,
Parriere Chasteauueulx, Chasteloux, and Auuerdiere, all captains and
commanders were taken prisoners, Diverse Castles and strong holds were
presently yielded unto the king of Navarre, and a very great fear possessed
the hearts of the rest of his enemies.

CHAP. XXIII.
The great arm^e of the Germans overthrown. The death of the Duke of
Bonillon. The Guises slander the King. The Leaguers besiege the Duchess of
Bonillon. Their overthrow. The Prince of Conde poisoned. The Parisians rebel
against the King. The King flies to Charteres. The Guisards vow to kill the
King.

THe French King, 1588 The army of the Germains commanded by the Duke of
Bonillon.
and Duke of Guise were all this while very busy in providing of all
necessary means to withstand the Germans, who still came on forwards.
Their army consisted of five thousand Ruttars, five thousand Lancequenets,
sixteen thousand Switzers, with whom were joined four thousand French
harquebuziers, and three hundred French horse. The Lord Mouy brought also two
thousand French harquebuziers on horseback, the Lord Villeneufe one thousand,
and the Lord Lovers one thousand. The Lord Chastillon likewise joined with
them, with one thousand five hundred harquebuziers, and two hundred horses. The
whole number came to some thirty five thousand: besides the companies brought
by the Prince of Contie. They had sixteen pieces of great Ordinance, with
store of all warlike munition. The general of all these, was the Duke of
Bonillon, who commanded as Lieutenant for the King of Navarre.

This mighty and puyssant army was the terror of the League, and the hope of
the Protestants, but the expectation of both was disappoynted: for after that
the Germans had marched through Lorraine, and were gotten into France as
far as Lancy in Masconois, where by reason that many principal Captains
were corrupted with money and fair promises, and the rest suffered great
wants, they concluded to return back: so that having made their capitulation,
and gotten their Passeportes, Sundry of the German Captains corrup^ed by money
caused the whole army to retire. The death of the duke of Bonillon.
every man made all the speed home that might be, laden with misery, shame,
and dishonor, with the loss of many Ensigns and Cornets, besides their
chiefest leaders and commanders. The Duke of Bonillon, general of that army,
with the Lord Clerebant and Van, being not able to draw them forwards by any
persuasion, returned to Geneua, where they died shortly after: The Count de La
Mark, brother to the duke of Bonillon, was deceased long before at a place
called Loyne. Great numbers of this dispersed army were invaded by their
enemies, and slain in their passage homewards, contrary to the promise which
had been made unto them by the Catholics. The Colonels and Captains of the
Switzers, the chief authors of the dissolution of that Army, were severely
punished by their Segneuries, so that this whole army was maruellously
afflicted, and every one was scourged after one sort or other: and having
spent and spoiled infinitely, did nothing but work their own calamity and
overthrow.

The King undoubtedly had taken marvelous care to s^uer this mighty
puyssaunce, and by cunning handling of the matter, The Guises slander the King.
had brought them to this extreme pass, that under the color of a Passeport,
he exposed them to the butcherie, and rage of their enemies. And although that
by reason of this politic dealing, he deserved high commendation: yet the
Guise so handled the matter, that all redownded to his further discredit, and
caused his subjects to speak worse of him then at any time before. For the
Guise had caused it to be bruited abroad, that not only the King had
willingly suffered the Germans to escape, contrary to the counsel and
advice of the Duke of Guise, but also had given them the means to retire in
safety, some into Germany, and others into Languedocke, there to join with
the King of Navarre, and so to continue further troubles in the land, to the
great and intolerable harm of the good Catholics, and the encouraging of
Heretics, and such as were enemies to holy Chuch.

When the Friars and Jesuits in Paris, and other principal cities were
possessed with these news, they brake forth into very seditious speeches,
openly exclayming against the King, and extolling the wisdom, prowess and
noble acts of the duke of Guise: whereby they procured him much favor among the
multitude that knew nothing, but what they heard by the Leaguers, and their
favorites, which made them think, that the King had killed his thousand, but
the Guise his ten thousand. All which treacherous dealings tended to no other
end but this: either to make the French believe that the K. was not endowed
with such noble and heroycall virtues, as were requisite for him that should
govern so mighty and puissant a nation, or else that he was a notorious
dissembler, a maintainer of Heretics, and a secret enemy to the Catholics.
And then what should they do with such a King? let the^ make choice of another
more valiant, more wise, more provident, more religious, and a more stout
defender of holy Church: and who should that be, but the Guise, who for the
zeal, courage, valor, and singular dexterity in the mannaging of matters of
estate, was not only superior to the King, The leaguers attempt against the
young duches of Bonillon.
but the paragon of all Europe.

The leaguers being assured of the death of the duke of Bonillon, and that he
had left his sister Madame Charlate de la Mark, a young and tender Lady, heir
to all his sovereign segneurie, and principality of Bonillon, thought it
their best to let the king of Navarre alone for a time, at whose hands there
was little to be gotten, unless they paid dear for it, and to enterprise
somewhat aagaynst this desolate Lady, and either by hook or by crook (as we
use to say) to get the Dukedom into their possession. VVhereupon the Duke of
Guise used all the cunning he could, to match his son the Prince Ienuill
with her: and the Duke of Lorraine was as earnest a suter for his son, called
Marthuis de Pont, and Lord Vaudemont. But neither of them being able by all
their devises, to win that Ladies favor, they thought it best to join
together, and to compel her to match according to their lykings. With this
resolution they entered the Dukedom of Bonillon, with a great power, burning,
wasting, killing, murdering, rauishing, and committing all other horrible and
detestable villainies that could be imagined, The cruelty of the leaguers
against the dukedom of Bonillon.
and besieged the said Lady, and her two principal Towns, Sedan and Iamets:
where they continued a long time, spent much Treasure, and lost most of their
men, and in the end, with shame and dishonor, (being well beaten at a woman's
hand, by the valiant conduct of the Lord Necuile,) were glad to give over, and
return home.

Whilst the dukedom of Bonillon, was vexed and tormented with these
troublesome suitors, the principal leagers assembled at Nancie in Lorrain, where
there was a great consultation held, how they might advance themselves, and
ouerthow the King, against whose person and state they had for a long time bout
all their endeavors. There they agreed to present certain articles to the king,
which they would have him agree unto: and those were such as tended to the
utter destruction of the King, and the ancient Nobility of France, and the
safety of themselves. First, they requested the King to join more openly with
the League, and to put all such as they dislyked out of their offices: The
petitions of the le^gue to the king.
To cause the Council of Trent to be proclaimed throughout all his Dominions:
To establish the Spanish inquisition: To put such Castles and strong Towns
into their hands, as they should name unto him: That he should send an
army into Lorraine, upon the borders of G rmanie, to let the entry of
strangers into the land, and for the maintenance thereof, should cause all the
goods of those, whom they termed Heretics or favorers of Heretics, to be
sold, and the money to be delivered into their hands. That the Catholics
should pay the tenth of their revenues for the same purpose: and that the
surplussage should be to pay the most needful debts of the principal
Leaguers, and that the life of no Heretic prisoner, should be spared, unless
he would abjure, and put in good security to live Catholiquely hereafter, and
to give all his goods, or the just value of them, which he has then in his
possession, to the supporting of the League, and to bind himself to serve
three years, wheresoever he should be commanded.

The King did allow of such of these Articles as did any way concern the
suppression of the reformed Religion: The king refuses to grant all the
petitions of the league.
but considering that the rest did wonderful derogate from his Crown and
dignity, and that they tended directly to the weakening of himself, and the
strengthening of the league, of which, for a long time, he had very hardly
conceived, he would not be enduced to condescend unto them, by any manner of
means or entreatie whatsoever.

Now as the Leaguers labored openly by these and such like devises, to weaken
the King, so they practiced secretly to destroy the King of Navarre, and Prince
of Conde, knowing that if they were once rid of them, it would be an easy
matter to accomplish the rest. Heerevpon they set on work certain wicked and
devilish persons, to bring these two great Princes to their deaths. And
assuring themselves that this detestable devise would take effect, they caused
it on a sudden to be bruited all over the Realm of France, that Navarre
and Conde were both dead. But by Gods good providence, Navarre escaped that
danger, and took no harm.

The Prince of Conde by the treacherous and villaynous dealing of some of his
household servant, and amongst others, of one Brillant, and a page, The
prince of Conde poisoned.
(two such as he had greatly favored, and bestowed many benefits upon) was
poisoned the third day of March, in the year of our Lord, The great
commendatio^ of the prince of Conde.
one thousand five hundred eighty and eight, and died within two days after,
at Saint Iean d' Angely. Whose death was greatly lamented of all good men, for
that he was wise, valiant, zealous in religion, true hearted to his Prince, a
lover of his country, and an irreconciliable enemy to the perturbers of the
state, and to all such as he knew to be adversaries to God, to the King, and
to the Crown of France.

The Guises and the rest of the leaguers, reioysed not a little at this news:
for now they thought they were gotten one step higher, and had greater hope
to oppress the Protestants then before: who they knew were mightily weakened
with this loss. And for that they supposed that in this conservation of men's
minds, they had opportunity to attempt something, which might still advance
their affairs, they thought good that the Lord Lauerdin, who had escaped a
scowring at the battle of Coutras, should assail Marans, a place of very
great importance, and if it were possible to make it sure for the league.

The Lord Lauerdin applied his business so diligently, that he gained the said
Island of Marans in a short time, Marans gained by the Lord Lauerdin.
by reason that the Protestants, being amassed (as it were) with the unexpected
death of the Prince, did not provide timely enough for the fortifying thereof,
with such store of men and munition, as was necessary.

Albeit that the King was glad, that the Lord Lauerdin had gotten Marans, yet
he liked not that it should be kept by the Lord Cluseaux, whom he knew to be
a favorer of the League: but there was no remedy, he must bear with the
time, being indeed not able to do as he would, for the most part of his
Council, and those of the chiefest were leagers, and the Duke of Guise, the
head of those monsters, had caused such infamous rumors to be raised of the
Kings actions, and by secret practices had so disgraced him among his subjects,
that he was almost grown into contempt among the communaltie, and was imputed
no body in comparison of the Guise. This opinion the King would gladly have
rooted out, and was very desirous to gain their good wills and affections,
if possibly he might. The better to effect this, he thought best to proclaim
wars afresh against the Protestants, The King prepares to go into Poictou
against the Protestants.
and to raise a great power, and to go in person into Poictou, against the King
of Navarre, and all his confederates, that so by some famous exploits against
those of the reformed religion, he might regaine the love and liking of his
lost subjects.

The Duke of Guise, who knew that he had stolen away the peoples hearts from
the King, thought it now good time to discover his secret meaning more openly,
and presuming of his favorers at Court, and the good will of the country, The
Guise determines to seize upon Paris, and to take the King.
concludes to get Paris, to seize upon the king either alive or dead, to kill
as many princes of the blood, and other officers of the crown as he could lay
hands upon, and by fine force to set the diadem of France upon his own head.
Now that he might be the more assured to accomplish all this, he wrote secret
letters to all his chief friends and followers, to meet him at Paris, as
spedily as they might. And for that the King should not be able to withstand
him, he had set the duke of Aumaile to war against sundry towns and cities
in Picardy, and had given order that others should attempt as much in Normandy,
and other places: knowing that the king would send thither his principal
forces to keep those countries in his obedience, and then he might with more
facility execute his intended purpose.

Upon these aduertisements of the Guise to his associates, there repaired unto
Paris, great numbers of the most factious, turbulent, and malecontent persons
of all the Land. Many Spanish Captains and Hispaniolized french, were soon
assembled in that mighty City, and that to the number of fifteen or
sixteen thousand: besides, the Citizen Leaguers who were exceeding many, and
those as desperate and rash headed as any others whosoever: the Duke of Guyse
being diligently informed of this, and knowing how greatly he was expected at
Paris by his confederates, resolved to post thither with all speed, and the
rather for that the king (even as he wished) had now dispersed his forces,
sending some into Normandy and others into Picardy to maintain^ his authority
in those provinces: the King had long mistrusted the Guyse, and for that he was
now advertised that he was coming to Paris, he vehemently suspected that
there was some notable practice in hand, to be performed against him by the
Leaguers, he therefore sent word to the said Duke, whom he vnderderstood to
be forward on his way, by the Lord Belieure, that in no wise he should come
to Paris at that time upon pain of his displeasure, and in case that he would
notwithstanding continue his journey, that then he held him for a traitor
and the author of all those miseries wherewith the Land was so encombred at
that instant: Belieure did his message, The Guyse enters into Paris contrary
to the Kings commandment.
but the Guyse did little regard it, for he followed the said Belieure at the
heels, and was at Paris almost as soon as he, accompanied not past with some
fifteen or sixteen Gentlemen, the better to cover his intended purpose,
knowing that he should find a sufficient number of partakers to maintain
himself against all men.

Not long after his arrival, he went very confidently to see the king, and
with all humble reverence with his knee to the ground, saluted him: but the
king being highly despleased for that his coming, contrary to his
commandment, gave him a frowning countenance. The Guyse stayed not long at
Court but returned to his house in the City: immediately after, the King being
duly informed of the great number of strangers that were in the same City,
and that it was very likely that they remained there for some dangerous
exploit, caused twelve companies of French men and Switzers to be distributed
into sundry places to keep all quiet and in their due obedience. The
Citizens at the instigation of the Guyse and his companies, took the Alarm,
and making as though they feared that they should be murdered and have their
houses sacked, The Parisians rise aagainst the King and kill his guard.
(for diverse were sent about to disperse such reports) armed themselves, and
being assisted by Brissac, Borsdauphin, Chamois, and the rest of the Guysards,
set upon the Switzers and the rest of the Kings guardes: whereof some they
killed, and others they disarmed, and such as remained they kept as prisoners,
and hoping now to attain to the Period of their desires, they made their
approches and besieged the Louure, entending to take the King either alive or
dead.

The king seeing all that great and populous City in an uproar, and that he
had not sufficient forces to oppose against such a rebellious rabble, determined
to leave the Louure, The King l^aueth Paris and flies to Chartres.
at the persuasions of sundry his most faithful councellers, who advised him
to give place to that desperate Rebellion, and to seek his safety some other
where whereupon he incontinently departed from Paris, and went that night as
far as Trappes, and the next day to his City of Chartres. Many great Lords
and Gentlemen of good place which were the kings friends, went after him as
fast as they could, some on horseback, and some on foot, making as good shift
as they could upon so short warning: wherein we may note a maruailous strange
alteration and vicissitude in the state of this great Prince, who having been
so mighty a monarke, and a king of two such noble and puissant countries as
were Polonia and France, a commander over so many great and honorable
personages, and had ruled such an infinite multitude of all sorts, was now
driven out of his own house, and out of his cheifest City, and forced to fly
before him who was his vassaile and subject, to his intolerable grief and
vexation, leaving his treasure and whatsoever precious things he had, to be a
pray for his enemies.

The Guyse understanding that the king was escaped, and had avoided his bloody
fingers, was maruailously grieved, and cursed his oversight, knowing that he
should never have the like opportunity again to effect his purpose, and
fearing that the King would seek to be revenged of so great an indignity
offered to his person, thought that he would provide the means as well as he
could, to defend himself and his: and therefore he seized upon the Kings
arsemall, and upon his treasor, The Guyse seiseth upon the Kings treasor.
whereof he brought to his own house above seven hundred thousand Crowns,
which he laid up as an earnest for the rest. Then did he forthwith alter the
policy of the City, remoouing Perrense the provost of the Merchants from his
office, and the rest of the cheifest officers which he knew to be affectionate
to the king, and placed such as were the most factious and seditious Leaguers
in their roumes: he wrote also sundry letters to his friends abroad, and to the
principal Towns such as he knew to be devoted to him, requiring them to
join with him, and to be in a readiness when he should have need, and
caused it to be bruted, that all that which had passed at Paris was not against
the king, but to defend the City which was in danger to be spoiled by
strangers, and that the king by the counsel of the Duke of Espernon, who had
(said he) intelligence with the King of Navarre and the Heretics, had caused
sundry gibbets to be set up in several places of the City, to hang diverse
Citizens and to spoil their houses, thereby to gather money, and to war
against the Leaguers.

The Guyse seeks to cover his rebellious action.
When the Guyse had taken the course to assure himself by all the devises he
could, he wrote letters to the king, seeking to disguyse all this action, and
to persuade him, that he had no evil meaning against his majesty, but had
always been and still remained his most dutiful subject, and had in this
tumultuous stir, happened at Paris, showed how he respected the King and all
his servants, in that he had taken so great prays even with the danger of his
life to save sundry his officers, his Captains and Soldiers, and so far
forth as possibly he might, to keep the people from murder and blouds^ed,
which was then so likely to have fallen out, and that to the great and
irreperable harm of the Kings best affected subjects. After the alleging of
these and many other arguments to prove his fidelity, he besought the king to
be his gracious Lord, and to account of him as his most faithful and loyal
s^biect, and for that he had a guilty conscience, he was continually in
fear, least the King would at one time or other be revenged, howsoever
peradventure for the time he might dissemble the matter, and show him a fair
countenance, and therefore he practiced all means to make his atonement, and
to that end made earnest suit to the Queen mother to stand his gracious Lady.
Such was his demeanor, and so cunningly he handled the matter, that she was
won to be a mediator for him, and to assay to bring him again into the kings
favor.

The king reposing a maruailous confidence in his mother, The Queen mother
reconcileth the Guyse to the King.
who had bewitched him with an opinion of her love and natural affection
toward him, suffered himself to be ruled by her advice, notwithstanding all
the persuasions of the Catholics that were about him, who exclaimed against
the Guyses and their proud and rebellious enterprises, and required the king
to ta^e condign punishment, proffering him their service, their lives, their
goods, and whatsoever means they had for the accomplishment thereof. The king
thanked them for their good wills, but resolving to make a peace, sent them
home again, and would not follow their counsels. After much going and coming
on both sides, the reconciliation was made, and the K. and the Leaguers became
good friends, and intended to bend all their forces against the Protestants.
Whereupon two mighty armies were prepared, the one for Guyen, Two armies sent
against the Protestants.
commanded by the Duke of Neuers, and the other for Dauphiny, under the leading
of the Duke de Maine. All these troublous stirs being now ended, and the K. and
the Leaguers being made friends, it was thought good to call an assembly of
the state to reform the policy of the Land, and to take some finer course
for the prosecuting of the wars against the Hugonots, and to that end the
king sent his writs to summon all provinces, Cities, and towns, This
Parliament was appointed to begin the 15. of August, yet afterward it was
deferred until the ninth of October following.
to send their deputies to Bloys, provided always that they were good
Catholics, and such as neither had favor, nor were any ways suspected to
favor the king of Navarre nor his associats, and the Duke of Guyse and the
rest of the Leaguers so handled the matter in the mean time, that not any one
man in a manner was chosen to be sent to that assembly, but such as they were
assured did either openly or secretly favor their proceedings.

At this great Parleament there was much adoo and many things talked of, but
especially of the Edict of Reunion, made the one and twenty of July, which
tended to the establishing of Popery, the rooting out of Heresy, and the
disinheriting of the Princes of the blood, provoking the king with many bitter
words and vehement exhortations, to embrew his hands in the blood of the
saints, and with fire and sword to root them out of France. All which was
assented unto by the king and his three estates, and enacted as a fundamental
law of the land, which they all swore to see inuiolably kept, and observed in all the kings dominions, to the uttermost of their powers.

The king of Navarre was quickly advertised of whatsoever had passed at Bloys,
The Prot^stants assemble at Rochel
and therefore assembled all his principal friends and followers at Rochel, the
16. of November following, whither likewise all the reformed churches sent
their deputies: where they resolved upon the defensive, and the means how to
withstand their enemies. The king continued at Bloys all this while, and albeit
he showed a fair countenance to the Guyse, yet in heart he loved him not,
for that indignity which was offered him at Paris, besides many other saucie
and audacious Pranks which he plaide since, did breed a revenging mind in the
K. which he meant to show more apparently as soon as any opportunity was
offered. Now as it usually falls out between late reconciled enemies, each
still suspected other, and many tarres ^ell out between their friends and
followers, which bred sundry sturres and hurleburlies in the Court: but there
were two especially which gave the ^larum to the Courtiers, and made every man
to stand upon his guard. The first quarrel arose among the Pages and lackies,
some holding with the Burbons, and some with the Leaguers, wherewith the Duke
of Guyse was so affrighted, Two sodain^ vprares at Court.
that he ran into his chamber, barred the doors, and kept himself as close
as he could. The second was occasioned by a soldier, who being hurt, ran to
save himself in the Guyses Chamber, whither he was followed by the kings
guard, with their drawn swords in their hands, whereupon once again all the
Court was in an uproar, not without great fear, least some dangerous event
would ensue.

About the middle of December, the Duke of Guyse showed himself more
disobedient then at any time before, and a great contemner of the king and his
authority, The Guyse a ma^^^^ter of murderers and Rebels.
in maintaining a number of Ruffians, murderers, factious and seditious
persons, and such as raised a rebellion in August last, and had attempted the
killing of the Duke of Espernan at Engolesme. These were lodged in the Court,
and flocked about the Guyse, and were so countenanced by him, that no
Magistrate durst say a word to them: besides, the king being daily informed of
many trech erous practices against his person and estate, called al his Nobles,
and willed them to swear, that they should never attempt any thing against
him: The Guyse refuses to take his oath for the preservation of the King.
the Duke most disloyally refused, and said in his presence, that he would not
take such an oath, and if he did any thing otherwise then he ought, there were
good laws to punish him, spare him not no other answer could be gottten at
his hands, and fearing that the ^ing would be revenged as well for this as for
other notorious contempts, as also considering that all the drifts of his
councellers were so discovered, that there was no way to hide them any longer,
and therefore that now with all speed he must put them in execution, he
called a Council of his most trusty friends, as Lewis Cardinal of Guyse his
brother, the Archbishop of Lions, and some few others, in which it was
concluded, The Guyse and his associats vow to kill the king.
that the king must needs be dispatched out of hand, and that all delays
were dangerous: and therefore the twenty four of that month was appointed
for that tragical execution, binding themselves to see the same performed with
a solemn oath.

Thus was this great french king discovered of a very ancient and noble race,
honored for a long time of his own subjects, and reverenced of his neighbor
Princes, condemned to die by the hands of most disloyal traitors, who had all
their advancement by him and his predecessors.

CHAP. XXIIII.
The King resolves to kill the Guyse. The death of Francis Duke of Guyse, and
of the Cardinal his brother. The terror of the Guysards. The death of the
Queen mother.

THough the King knew not of this sentence of death which was pronounced
against him, The King resolves to kill the Guyse.
yet the old and new injuries offered unto him by the Guyse, did sufficiently
exasperate him, and made him watch all opportunity to seek his revenge, and
as soon as ever he could to be rid of so desperate a traitor. This
determination of the king could not be kept so secret, but that the Guyse
having many friends about the king, who suspected some such thing, advertised
the Duke the two and twenty of December, by laying a little bill under his
napkin, wherein was written: Look to your self for some are about to play a
shrewd play with you. He perusing the writing, wrote this answer: They dare
not, and so threw it under the ^able. The same day the king received diverse
aduertisements of this horrible conspiracy of the Guyse against his person,
The aduertisements of the Duke of Maine and Aumaile to the King, touching the
attempt of the Guyse.
and especially from the Duke de Maine, who sent Alphonso Corse to him with
this message. That it was an easy matter to carry beads about, and to put on
a counterfeit show of holiness, but he was sure that his brother had a
dangerous enterprise in hand against his Majesty, which he knew not certainly
when he would put in execution, but he was well assured that the time was not
far off, and that he doubted least his warning should come too late. And
advised him in these words, That his Majesty should beware of a desperate and
furious mind. The Duke of Aumaile sent likewise the duchess his Wife to give
the King to understand, That there was great danger toward his person, and
that the conspirators were upon the point of execution. The king had also
intercepted many letters, by which he did evidently perceive as much, and how
that the Guyses had sworn his death and destruction, and disinhereting of the
royal blood of France in the houses of Valoys and Burbons, and to set up
the house of Lorraine.

All these remonstrances made the king bestirre him, and to devise some speedy
Course for the preservation of his own life. Whereupon he got the keys of the
Castle, doubled his guards, and appointed a strong watch in the Town, with
commandment not to open the gates without his special lisence: all which was
done in the night, without the knowledge of the Guyse, and calling unto him
some seven or eight of those five and forty pensioners which daily attended
on his person, he revealed unto them his purpose, requiring their aid and
assistance, who received most willingly their service, with promise to execute
his will, and to do as his Majesty had directed them.

The next morning the Duke of Guyse, the Cardinal his brother, the Archbishop
of Lions with the Mareschall of Haultmont were assembled in the chamber near
unto the king, and ready to sit in council how and in what manner it were
best to commit their detestable parricide. The king having disposed of all
things in the best manner that he could devise, sent a Gentleman to call the
Duke of Guyse to come and speak with him, who coming forth, and seeing the
Guards more carefully disposed then was accustomed, having a guilty
conscience, began to suspect, and (as oftentimes the mind of man upon the
instant of so great adventures presageth that which afterward ensues) so at
this present the Dukes heart fainted, and his color charged, and as one fearing
some imminent peril, he was ready to swound: he had sent his Page for a
handkercheffe, in one of the corners whereof his secretary named Pellicart had
knit up a little written bill, containing a warning to get him away with all
speed, or else he were but dead. But this handkercheffe was intercepted with
the remembrance, as the Page was coming up, and never came to his hands.

The Duke in going through a narrow passage to the King, increased his
mistrust, and was about to return, but still he went forwards into the Kings
utter chamber, where seeing the Lord Loiguake fitting upon a chest, whom of all
other he most hated, for that he had been long persuaded that the same Lord
determined to kill him, he set his hand to his sword with a purpose to set
upon the said Loiguake: but by reason he did wear his Cloak Scarft wise,
he was so troubled, that he could not draw it past half way out of the sheath:
they who were appointed for his execution, The death of Francis D. of Guyse.
seeing him enterprise such an audacious act and that at the kings chamber
door, prevented him and slew him at that instant.

The noise was such in this tragical execution, that the Cardinal entered into
a mistrust, and made have to get forth, but he was stayed by a Gentleman of the
Scottish guard, The death of the Cardinal of Guise
who had commandment to arrest him, and not long after by reason of his former
treasons and his presumptuous behavior at that present, mingled with some
threatening speeches, he was strangled in the same placce where he was taken
prisoner. The Archbishop rushed forth in great fury, and said he would
help the Duke of Guyse, but he was quickly cooled and clapped up in prison,
though afterward released upon his submission and acknowledgement of his
offense. The Cardinal of Burbon, the Prince Ieuuille son to the Duke of
Guyse, the Mareschall D'Albenfe, with many other pertakers in this treason,
were apprehended and committed to safe keeping, and likewise Pellicart
secretary to the Duke of Guyse with all his papers and writings, whereby all
the secret Councelles of the Guyses and the rest of the Leaguers, as well of
Princes and Nobles as of the Clergy, Town, and Cities, were manifested and
discovered.

The fame of this execution was forthwith spread abroad in the Town, albeit
the Castle gates were shut, which made all such as had guilty consciences to
pack from Bloys as speedily as ever did the Protestants from the suburbs of
Saint Germans on Bartholmew day, The Guysards fly from Bloys.
and to seek to shift for themselves some other where.

Thus were the Leaguers wonderfully crossed in their designements, and many who
the day before thought it an honor to be called Guysards and were ready to
challenge to the Combat, such as reputed them Royalles were now altered on the
sudden, and cast in a new mould, esteeming all that factious multitude worse
then thieves and murderers.

Shortly after that these things thus passed at Blois, died the Queen mother,
The death of the Qu^ene mother of France.
who was very old, and had lived too long for France, where she had been as
the firebrand of the Country, the nurse of all rebellions, the bellows of all
civil dissension, the instrument of the devil, to work all impiety and
ungodliness, the procurer of the fall and destruction of her own children,
and the principal worker of all this woeful and lamentable alteration, happened
in that noble and renowned Kingdom.

CHAP. XXV.
The rebellion of Duke de Maine, and most of the principal Cities of France.
The King of France, and the King of Navarre are reconciled, The King of
France murdered by a Friar, The King of Navarre proclaimed King of France.

Blois, and for that purpose wrote diverse Letters to his several governors of
his provinces, duly enforming them of al these occurrences: and sent to the
assembly of the States, to let them understand, that it was his pleasure, that
they should still continue: and that he was fully determined to follow their
reasonable counsels in all things: but they by little and little slyding away
one after another, got them home into their Countries: and by spreading of most
accursed and damnable rumors, deprauing the Kings fact with many hyperbolicall
speeches, which they amplified with sundry lying reasons, and defamatorie
libels, tearming this execution by the name of the massacre committed at Blois,
caused an universal rebellion of all those Towns, Cities, and Provinces,
which had rejected the Gospel in former times. The Duke de Maine no sooner
understood thereof, but that he persuaded himself, that seeing his brother was
dead, The duke de Maine rebelleth aga nst the King.
he might now peradventure obtain the Crown for himself, if he would lay in
for it: for he had a great power in a readiness, and no doubt but the most of
the Leaguers would follow him, for fear least if they should fall into the
Kings hands, he would punish them according to their deserts. With this
resolution he left Dauphiny, and hasted into Burgundy, and Champaigne, taking
with him such strength and power as he could get, and making sure as many
places as he could come by, prepared to make war against the king.

Paris which was the capitol City of the whole kingdom, and had more
favored the Guise then any other, was moved to great indignation, Paris and
the rest of the principal Cities rebel against the King,
and showed it self highly offended. And being further incensed with the
piteous outcryes and lamentable complaints of the Duchesses of Guise and
Nemours, and with the inuectiue Sermons of the Jesuits, and Friars, grew into
a desperate madness, shaking off the yoke of obedience, and rebelled openly
against their natural Prince, and liege Lord. Most of the greatest, rychest,
and strongest Cities, as Orleance, Roan, Amiens, Aniou, Lions, Abeuille, Remes,
Tholous, and many others, followed the example of the Parisians, and
conspiring with the rest of the Leaguers, imprisoned the Kings friends, seyzed
upon his strong holds, robbed him of his treasure, and used him in all
outrageous and rebellious manner.

The King understanding of all these seditious sturres, sought by fair means
and in gentle manner, to reduce them to their obedience, sending out his
proclaimations to pardon whatsoever was past, and to bury it in the grave of
oblivion, so that they would lay down their Arms, and live peaceably under
his authority, The seditious divinity of the Sorbonists.
as in duty they were bound: but they made no reckoning of the Kings
clemency, but termed it cowardlinesse, as though he were afraid of their
forces, being animated by the Sorbonists, and their Doctors in Theology, who
had resolved that they were set free from their oath of obedience, and former
allegiaunce made unto Henry the third. And that it was lawful for them, and
for all the residue of the people of France, to take Arms against the said
King Henry, and to persecute him, and all his adherents, with fire and sword,
as enemies to God, to their Country, and to holy Church.

When they had once gotten this advantage, that they were able to color their
proceedings (as it were with an oracle from heaven) they made no more
conscience at the matter, The duke de Maine made general of the Leaguers.
but presently determined to choose them a General for the leading of their
forces, and to establish a new Council: by whose direction they might manage
the rest of their affairs. They refused all the Princes of the blood, and
chose the Duke de Maine, who was a man much favored of the leaguers, The
leaguers appoint a council of state.
and one that was well acquainted with all their practices. The Dukes of
Aumaile, and Nemours, with the Cheualier of Aumaile, were made governors of
Paris. There were also 47. of the most seditious, turbulent, factious, and
bitterest enemies to the King, appointed to order the state, as the kings
privy council had done in former times. These had no sooner gotten this
authority into their hands, but they committed most horrible outrages against
all such as they suspected to be the kings friends, imprisoning, murdering,
robbing, sac^ing and spoiling them in such sort, as was never heard of within
any man's remembrance, and going to the royal palace called the Louure, they
seyzed upon all the kings goods, The leaguers notorious disobedience.
they violated the great Seal of France, brake it in pieces, and trod it
under their feet. They rent and tore the Arms of Valois, and Burbon, and
trayled them in most despitefull manner in the mire and dyrt through the
Streets: and assembling as many of the principal Leaguers, both of the
Nobility, Clergy, and Communaltie as they could, wrote to other Cities,
their Confederates, to follow their example, and to join with them, and also
to procure as many partakers as they might, the better to countenance their
proceedings.

The king had often and very seriously dissuaded them from this seditious
course, and with all lenity sought to reduce them to their former obedience:
but considering that he prevailed nothing by gentleness, and clemency, but
rather that the people waxed worse and worse, he therefore now determined to
take a sharper course, and by force to bring them under his obedience, but
fearing his own weakness, and want of sufficient power to bring his purposes
to pass for that he was, as it were compassed about with his enemies, not
knowing what to do, or whom to trust, The king makes peace with the (...) of
Navarre,
perceiving that the most of those who were about him, were favorers of the
rebels, he was content to follow the advice of his most trusty counselors,
and to make peace with the King of Navarre, and to use his counsal and forces
for his just and lawful defense: and the rather for that the Duke de Maine
approached very near unto him, with a great and puissant army. Thus was the
king for the safety of his person, forced to cast himself into the arms of
him, whom for many years he had reputed for his mortal enemy, and glad to
seek to be preserved by such an one, whose destruction he had sought with all
extremity.

The King of Navarre being advertised of the Kings intent, and solicited by
sundry messengers to come to his aid with all expedition, called his Nobles
and Captains, and gathered all his forces together, and passing over the Loyre
at Samnur, went toward the King, who was greatly distressed at Toures, and in
imminent peril, to be oppressed by the Leaguers. The meeting of the King of
France, and the King of Navarre.
The King understanding of his approach, the thirty of April sent the
Mareschall Haultmont, accompanied with a great number of the Nobility, to
desire him to come to Plesis de Tours: where he with all his Court staid for
him.

The King of Navarre readily obeyed, passing over the bridge of Saint Saphorin,
where he left all his forces in battle array, and went toward the King,
whom he sound staying for him in the Park of Plessis. There was such a
concourse of people, and so great a throng, that the two Kings were forced to
stay above half a quarter of an hour, stretching and holding out their hands
before they could embrace one another: so great was the prease, and such a
multitude were slocked together, to behold this joyful and blessed meeting.
The kind embracings and loving salutations between these two Potentates, did
evidently declare their inward joy and contentation. The rejoicing of all sorts
was incredible: nothing was heard for the space of half an hour but God save
the King: a voice which had not been heard near the Court in more then four
Months before. And reiterating their joyful acclamations, they ceased not but
cried out, God save the Kings, God save the King, and the King of Navarre.

Here we may see a strange and maruailous alteration on the sudden: for these
two Princes which had been so bitter enemies, each having for a long time
pursued other by cruel and bloody wars, are now reconciled, and are become
loving and kind friends. And the king, who not long before stood in danger,
either to be murdered, or else to be delivered into the hands of those, who
thirsted for nothing more then for his blood, is now freed from all fear, and
restored to his former liberty: and is fortifyed by the arryuall of this
Prince and Army, which did both countenance his authority, and encourage his
friends, and so daunted his enemies, that the Duke de Maine, The Duke de Maine
hastes to Paris.
was glad to give over his siege before Chasteaurenault, and so retire to Paris
with all speed.

The two kings sat often in council about their affairs, devising of the
best means to prosecute their wars for their most advantage. The king of
Navarre made many roades into the Country, to the great damage and hurt of the
Leaguers, and so scoured the coast that no enemy durst once appear in sight.
In the mean while the king received certain Regiments of Switzers, and help
came from all parts of his Realm: so that his army daily increased in number,
fame and power. And being now able to meet his enemies in the face, he marched
toward Paris, The King marches toward Paris.
aad took by the way Ponthois, Saint Clow, Poysey, Saint Germans, Charewton,
and sundry other towns. By which means that great and populous City began
to be sore distressed for want of victuals and other necessaries.

This made the conspirators to tremble, and to lay their heads together, how
to avoid this peril, The leaguers conspire to kill the King.
which now hung over their heads: whereupon the dukes of Maine, Aumatle, and
Nemours, the Archbishop of Lions, whom the King a little before had pardoned
and set at liberty, the Lord Rosue, Bosdauphin Brissac, Sagone, the 47. which
were chosen for the Council, and the 17. Colonels, which were appointed over
the 18. wards of the city assembled together: and after much reasoning, pro and
contra, at last resolved that the only means to save themselves, and to
advance their affairs, was to kill the King, who otherwise was likely to get
the City in short time, and to take an exemplarie punishment upon them, and
all their adherents. Hereupon the King is once again condemned to die, and as
speedy a course taken as might be devised to hasten his execution. Friar James
Clement, appointed to kill the King.
They persuaded with one Friar James Clement, of the order of S. Dominicke, a
lewd and bold hypocrite, and enduced him with many reasons (who was otherwise
ready enough to any mischief) to attempt this tragical and bloody act. They
forced the first president of the Senate, named Harlay, whom for his
faithfulness to his Prince, they had long detained in prison, to write letters
to the K. which this Friar should carry with him. They taught the said Clement
likewise a lesson, containing matters of great weight and importance, aduising
him that he should not disclose them to any but to the King, and that in
private, and great secrecy. Providing him besides, a sharp and long knife,
enuenomed with deadly poison, wherewith he should adventure to murder the said
King, as soon as he espied any fit occasion offered, and entreated Pagarola
the Popes Legate to bless him, and his knife for his better speed.

Friar Clement goes to the camp at Saint Clow.
The Friar being thoroughly schooled by this accursed company, prepares for his
journey: he puts on his hypocritical weed on his back, lays up his lesson
in his head, and secretly hides his poisoned knife in his sleeue, and taking
an other Friar as bad as himself in his company, hasted to execute his
deuilish purpose and intent. He was no sooner come to the Camp, which then
lay at Saint Clow, but he told such as he met first, that he had Letters
to the King from the first President, and certain other Parisians, well
affected to his Majesty, containing matters of very great importance,
besides many other weighty things to be declared by word of mouth. The King
being forthwith advertised hereof, commanded that he should attend until
he were called. Within a while after, the king willed that the Friar should
be brought before him. The Friar entered very boldly into the kings Chamber,
and being asked what his errant was, he answered that he had matters of
great weight and importance, to declare unto his Majesty, and such as highly
concerned his service, the king supposing that all was Gospel that the Friar
said, commanded such as were about him to avoid the Chamber, and sat down
in a Chair to hear the Friars news. The Friar approached to the King, and
falling upon his knees, began to tell a long tale: and occupying the Kings
ears with a long and lying discourse, espying his advantage, drew out his
knife out of his sleeue, Friar Clement wounds the king with a poisoned knife.
and stabbed the King in the lower part of his belly, and then made have to get
away. The king being wonderfully terrified with that unexpected attempt, cried
out, and laying hand upon a dagger which was near him, struck the Friar, and
wounded him. The Lords and Gentlemen which were attending in an utter Chamber,
hearing the noise, came running in, and with their Swords and Rapiers, Friar
Clement is slain
slew the Friar.

The Kings Surgeons were presently called, and his wound dressed, and he laid
on his bed. And for that he knew not whether he should die or not, he called
for the king of Navarre, all the Princes, Lords, and Noble men, that were in
his Camp, and for the Captains, Colonels, The King of Navarre made heir
apparent to the crown of France.
and Chieftaines of the strangers, before whom he declared, that the king of
Navarre was the true, and indubitate heir to the Crown of France: praying
and exhorthing all of them to acknowledge him, and to promise true obedience
unto him, and to cause the like to be acknowledged in the whole Camp: and
forthwith caused Letters to be written to all Provinces and Cities, to
advertise them, how things had passed at Saint Clowe, and of his last will and
Testament: requiring all his faithful subjects to protest the fulfilling of
the same: instantly requiring all true Frenchmen to revenge his death, and to
take condign punishment upon the authors of that impious and execrable fact,
and so the two and twenty of Iulie 1^89. the poison preuayling, and dispersing
it self through his body, The death of Henry the 3 the French King.
not withstanding all the remedies that could be devised, or imagined, he
yielded up his life into the hands of him that gave it him, having reigned
fourteen years, and seven months.

And this was the end of Henry the third the French king, and king of
Polonia, and the last of the house of Valois: who being bewitched with the
sorceries of his mother, and inclyning to evil by his own bad disposition,
opposed himself against Gods true religion, and being given over to work his
own destruction, followed the wicked counsels of his notorious and sworn
enemies, who spoke him fair to his face, but inwardly hated him, and never
ceased persecuting of their deuelish devises, until they had brought his state
to confusion, and procured his untimely death and destruction.

CHAP. XXVI.
Henry the fourth the French King, overthrows the Leaguers in two several
battles. Great famine in Paris. The Duke of Parma enters into France,
relieueth Paris. From whence he flies again in great haste into the Low
Countries. The Pope excommunicateth the King, Who causes his Bull to be
burned at Towers. The great Army of the Germianes. The Duke of Parma goes the
s^conde time into France, and preuayleth greatly against the King. The
Leaguers seek for peace. The King incline to Popery. His coronation. Paris
with most of the great Cities of France turn to the King.

IMmediately after the death of Henry the third, Henry of Burbon King of
Navarre, and the true inheritour to the Crown of France, both by his own
right, and by the last will and testament of the late King, The princes,
Nobles, and soldiers take their oath of obedience to Henry the fourth.
was proclaimed King of France, by the name of King Henry the forth, and so
acknowledged by all the Princes, Nobles, Colonels, Captains and soldiers in
the Camp, after the ancient manner of choosing the Roman Emperors, giving him
their oaths of fidelity and obedience, with protestation to assist him to
maintain his royal and princely authority against all traitors, rebels, and
leaguers, to the uttermost of their powers. The Prince Montpensier, being then
at Audly, a town upon the River of Seyne, caused likewise all his army to take
the like oath, exhorting them to defend constantly the late kings will, and
valiantly to oppose themselves against al seditious persons, and despisers of
gods lawful ordinance, traitors to their King. and sworn enemies to their own
country.

This Henry of Burbon King of Navarre, and now the French king (and so
hereafter he shall be termed) considering the strength of his open enemies,
and fearing the treachery of many in the Camp, who were devoted to the
league, knowing that they might be a means to distress him, being so near
unto a great number of his evil willers, who were likely to double their rage,
by reason of this exploit done upon the late Kings person, The French King
retireth toward Norman de.
thought good to license so many as he suspected, to depart the camp, and
determined to retire with the rest into Normandy, somewhat further from his
enemies, and to gather as great a power as he could of his trustiest, and most
assured friends, and in the mean time, to view the attempts and preparations
of the Leaguers.

The army of the D. de Maine.
The D. de Maine, besides all the bands which he had collected of the French
rebels, received certain Swart Rutters under the leading of the Duke of
Brimswicke. The Duke of Lorraine sent his son likewise called the Marquis of
Pont. with certain companies of horsemen with this great army, which amounted
to the number of 25000. men. The Duke de Maine marched toward Deep, where the
King lay with some nine or ten thousand men: who understanding of the approach
of the enemy, took the field with those forces which he had, and encamped at
Arques, about two miles from Deep, where he stayed not long, but that the
enemy appeared in fight at a village not far off, called Martinglize. The king
sent out forthwith his light horsemen to discover, between who^ and the
foreru^ners of the Leaguers, there were many hot skirmishes. On the 19. day of
September the enemy passed over a little river which ran between both
Armies, and put himself in battle array very well ordered and strongly
appointed* and marched directly toward the king. The Lord Billing with two
thousand shot was appointed to charge first, and the Duke de Maine stood
behind him, with a strong battle ready to succor as need required. The
king had quickly ordered his battailon, and having disposed of all things in as
warlike manner as he could devise, sent forth his light horsemen to charge the
enemy, who were backed with the Prince of Conde, led by the Lord Montaret. His
battailon of footmen was flanked with his own cornet, wherein were the Lord
Graund Pryer of France, the Count Rochfaucoult, the Count Rossy his brother,
the Count Rochford, with diverse other Gentlemen of great reckoning, and such as
were nearest about his person: and having called upon God to aid him in his
just and righteous quarrel, so furiously charged the enemy, that he left
five hundred dead upon the place at that instant. The rest seeing the slaughter
of their fellows, and the fury of the kings soldiers, began to shrink, and
in a short time to fly away in great fear and disorder.

The Principal men of the Leaguers which were slain, were the Lord Saint
Andrew Sagne, Collonell of the light horsemen, the Lord Saint Vidal Lieutenant
of the Ordenance, the Lord Vienuille, Count Billing, Temblecourt, Sauelak, and
diverse others were taken prisoners. The king lost the Count Rossy, brother to
Rochfaucont, and the Lord Bake Ville a Gentleman of very worthy and commendable
parts, and not past some thirty or forty others.

The Duke de Maine seeing his bad luck, retired his beaten troops toward
Picardy: the king being strengthened with the forces of the Prince of Soysons,
Duke Languauille, and Mareschall Haultmont, besides four thousand Englishmen
newly sent him out of England, The Lord VVillowby.
under the leading of the right noble and valiant Lord VVillowby: departed from
Deep, and coasted the enemy, til he came to Menlau and then returned toward
Paris, supposing that by that means he should draw the Duke to follow him,
and so bring him to a battle. The king brings hi^ army before Paris.
The King coming to Paris about the 28. of October, determined to assault the
suburbs, and having prepared all things in a readiness for that purpose,
assailed them the first of November following: where he found some
resistance, but the courage of the Soldiers redoubled with the presence of the
Prince, was such, The suburbs of S. Germans taken.
that they quickly gained them, and slew above a thousand and five hundred of
their enemies: there were also taken fourteen ensigns, and thirteen pieces
of Ordenance. The king seeing the Leaguers attempted nothing but that they kept
themselves close within the Walls, albeit the Duke de Maine was entered within
the City with all his forces, The cruelty of de Maine
being moved with sundry weighty causes, resolved to dislodge, and to
employ his forces in some other places. He was no sooner departed, but that
the Duke de Maine picked a quarrel against diverse of the richest Citizens,
charging them that they had conspired against the holy League, and procured the
King to come to Paris, which promised to deliver the City into his hands,
whereupon many were condemned and executed, and their goods seized to the use
of the League.

The King marched with all his power toward the Loyre and Seyne, purposing to
redeem the Towns which lay between those two rivers under his obedience, and
in his way took Estamps, Ianuille, Chasteandune, Vendosme, Lauerdin,
Chasteande, Loyre, Monteuert, Chere and Montrichard, yielded of their own
accord. The strong town of Man's was taken by composition, Sablis, Laual,
Chasteantier, with the Castles of Beanmont, Touuoy, and Alenson, with many
other places of importance, were likewise yielded unto the king, so that in a
short space he had gotten very great number of strong ^ownes, Castles, and
Cities, yea, very large and mighty provinces, out of the hands of the
turbulent and seditious Leaguers. The Lord Diguceres likewise joining with the
Lord Valette, brother to the Duke of Espernon, prevailed mightily in Province
and Languedock, and brought the greatest part of those Countries under the
kings obedience.

The Duke de Maine lay all this while in Paris, and did nothing until the
coming of the Popes Legate called Hemico Caietano, The Duke de Maine receives
Money from the Pope and the King of Spain.
but then he began to stir being animated by this Ambassador, who brought
with him fifty thousand Ducats from Rome: he also received three hundred
thousand Crowns from the Spaniard, and by an excessive tax imposed upon the
Parisians, with the spoil and havoc which was made upon the Royals and
richest merchants: he got above a Million of gold, with which and the rest of
his exhibition from Rome and Spain, he furnished his Army with all
necessaries, and leaving Paris went forth to seek the king, having in his
army three thousand horse, and thirty thousand footmen. He took by the way
the Castle of Viennes, and in the latter end of January got Ponthois, from
whence he removed, and planted his siege before Meulan.

The Duke of Parma sends forces to aid Duke de Maine.
The Duke of Parma sent the Count Egmond, and the Lord La Mote, governor of
Graueling, with some five or six thousand chosen Soldiers to the aid of the
Leaguers the Duke de Maine received them in Picardy, and joining them with the
rest of his forces, marched toward Dammartin, drawing near unto the king, who
was then at siege before Dreux. The King was no sooner advertised hereof, but
that he raised his siege, and hasted toward Yury, where he supposed that the
Duke with all his forces had been lodged, 1590.
and coming to a place near unto the Town called Saint Andrews plain, he
ordered his battles, The Kings battle.
dividing all his horsemen into seven esquadrons, flanking them very strongly
with their several battailons of footmen, every one with their Enfans Perdus
in their front, ready to attach the skirmish as soon as the enemy should
appear. The first Squadron was led by the Mareschall Aulmont, wherein in was
three hundred horse, and twelve Regiments of French footmen. The Prince
Montpencier led the second, which consisted of three hundred horse and four
hundred Lansquenetes, and a Regiment of Switzers. The third being divided into
two companies containing four hundred light horse, were somewhat further
advanced then the former two, and were led by the Lord Graund Pryor, the lord
Guynny. The Baron of Biron commanded over the fourth wherein were two hundred
and fifty good horses, with certain Cornets of light horsemen. In the fifth was
the king himself with six hundred horse, flanked on each side with four
Regiments of Switzers. The sixth was led by the Mareschall Biron, with two
hundred and fifty horses, and two Regiments of French footmen. The seventh
squadron was a great Hot of Rutters, strengthened with French footmen as was
used in other battles.

The Duke de Ma^ne resolving to try his fortune at that present, The Duke de
Maines battle.
set likewise his forces in battle array, and taking his Cornet consisting of
some two hundred and fifty horses, put himself in the midst of two
squadrons of Lances, which came out of the low countries, wherein were some
twelve or thirteen hundred horse. The Duke of Nemours with other two hundred
and fifty horse, and the Cheualier D' Aumaile with his band of horse,
incorporated themselves with this huge company of Lances, containing now in all, some thousand eight hundred horsemen, marching in front they were flanked
also with two Regiments of Switzers, lyned with French shot. There were two
other squadrons of Lances, the one compounded of French, Italians, and
Albaneses, the other of Wallons and Spaniards, and between them both a strong
battilon of French enfantery and Lansquenetes, who had on their right wing
seven hundred Rutters, and on the left wing five hundred, with four
Culuerings.

All things being thus ordered, and both armies in a readiness for a general
fight, the great Ordenance began to thunder on both sides: the fury whereof
being once past, The Duke de Maine overthrown in the plain of Saint Andrew.
the horsemen and footmen charged each other courageously, and maintained a
cruel and bloody fight for a long time, but at length the victory inclined to
the King, and the whole power of the Duke was overthrown. The King himself
that day fought valiantly, and performed both the duty of a prudent captain
and a courageous and hardy Soldier. There were slain very near two thousand
horsemen of the enemies, and many of them commanders. Some twelve or thirteen
hundred were drowned in the River of Yury: the most part of the footmen were
cut in pieces, and above four hundred were taken prisoners: all the Switzers
yielded to the kings mercy: the Duke de Maine ran away with the foremost,
leaving his friends to the mercy of their enemies, and lost all his Ordenance
and munition: the Duke of Nemours, Bassampierre, Tauannes, Rosue, and many
others, fled to Dreux: the cheifest that was slain was the Count Egmond,
knight of the order of the golden Fleece, and the general over the forces sent
from the Duke of Parma out of the low countries: the young Count of Brunswick,
captain Collin a Spaniard, and the Lord of Chastaneray: the Principal
prisoners were the Lord Austfrist, with many other Italian and Spanish Lords,
the Lord Boysdauphin, who bare the white Cornet of the Duke de Maine, was
likewise taken prisoner, and with him, Fountain, Martell, Lechant, and many
other Gentlemen of good account.

On the kings side there were slain the Lord Clermont, Autragne, one of the
Captains of the kings guard, the Lord Tishcombert, Longanuay, Crenay, Vienne,
Muauille, Fequiers, with some other twenty or thirty Gentlemen at the most.
The Marquess of Neste, the Eearle Choysy, the Lord de O, the Count Lud, the
Lords Mouleuet, Lauergue, Rosne, and many others were hurt, but not in danger
of death: and this was the end of this great battle, fought in the plain of
Saint Andrew, the fourth of March, 1590.

The fame of this glorious victory over the Leaguers so terrified sundry
towns, that they yielded forthwith, and sent to crave pardon for their former
offenses. Mante, Vernon, Cressy, Lagny, Poysy, Saint German, and Saint Clow,
were the first that were drawn to their due obedience, by whose examples
sundry others were easily, reclaimed and yielded upon their first sommance:
the king being glad of this fortunate success, resolved to besiege Paris:
whereof when as the Parisians The Parisians prepare to endure a siege.
were informed, as also of the overthrow of the Duke de Maine, they were
maruailously affrighted, and the rather for that they had promised themselves
an assured victory, grounding upon the Dukes proud bragges, and the
fantastical prophesies of sundry seditious Friars, and had not the Duke
Henrico Caietanc the Popes Nuntio, and Barnardin Mendoza scattered good store
of Crowns among the Jesuits and such frierlike fellows, who should with
their seditious Sermons encourage the people to persist in their rebellious
actions, and corrupted the principal inhabitants with money and fair
promises: the Parisians had in that conservation of mind come to ask pardon
as well as others: but they being seduced by their chiefetaines and
ringleaders, began to bethink them how to fortify their Cities, and to
make themselves able to endure a siege.

The king seeing their obstinacy, followed his course, and knowing the City to
be very populous, and nothing well provided for so many months, determined to
take all the passages, and to block in the Parisians so sure, that they should
come by no victuals, making choice to vanquish them rather by famine then by the
sword, as the safest way to punish his enemies, and to save his friends. He
therefore seized upon all the strong Towns about the City, as Corbeil,
Melun, Montereaufault, Yonne, and Charenten, and stopping the River of Oyse,
Marne, Yonne, and Seyne, would not suffer any provision to be conuayed into
the City. Whereupon there began to grow great scarceness, The Duke de Maine
goes to Bruxelles to the Duke of Parma for aid.
and a sore famine threatened that rebellious multitude. The Duke de Maine was
gone into Peronne in Picardy, and from thence to Bruxelles, to the Duke of
Parma, to entreat him to come to the succors of the League and used all the
other means he could to levy new forces: and having had some promises from
Spain, assured himself of aid out of the low Countries, wherewith he should be
once again able to meet the king, who all this while lay before Paris, and
attempted nothing but only to keep it from victuals, and by that means had
so famished the town of S. Dennis, S. Dennis, yields to the King.
that after that they had consumed all their old store, and had eaten up their
horses, dogs, cats, rats, mice, roots, herbs, and much bread made of ground
straw beaten to powder, they were enforced to yield to the kings mercy, who
used them very graciously Penury and want likewise so pressed the City of
Paris, Great famine in Paris.
that by the beginning of July there were no dainties to be found in the City,
but the Parisians were glad to fall to such homely viands, as not long before
had served for a dish at S. Dennis. Yea, so great and so horrible was the
famine, that there were many children eaten and devoured by those hungry and
staruen rebels.

When the Duke da Maine who was still attending upon the Duke of Parma, was
advertised of the great and extreme penury that was among the Parisians, as
also of the vprores and murtherings of the people, he wrote letters full of
rich promises, assuring them of the coming of the Duke of Parma and himself,
with a sufficient number to rail the siege. The miserable people oppressed
with the tyranny of their rulers, hardened with seditious sermons, blinded with
ignorance, seduced with malice, and sed with much villainy from Spain, from
the Pope, and from this Duke, and by Gods just judgment given over to a
reprobate sense, held out obstinately, and would by no persuasions be enduced
to submit themselves unto the Kings mercy.

The hope that the Spaniard had to conquer France, and to cloth himself with
the rich spoil of the Flower de Lis, made the Duke of Parma to give better
ear to the Duke de Maine, The Duke of Parma enters into France.
and to hearken to the succors of the distressed Leaguers, so that having
gathered a power of some 15000. Spaniards, Italians, Wallons, and Flemmings,
all of the old bands of the country: in the latter end of August he entered
into France, and joining with the forces of the Duke de Maine, marched toward
Paris. The King having to deal with so great an enemy, brake up his siege and
went to meet him as far as the plain of Boundy, and there ordered his
battles, and made himself ready to end the quarrel by a general fight: the
Kings army consisted of 10000. French footmen, 4000. Switzers, 4000. horsemen,
the greatest number whereof were gentlemen of the cheerest houses in France, and
800. Rutters: there were six Princes, two Mareschalles of France, and a great
number of noblemen, captains, and Gentlemen, who were able to lead as great
an army as that was. The Duke of Parma having discovered all his warlike
multitude from the top of a hill, returned to his camp, and caused his
soldiers to entrench themselves as strongly as they could, and refused to
fight, The Duke of Parma refuses to fight.
albeit the king stayed for him by the space of three days together: but
afterward perceiving that the Duke would not be drawn to a battle by no
means, he determined to break up his army, and to send his soldiers into
several provinces to rest and relieve them after so painful and laborious a
journey, and so to make them fresh and lusty against he should have better
opportunity to fight against his enemies.

As Soon as the king was departed well near twenty Leagues off, and that he had
divided his forces by sending them into several places, The Duke of Parma
enters into Paris.
the Duke gat him out of the treaches and hasted to Paris, where he was
welcomed with great joy: but he had not continued there long, but the tyranny,
pride, and villainy of the Spaniard and hispaniolized was such, that the
Parisians waxed weary of that intolerable burden, and would feign have bin
rid of them and they had wist how, they therefore entreated the duke to open the
river for the traffic, which he promised, and undertook the siege of
Corbaile, which, after 3. assaults wherein he lost a great number of his best
and most approved soldiers, he took by force, and showed all cruelty upon
the inhabitants. He made the Parisians believe that he would go from thence to
take Poysy, Meulan, Maule, Vernon, and Pont del Arch: but indeed he was not so
good as his word, for he did nothing of all this, but trifled out the time, The
Duke of Parma fli th out of France.
and fed the citizens with fair words until the latter end of October, and
then marched homeward through Bric, being followed hard at the heels, by the
king and those small forces which he could raise upon the sudden, as far as L'
Arbre de Guyze, where he entered into the low countries with not past some
8000. of all that company wherewith he had entered into France.

After that the Duke of Parma was gotten into the low Countries, the king
having gathered al his forces together marched toward Chartres, which he
besieged, Chartres taken by the the king.
and after many sharp assaults took it, and brought it under his obedience,
he took also Aulnean, Macheuille, Dourdan, Bonsery, Clay, Tremblay, Manican,
Ginlis, and so scoured all the part of Picardy, that no enemy durst once show
his face, and from thence passed into Britain, where he defeated the Lord
Saint Lawrence, Mareschall of the Army of the rebels under Duke Mercury, and
surprised Louuiers, where he found great store of Corn, Wine, and all other
necessary provision, besides four thousand fat Oxen, wherewith he
plentifully victualled his army for many days.

Cinqcens t^oken.
About the same time the Lord Chartres, governor for the King in Deep, and Sir
Roger Williams a very courageous and well experienced English knight, with
their English and French forces, amounting to some seven hundred men, defeated
two regiments of the Leaguers at a place called Cinqcens, and put them in a
manner all to the sword. The Prince Conty took Mount Morillon, Chaurguy, S.
Sauin, Blank en Bury, Bourge, Archambault, Playsance, Bellarbre, Availes,
Betoune, Bisse, and many other forts and Castles in Limosin and Toureyne. The
Prince D' Ombs accompanied with the valiant, fortunate, and noble Gentleman Sir
John Norris, general of such forces as were sent out of England for the aid of
the K. into Britain, took Guingcampe, Cuingcampe taken.
where there were a great number of the Nobility and Gentlemen of the
Country, who with the Town paid fifty thousand Crowns for their Ransom,
and took the oath of Obedience to the king: and passing from thence to
Quelnec, encountered with the Duke Mercury a principal Leaguer, who at the
first showed a countenance as though he would have tried the quarrel by an
entire fight: but after the loss of some two or three hundred Spanish and
French Leaguers, with Don Roderigo, chief Mareschall of the Spaniards, and the
Lord Guebrian Colonel of all the footmen, he retired further off to places of
greater security.

The king was now at the siege of Noyon, Noyon taken.
which in the end yielded upon composition, and the Lord Vile submitted
himself to the king, and had leave to depart whither he would: the Leaguers
seeing the kings fortunate success, fearing that all in the end would yield
unto him, procured a new excommunication from Rome against him and all his
faithful subjects, The Pope excommunicateth the King.
and caused it to be published at Pont del Arch in Normandy, by Marcellus
Landrianus, a saucie and malepert Jesuit: but the king being advertised
hereof, commanded his Court of Parleament holden at Cane to proceed against
Pope Gregory the fourteenth, who sent it, and his Nuntio that brought it, as
against tyrannes, conspirators with rebels, perturbers of the State, sowers of
sedition, a^^ the common and notorious enemies of GOD and all goodness, and
taking the Popes Bull, The Popes Bull hanged upon the gallows and burned at
Tours.
caused it to be fastened to a gibbet at Tours, by the common hangman of the
town, and to be consumed to ashes, to the great rejoicing of all the
beholders.

The King understanding that the right honorable Lord the Earl of Essex was
now arrived in France with a band of very brave men, and was marching
toward him, went to meet the said Earl at a place called Gysors, where he
remained not long, but returned toward Champaigne, for that he understood
that his Germans were now in a readiness to march on forwards on their way
toward France. In the mean while the English forces took the town of
Gourny, and joining with the Marshall Biron, Go^rney ta-t^ken by the earl of
E^^^x
distressed the Leaguers in those quarters.

Much about this time the Prince Ienuille son to Francis late Duke of Guyse,
escaped out of prison at Tours, where he had been kept for the space of three
years and more, The young D. of Guise escapes out of prison.
and having the ways laid with fresh horse by the counsel of the Lord De la
Chastre, his kinsman got safely to Selles, and from thence to Verdun, where he
was most joyfully received of all the Leaguers, who had attended his coming
with great devotion, and were exceeding glad that they had recovered him, by
whose means they imagined the better to countenance their actions, and to
effect their intended purpose. Howbeit, this their joy was forthwith crossed
by the coming of the Germans, who were already entered into France, and
hasted to the succors of the king.

This great and mighty Army wherein were some two or three and twenty
thousand footmen and horsemen, The army of the Germain
was divided into sundry battailons, and led by their several chiefetaines and
commanders. The Vicont of Turennes conducted the Vauntgard, wherein were some
1600 horse, next whom followed the Earl of Anhoult, chief commander in the
Army, with two thousand and two hundred horse. The third place was allotted to
Barbisderse, with a squadron of some 1000. horse. Iselstenius and the
Lieutenant of the Lord Robours, led 8. or 900. footmen. Creighnicht, Bernhard,
Dessaw, and Bonnaw, had their several regiments, and each co^sisted of a 1000.
horse. The Lord Laudins and the Earl of VVide had under their leading 6400.
footmen, equally divided into two great squadrons, which were flanked as it
were with another strong battailon, wherein were about 4300. footmen, and 200.
horse, led by Templuys and the Earl of VVeda. Christopher de Fesler with 300.
footmen, served as a wing on the left hand, between whom and the Earl of
VVide was the young Earl of VVestenberg with 3400. footmen: there was also
maruailous store of all warlike munition, as great Artillery, powder, shot,
bridges, boats, spades, shouelles, pickaxes, and all other necessaries for the
wars, and nothing wanting which was requisite for the advancement of their
affairs: The Duke of Lorraine made all the preparation that might be to stop
the passage of these Germans, and to that end stuffed all his frontier
towns with strong garrisons: but they opening their way by force, passed
forwards, and by easy iourneyes came to the king, who being strenhthened with
these new forces, resolved to besiege Boar. The Leaguers being now not able to
encounter with the king in the field, fortified the City as strong as they
could, and attended the coming of the Duke of Parma, whose aid they had
instantly desired, the better to maintain head against the king.

The Duke understanding in what terms the Leaguers stood, and knowing that
the loss of Roan, being a principal City in France, 1592 The duke of Parma
goes the second time into France.
and the cheifest in Normandy, would be very prejudicial unto that mystery,
which lay secretly enclosed in his breast, and a great means to cross the
proceedings of the Spanish king, and hispaniolized French, gathered a great
power, and leaving the government of the Low countries to the Count Mansford,
marched toward France, which he entered about the midst of January with some 8.
or 9000. Spaniards, Italians, Duch, Wallons, and joining with the Leaguers so
increased his army, that he grew to be some 17. or 18000 strong, with which
power he determined to raise the Kings siege, and to deliver the^ who had with
so great earnestness sought his help, and with this resolution he marched
toward Roan, which as soon as those who kept the town understood, they began
to pluck up their hearts, and made many sallyes forth upon the kings forces
but being valiantly withstood and shrewdly beaten, were glad to return with
the loss often times of their valiantest leaders and most forward soldiers.
Now as the Leaguers within the town began to be punished with many miseries,
and the famine daily increased to the destruction of many so penury and want of
necessaries began to creep in among the kings soldiers, and by reason it was
in the extreme of the Winter, many perished with cold, and great numbers fell
into very sore and grievous diseases: notwithstanding, the siege was still
continued, and all the politic devises that might be put in practice to gain
the city. The Duke being about Rue, and there thoroughly informed as well of the
state of Roan, as of the courage and resolution of the kings forces, would not
attempt any thing rast ly, but sending for greater forces out of Flanders,
under the conduct of the Earls of Aremberg and Barlemont, kept himself close
for a while, purposing as it seemed, to protract the time, and to cause the K.
who (as is already said) began to fall into manifold wa^ts, to raise his siege
from before the city: but the Duke perceiving that this depose took not so
speedy effect as he desired, and pondering with himself how hard and dangerous
a matter it was to relieve the city by force, The pollitike d^uise of the Duke.
sought by a cunning and pollitike devise to bring his business about, and
therefore on the sudden dislodged, and retired his whole power over the River
of Some, as though he had purposed to return home again without any more ado.
Which when the king perceived, and now verily thinking that he had bin quite
gone, he licensed the greatest part of his Nobility and Gentlemen to depart
home to their houses, there to refresh themselves after so long and tedious
travail, and reserving a sufficient number to maintain the siege, the K.
departed to Deep there to repose himself and to take counsel for the
ordering of the rest of his affairs.

The Duke was quickly informed by his espialles of whatsoever the king had
done, The Duke retur^eth toward Roan.
and ^nowing now that all his advantage consisted in, celeritie caused his
troops on the sudden to turn head and to march back again toward Roan,
and using great expedition, so fast approached, that the kings army being not
ready to encounter him, and no assured course taken to cross his
designements, he besieged Candebeck, a town standing upon the river between
New-hauen and Roan. Roan relee^^d by the (...) of Parma.
By this means was the river cleared, and liberty obtained to pass and
repasse without peril: then were there forthwith a great number of ships
provided, and being thoroughly furnished with victuals and all other necessaries,
were sent to Roan to relieve the Leaguers who were now extremely distressed
and almost famished. The King sought all the opportunity that might be to
fight with the Duke, and offered many skirmishes to draw him thereto, but he
knowing fortune to be very inconstant, and in the wars especially to be
most wavering and uncertain, utterly refused to hazard all upon a Battle,
and understanding that there was some scarcity in the kings camp, and that it
was impossible that so great a multitude should be long kept together in a
Country so exceedingly wasted, where there were no means to relieve their
wants, kept himself close, and sought to weary his enemies by his long
delays.

The K. daily braued the Spaniards in the face, and dared them by many
indignities to come to handy strokes: which made the Duke resolve to do
somewhat, albeit he were sickly and most unwilling to fight, The Duke would not
be drawn to an entire fight.
supposing that if he should not stir upon so many prouocations, his
enemies would wax more courageous, and himself with all his Spaniards should
lose much of their wonted honor and reputation. Whereupon he determined to
encounter with the kings forces, and to make some trial of the courage and
resolution of his enemies: yet so warily, that he would be sure not to bring
himself and his soldiers to a set battle, but by some light conflict to
maintain his honor: and by a Spanish brauado, to make the world believe, that
he did but little esteem of the king, and all his forces. Whereupon every
thing being in a readiness, and having encouraged his troops with sundry
persuasions, the signal was no sooner given, but there began a sharp and
cruel fight, which hastened the death of many brave and valiant soldiers. But
the Duke espying the Kings side to be too strong, and that his men were put to
the worse, withdrewe his troops within their intrenchments, having lost the
young Lord of Chastres, and many other of great reckoning and account. The dukes
horse was shot through with a bullet. The Count Horratio, Scipio, and Hanniball
Bentiuolio, with many others were sore wounded and in danger of their lives.
The Duke not liking to try the quarrel any more by force, fell to his old
politic practices, The duke de Maine enters Roan.
and labored by all possible means to get away away from the king without any
further fighting. Wherefore leaving a garrison of some 500 Spaniards, French and
Wallons in Caudebecke, and sending the Duke de Maine with 3000. Leaguers into
Roan, he reposing himself for a while within the City, at length marched
away, as strongly and as closely as he could toward Paris, The D. of Parma
marches toward Paris.
there to refresh them after so long and tedious travails: as also to make
trial what store of Crowns might be gotten to satisfy his greedy Soldiers.
The King pursued him, and following him in the tail, watched to skirmish with
him upon every advantage. But seeing he could not effect that, which he so
earnestly affected, which was to draw him to an entyre fight: he caused all
his troops to turn head, and led them before Caudebecke, which he
forthwith recovered from the Leaguers, and leaving a strong garrison to
defend the River, he retired to Deep, The King goes to Deep.
giving leave to the greatest part of his army to go refresh themselves in more
fertile and commodious Countries.

Thus was Roan delivered out of the hands of the King, by the coming of the
duke to the great encouragement of the Leaguers, who seeing the Kings fortune
to frown, began to triumph, and to rejoice exceedingly for this their
unexpected relief: and the rather for that this their good hap was seconded by
diverse other fortunate exploits in other places: for the Duke Ioyense
overthrew certain of the Kings troops before Lautrech, as they went to
surprise the sa^d town, being betrayed by some of those, who had promised them
to be a means to let them enter without any empeachment. But they using this
as a stratagem to entrap the Kings soldiers, The leaguers overthrow sundry of
the Kings forces.
informed the Duke of all their proceedings: who as soon as he had
intelligence thereof, gathered a strong power, and lying in ambush by the way
as they should pass, suddenly set upon them, and slew three or four hundred,
and took 200. prisoners: among whom were Monsieur de Violet, de Godius, and
sundry others of very good account. Three hundred fled to a castle not far
off, called la Trappe, which was forthwith besieged by the said Duke, and the
leaguers: they who were within the castle valiantly defended the place for a
while, enduring some thirty or forty Canon shot at length considering their
want of necessaries, and how they were not able to maintain themselves as they
desired, they yielded, having lost Colaun: bieres, Tanieuse, L'estolies,
Raueleus, Bertrand, Deluan, Biense, de Lucques, La Brosse, Lespinac, and many
other chieftains and commanders. La Barry, Portale^se, Pibrac, besides, sundry
gentlemen were taken prisoners, and well near two hundred common soldiers.
About the same time Duke Mercury likewise overthrew the power of the prince of
Conty, and the prince D' Ombes in Britany: and having taken ten field pieces
from them, slew many of their brauest and valiantest men, as Membraise,
Rochpot, Picheres, with some others, prevailing mightily in those quarters, and
reducing sundry towns under the obedience of the seditious league. Thus did
the Kings affairs begin to go backward, and many towns who were wavering
before, did now wholly abandon the King, and join with the rebels. Sundry of
the nobility, who were popishly affected, and therefore glad of the Kings bad
success, revolted, and secretly conveyed themselves away, either to the enemy,
or into their own countries, and by their bad example, drew on infinite
numbers to take the same course, forsaking their lawful prince when he stood
in greatest need of their service, exposing that noble kingdom to the
barbarous villainy of that viperous brood, who never cease gnawing out of the
bowels of her, that should be their dearest and best beloved mother.

The King wanting sufficient power to stop these wicked proceedings, was forced
to suffer the rebels to range at large, and to get many of his towns, both in
Normandy, Britany, Province, and Dauphiny: They took likewise Espernon: wherein
they found great store of wine, corn, and other necessaries for the wars.
These fortunate exploits so encouraged that rebellious route, and so puffed
them up with the pride of their own forces, that they utterly refused to bow
their necks under the yoke of obedience: or to admit of any other government
then such as pleased themselves. The king was loath to loose Espernon, being a
town of very good importance, and therefore drew all his forces to the siege
thereof, where the Mareschall Biron was slain Mareschall Biron slain.
with a shot from the wall, while he was very busy in viewing the army, and
in giving order for the planting of the siege Yea, and the king himself was in
great peril, The danger of the King.
having his horse killed under him with the same bullet, wherewith the
Mareschall was slain before. Duke Mercury in the mean time took Manus in
Britain, and the duke de Maine recovered Caudebecke, and cleared all the river
from New-hauen up to Roan. The D. of Nemours, governor of Lions, took Vienna
and Valence, and by that means commanded the river of Rhodanus. Now were the
Germains who came into France in 91. desirous to return home: so that taking
their leave of the French K. they marched toward Germany as fast as they could:
but by reason they were not so many, nor so strong as when they came first into
France, they were desirous to pass rather by leave then by force, and
therefore they thought it convenient to send to the Duke of Parma for to
obtain License of him, that they might quietly pass through the Dukedom of
Luxemburge, who readily condisce^ded thereto, upon condition that they should
not rifle the Country as they went, but should travail in peaceable manner,
and pay for whatsoever they took. Thus this great and mighty Army which had
in conceit devoured half France, The Germans return home.
and at their coming had opened their way by fine force, returned home without
doing of any great matter, and were driven to ask leave and to sue to their
enemies for their pasport, such and so strange an alteration ensued in a short
space.

The Leaguers being drunken with this prosperous success, began to consult
about the election of a new King, and to that end the Duke of Ferta, and the
Cardinal of Sens, The Leaguers consult about a new King.
the Popes Nuntio were sent to Paris to be present as assistants in this
weighty business, as well to aid with their advise and counsel, as to
persuade with sundry great states, who as yet were not fully resolved in this
point, neither whether they should assent to so wicked and desperate
proceedings.

Now albeit that the rebellious multitude had prospered for a long time, and
were grown in a manner to the full period of their desires, having effected many
things greatly tending to the countenancing of their affairs, in so much as
that they had gained the strongest and richest cities, with infinite numbers of
turbulent and seditious heads to join hand in hand with them, and to take
part in these their wicked and desperate attempts: yet, as it always falls
out among such a confused and brainesicke rabble, each mistrusted other, and
being often admonished by the secret warnings of their own consciences how
damnable a course they had run, as also considering the intolerable
servitude whereto they were likely to bring themselves and their posterity if
they should longer submit themselves to their Spanish protector, and likewise
seriously pondering the kings estate, which was still supported by the chief
Princes of the blood, the ancient and most honorable Nobility of France,
favored by a number of valiant and wise personages, and countenanced by sundry
mighty Princes abroad, so that it still seemed to be impossible to bring
their purposes to pass, but rather that they should hazard their own estates,
their lives and liberties, yea, and in fine the whold kingdom, by calling in
the Spaniards their old and ancient enemies, who sought for nothing more then
for the spoil of the Flower de Lis. All these reasons with many other being
well weighed, they supposed it to be their best, to reconcile themselves to
their king, of whole ready inclination to peace, The Leaguers seek for peace.
though it were with hard conditions, they nothing doubted: whereupon they first
privily practiced with sundry of the Papists which followed the king, whereof
there were no small number, and having by their means made as it were an
entry unto their pretensed purpose, they sent their deputies to treat of a
peace for three months, whereto the king assented in July 1593. and afterward
continued the same for two months more, videlicet, unto the end of the
month of December following: in all which time there was nothing done,
otherwise then the sending of sundry messages each to other, with continual
practicing to draw the king to the liking of Popery: wherein there was such
pains taken, and so far humane policy prevailed, that this noble and
famous Prince who had for the space of four or five and twenty years so
valiantly and fortunately de^ended the Gospel, and that with the hazard and
peril of his own life, The K. enclineth to Popery.
freely exposing his royal person, his treasor, his friends, and all other
means whatsoever ^o^ the maintenance thereof, began to wax calm in the
defense of his profession, and to incline to that false and superstitious
Religion of Rome, to the high displeasure of almighty God, the great dishonor
of his princely Majesty, and to the extreme grief and astonishment of all the
Protestants. Thus this noble and renowned Monarke, the hope (as it were) of all that favored Gods truth, whom God had beautified with so many excellent graces
and notable virtues, as courage, wisdom, zeal and constancy in so many
apparent dangers, and had made him the protecter and comforter of his afflicted
church in France, had delivered him out of the hands of all his enemies, 2.
Sam. 12.8
and had given him his Lords house (as the Prophet speaks) and if that had
been too little, would have given him much more, making his proudest enemies
to stoop before h m, and to the admiration and wonderment of all men
continually protected him in despite of all those who sought his ruin and
overthrow, is another argument of the mutabilitie and interchangeable estate of
all things in the world, and that not only the heavens, the earth, the sea,
the beasts of the field, the fishes in the waters, and the souls of the air
are full of variety and change, but likewise kingdoms, countries, and
commonwealths, Cities, and towns, all estates and conditions, of men high and
low, rich and poor, wise and foolish, Prince and people, are full of change
and alteration.

Sundry principal Cities of France return to the King.
In January and February immediately following the Kings so apparent inclination
to Popery, most of the principal Cities of France which had with so notorious
obstinacy for a long while shaken off the yoke of their obedience, began to
be reclaimed, and as it were on the sudden to be arranged on the kings side,
and Meaux, Lions, Orleance, Bourges, Ponto^se, with many other towns of
special monument and account opened their gates and willingly received the
kings garrisons, crying Vine Henry 4. roy de France and de Navarre, expelling
the Spaniards and hispaniolised French, showing great forwardness to
withstand the outrageous proceedings of the furious and desperate Leaguers.

The king had no sooner reduced these strong Towns under his obedience, having
by this means mightily strengthened himself and weakened his enemies, but that
he was forthwith advised by the Princes of his blood, the dukes and peers of
France, the officers of his Crown, the Lords of his Council, and the most
no^able personages of his courts of Parliame^ts, to frame himself to his corona
ion and annoynting, and that in such manner as all other kings his predecessors
had done before him. Which said ceremonious order of anointing is accounted the
evident token of their royalty, and the public approbation of the French
nation. Whereto the K. assenting as one now entending to observe the ancient
customs of his predecessors: it was resolved that this solemn ceremony should
be performed at our ladies church at Chartres, for that the city of Rheims,
where for the most part the king of France had wont evermore to be crowned,
still persisted in her rebellion, and banded her self with the kings enemies.

All things being in a readiness for the solemnizatio^ of th^^^ (...)
magnificent coronation, upon the seven and twenty day o^ (...) the King came
to the said Church, attended with a great (...) Princes, Earls, Lords, and
other States of France. And by (...) some of the twelve Peers as yet held
out against the King, and other ^ere sick, so that there wanted of the full
and competent number to atte^^ (...), and to dootheyr service as the time then
required, the King (...) others in their stead to make up the whole number,
whose names were as follows.

The 6. peers ecclesiastical. 1 Bishop of Charters. Representing the 1
Archbishop of Rh^mis the first peer Ecclesiast^ all. 2 Bishop of Nautes. 2 The
Bishop duke of (...), 3 Bishop of Digne, 3 Bishop (...), 4 Bishop of Mallefais,
4 Bishop (...) of (...), 5 Bishop of Orleance, 5 Bishop Count of (...)* 6
Bishop Angiers. 6 Bishop^ ou^ to (...). The 6 peers temporal. 7 Prince of
Coney, Representing the 7 Duke of Bu^^^^^^* 8 County Soyssons, 8 Duke of
Nor^^^^^^, 9 Duke Mo^tpensier, 9 Duke of Aqr^^^^^e, 10 Duke of Rays, 10 Count
of Th^^ous, 11 Duke of Vantadon, 11 Count of Flanders, 12 Lord of Lupembourg,
12 Count of Champa^^ne.

The King was crowned by the Bishop of Chartres, who for that day supplied the
room of the Archbishop of Rhemis, and enth^onised him in his royal and Kingly
seat, in such manner and order as the rest of the Kings his predecessors had
been accustomed in former times.

Now began the Kings authority to wax great, and to enlarge it self every
day more and more, and so far it spread in a short time, after that it was
received into the heart of all France: for the 20. of March following, Paris
the Metropolitan City of the whole realm, Paris ^elleth to the (...).
which had continued in all kind of rebellious disorder, and that for many
years together, omitting no kind of outrage that could be imagined against her
natural, and liege sovereigns, their crowns and dignities, by the virtuous
and commendable industry of Brissac, was likewise reduced under the Kings
obedience: who pardoning the inhabitants, so many and so monstrous offenses,
restored them to their ancient priueligie^, rights, grants, Franchises, and
liberties, with the reestablishments of his courts of Parliament, and that in
as large and ample manner as they had been at any time endued by any of the
kings his predecessors, abrogating all laws, decrees, statutes and ordinances,
which had passed in prejudice of the^, as appears by an Edict bearing date
the 28 of March, 1594. So as neither the said inhabitants, nor any of them
should from thenceforth be troubled, molested, or disquieted in any manner of
sort for their former disobediences, imposing perpetual silence hereof to his
Attourneyes general, and to all other persons whatsoever: commanding withal,
all Dukes and Peers of France, all Officers of the Crown, all his
Lieutenants and other Magistrates, to cause the same to be proclaimed and
published in their several jurisdictions and resorts, with express charge,
that the contents of the same should be inuiolably kept and observed, to the
end that if it were possible, the whole kingdom of France, which for a long
time had endured so many calamities, might now at length feel some ease and
mitigation of former miseryes, and the beaten bark of that distressed state,
which had been so daungerously tossed in a vast Ocean of all kind of
affliction, might in the end be brought to some desired haven of peace and
quietness, and there be safely harbored, to the eternal glory of God, the
perpetual honor of the King, and the continual joy and comfort of the whole
Commonwealth.

FINIS.
LONDON Printed by Thomas Creed. 1597.


