THE PROTESTATION OF THE MOST HIGH AND MIGHTY PRINCE FRAVNCIS, both Son and
Brother of King, Duke of Allenson and of Eureux, Earl of Dreux, and of Perch
etc.

LIVETENANT GENERAL FOR THE KING IN ALL HIS COVNtreis and dominions, Protector
of the liberty of the Crown of France, oppressed by the strangers.

Translated out of french into English, and newely imprinted. 1575.

THE PROTFSTATION OF THE MOST HIGH and mighty Prince Frauncis, both Son
and Brother of King, Duke of Allenson etc.
FRAVNCIS, both son and brother of a King, Duke of Allenson, first Peer of
France etc. To all men whom it shall appertain, Greeting. Knoweye that we
being truly advertised and informed, that of the observation of laws
depends the conservation of all Realms and Lordshipps, and by that means
peace grows and is entertained among the subjects, So when they are not kept
in the purity that our ancestorshaue leaft the^ unto us, and that they seem
to weaken and decay, and be as it were dead and buried, The subjects being
imholdened, do license, dispense, and easily give them selves to all
dissolutnes: which does cause oftentimes civil vvarres. And finally the
destruction and overthrow of great realms and common vvelthes: if in time it
be not remedied by the divine goodness of God, which does raise (when it
pleases him) excellent and mighty persons to vvithsta^d the tyra^nie of
those which seek not but to bring all things to confusion, only to make them
selves rich, (at whose cost soever it be) of the blood and sweat of the
poor: or else to sease them selves of the said realms and Lordships, as we may
easily leame, by the ruynes and decays of infinite florishi^g kingdoms, that
by these like means have ended, which ought to be an example to al true
frencheme^ for to prick them forevvard to set up again the ancient laws, and
to let and vvithstande (every one according to the ability which God has
given unto him) that it may not fall into the hands of those which of long
time have sought for it. And for to bring their purpose to pass, do nourishe
and maintain the dissentions which we see at this instant, coulouring their
dealings with the controversy that is in religion: which they vvoulde be right
sorry to see it pacified, as it is evidently seen, and well known by the
things passed, to the intent they may color the better the taxes, imposts, and
subsidies which they do daily invent, and gather in the Kings name upon the
poor people, the Nobility, and the Clergy, under pretense to pay his debtes:
tending only to the wealth of fevve persons almost all strangers, which
rule the King, and occupy the chief places, and offices of this realm
against the laws of the same. All the which enterprises we could not well
like of, and therefore have been calumniated, and evil reported to the Kingour
most dear Lord and Brother, and for this cause in great danger of our life,
and kept as every one knows, which things we have suffered, hoping that the
King vvoulde remedy such miseries, and suffer no longer to be abused of so many
men, and that he should know our innocence. But sei^g the wound to wax
daily worse and worse, and no person to be more vnvvorthily used then we.
And that so many Princes, Lords, Gentelmen, and Ecclesiastical persons,
Citizens, and burgesses, had their eyes fixed on us, stretching forth their
hands and imploring our aid. We being overcome with their prayers, and
partaker of their miseries resolved (all fear of death set a side, which was
near to ensue) to attempt to get out of the captivity that we were in, to
take the public cause in hand, and to withstand the wicked and pernicious
cou^sells of the perturbators of this Realm, in which attempt God has so
favored us that the xvi. day of September we arrived in this our town of
Dreux, where many lords Gentelme^ and others, as well of the Clergy as of the
co^mo^s of this realm have repaired unto us: to whom we have declared, that
our vvil and intention was not to take upon us, or to attempt in any wise upon
the authority of the King our said Lord and Brother, the which we desire to
preserve and increase with all our power. But only to employ us with all
our forces, yea not to spare our life and goods for to put out, and drive
away all the perturbators of the public rest: to pursue by law and justice
all such spoils, theftes, murders, and slaughters so abominably, and against
all right and reason committed in the oppen sight and knowledge of all men, to
deliver so many Lords Gentelmen and others committed prisoners, or wrongfully
banished and without cause: to restore them again (and all other honest men)
to their goods and livings, estates, and honors: to abolish all taxes,
subsidies and imposts set upon the poor people by the malice and suggestion of
strangers, against the ancient Laws and statutes of this Realm. To
maintai^e the Nobility and Clergy in their ancient privileges, freedoms,
and liberties. And so, to stablish in France, a good, firm, and stable peace.
And to bring these things to pass, we do not mean to use any other means,
but such as our predicessors have done, and that have been acustomed at all
times in this Realm, when it has been question of reformation of religion,
and justice: which are the two pri^cipall stays of all Monarchies, to
restore again the Realm to his former flourishing state, dignity and liberty:
that is by a general and free assembly of the three estates of this Realm,
being called and appointed to be kept in a sure and free place, from the
which all strangers shall be excluded. Protestinge before God (whom we call
to our aid and help, and who we be assured will guide our enterprises)
that we are not herein moved nor leadde through desire of private revenge
(although we have just occasion so to do, for the great vvronges done unto
us) nor yet of highness or desire to command more then we do, or then to us
appertains. Being pleased and contented (as we have good occasion) with the
goods, authority, and greatness, that we have of Godds grace, and of his
benignity having appointed us to be borne the son of a King, and ordained us
the second person of this Realm. That if it happen (as God forbid) to call us
before such time as we may see the end and execution of this so holy an
enterprise, we shall think us most happy to have (for the same) bestovved our
life, which does concern the service of God and of the King, the freedom and
liberty of the Nobility and of the Clergy, the rest and vnburdening of the
people, and the liberty of the country. And for to take away all lettes, and
to reconcyle the hearts of natural Frenchemen, we have taken and do take
the^, in to our protection and safe keeping, asvvell of the one religion as of
the other. Praying and exhorting the^, in the name of God, to behave them
together one with an other as brethren, friends, and fellow Citezens: and not
to provoke one an other by injuries or otherwise: Until that by the general
estates, and assembly of counsil order be taken for religion, and to permit
and let every one enjoy the exercise of the same. Praying all Kings, Queen's,
Princes, and Potentates, common wealths and all other neighbors, alies, and
confederates of this Realm and Crown to favor, aid, and help us in this
so holy and laudable enterprise: and to have none other opinion of us, then
that which we declare and testify by this present Protestation. Praying also
all Princes, Lords, Gentlemen, Citizens, Townsmen, and all other subjects of
the crown, to repair to us, to accompany and help us with victualles,
armor, money, and others their abilities and commodities, that through their
fault and negligence the execution of so high an enterprise be not differred;
and the peace let. Declaring only those to be our ennemies which by force
shall resist and seek to vvithstande our enterprise: And our friends those
which shall run upon them.

Given at Dreux, the xvij. day of September. 1575. Subscribed Francis.


