News from France.

OR A relation of a marvelous and fearful accident of a disaster, which
happened at PARIS the seventh day of March, this present year 1618. where by
means of a terrible fire, all the Palace was burnt and consumed.

Together with a narration of the loss and ruin of many Tradesmen, who had
all their goods consumed by the said fire.

As also an Iniunction of the Court of Parliament concerning the restoring
back and delivering of all bags of papers, Processes, pieces and Records which
were taken up being cast out of the Palace during the said fire.

Truly translated according to the French Copy: and set forth by authority.

LONDON, Printed by William Jones, for Nathaniell Brown, and are to be sold,
at the next shop to the great North door of saint Paul's Church. 1618.

NEWS FROM France. Or a Relation of the marvelous and fearfeull accident of a
disaster, which happened at Paris the seventh day of March this present year.
1618. Where by means of a terrible fire all the Palace was burnt and consumed.
TOGETHER WITH A NARRAtion of the loss and ruin of many tradesmen who had all
their goods consumed by the said fire. AS ALSO AN INIVNCTION OF THE Court of
Parliament concerning the restoring and deleuiring back of all bags of
papers etc.
Worthy Reader, the Author being curious to give you to understand a matter
prodigious and feaerfull, which is altogether worthy of memory, and remarked
of many men of quality as well spiritual as temporal seeing an accident to
happen in the best piece of the famous City of Paris, being a place where true
and upright justice ought without delay to be done, named the Palace of the
Kings of France and the most renowned in the world by Reason of a Chapel
named the Holy, the which Almighty God has preserved from the gulf of an
horrible and unquenchable fire, which descended from Heaven, about midnight in
the form and fashion of a terrible great flaming star, being for the bigness
one cubite in length and of one foot in breadth, the which consuming fire did
burn and waste the full space of a day and an a half within the great Hall of
the Palace of Paris, without being able to be stayed or quenched by any means,
as shewinge that this fire would demonstrate the Justice of God and the anger
and wrath of the most holy Trinity declaring unto sinners that they should
be converted and have God alwaias before their eyes without musing and
troublinge themselves in heaping up worldly good; and transitory riches, and
leaving the means to come to the kingdom of God unsought for. In such sort
began the fire the seventh day of March, about an hour after midnight that
with the force thereof it burned and consumed all the ancient Antiquities and
Records of this Realm of France having made in one night a greater deluge and
destruction, then a hundred men are able to restore and build up in a year.

It is almost impossible for any man to have ever seen a fire so vehement and
cruel as that was. For twenty thousand persons could not with all their
forces, nor by the force of water quench the great fury of these merciless
flames. First the Chapel where they did use to celebrate the Mass within the
great Hall of the Palace was utterly consumed, as likewise the Kings Effigies
and Statues which were set of carved sto^e were also utterly consumed. The
Valte or Arch of the great Hall did flame in that manner as if the stone
thereof had bin of sulpher or brimstone, all the shoppes of tradesmen as well at
the entry as within the Hall were wholly burnt and consumed, in such manner
that the loss caused by this fire is the occasion of the utter overthrow and
undoing of many poor tradesmen who had all their means, and goods within
their shoppes. Afterward this fire cast it self upon the backward parts on
the side toward the River, and began to get in to the prison of the
Consergerie and showed its force in great flames, by reason of the wind, as
also in regard of the great drynes of the wood, which was anciently serving
to the said Prison, so as that from four of the Clock in the morning until
eight of the Clock, a man might see this fire flame a league off round about
Paris, which continued consuming more then twenty hours: during which time the
forces of thousands of people could not quench it neither by water, nor by any
Art or industry, nor could the labor of the poor Prisoners do any good, who
did endure very much pain and toil by occasion of the fury of this fire. So
as all the best part of the Palace was burnt, except the Gallery of the
Prisoners, which was saved as well by the tradesmen which had e^terest therein,
as also by those which came to help and succor them: so as at the last,
there was such good order taken, that by little and little they found the
means to extinguish and stope the fire after an infinite loss, and very great
travel and pains of more then two thousand persons which labored therein.

But God has preserved the Chapel called the Holy showing to his people that
he desires to be honored and glorified.

We may well know that this fire signifies unto us a beginning of the wrath of
God and that he is angry against us, for this fire puts us in mind of the end
of the world, and should stir us up to the firm belief which we ought to
have in the spiritual merrcy of God, and to hold our selves alwaeyes ready to
fight against the enemy of our souls, and to embrace the true God and
Savior. And namely in this holy time of Lent we ought to reconcile our selves
unto God and to demand pardon and mercy of him for all our finnes, that
thereby we may come to the hiretage which he has purchased by his death and
passion, beseeching him to have pity upon us, and to preserve us henceforth
from such accidents.



The Arrest or Decree of the Court of Parliament of PARIS touching the
restoring of the papers and registers which were cast by during the said fire.
THe Court upon the complaint made thereunto, by the Attorney general of the
King touching the diuerting and casting aside of the bags, process, papers,
parchments and registers made in the Palace during the time of the fire has
enjoined and does enjoin, all persons of what quality estate and condition
soever they be, which have taken or carried away found by accident or by what
means soever there be come into their hands, any of the said bags process,
pieces, titles, Regester minutes and other papers, that they do speedyly, and
readily carry and put them into the hands of Master John Du Tillet Regester or
Greffier of the said Court, or into the hands of his Deputy in his house
scitu^te in the street Debu^si in this City of Paris, without retaining or
keeping back any of them by guile fraud or otherwise, upon pain of exemplary
punishment. Of which bags, Registers papers, and letters, the said Greffier
or his Deputy shall keep a Regester of the names, surnames and dwelling places
of those which shall so bring them, for which he shall give them a full
discharge, that afterward the said bags and writtinges may be restored to
the Pronotares Civil and Criminill, to whom the same shall belong.

Inhibiting and forbidding upon the same pains all Tradesmen, Apothecaryes,
sellers of paper, Lardmakers, Mercers, Grosers and any others to buy directly
or inderectly either by themselves or means of any other persons any
Parchments, Papers, writ^en in minute, or in bundles, nor to employ them about
their packetts and trade: but if any shall be brought and offered unto them
they are enjoined to ^etaine them, and show them to the Justices and to the end
none may pretend cause of ignorance this present Arest and Decree shall be
read and publishe^ as well by the sound of the Trumpet and the public cry, as
also by the Priests of the Churches of the Parishes in the time of service, and
it is ordained that the Attorney general of the King shall have a Commission
to inform hunselfe of the retention and concealment, and permitt^h him to give
monition and warning that notice and revelation may be the better had. Given in
the Parliament the eight day of March 1618.

Signed Voysin.

IN DOMINO CONFIDO

