THE POPE CONFVTED. The holy and Apostolic Church confuting the Pope. The
first Action.

Translated out of Latin into English, by James Bell.

PSALM. 27. Dominus illuminatio mea, and salus mea: quem timebo? Imprinted at
London by Thomas Dawson, for Richard Sergier. 1580.

The Translator to the Reader.
THe Author who co^piled this little book, contented with the testimony of a
good conscience, has by an honest veyle made the concealment of his name
excusable with all such as be endued with like mildness of spirit. And it
becomes his modesty very well whosoever he be. Whose example I purposed once
to have imitated, and had in deed delivered my simple labors herein without
notice of name likewise, had I not by good cha^nce, wh^les I was yet travailing
in my translation, chanced upon an enemy of the truth (whereof there be to
many lurking in corners if it might please God otherwise) a friend of the Pope:
who upon conference upon some matters confuted in this t^eatie, charged me with
my falling from them, I mean from their common errors in this behalf: adding
withal that it was not thought credible amongst many of the like stragglers,
that I had slipped the collar, and become, as he termed me, an Apostata. Whom
after I had assured of my calling with some circumstances of the manner of mine
escape out of that La^erane Laberinth, not without some earn^st prayers for his
like reclaim, though to no purpose: I began to bethink my self that I could
do no better than to manifest my name in this place, yielding most hearty and
humble thanks to the Lord that I happened upon so good an occasion to wipe away
my blemish. In deed I wandered long in the self same mizmaze, nooseled therein
by the gray headed of that school, whose countenance carried me from my Christ
to the Swinstie of Sorbone, which had swalowed me up, if the Lord had not
prevented me with his mercy betimes. I was, I say, as they are, I am now as I
am (Christ Jesus be thanked) a convert I confess. The Lord grant I may stand
fast to the glory of his name, and the good example of others, whose like
conversion I do heartily wish in the Lord. And so desiring thy good prayers to
Jesus Christ (gentle Reader) to assist me with his grace, that I may persevere
in this his gracious calling to the end I will no longer abuse thy patience:
The Lord Jesus govern and guide thee in the true obedience of his glorious
Gospel, to the glory of his name. Amen.

Thy loving fellow servant in the Lord James Bell.

The Athour to the freendly Reader.
WHEREas this little treatise offers it self to the view without the
Authors name, herein whosoever he be that compiled it, whether he be Dutch,
French, or English desires to hold him excused. He thought it more convenient
to produce the holy universal and Apostolic Church it self speaking in her
own person, name, and voice: that so she might debate her own cause being
public and not private against her adversary the Pope with greater gravity
and majesty. For as the Lord has not given equabilitie of estate to all
persons alike, and as one and the self same manner of speech accords not
with all sorts of men: So was it not seemly to depend the general
greeuaunce of all nations, and the universal complaint of all people upon the
mouth of any one private person: as neither would one manner of pleading in so
weighty a matter become any one private Advocate. With another manner of
cou^tena^ce speaks Cicero as a Consul and Judge, then when as a private
Orator he pleads at the common bar. Certes our lot has been so unlucky
to light upon these days now, all matters being so on all parts enuenimed
with poison, and so on all sides waxen cankred and incurable, that neither
endeavor nor petition, prayer, nor wholesome admonition of any private person
were able in any respect to avail. For this Roman rufler makes not so
slender an account of his Peacockes plummes, as to vouchsafe any private
counsale or correction. This hydeous Hydre requires too be matched with
mightier countenances and powers of greater estate: whether the Lord Christ
himself will vouchsafe to destroy this monster with the breath of his mouth from
out of heaven: or whether the excellent majesty of mighty Potentates and
Monarchs of the earth, uniting all their Councelles in one will not disdain of
their authorities royal to become public Vmpieres here, and yield their
princely assistance to the suppressing of this insole^t outrage. Wherefore if
ought in this treaty may seem (gentle Reader) to have been uttered with
overmuch bitterness of speech: Imagine in thy mind of this discourse, as
though it proceeded not from any one particular member of the Church alone,
but from the whole Church it self, or from Peter or Paul, or else from the
whole parliament of the Apostles proclaiming their general consentes, voices,
and mutual agreements by their authority Apostolic: who, as did in times
past with incredible travail and industry plant and enlarge the bounds of
Christ's Church, so if they were living now, and beheld with their eyes the
merueilous misdemeanors and disorders of the Church, without all peradventure
they would thunder out far more bitter and sharper storms of reproouing
speeches against this horrible adversary of Christ. The Lord Jesus bless
thee, Christian Reader.

Faults escaped in the printing.
Fol. 5. a. for least. read last. fol. 6. a. so not, for not so. fol. 8. b for
insolency, read influence. fol. 11. a. for sovereign, read sovereignty.
fol. 14. a for whereas, read whenas fol 21. a for death, read the death
fol. 21. b for be proved, read ye proved. fol^ 22. a f^r your mighty
mai^stie, read the mighty majesty. fol. eodem b for neither king^ read
whether king. fol. 28. b for hear therefore, read here therefore. fol. 24.
b for will justify, read will I justify. fol. 37 a for light of the
vvo^rde, read light of the world fol. 42. for With, read Which fol. 59 b
for byhange, read Byhanger. fol. 60 read causes linked wi^h, fol. 62. a for
of the supercelest, read but of the supercelestiall. fol. eodem a read to the
great. fol. 95. a for elsewhere in, read elsewhere then. fol. 65. b for hope
reward, read hope of ^evvarde. fol. 69. a for righteously, read righteous
by, fol. 71. b. for in any our, read in any one thing fol, 75. b. for our
self same, read one self same. fol^ 76, a for ear, read ^a^e. Fol. 83. b.
for this manner, read his manner.

A DEFENSE OF THE holy and Apostolyke Church, against the Bishop of Rome. THE
FIRST ACTION.
How long at the length will you abuse our gentle suff^raunce, The universal
Church does complain^ or expo^^ulate with the Bishopp of Rome.
ye Pope of Rome? How long shall your fury and counterfeyte hypocrisy delude
us? What kind of inordinate licentiousnes is this, that so much diste^^pereth
you? What does your outrageous insolency import? what does it practice?
whether will i^ ra^nge^ what measure or end of this your int^llerable (...)
and tyranny shall we look for at your hands at the last ^haue you so
shamefully shaken off all shamefastnes^ all feeling and insight of humanity
and common reason: that knowing both heaven and earth conspired against your
destruction, through your monstrous and manifold treacheries, horrible and
unmeasurable murders, beholding daily with your eyes, so many, so manifest
arguments, and plain demonstrations, as it were fore warnings of your utter
overthrow, and can none of all the same mollify your mind any thing at all?
Can they nothing at all restrain you from ^^trage? what? does not this so
palpable lightsomenesse of Christ's Gospel, this so glorious majesty of the
truth glistering as the Sunshine in midday, manacing, I know not what horrible
confusion of your kingdom, the pomp of your tottering Throne already rent
asunder, and for the most part darkened and lef^ succourles: does not the
blood of so many Martyrs, the testim^nies of so many Doctors: the (...) of
the people: The secret determinations, and foreiu^gementes, yea not only
secret dete^minations, but the open speeches, and francke voices of all the
godly, wherewith they do generally all denounce, detest, and condemn you for
the very Antichrist: does not the apparent gestures and frowning countenances
of all sorts of men: does not the sting of your own conscience at the least,
nor any regard of shame: does not the friendly alliance of so many Cities
united in one, with inseperable hands of mutual league, apparaunt even to your
face, the daily protest^^tions of all people, the Lances and Swoordes of
princes, sharpened with deadly hate, and ^et an edge against you, and even now
bending their main force to your destruction, the prepared power of people and
Nations: the inward heart burninges of the greatest dominions of the world,
yea their very nails scar^ely restrayneable from your present ^aking in
peers, does nothing of al these, no one of all these (I say) move you any
io^ atal?

But admit that all the aforesaid threatenings, whereof I have spoken before, as
depending upon the only policy and force of men, may little prevail with
you, who dare proudly presume of your self, I know not what Luciferlike
title above man, what then? will not the iudgemen^ of the mighty Lord of
Hosts, at the least will not the fearful wrath of that terrible Judge, being
enflamed against you, will not the most horrible downefal, and unspeakable
desolatio^ from above, The beast mentioned in the Apocalipse the 13^ and 14.
Chap
hanging over your head^ the most manifest Oracles of pr^pheticall Scriptures
cause you to be appalled^ What? when you read the down fall of the beast
mentioned in the Apocalips, when as be holding the Prophet call Tables, you
hear with your ears, and see with your eyes, that hellish lake of everlasting
destruction, boiling out unquenchable flames of fire and Brimstoone: may none
of all these force you to trem^le and quake for fear, and can you think that
no one of the foresaid scriptures do belong to you^ but all this
notwithstanding, does this Tragical Prelate r^ffle on in rage, free in fury,
mask in madness, nor will this Apocalipticall beast by any means be managed?

And be it also, that our most merciful father do as yet hold back his long
lingering revenge, shall we Christian Princes, and nations therefore (whom this
Babylonicall Strumpet has so long bewitched with her poisoned doldrenche of
abominable fornica^ion) beholding with our eyes so many Christian Countries,
so ^^^iercifully and monstrously rent a sunder, wittingly and w^llingly suffer
our selves to be led thus continually by the lips, and mooseled with such
mockeries? If the aun^ient nobility of the Romans could think it a matter
much inconvenient to tollerat the hautines of Luci^s Tarquinius a king yea
their natural Liege, lawful Lord and King, raunging somewhat more insolently
then was seemly: what should move us kings, and princes authorized in our
est^tes by God him self too think that either we may, without due remorse of
conscience any longer wink at, or without manifest prejudice of the ^^iuersall
Church, behold or bear with this pompous pontifical arrogancy far
exceeding all kingly, The pomp of the Pope.
yea chrise more monstrous then Tarquines pride, I say not in a king, but in a
beggarly Prelate, vnmeasurably vaunting himself, not only beyond the pride of
Tarquine, but also above al humane power, nay rather above all whatsoever is
called God? For what greater arrogancy of any mortal man, since the first
creation of mankind, has ever bin heard of, or what more grievous injury ever
offered to the church of god, or Fistula more co^tagious might be imagined,
the^ that in this equal, and eue^ esta^e of bishoplike fu^ctio^, one only
Bishop so to raise his crest, as ye challe^ging to himself universal
Dictatorship, he should so ouercrow his fellow seru^nts, as that all other
Bishops and Councels, should swear humble submission unto him, unto whose
authority all humane creature should assubiect it self: at whose hecke
Princes must yield their Scepters and Segniories: yea Emperors also must of
fine force, stowys to the ground, and give their necks to be trodden upon?
Which malaper^ sauciness being of it self no less absurd, then execrably
heinous, is so altogether void of all feeling of common sense, so also in all
respects contrary to the nature and office of Bishoplike Pastorship, as that
nothing may sound into men's ears more detestable, or permitted of us, more
perilous. In this case now let any reasonable person judge, what the due
consideration of our princely authority may exact of us, what the present
danger of this our time may require of us, and what the common calamity of
the distressed Church may command us to do herein.

Surely if one only Roman Co^sul, for the dutiful love he bare to the
discharge of his duty to the common weal, thought it a matter intolerable to
bear with the mischiu^us treacheries and treasons of Lucius Catiline a wicked
Citizen, Ci^e^o against Catilin^.
practizing the subu^rsion of his own natural country, to wit, one only
City, and for this cause could with his Counsels prevent his attemptes, with
his only authority, suppress his insolency, and with maine force utterly
overthrow his outrage: in what one action may we, wh^^ the majesty of the
Lord of Hosts has ordained guids of his people, and gardians of his religion,
discharge our vocation more princely, or profit the Christian common weal
more substancially, then in this so great a calamity, I say not of one only
City, but in this so universal an overthrow of the whole world, and general
massacre of al Christian religion, that with all expedition we not only
seclude, if not at the bestout of al partaking of Christian society, yet that
we abandon an^ utterly ^^nishe from all our territories and domini^u^ this
Babilonicall Hydre, so monstruously raging with fire and sword, so broyling,
and imbruyng all places with fa^gottes and goare, so tumbling in the bloody
butchery of the godly, not only exacting humbl^ submission of Kynge^ and
Keysers, but manacing also, and threatening, yea most arrogantly checking and
mating them to ^hei^ beards^ as even the self same, whom by sundry approved
^n^ manifest testimonies of holy scriptures, we can not but judge to be none
other the^ the very undoubted Antichrist.

But whereof shall I here complain me first? Or against what shall I be able
to exclaim sufficiently? O gross world, O blockishe blindness of these
days: I say not drousie slumber of Princes: Undoubtedly it behooued us long
since in our Princely authority, to have ra^sackt this lazy Lacerane lub^er,
or ^^^her mo^struous myscreaunt, and to have thrown him quit^ ou^ of our
coasts, into the ^auadge Wilderness, yea ^^^n ^^to the cruel Caniballes,
that so he that can not possibly be satisfied with man's flesh, may learn at
the length amydst that flesh cormoraunt cruelty, some sparcke of humanity
and courtesy. If we had thus done long heer^tofore, many thousands of
innocent Martyrs had been preserved from that tragical tyranny. And yet
having so merciless a slaughter of Christian blood, the infinite number
whereof is not only extant in Historyes, but also daily and hourly presented
to our ears and eyes: This Antichrist notwithstanding lives ^^ill, and
continues am^ngest us, not so much by the ben^fite of the air that he takes,
as through our own default, and negligence: what said I? ^ee lives: nay
rather he florisheth, he reigns, he triumphs: he is not only
conuersaunt and present in each places of our Palaces, but also present, and
President of our Counselles: He^ ^nacteth and commands what him lists:
finally he deuoureth our people as his pray, and our selves he scorneth for
do^trelles and fools. And because he can not with open attempts work our
destruction, he pursues us with covert and crafty vndermininges, beholding
with his eyes already the murdering of every of us, whom his heart has
appointed to the sword: And even those has he appointed whomsoever he
understands to be more addicted too set forth the glory of Christ, then to
uphold his pomp. The continual course whereof does evidently bewray him to
be the undoubted Antichrist. Otherwise what may it be, that should so cruelly
teaze him to such beastly sauadgenesse, but that he fears, least the glorious
Sunneshine of Christ's renoume, will dazell and darken his counterfaite
kingdom. For his monstrous mind being enflamed with intolerable desire of
superiority, since it has now advanced it self to that loftiness of
estate, cannot easily suffer to be removed from that rotten claim of staring
stateliness. And because he perceaueth that in this gladsome kingdom of the
Gospel, he can no longer now retain the same without bloodshed, and butcherie
of thousands of souls, hereof comes it, that as many as he perceives to be
true professoures of the word, even so many he recompteth for his open
adversaries, whom he thinks convenient to cut of by practice, and policy
whatsoever.

A defense of the Church of England against the seditious Bulls of the Pope.
From hence arises all this storm of so great Tragedies: here hence come
those dreadful thunderclappes, and deadly flashes of scorching curses, and yet
not so much to be feared of any, as to be scorned of all. They call them
Bulls: To wit Pardons and Popish Libelles wonderful craftily forged too
entrappe, and beguyle seelye souls, under the visor of Peter and Paul's
autorities. For this is the very gunshotte wherewith these holy Fathers do
usually avenge the rancour of their hearts, if they chance at any time to
wexe chole^ike and wroth. And because through such preatie Buggebeares^ they
have heretofore accustomed to be dreadful, and fearful too other kingdoms
and Monarchies, hereof came it that Pope Pius the fifth not long sithence,
like Jupiter Olympius with his fiery thunder boltes ^ut of his Castle of S.
Angelo did set upon poor little England with a terrible Bull. Pope Pius ^^e
fif^h raging against Elizabe^h Queen of England.
In the which proud presumptuous attempt, he practiced with ^hamelesse
slanders and railing reproaches first too defame the virtuous Lady Queen
Elizabeth, thereby to procure her high^esse the hatred of foreign nations: and
bey^g not satisfied therewith, endeavored also to deprive her of her Regal
Patrimony, and true inheritable kingdom: and not of her kingdom only, but to
bereave her also of life, and for that purpose solicited against her,
traiterous treachours both within her own Realm, and abroad.

There passed not many days, before that Gregory the thirtienth a whelpe of
the same litter, Pope Grego^ie 13. enflamed against England and the Queen of
England.
pursuing the platfourme of his Predece^sour Pius, gave attempt not much
unlike to the first, sparing no travail, nor cost, no attempt unassayed,
whereby he might teaze up the Subjects to rage against their Queen, to bring
al unto hurly burly, finally too rende asunder their f^i^h and alleadgeance
which by Gods commaund^me^t they owe to their lawful Magistra^e, supposing too
have found here some such Asseheades forsooth, who would more easily have
been induced to reverence those Apish flashes of Momus smokes, then to derid^
them as bab^es. Bu^ what success hitherto he has attained ^ith those
Fr^ntike vproares, tumbling and tur^oyling all things, I mean not here to
stand upon. This on^ thing would I fain learn of them, whereof I do earnestly
^raue an answe^re. I mean not here the answer of any one private person alone,
neither of Pius, nor yet of Gregory: But I appeal to all that Romish Sea in
general, which powers out such Prelates unto us: Even of those reverend
Uicars I demand this question. What if their power were agreeable to their
will, and were able in very deed to prevail against them, as farfoorth as they
accurse them in words^ and as they do denounce in those their mu^derous bulls,
wherein they belch out against the subjects of that realm, such horrible
exclamatious, and accurse them down to hell, drown them in the bottomless
gulf of everlasting flambes, and throw them out to be devoured with the
swords of the furious. Let them tell us, would they do it in deed? Or would
they put it in execution, if they were able? May it be possible, that any such
cruelty could ever enter into the thought of any Christian heart, namely
against Christians? If they deny it, what mean they then by those their
craf^ie conspiracies, far exceedyng Catilines currishnesse attempted, yea
practiced also, to bring such murders to pass? But if they confess it, which
indeed they can not cover with any colorable cloak: Certes they do
sufficiently (like Rattes by their p^epyng) bewray themselves by their own
doom, what spirit they be off^ what monster they fo^ter under that forged
visor of Peter, what Scorpion they shrowde under tha^ Lions skin.

A complaint against the Popes of Rome.
But let us proceed further. Go too now: Admi^ that so great force of malice,
so greedy rancour of revenge might pearce so deep^ly into the Apostolical
breasts, importyng the ^^^er ruin of the godly. I wo^lde then feign learn of
them, upon what their des^r^e at the length they become so maliciouslye
malignaunt against them. For whatsoever the offense be, surely it can not
possibly be matter of small importance, that may provoke those most holy
Prela^es to grow into such outrage against their Christian Brethren, seeing
in outward semblaunce and behavior, they do so cour^giously brave them
selves upon the meekness of Christ, upon the Faith of Peter, and the spirit
of Paul. 2. Cor. 1^^
We do read in the Scriptures that the most holy Apostle S. Paul him self
does in the mighty power of the spirit, thunder out, That the weapons of our
warrefare be not carnal, but mighty in spirit, to the subdewing of strong
holds wherewith we do suppress evil thoughts, and do subdewe all power,
extolling it self against the will of God, and lead captive all thoughts and
imaginations, to yield dew obedience unto Christ, etc.

First you see weapons named here, not of one Paul, What the power of the
Church is and how far it stretches.
nor of one Peeter, but our own weapons (says he) that is to say, general
weapons, common with the universal Church of Christ: which are then at the
least to be exercised, not rashly against all persons, nor upon every light
occasion, but even when necessity urges, against those (if any shall happen
to bee^) which do wax insolent and stifnecked against the knowledge of God,
and their dew obedience unto Christ. Of which sort if any may be found
faulty in that Realm, that may prejudice the grace of Christ, surely I will
not in any respect abridg^ condign correction, according to the censure
Apostolic. But now, whereas that whole nation, to the vttermoste of their
power, does endeavor to become the Servants of Christ: whereas there is not one
so much, that does not prostrate him self to the majesty of the Son of God,
and to his divine Godheade: that does not worship him in Spirit and truth, yea
and worship him there where the Scriptures have enthronized him: that does not
thankfully acknowledge his Heavenly benefits: that does not yield dew
reverence to his Sacraments: that does not only profess all obedience linked
together with faith, to be dew unto him, but also repose all their affiaunce
and confidence in him: Finally whereas in their churches, all matters, are so
orderly administered by them, as that no defect may be found of any thing
apperteining too the duty of true christianity: The Pope cruelly raging
against the godly without all cause or reason.
wherein nothing is admitted, that is not consonant to the sacred authority of
the Evangelical institution: I beseech you (Sir Pope of Rome) what would you
desire more? What? seems it not sufficient in your conceit, that Christ, who
alone preserves the estate of his church be glorified in his own Church,
unless the pomp of the Pope be enterlaced with the glory of Christ, and
reverenced with semblable obedience? And from whence else come these tumultes,
these flashes of lightening, and storms of of thunderboltes raised up? Is it
because they do yield their obedience too Christ, as it behooves them to
do? or because they humble not the^ selves to the Pope? If the glory of Christ
be your glory, as of right it ought to be, what needs any contention then?
why do you no^ cast down your proud Peacockes tail, and call your self
back again into the society of general obedience? But if ye think it not
sufficient, that the son of GOD may be magnified without the Romish Bishop,
why then surcease from henceforth to be taken for the servant of Jesus, and
the heir of Peter. For what other thing did Peter or Paul vaunt upon, but the
only glory of Jesus Christ? Philip. 1.
Whether by occasion (says he) or in truth, so that Christ be preached, herein
do I rejoice, and will rejoice. What say you to this? That Christ himself,
whiles he dwelte here upon earth, would have a special testimony left
behind him, how far he was both in words, and deeds estraunged from
craving, or groping after glory, who embasing him self of his own freewill,
even to the ignominy of the Cross: by how much he disclaimed from the title
of glory, so much the more ouerflowing abundance of glory did ouerspreade
him, by only despising of glory. Io^^.1.
I do not seek (says he) mine own glory, but there is one that seeks and
judges. Again the same Christ being on a time despised, and cast out from
that most churlish city, did not so attempt any matter of revenge therefore, as
that he seemed very grievously offended with them which did provoke him to take
vengeance. O heavenly mildness of a meek spirit worthy of all reverence
and honor: Luke.^^
You know not (says he) of what spirit you be, The Son of man came not
for too destroy, but to save men's lives.

Now let us compare the one with the other, to wit, the Uicar with his head.
You have heard how the Lord being not entertained upon the way, what he did,
and what answer he gave. But what the Pope would have done in this case, if
he had been present, furnished with like power to be avenged, I do not here
discuss. Truly how he behaueth him self at this present, little England
alone may be a sufficient testimony: which having now over many years been
plagued with that Romish ruffler, and worn out even to the bare stumpes, with
much ado shaking from her shoulders, that yoke of intolerable thraldom,
durst pr^sume at the last to cast from out her territories, this T^oian horse,
and reduce her estate to the ancient iberties. Hereof springs that Canker,
hereof arise these Tragical furies, wherewith he would seem ready to
devour, not the bodies of men only, but the very souls also, if he were
able. Go to now, and what cause can this ^remshape^ Uicar vouch at the
length, why he should thus mingle heaven and earth together, and rake up
from the deep, those swallowing Sands of gaping gulf? Let us now see what
the matter is.

The Pope of Rome is banished out of English soil, in that he would be a
Ruler, I confess: but as a soiourner, he is not excluded. But Christ
notwithstanding is received: him do they embrace as their Lord: his voice
they do acknowledge, and be obedient unto: but because they know not you
(Sir Pope) if they receive you not, why should you storm at it? You require
pardie that they should couple you with Christ in their worshipping. But put
the case, that Christ can in no wise be received into England, unless the
Pope be banished: Christ can not be received unless the Pope be banished.
neither the Pope have any possible footing there, except they thruste Christ
clean out of their Coasts: Whether of these two think you convenient to be
obeyed by them, since they can not possibly serve both at once? John the most
worthy Prophet of all Prophets, yea more then a Prophet, does cry out in the
Desert: It behooves that he increase, and that I do diminish. John.3. Chap.
And will you not permit the glory of Christ to grow forward in his own
Temple, unless your pomp be made copemate of his glory? Who b^eing his humble
servant and faithful friend in deed, as in outward appearance and words you
do profess to be^ why then, endeavor as seruiceably and faithfully to
advance the honor of your Lord ^^d Master, and withal accept as lovingly of
your follow servants, who dutifully serve the same Lord and master whom
your selves do profess. I beseech you Sir, is not our request agreeable with
equity? But if the matter go otherwise, and that you will be exempt from the
place of a servant as no fit member of our Church, but do require rather, to
be enstalled a Lord over our faith: then know ye for certainty, that your
banishment from our Kingdoms is not procured by our only means, but
authorized by the very sacred Scriptures: wherein we find most evidently, one
only Lord to be attended vpon^ and one only faith to be directed by. Even as
we read in the same Apostle else where: Not because we are Lords of your
faith (says he.) Ep^e. 4.
So also neither Peter himself, 2. C^r. 1.
far unlike to an Imperious Apostle, c^ulde not at any time permit in the
Clergy, 1. ^eter 1.
the name of Lordly estate: neither did ever presume to challenge any such title
to himself, as the which he reproved very sharply in others. For he right
well remembered what Lord he was disciple unto, namely the same Lord, who being
always the greatest despiser of worldly pomp, would never contend for honor
and seignorie, but in all lowliness rather, would yield humble service to all
persons, without respect.

But lo a reply forthwith of some of this crew. Sau^ders in his Ierarchical
Monarchy^
What (say they) do we not call them Lords commonly, who, as Gods Ministers,
do exercise princely authority, and regiment over the earth? Yes truly: and
therefore let every province have his peculiar seignior, who according to Gods
appointment, may exercise this function of bearing government and rule. But
what is this to Peter? What is this to the Apostles, and Apostolic Ministers:
who be called to this function, to this only end, to profit the congregation
of Christ, and not ouerrule them, as Princes and Potentates: to nourishe and
feed the flock of their Lord, not Lordly, and loftily to ouercrowe them, as
Lords of the flock? For their estate is not an estate of stately domination,
and tyrannical superiority, but an office, a charge, and a shepeherdes estate.
And as it is a charge, How the charge of a Sheapeheard^ is limited and how it
ought to be discharged.
so ought the same charge be stretched no further, than for whose sake properly
it is undertaken: so also neither ought it be applied otherwise in any respect,
then as it shall apperteine to the proper and peculiar benefit of the flock.
For neither the Scholemaister may therefore take upon him to ouerrule his
pupilles, as Parents do their children, or as Princes their subjects: because
his office is to instruct the^ in learning: neither is he otherwise worthy the
place of a Schoolemaister, then in that respect that he may teach good and
wholesome doctrine. In like manner, whereas the office of a godly pastor
consists in this only, to direct the consciences of Christians, to employ
all his study and travel to the enlargement of Christ's kingdom, he ought for
this cause abide unremovable within the bounds of his charge, and therein
behave himself as a shepeheard, not as a Lord: as a servant, not as a
master. It is one thing to bear soueraintie by public and Christian
authority: an other thing to be a servant, in feeding the flock, and to be
subject to the state: And yet neither does this kind of service want his
proper and peculiar dignity. As in all commonweals the most renowned and
famous actions do of their own nature, allure the well liking, and laudable
commendation of the godly: So Ministers of the Church also, such as being
endued with heavenly gifts of spiritual blessing, and the mighty power of
Christ Jesus, though they groape not greedily for promotion, shall never yet
be destitute of their due honor and reverence, which of it own nature does
always attend upon and accompany godly and famous personages: I mean not any
such dignity notwtstanding, as should raise the^ to the state of princes, nor
make them Lords of the earth, ne yet advance them to Monarchies, nor so much
as privilege them from due obedience to the state, nor to the Laws and
Statutes of the higher powers.

Therefore as concerning the prerogative of Princes, since there is so great
a number of Regions. Nations, and people, such a variety of Laws and tongues,
nothing can be more seemly, nor more consonant for the ordinance of God, then
that in all societies and estates of Nations, a special preeminence, and
singular superiority should be yielded to some one personage, as to a certain
chief governor and head, by whose authority and sovereignty, al others may
be trained under whom also several offices, and charges may be severally
distributed, as shall seem necessary and commodious, for the well ordering of
every weal public. Hereof is it, Romans 13.
That the higher powers do of right bear a necessary preeminence directly
under God, as the Apostle witnesses. And yet even the self same powers are
empale^, and compassed in within their prescripts, listes, limits, and bounds
according to Gods ordinance. But as to that universality, and Ierarchie over
the whole Church of Christ: One only vniuer^all head of the universal Church.
or to be only and entier Lord, and ruler over our faith, besides Christ
only, we acknowledge neither king nor keyser, whatsoever. And what was he then
that at any time has authorized you (ye Prelate of Rome) to be chief
governor, and Lord over the universal Church of Christ, so far and wide
ouerstretched, over the face of the whole earth? Or who ever besides you has
been heard of, that durst presume upon so proud a Title of superiority,
either in the Apostles time, or in the whole succeeding age, until this your
challenge, without great reproach and grievous controulement of every good man?
Or with what face at the length dare your self so arrogantly raise up your
crest so Luciferlyke, as to be magnified for the only and principal
Bishop, and Monarchy of the whole state of Christianity, unless ye were
Antichrist him self? In this case therefore, advise and bethink your self
well, ye Romish Prelate, what ye now do, or rather what ye ought to do. If
ye think that the credit of your Majesty is cracked by them, because they
have banished you out of their Coasts: I pray you heartely when it comes to
your mind, to make a true account, how much they have been beneficial unto
you and others of your crew, whiles they were your vassals, tell us now this one
thing, what secret insolency lurketh in that authority of your majesty,
that may by an unavoidable necessity enforce them to the like superfluous
pillage any longer.

The universal Ierarchie of the Pope serves to no use in the Church of
Chr^s^e.
For why should they so do? is it because you may grant them salvation, and
bless them? But their salvation is already plentiful, sufficient and
everlasting for them in our only Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Is it because
you may give them remission of sins? but the same is also given them freely
in the faith of the Gospel, without any other aid. What is it then? Because
you may preach the word of God to Gods people? or is it rather because ye
may, as ye have hitherto accustomed, thrust upon them men's traditions, pelting
gloses, and old wives tales in steed of Christ's Gospel? that ye may rob
the lay people of the word of God, with holding it fast locked from them, in
an unknown and barbarous tongue? That ye may scatter abroad the doctrine of
Diuelles? But the Lord be highly thanked for it, there lacks no store of
godly personages amongst them, which are able too execute that holy function of
preaching Gods word, and do execute it indeed without aid of the Laterane
Bishopp freely, and with good success: yea so much the more freely, by how
much they be severed from your tyranny by distaunce of place. What is the
cause the^? that ye may determine their causes and controversies? But where may
controversies be more happily decided, and more speedily ended, then where the
special circumstances of the greeuances began first, and are best known?
Here of came that sacred decree of those godly Fathers in the Africane
Council as Cyprian does testify: Cyprian the first book, the third Epistle.
That every man's cause should be pleaded in the same province where the
offense was committed, where also might be both accusers and witnesses of the
crime. And for this cause it was decreed further: That to every pastor some
particular portion of the flock should be appointed, which every of them
should rule and direct, rendering accounte of his proceedings therein to the
Lord etc. In their English affairs therefore what interest may the Romish
Inquisition challenge, since the States of his own Nation of Affricke have
utterly renounced it?

But happily the authority of the Pope is holden very necessary to choose
Bishops, and to dispose other orders Ecclesiastical: for this they mainteyne
for inviolable, that all manner election of Bishops is utterly unlawful, except
they be consecrated by the Romish Sea. But what is this else, then to rob
the Church of her lawful right and interest in her free election, and to
yield over the Church her self (which ought to be the Spouse of Christ) a
servile bondmayde to the Pope, and not the Pope to the Church? when as
notwithstanding the Apostle Paul, writing to the Corinthians, doubted nothing
at all to make the Apostles themselves subject to the Church speaking on this
wise: The Church in respect of sovereignty, is above Apostles and Ministers.
1. Cor. 3.
All things are yours (says he) whether it be Paul, or Cephas, or Apollo,
whether they be things present or things to come, but you are Christ's, (he
does not say, you are the Popes) and Christ is God. Briefly, as concerning
that laying on of hands, which the Papists account altogether unlawful
without the Popes annoynting, why should it be less lawful for us, to put
the same in execution in our Churches, in ecclesiastical elections, and
ordering our own Ministers and Pastors, then the Cardinals of Rome in the
choice of their Pope? For since in Rome it self is no such necessary
succession of personages, or Palles, but that which is purchased for the penie:
and since no consecration almost does pass there, that is not rather
besmeared with Oil of money, then with any Oil else, I beseech you^ what
should be the cause, why the proceedings of our Churches may not be adjudged
more legitima^e and cano^icall, being exe^uted according to the prescript
ordinances of the Canons, not without due trial of learning, good
consideration of conversation, common consent, and voices o^ the Congregation?
namely, (...) 1^.
for as much as the Lord has promised wheresoever two or three do agree
together in any one thing in his name, that the Father will grant them their
requests.

Which being agreed upon, I demand what cause of just complaint you can
allege against us: ye Roman Bishop? or what injury have you sustained at our
hands? If none at all, why do ye fret and fume, wherefore does your choler
boil so monstrously? to what end are those thunder clappes of bulls, and
warlike wild sier scattered abroad, wherewith like a most unmerciful Caligula
ye seem ready bent to scorch and cut all our heads from our shoulders at one
blow, if you were able? The stay whereof surely proceeded not of any relent of
your cruelty, nor of any your fearfulness too commit the fact: but from
Gods only merciful benignity, which does for the most part rebounde back
malicious attemptes either upon the wicked authors themselves, or as vapors
and clouds scatter them to naught. But go to, let us grant unto you that by
this excluding of you, some particular Church have been iniurio^s to your
majesty, which being nevertheless most untrue, yet let us imagine it to be
even so. It behooued you notwithstanding to call to your remembrance of what
spirit ye were of^ if at the least ye belong to Christ, whose vicar you do
challenge your self to be. ^^th. 5.
Of whom if you have not yet learned the lesson, which ought to have bin first
and chiefly learned, too wit, To pray for your enemies, ye should at the least
not have forgotten the lesson next unto the same: That whatsoever injury had
been offered you against equity and right, ye may not be judge yet of your own
private grieuau^ce, but have committed the same wholly to be avenged of the
Lord. For so you read commanded by Gods own mouth, Vengeance is mine, and
I will reward: Deuteronomy. ^2.
says the Lord. Roma. 12.
So might you not in any wise have misdoughted, but that he upon some good
liking of your cause, undertaking the defense thereof, would of his sincere
Justice both more orderly and more mightily have repulsed the injury, then your
self were able too do. For proof whereof as there be sundry examples in the
scripture, so amongst al other that counsel of Gamaliel, wherewith he appeased
the outrageous insolency of the Pharisees from sleing the Apostles, ought to
have bin remembered agreeing with Gamaliel in counsel. Acts 3.
If that which these men do, be of men, or the counsel of men, it will come too
naught of it self. But if this counsel be of God, the^ shall I as wickedly as
in vain strive against it, as one not only rebellious against men, but against
God himself.

Al which I do hither too debate with you in such sort, as if you had just
cause of complaint, were it never so little against us for empayring your
dignity: which if it were true, yet does not the Apostolic gravity usually
let loose the reins of private revenge so grievously, nor any of the scripture
enstruct thereunto. The mild lenytie of the Gospel would rather allure too
deal more favorably with the brethren yea though they were faulty, who albeit
they be not Romans yet because we be Christians, behooued you even for
Christ's sake, whom we do woorshippe (though we woorshippe not you) to have
had dew consideration of the mutual amytie, and necessary bonds, that ought
too be betwixt Christians, if at least ye be a true Christian your self.
Certes this railing, and slanderous reproaches, wherewith ye do practice, and
procure us too be hated of all, and our commonweals and kingdoms to be
rent asunder withal, and brought to utter confusion, does i^ no respect
beseem the profession whereinto you are entered.

But to come near to the purpose now, and to deteyne you more strongly within
my ward, I do argue with you on this wise, as that I may thoroughly convince,
not only the whole substance of your challen^e against us to be most void
of reason, and fraught full of folly and pride, but also to make it appear by
most evident demonstration, that all this so mighty a confederacy of Nations
and people, conspiring in general against your destruction, which you do see
with your eyes, is not only clear of all blemish of rancour, but also
conceived and raised up in one upon most urgent and necessary causes, and
undertaken with no less fear of God in respect of true piety, is not so much
procured by men, or by man's Counsel, as directed altogether by the only
outstretched arm of the Lord of Hosts: and so directed, as that without his
godly assistance, so many and so marvelous enterprises, could never have
been possibly atchiued, in so short space, and with so good success. And to
the end you and the complyces of your conspiracy may be made more assured of
the proof hereof: open the eyes of your remembrance at the last, and behold
on every part the manner and marvelous frame of the proceedinges therein.

First I suppose, no man is ignorant, into what amazed admiration all Nations
were carried with that your notorious state of Empire, with that wonderful
mass of Majesty and loftiness of seat, so richly enstalled, so gloriously
enthronized, with so many and so magnificent fortifications environed, yea (as
it seemed) established with scriptures and countenanced with the authority of
Peter and Paul, as long as it held sovereign over the whole world in assured
security. All which so wonderful power, so puyssant majesty, so large
outstretched dominion of popish Ierarchie, which stood so long by the space of
five hundred years continually in so vndiscontinued and emp^ired a possession,
How great an^ incomparable the state of the Romish sea was by the space of 500.
years.
who could ^uer have suspected, or conceived by any never so light
imagination, should not also enjoyed unremovable continuance even to the
worlds end? For better confirmation of which Empire, severe and sharp laws
were enacted, dreadful decrees, yea most horrible torments provided, for the
punishment of such, whosoever would but once hiss against the Popes holiness,
though he playe^ the ruffian never so rudely. A sweet and plausible title of
the Catholic and Apostolic Church was pretended: the power of the keys was
chopped in among: the undoubted succession of Peter, not without the authori^ie
of Paul, capemarchant withal: insomuch that whosoever should but lo^ke awrie
upon the P^pe, might ^eeme not so much to prejudice his holiness, as to be
openly iniurio^s to Peter and Paul themselves. Moreover there wanted not to
this mighty Domitian, Domitian a mo^struous tyra^t.
his fearful lightnings, wherewith he might out of his heavenly Capitol amaze
the tim^rous souls of weak princes: finally that nothing might lack, to
brave out his power, as to color his crafty iugling, there were annexed to the
premises, a sweet and amiable countenance of hypocritical holiness, a
counterfeit sincerity of unspotted life, yea outward resemblance of true
religion, thereby to dazel more easily the eyes and hearts of the unlettered.
And for this cause to garnishe this pageant to the full, whole skulles and
droanes of Monks, Friars, and Massemongers, did swarm together, busied busily
in fasting, in alms giving, in Psalms singing, in prayers and Mass mumbling,
in their unmarried life resembling Angelical purity, surpassing all human
condition. In the Churches how religiously were al things solemnised too
reclaim men to their lu^e?

But amongst all the rest, no one thing was more forcible to the establishing
of the power and continuance of this kingdom, then the ignorance of that
blind age, and the penury of learning and judgment. For in the Schools was
nothing ^aught but cold and frivolous suttleties: In the Councels nothing
decreed, but by the prescript rule of the Pope alone: neither was any sound
heard in the Temples of any thing almost besides stage-like ceremonies and men's
traditions. And what marvel then, if, the pure and eloquent sciences, both
sacred and profane, being utterly exti^ct, barbarous blindness had
overwhelmed all things, with gro^se ignorance, whereby no man could become
either more expert in learning, or more virtuous in manners, when as neither
books, nor authors were extant, out of the which any such supply might be
furnished? For as yet came not to light that most happy, and heavenly Jewel,
to wit, the Art of Printing books: The happy inuen^ion of the ^rt of
printing.
all things were certifie^ by the industry of wryting^ and hired travail of
writers: yea the same also not obtained without great charges and costs.
Whereby it came to pass, that the poorer sort being utterly barred of
atteyning learning, scarce any use of Books, or good litterature was in ure,
except amongst a few Monks only, yea those also not very many: with whom
likewise, the very same written books remained rather in Libraries fast
chayned a rotting, than worn out with any they^ handling. In the mean space
the common people did neither read, nor hear what the Evangelical and
Apostolical wryti^ges did proclayme touching Christ, nor touching his grace,
and benefits: only they were commanded to believe that which the holy mother
Church did believe: Which was not altogether amiss if they had concluded upon
a true Church, according to the right pattern thereof. Now these learned and
great wise men would have this Church to be none other, but the Sea of Rome
pardie, and that crew of Cloysterers, amongst whom that triple holy Pope must
needs be acknowledged for head, and Lord over all: whose decrees all and
every person what soever must be of necessity constrained to obey, as so
many holy oracles proclaimed from heaven: whatsoever this Gentleman should
clogge the Christians withal, must with like necessity be undertaken and borne
without grudging. This ympe they justified to be the only Priest of the
Leuitical ra^e, yea the very bond of Christian society, besides whom they
affirmed was no faith, no hope, no, nor any Church at all. Who so should
depart from this Church (as much to say) from the Pope, might not otherwise
hope for eternal salvation by any means: whatsoever the Pope should speak or
do, could be no error, neither ought he be judged of any person: And that
Christ did reign in heaven, the Pope must reign in earth. And albeit Christ
did promise that he would be always present with his Church, yet must this
be an infallible rule, That he could not dispose the riches of his grace, in
the government of his Church otherwise, than by the dispensation of this
Gentleman his only Uicar.

In this calamity of state and time: I pray you what other knowledge could the
rude and unlettered multitude attain unto, but that which others taught them?
And then also what other thing was beaten into the ears of the people, then
that, which by all manner of means might avail to amplify the majesty of
that popish kingdom? The bravery whereof whosoever could blaze out wit^ most
lofty titles and stateliest style, was adjudged the most profound and delicate
divine. And then these notable and invincible oracles were finely sifted out,
not of any light trash, but coonned out of the very bowels of divine
Philosophy. The proppes and ^il^ers of the Romish religion.
Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock will I build my Church. I have prayed for
thee Peter, that thy faith should not faint: Feed my sheep. Ergo the most
holy father the Pope of Rome is enthronized the universal Prince of the Romish
Sea, unto whom only are given the keys of al manner jurisdiction. The Romish
Church has taught thus: Th^s has it seemed good to the universal Bishop, who
carries about with him the holy Ghost within the cubbard of his breast. These
be the traditions of the holy fathers. Ergo this is the Catholic Church.

In good fellowship gentle Reader, what ^tronger force of illusion could
possibly be seen at any time? In so marvelous a confusion of thick and
darkened clouds, what could be more easy, than for the unlettered, and
unskillful multitude to wander up and down by whole heaps, into any amazed
error whatsoever? even as a man having first pyked an others eyes out of his
head, might easily lead him then to break his neck where him ly^ted. Herein
unless the most mighty Lord Creator of all things, and gouerno^r of all
things, looking down from above, had put to his helping han^e in time, what
could all the Counsels of men agreeing together in one, all their forces and
powers conspiring together prevail against that so mightily for^ifyed force of
popish Monarchy, by such a continual course of succeeding years
established? the proof whereof many great and probable arguments have
heretofore declared. For how often has attemptes bee^e given, even of the most
puissant Monarchies, Kings, and Potenta^es of the world, to snaffle this
intolerable ambition of popane arrogancy, yet void of al success
notwithstanding. For immediately upon an assay made, princes being s^a^ed,
eyt^er through fear of further peril, or lead on ^he blind side by cra^ty
collusion, or zeal of Religion, or circumuented by traiterous re^cu^tyng of
their Subjects at home, have surceassed all the sort of them from further
exploites.

Examples whereof, albeit in number infinite, It is proou^d by plain
demo^stratio^s that the overthrow of the p^pishe Sea came not of m^n, but from
God the v^^ye author thereof.
may easily and readily ^ee vouched, if out of France, Germany, Cicilie,
Austriche, ^e w^ulde reckon up all, and every particular King and Emper^ur^
bearing the names of Phillip, Jews, Otto, Henry, Frederick as we might: yet
passing over for this present for^aigne princes, we will content ourselves with
a brief Catolog^e taken out of our nati^e Country Mo^um^ntes, such as shall
su^^ice for this present purpose. William conqueror.
William of Norma^die, wearing the Cro^n of this land.500. years ago or very
near theraboutes, this Romish tyrannical Ierarchie (whereof I spoke before)
began too grow somewhat more lof^ie then before, against whose hauty arrogance
Henry the first of that name, Henry the f^^ste king of England
a learned and puissant Prince of courage, began somewhat to bend his
brows. After whose death his successor Henry the second did set himself
against the Pope, Henry the 2. king of England
in more forcible ma^er. But Pandol^ the Popes Legate forthwith qualified the
king. Not long after succeeded John king of England, John king of England.
who was much more eagerly sharpened a^gaynst the Pope: but this force
prevailed nothing at al. After them reigned Henry the third of that name,
Henry the 3.
who might^ly labored to stay the Romish money markettes exceeding all
measure and mean within his own kingdoms. This was a worthy enterprise
certes, well beseeming the nobleness of a most worthy king. But the
in^atiable pride of the Pope gate the upper hand notwithstanding. Matthew of
P^ris a chronicl^^.
King Henry has his counsels (quoth the Pope) so have I my council also.

What shall we say to this, that the same has been earnestly impugned by
learned and grave divines, (as we find recorded in Histories) to call back
that most insolent tyranny of that proud Peacocke, to some mean and
reasonable order, wherein these also did but beat the air and loose their
labor: Divines put to sil^nce.

As many as g^^^ said the Pope, were m^r^yred with ^^r^ or tortures.


for either they were prick forthwith to prison, or raked to recant, or
tormen^ed with tortures, compelled to be mute. Amongst whom innumerable names
of godly Martyrs, besides the Valdenses, Albingenses, Merindolanes, Bohemias
be registered of record. What other cause procured the death of that godly
martyr Jerome Sauouarolla, whose worthy sermons published in the Italian
tongue, and printed at Uenice, Out of the chronicles of Henry of Euforde.
Italy it self to this day yet can in no wise digest? What else was the
destruction of those two Moonks burnt at Auynyon under Pope Innocent the sixth?
What other cause did consume to ashes William Sawtre^, Swinderbie, Thorpe,
G^alter, Brute a very learned young man, John Badbie, Lord Cobham right
honorable of parentage, and infini^ others partakers of the same persecution?
What other matter raked out of grave John Wicklife being buried long before? In
which Catalogue let be numbered also, whom for reverence due unto them I may
not forget Tauler, Wesel, Groningensis, Hilton, Isenua, William de Sancto
amore, Nicholas Oremmus, William Laudiue^sis, John Poliacensis, Armacan, Peter
de Vineis, the Archbishop of Tullensis, The Chronicle of John Auen^^^e 7.
book.
of whom Auentine makes mention.

But I pass over these as being over ancient, whom if I should rehearse by
particularities^ mine Oration would scarce find an end. I will draw near to
these years, where with we be better acquainted, in the which I know not, by
what means the impiety of this Romish fury waxyng more ripe in riot, rusht
abroad into the world, but even then chiefly, whereas by your traiterous
treachery, and merciless cruelty, you haled too the s^ake the most worthy
Father John Hus, John Hus.
and Jerome of Prage^ I^^o^^ ^^ ^rage^
partakers of the same Martyrdom, under color of Su^mons to the Council, by
the Emperors safe conduit: with traiterous practice, ye Roman Popes cannot
deny to be procured by your means. If I demand the cause of this tyranny,
what aunsweare will you make? wherein had they offended? what was their crime?
did they any way blasphemously abuse them selves against the name of Christ?
nothing less. But for that the good men moved in conscience in discharge of
their faith and duty, durst adventure to pinche the pride of the Pope. To
such an unspeakable outrage coupled with insatiable sauagenes, was the
untreatable insolency of this Babylonicall stru^pet, crawled up at that season:
that neither it might be law^ull for any person whatsoever, once too dare
quacke against her: yea though he did so, yet should he little prevail.

Wherefore if that so mighty power and outstretched Dominion of your stately
state (the like whereof was never heard of to bear sway on earth by any
memory of man) fortified and established with so great authority, such huge
Hosts, Armies, Treasures, Munitions, Aliances and Confederates, whereof you
were seized in so long, and continued a possession unvanquishable almost
against all attemptes whatsoever hitherto, seem somewhat crazed now, and
brought on knee: I suppose by this time you are not ignorant (ye Pope of Rome)
of the very cause, that brought this plague upon your necks, The decay of
Romish Sea to be imput^d not to men but God only.
and fatal confusion to your Sea. It is come to pass surely not by any humane
force, nor puissa^t princes power, not by any brunt of battle strong, nor
Armies huge of kings or keys^^s train, not by any wits of me^ or wily worldly
diriftes. and yet happily you do imagine that poor Luther was chiefest
ringleader of this roast, and his Copemate Calvin, with others were procurers
of your bane. Believe it not Pope, those were but stones thrown against you,
but what hand directed those stones to your destruction, you understand not.
You respecting only outward and worldly policy, cannot epsy any besides
Luther and the Lutherans. But there is an other that couer^ly undermines all
your pomp, whom if hitherto as yet you could not discern by most evident
demonstrations, nor conceive by any reasons reach, you may now perceive at the
length as bright as the Sun, out of Saint Paul what he is. 2. These. 2.
Whom the Lord (says S. Paul) shall destroy with the breath of his mouth.
When you hear the Lord himself named, you see the very author of the Action
it self: not Luther, not Calvin: but that most mighty and ^ighest workmaister
of the whole Tragedy, who ^etteth forth upon the Stage, ministers of his
will, whom he will. Again when you hear the breathe of his mouth: therein you
may behold both the mean and order of subduing the enemy, not by any force
of arms, nor earthly power, but by influence divine, and preaching the word.

But if you cannot be induced to believe this to be true by this testimony of
Paul, which as being far fetch^ you will conster not to apperteine unto you,
I will now call you home near unto your own self, and will come even too
that time somewhat more familiar to your remembrance, wherein John Hus lived,
of whom I made mention before. Since when ye cannot but remember what he,
even then, when as being long ^ost and turmoyled from post and pillar, by your
treachery and execrable fury, The prophecy of John Hus against the pope
fore told by revelation of the heavenly Oracle should befall upon you:
Namely, That after one hundred years then next ensuing, you should render an
account to God, and too him, of the mischieues which you wrought. If ye will
deny this to be true, it will be openly iusti^ied to your teeth not only by all
Historiograp^ers, but also by that ancient piece o^ coy^e, which is yet
usually current, engraven with the names of John Hus, and Jerome of Prage. It
remains now too make proof of this by the sequel thereof: which if you
suppose to be worthy of credit, ^it down then, and make a true computatio^
of the years succeeding, In the year of our Lord 141^ I^ the yee^^ of our
Lord 1517
and compare them with those years where in Luther made the first show of him
self, when as he made an open challenge against the Popes pelting Pardons^ for
it was the very next year ensuing that hundred year whereof John Hus
forewarned in his prophecy.

There may be annexed heereto one other note, though not altogether of so
great importance, yet perhaps not altogether unworthy to be remembered: The
Prophetical dream of John Hus concerning the Romish Sea.
to wit, the same whereof the same John Hus makes mention in his book of
Epistles, and was revealed unto him in a dream many years before! Namely:
That in the Temple named Bethleem, whereof he was Minister, he should with
pencill in hand very artificially paint the Images of Christ, and his Apostles:
which being afterward razed, and s^rapte clean out by the Pope, and his
Cardinals, immediately sprang up many Painters, expert men in the same art,
which should not only restore the same Images much more beautiful t^en before,
but also that the number of the ^ame Painters should be so great, that from
thencefoorth they seemed too contemn the violence of the Cardinals, and
their Pope also. I mean not here to discuss the certain ^uentes and
interpretations of dreams: But this is to be ^o^dred at surely, to see how
notably and aptly the seq^ele was in all points answerable to the divination
touching those personages. And thus much hitherto of John Hus and Jerome of
Prage: whom not long after succeeded Martine Luther mentioned before: raised up
doubtless by the most evidently discernable providence of god. But of him we
shall treat more at large hereafter, in place fit for the same, God willing.
In the mean time let us proceed too the discovery of those things, worthy
of consideration, which happened in that mean intercourse of time.

For after the slaughter of John Hus, xxiiii. years were scarce expired,
before that through the singular providence and incredible benefit of God, the
famous science of printing Books, The Art of printing began in the year 1440
in most exquisite manner, very strange, then yea never heard of before, was
discovered, to the unspeakable commodity of well natured dispositions, and
such as were desirous of learning: then the which kind of skill, as amongst al
other manuel occupations no one science was delivered to the use of mankind
more excellent and more incomparably beneficial, for the capacity, and
industry of man: even so ought we to judge of the same, that it was not in
vain raised up, nor without some special counsel, and singular providence of
god, the only author thereof. For the supercelestiall wisdom, perceived
plainly the lamentable misery of the state of christianity: wherein the very
fou^datio^s of the Apostolic discipline were utterly undermined, and
translated into, I can not tell what, unsavory suttleties, crabbed and
fruitless quillities: By what means and occasions the Church of Christ
wa^re covered.
it beheld likewise what, and how monstrous fogges of darkness, and
pestiferous errors, violently whirled by blind fury, cloked with counterfaite
hypocrisy, fortified with tyrannous impiety, ranged every where uncontrolled,
even too the utter ro^tyng out, and subuertion of sincere and true piety: how
all things were overwhelmed with grossenes and barbarous rudeness: he saw
also religion defiled with all deformity: in the Church nothing sound in
doctrine, scarce any title void of corruption: the true woorshippe of GOD
converted to a gaynful merchandise: the faith of the Gospel turned into
outward and Apish Ceremonies. The Church it self clean transformed out of
kind, intoo a kingdom, not like to that of Plato, but into a Bishoply and
Princely Seignory in place of Christ's true religion, which ought too have
been one uniform and general to all, crept in particular rules of Fraunces,
Dominicke, Brigit and six hundred other strange religions besides. In steed
of true worshipping of God, innumerable feasts of Saints were celebrated in
steed of true invocation of Gods holy name, Pilgrimages were vowed, Iubiles,
Stations of Saints, Relics and worshipping of Images. Errors and confusion in
the popes doctrine.
Finally in the place of Christ, the Pope bare dominion not only in temples,
but even in the consciences of men. Christ sat in heaven, but the Pope Christ
his vicar reigned on earth, in power surmounting all Kings and Monarchs so
much, by how much the Mathematikes have apporcioned the Sun to exceed the
Moon in quantity, to wit, seventy times seven. He was accounted the only
fountain of all jurisdictions, from whose fullness behooued all Bishops to
draw their authority without all question. What needs any long process?
As Soon as the Church began to change his head, and the Pope ganne too take
upon him the place of Christ: forthwith came to pass, that together with
this new head, vpstart such a femshapen visour of religion, as scarce any
one iotte of the ancient discipline remained unpolluted. For the Scriptures
being now commanded too silence, nothing could be heard, nothing could be
delivered, too feed the humors of such, as would have been learned, but
Canons Laws, Decrees, and Decretalles of the Pope, upon these were the
nymblest and finest wits employed. By these were all causes Politike^ Civil,
and Ecclesiastical, both public, and private determined in churches, in
Judgments, in Consistories, common pleadings, and Councels. Godliness, which
tofore was enstalled in the spiritual enstruction of the mind, and in the
true conversation of Christ, was now posted over too other gewgawes, which
should hold men's senses captive, and not edify their consciences: whereby
neglecting the things which only auayled to the obteining of salvation, the
unlettered multitude was carried away into (I know not what) newfangled
mysteries, too Oil, too Wax, Salt, Water, to the Moon shining in the water,
to Cowles, to Belles, to Chali^es, Temples and Aultars consecrated with the
Popes blessing, to Iubiles, Immunities, to Graces, to Expecta^io^s, to
Preuentio^s, yearly Pentions^ Palles, Indulge^ces, Bulls, Pardons: and to
surceasse here too reckon up the infinite rabble of the remaining rags,
wherewith they had perverted all things, clean contrary to Chri^tes
institution, Sacraments gelded, new chopped in place, one part of the Sacrament
craftily conveyed from the use of the Layitie, prayers pattered and mumbled in
an unknown language, private Masses in steed of the holy Communion iumbled up
in all corners of Churches, where the Priest not imparting any portion to the
people, but uttering it too the gaze, to be tooted upon and worshipped, first
lifts it above his Crown, then swalowes it down alone, not in remembrance
of the Lords death and passion, but whole Christ flesh blood and bone to the
salvation of body and soul. For this Article was the very sinowes, bones, and
marrow of most absolute religion: couple here with satisfactions, Purgatory
pickpurse, the vnblooddy sacrifice of the Mass, assuredness of salvation, not
depending upon Christ only and faith in him, but to be purchased with
righteousness of works, redeeminges of merits, and pardons for silver and
coin.

For reformation therefore of these so many, The means that God used to
overthrow the Pope.
and so horrible outrages, seeing they seemed now in no case tolerable: it
seemed good to the Almighty Majesty, too yield his merciful countenance at
the length. For albeit Antichriste must of necessity have his time to play his
Pageant in: yet could not the mercy of the father deny ye gracious co^solatio^
to his church, unto y^ which it had obliged it self with an everlasting
covenant, but that it must relieve her necessities, being surprised now with
such miserable, and almost unrecoverable calamities. And to the end he might
bring the same too pass most commodiously without any vproare: he stirred not
up Princes to arms, neither provoked he to blooddy battle: but as I said
before, sent down from above this inestimable Jewel of Printing intoo the
earth: By what means the noblest science began to be revealed in this later
age.
which should first disclose the lively welspringes of purest doctrine, and
publishe abroad too the world, the ancient authors of learned antiquity,
and withal should deliver at large to the open view of all men the books of
holy Scriptures, and the purest and grauest Fathers of the Primitive Church,
and those also in such great abundaunce, and at so reasonable prices, as that
no man could be of so poor ability, not to be able too buy for a few
pence whatsoever book him listed, and to peruse them for his instruction. By
this means, Maugre the Pope and his Cardinals, began Christ by little and
little, too be made familiar to the world: the Prophets and Euangelis^es
sounded into men's ears every where: Paul, Peter and other Doctors
Expositours of soundest and purest Divinity, were conuersaunt daily in the
eyes, and hands of the people: which being advisedly read over, and grown at
length to some acquaintance, is almost incredible to believe how wonderful
a light of doctrine, how insatiable a greediness to learn, and to read,
what a sudden enterchange of manners, what a beautiful countenance of all
things ensued, and floorished even upon the sudden.

The champio^s of the christian warfare were ^aised up by God.
Here lo that infinite number of Painters whereof I made mention before out of
the dream of John Hus. Here lo^ those painted Images in the temple of God
spoken of before, engraven now in the minds and hearts of Christians: being
not of any new invention, notwtstanding, neither forged upon any new Anvyle
(as you are wont to slander us) but even the self same, which were by you yea
by your own selves scraped and blotted out were now restored again to their
former integrity: against the which from henceforth all the whole brood of
Papists shall never be able too prevail again. Moreover after these
Painters before rehearsed, sprange up many others, the number whereof
increases daily, which yield most commendable travail with as good success,
partly too restore the auncietie, sincerity and purity of good literature,
partly too reedifie the derayed crazes and ruins of the aunciente Church of
Christ.

On this wise new sound sciences, cowpled with pure religion, merue^lously
floorishing in daily encreasinges, in very fit time and place stepped forth
Martine Luther into the world: The first appe^^ng of Luther.
and yet not he only and alone, but a great number of worthy personages
together with him, excellent men both in faith and learning: all which
associated in one, and vndertakiug so rightful and necessary a patronage of
the distressed Gospel, where as they taught nothing else therein either to
themselves, or to others^ but the only glory of Christ, iustif^yng their
doctrine by the undoubted and most pure fountains of gods word. There was no
cause now, why you should so furiously rage against your own brethren the
Christians, yea and that without all deserte, and like to troublesome Dauus in
Terence turning and turmoyling all things vpside down, raise up such
monstrous tempests, and scorching whirlewindes of hot persecutions. Nay rather
it behooued you to have yielded most hearty thanks too the Lord, being the
husband of his most dear spouse the Church, and have enforced all your aid,
help, power and policy withal to the enlarging of his glory according to
piety, and as the duty of your function did exact and bind you unto.

But what helhounde now, The Pope being the scourge of the Gospel sets
himself against Christ and his ^ospel.
what Beelzebub prince of darkness has so bewitched you with mad frenzy,
that you should so monstruously with so horrible ou^rage rushe upon the godly
servants of Christ, contrary to the express word of your God, yea without
all regard of charity or shame, and in steed of a christian shephear^ become
a most butcherly bloodsucker of your own brethren, for whose safety Christ
himself did vouchsafe to give his own life? for what man is able either by
speech to express, or record in memory the infinite thousands of most holy
martyrs devoured with unspeakable cruelty, and sauagely tortures, which
within very few years, by the murdering practices of your execrable
cormerauntes within Christendom, with unquenchable and Wooluishe Tyranny not
as yet ceassing to embrue it self with all manner of horror, upon the silly
flock and sheep of Jesus Christ: I would very feign learn this one thing of
you, by what law at the length, or by what interest do you presume too
challenge too your selves so merciless an in^ole^cie in devouring the faithful
worshippers of Christ ye proud Prelates. Forsooth by the law I suppose,
John.15.
which the Scribes and Pharisees denounced long si^hens, We have a law, and by
our law they must die. In deed you have a law for burning of Heretics
decreed at the request of Pope Innocent the third: And in your Court all be
deemed heretics, whosoever be of opinion, that the true means too attain
salvation, ought too be sought and taught out of Christ's Gospel, and not out
of the Popes decrees.

But if you mind thus to proceed, why then also annexe unto their stakes
where they burn, the same title with the same Inscription of Pilate, Jesus of
Nazareth King of the Jews. For if your inquisitors may be demanded to render
a true account of this their butcheries: what do these silly ones, whom they
do so cruelly persecute, publishe or preach in all their writings, books,
and sermons else, then this one thing altogether: namely, to beat into the
deaf ears of the people our Lord and Savior Christ crucified, King of all
kings, to the end they should glorify him, and in him only repose all hope
and affia^nce, as upon a most vndefesible shoot-Anker of eternal salvation?
And herein I pray you, what so heinous or grievous matter lurketh, as may
seem worthy so many, and so horrible tortures?

But I will refer this manner of accusation unto that place of my ^reatie,
wherein shall be uttered the grievous complainte of all nations touching your
unmeasurable cruelty, and I will bend my pen too that wherein your
senseless insensibilitie seems as woorthily to be scorned, as your Tyranny
too be detested. For what kind of foolishness, or rather madness is this,
accor^ing to the old Proverb, to kick against the prick, and ^o^ offer
^ambate against God? wherein the more fiercely ye urge, the more deeply ye
wound your selves: the which as has heretofore usually happened too all Tyrants
in like manner impugning the Gospel of Christ: So also may ye right well
perceive (if I be not deceived) that the selfsame may not only even now of
all likelihood chance unto you, after their example, but is already also for
the more part come upon you. For who is so senseless, that entryng into due
consideration of the matter it self, viewing with upright eye the beginnings
and proceedings of our cause, does not evidently see, how those your stately
^urrets mounted up aloft, from so fickle and slippery foundation, are of
themselves fallen to the ground without any resistaunce or humane force: God
himself fights against the outrage of the Pope.
on the other side how our simple buildinges, though in outward apparaunce very
slender and weak, have been raised up even from the first foundation
hitherto, maugre the malice of al Emperors, of al Kings, of all Popes, yea of
all potentates and people almost: and how by simple degrees, by little and
little, have with a wonderful ouerspreading surrounded al nations of the
world, and be now at the length advanced and had in prise in princes Palaces
and Courts. All which may be sufficient argum^nts to enduce you to know that
God himself does march in field for us, and from above deride al your
trecheries to scorn: and withal that the truth it self is of so forcible
power, as that no manner of humane forces whatsoever, no not the gates of Hell
can possibly overthrow it.

For I beseech you tell us to what issue at the last is all this execrable fury
come after so many your murders, and slaughters of the Lords flock, after
that your horrible embruing your selves in so many bodies and bowels of
Christians, how much has it prevailed you? ye have murdered ^illy poor
men, and bereft simple weak women of life wi^hall: of which blo^ddy butcherie,
it is so far of for you too be able to yield any reasonable cause, as that
by how much the more narrowly you urge it^ by so much the more discerneable it
does bewray your insolency, wherein, but that the migh^ie hand of the Lord had
been assistaunt encountryng your diu^lis^e practices, what monstrous devises
have not ^eene attempted by you? or what merciless outrage have not been
coupled too those your de^ises to bring a general^ confusion of all estates,
and degrees of people? what one Island throughout all Europe, what region has
not now long since be^ne set on flame with your Faggottes and fire? what
Prince of people these many hundred years now or Emperor, has not yielded
himself Uassall and slauishe Executioner of your insa^iable bloodthi^stinesse?

Go to, and what success else have all these so many, so mighty Massacres
attained too in fine, but abridged your Treasures, and thereby cowpt up into
na^rowe Streightes your lauishe loftiness? And by how much the more beas^ly
your fu^ious madness b^st^r^eth it self, so much the shorter becomes your
^orce, and the more you plundge your selves into unrecoverable hatred and
de^estations of all nations.

The Pop^s vproares in France and Flaunders.
In France, i^ Flaunders what brainsick^ broi^es of Wars and Conspiracies
have ye procured? wherein if you have not achieved your purpose, yet wanted
not a most forewarde (...) too fu^t^er all treacheries, nor vnweer^able
endeavor to^ perfo^rme^ For what else did your mad minde^ mean when you
stirred up against the French Guy^e^ and the house of Lorrayne? and against
the Fleminges, the Dukes of Alba and Austriche, two Mo^sters of Mars: The pop^s
practices against England.
and against England that tray^erous ^ennegate Stukeley: and in Irelande that
Rogyshe Rebe^l James Fitz Morice with your braying Bulls? What dyd^ your^
Treacherous conspiracy emporte, or gro^e after, but an utter rootyng out of
all godly ones, whosoever would dare testify Chri^te in their mo^thes. For
this was the only mark of all your practices: This seemed the only end of
all your D^uelishe dryf^es: namely that it myg^^ be lawful for you in blooddy
wise too triumph over the Public calamity of all the Godly.

For which cause we render, as becomes us, all ^ossible and immortal
thanks too Jesus Christ our Lord, and mighty Conqueror, who by the
v^speakeable power of his Godhead, has so mercifully confounded those
unscheuous Ministers of your malice and M^ssac^e: who by his everlasting
wisdom does daily root ou^, and scatter too naught the blooddy bruyngs of
your beastly conspiracy: who b^ his unsearchable Counsel does ^rushe you on
al sides environed about with such S^reightes, that ye can not now once
hysse so much against his Church, but that it shall redounde to your greater
damage and shameful downfall.

Which being of it self now so evidently apparaunt in the eyes of all men,
more bright then the Sunneshine in midday, if as yet ye feel it not sensibly,
^er^es you are stark blind: But if you see it in deed, what mon^trous and
forlorn shamelessness is this, too be so insatiable bru^^^she as not to be
contented too broche such Plag^es not only against men without any their
deserts, unless you proclaim also open war against your God, against his
word, and against his truth? And what think you too gain thereby at the
last? ween you that having en^^ared and brought under your y^ke all other
Princes of the world by your Frauds, Deceiptes, Lies, Man^^es and
Threatenings: that you should with policy prevent or with power put to flight
the most high and mighty God, which is the Lord of Hosts? Is there any thing
amongst the creatures so great, or in the whole frame of ye world so mighty,
so forcible of power, or so defencible with Counsel, that can either escape
his eyes, or be able to resist his will? The Lord did long ^^thens make this
proclamation by the trompe of his Gospel. Be of good cheer, I have overcome
the world: Io^n^ 16.
And dare ye conspire now with the wo^ld and make a counter proclamation, Be of
good cheer I have overcome Christ? Surely, to confess as truth is, ye have
bestirred your s^umpes in your office, treading upon, and oppressing the weak
members of Christ so lustily, as that ye conques^ seemed to have fallen almost
iumpe into your hands. For I confess indeed that by your means many
thousands of godly personges have been cut of, and consumed too ashes, in
so much that scarce any one part of all Europe ha^h escaped, too be
overwhelmed and overflowed with whole streams of Christian goare. And this is
even the same, whereof the heavenly Prophet forewarned us long since in the
book of the Apocalips: And I saw (quoth he) a woman drunken with the blood of
the Saints, and with the blood of them that suffered for the name of Jesus.
Apoca. 17.
And immediately after: These shall fight against the Lamb. But too what
success came this so great a hurly burly at the length? The lamb a
^onquerour.
And the lamb (says he) shall overcome them, for he is Lord of Lords, and
king of kings.

So tha^ it appeare^h hereby plainly, that there should come a grievous and
continual combat against Christ and his Saints: which also we have seen
manyfestly come too pa^se already many years since: And we trust
undoubtedly, that the same last day of glorious conquest is not far of,
wherein the lamb shall triumph in Majesty. As for the a di^erse f^^^, and
eue^^ie powers of this world, this most mild Lamb^ o^r victorious conqueror,
has our alr^ad^e throw^e ^owne, in his own person by the power of his
resurrec^ion. The double conquest of C^ri^^: One in his own person alr^adie
past, the other in the Saints yet to come.
In his Saints he shall then at the ^ength fully and most absolutely overcome,
w^enas having destroyed the death^ he shall wipe away all tea^^^ from the eyes
of the faithful his elect.

In the mean space, since it cannot otherwise be, but that his Church must
be continually conversant amiddes the camp of the mal^gnant, traueling and
moyling, as it were against al assaults of the enemies, which never ceass^ to
assay^^ her with their ba^terie, yet thi^ comfort is l^st, that it comes many
times to pass, that in the hote^^ of all the ski^mish, the victory is suddenly
snatched out of the enemies ^andes, and the holy ones depart the field with
honor: and truth it self tossed and ^^^m^yled, yea driven as i^ were to the
har^ h^dge by the aduersa^ies, does re^ouer her stand^^^ in despite of the
enemies boardes, and pu^^hent to flight, when they assure themselves most of
the victory. Whereof having assured proof in sundry calamiti^s, and
distresses of the church many times heretofore: emo^gst al other was never any
one pre^^dent more app^r^nt and more glorious, represented to the view of the
world, then a few yeare^ past in H^nrie the French king: Henry the french
king being hurt in the eye with a shiuer of a lance died.
and forthwith after th^^, in Marie Queen of England, Queen Mary of England.
and some others else where in this our later age. To prove the same to be
true, since so many t^^^imonie^ be exta^t every where, (...) whereof yo^ (...)
behold^ with your eyes, the rest being recorded in hystories as you cannot lai^
remember, you may well concey^^ by the ^^me, wh^^ i^ either to be hoped for of
you and yours her^after, or else what you and yours ought spe^dily reforme^ For
how often now these many years has the most excellent Majesty of our
merciful God tamed your manifold and treacherous furies, snaffled your
practizes, subdued your sacriledges, pollices and devises, deluded your
fraudulent expecta^ion: and either scattered to naught the most pestiferous
Counsels of your conspiracies, or rebounded them back again upon the Authors
heads, to their utter confusion and shame?

First call to your remembrance what outrageous tumults and bloody battles
after that slaughter of Hu^ and Jerome of Prage, two most co^^san^ and godly
Mar^re^s (...) ment^^^ed, be procure^ against the Bohe^^ans^ by the conduct
and fy^ ebra^^e of your fury Sigismonde (...) Em^erour, The Pope procure^ war
aga^^^t (...)
but chiefly Julian the Cardinal^ E^p^rour. Iu^ian the Cardinal.
In which your frantike and fu^iouz, Iorme of ouerage, when as you had coup^d
vp^ the poor silly Bohemians within a certain straight, and on (...) parts
enuyr^ded with a triple a ^iny of most valiant Saxons to ouerrunne that little
handful of wretches, having to their Capteyne Cisca only, Cisca Captain of
the Bohemyans.
or rather Christ him self: And whereas charging five several and mighty
onsettes upon them, and with all sounding five cowardly retyres, and five times
vanquished by them, you made the glory of their victory more famons by your
shameful cowardice and fleeing the field: Can any man be so wilfully
poreblinde, as not to discern easily, that their cause was not only most
evidently allowed by Gods own doom, but was also by his only aid and
assistaunce most mightily defended and preserved against your tyranny? That I
make no mention mean whiles of the mishappes that chanced to the same
Emperor Sigismonde, after that his service employed on your behalf, who
otherwise worthy to be registered amongst the most famous Princes, whereas
he flourished before amongst all other good things in merueilous abundaunce
of treasure, honor, and tra^^uillitie to the full, after his ha^t^ desire:
upon the sodeine, i^m^diatly after the Mar^yrdome of John Hus, and that
conflict which the Bohemians (^ortune changing her ch^ere) was ^nforced to
taste of the same sauce in his own dominions, and domestical calami^i^s,
which he broached before for the other p^ore members of Christ. The example o^
^od^ ^^ngea^^ce (...) Julian the Ca^dinall.
But upon ^^lian the Cardi^^l^ your mighty Majesty did much more sharply
avenge it self, for not long after those warl^ke vproa^^^, he was miserably
slain in ^he Turkishe wars.

Immediately hereupon assembled ^ council a^ (...) procured chiefly against
the Bohemians. The Council of ^as^^.
In which council albei^ was ^o smal^ hope con^ei^^d, that your Romish
authority should have won the Spurres^ and been (...) for ((...): yet so it
came ^o ^asse beyond all men^ iudg^ments, by the only hand^ (...) of God, (...)
con^ra^^, and (...) against the ^asilians^ Yet did no^ (...) ^^^htie God lea^e
the p^or^ Basilians succo^^les i^ their (...) and righteous cause, standing
a^a^nst ^he fo^c^ (...) adversaries as it were against the huge hos^ed^
Sennache^ib.

that shall I here rehearse the ^est of your outrag^s which are innumerable?
what shall I speak of the st^te of Geneua, The state of (...) oftentym^^
^eliuer^d from ^he ^o^es treche^^^^.
which being oftentimes circumuented by you, and your wicked counsels and
crafty practi^es chiefly, and as often d^^^ered by Gods only as^istaunce, may
be a sufficient argu^^^^ to proou^, that your ^an^e was no less odio^s to God,
then your tyranny p^rnicious to me^. And yet I know not certainly whether the
maies^y of the Lord of Hosts did at anytyme more comfor^a^ly, or more
magnif^cently ^^^wre abroad the riches of his mercy, then in that ^a^e s^ege
of Rochell^ the Godly Citizens and inhabitants whereof being grievously
besieged by him, The siege of Rochel.
of whom they might of al likelihoode have been swallowed up easily without
dint of sword, yea though he had slept soundly in his Pauilion: yet in this
lamentable case and dispeired estate, being myserably distressed, as well for
want of food, as environed with succourlesse siege^ the fa^herly hand of the
Lord did so nothing slack his aid and fatherly care of preserving his
people, as that by a woonderous miracle, relieuing them with unspeakable
abundance of fish, did not only at one instant deliver them from fa^ine, but
also from all peril and danger of the enemy. Hereof what each might may judge
of their cause, even by the testimony of God himself may easily appear.

The Citizens of Rochel defended.
What then (will some one say) will God allow seditious commotions, and
vpro^res of subjects against their natural Princes? No verily, I confess it.
But I do utterly ^enie, that this defense of the Citizens of R^chel was to be
judged a rebellion against their king: forasmuch as neither the Citizens
undertook the defense of their lines as against their liege Lord, neither did
the king himself deal against them for any their misdemeanour against him,
but at the only instigation and commandment of the Pope. Wherefore if in
this foreign quarrel, which the Subjects withstoode, they had been
overthrown, yet ought they not have been deemed rebels for standing in their
own defense: neither if the king had vanquished, the victory could have been
judged his own, but rather the proper and peculiar conquest of the Pope only.
For the contention betwixt them did not grow upon this, Rochel defending it
self, was for the kings behoof not against the king.
neither the king should bear sovereignty over the French, but that neither
king, nor subjects might become vassals to the Pope. Neither did the Subjects
put on arms to the end to abridge their liege Lord and king of one dram of
his Majesty: nor yet to dispossess him of his sovereignty, nor to bereeue
him of his due honor, not to spoil him of his right of government, nor yet to
force him to yield to such conditions as listed them. Nay rather to this end
did they mainteyne their defense, that it might be lawful for them as subjects
to obey their own and one only governor on earth, exempt from all other
hautie usurpation of foreign power, and yield their humble alleageaunce to
their natural King only, and not to two Monarchs in one kingdom: and that
their liege Lord would permyt them quietly to enjoy such privileges and
laws, which his highness had established amongst them. To this only end
tended all that honest and necessary defense of the subjects: so that now may
appear manifestly, that their entering into arms was not against their King,
but rather altogether for their kings behoof: Yea on such conditions en^ered
into, that they might thereby establish the Majesty of their Prince in perfect
freedom delivered clear from the treacherous thraldom of all Romish
rakehels. For in all human actions we may not so simply prye into the manner
of proceedings what is done: but the cause rather, the purpose, the end and
mark whereunto they be directed, must be duly considered: which being
thoroughly weyed, what could the king require (I beseech you) more accordant for
his estate? Or what greater tokens of most humble obeysaunce could the subject
yield more glorious for their Lord? Wherefore since it pleased the heavenly
benignity in so perilous a time, and dangerous a case, to vouch^afe his
me^^ifull aid, rather to the preservation and deliu^ry of the distressed
Citizens, then too that most arrogant in^^lency of the Pope: the kings
Majesty entering into due consideration of the necessary circumstances, might
of his singular justice, have so accepted of the equity of their cause, as
that nothing could have been given from ab^ue more beneficial for his Crown
and dignity, more peaceable for the freedom of his subjects, and more
commodious for the preservation of his peace and sauegard of his nation.

But leaving France a whiles, let us cast our eyes now upon Germany, where
also I know not whether more famous exploytes, as far more evident
demonstrations of Gods victorious conquestes, then those other spoken off
before, be more evidently discernable. For who can be so wilfully obstinate
against the truth, so blockish of judgment, so void of wit, who duly entering
into the practizes of the very same Saxons, whom ye your selves a little erst
did wage against the Bohemians, being at this presen^e much more eagerly
sharpened, and set on edge against your own person: who also advisedly
beholding the friendly leagues of so many Princes, so many regions, and so many
Cities linked together, with such impregnable bonds of mutual amity, can
not easily discern, that this merueylous pla^^e of so great conclusions could
never have been so firmly combyned together, without Gods good will and
heavenly wisdom, and therefore also to have been procured to this end chiefly
and only, to snaffle and hale back that brutishe and more then savage outrage
of your execrable, and most barbarous beyond all measure raging tyranny, and
cruelty, verifiyng herein the Prophecy of the Prophetical Apostle in the
Revelation uttered concerning the kings that should detest and hate that
whorishe strumpet, Apoca. 17.
and should make her desolate and naked, and devour her flesh, and burn her
to ashes. etc,

But why do I here mention kings, people, nations and Empyres enflamed with
^otte desire of revenge against this Babylonicall Sea, since I may more
easily refer you over to one only, Martine Luther.
I say not a Monarche, but a silly, bare, unweaponed Monk: as the which being
aided with no Garrison of Soldiers, void of money and men, without all help
of human force, did so migh^ily crack the credit of your Crown through the
only breath of the holy Ghost, and simple preaching of the word only (as
David did heretofore overthrow Goliath) that no power of yours were it never
so great, could once so much as pinche him, not all the droaues and shaven
swarms of sworn Uotaries, Bishops and Cardinals could suppress him: no
not all your most picked and choice Champions were able once to quail him. On
the other side, he poor silly contemptible man, only, and alone did so
scatter abroad all your devises, confound your Counsels, ransacke your
stately Turrets and blazing bravery of your magnificent Monarchy: finally, did
so raze to the ground that your Crowing Castle of Babylonicall presumption,
that if he prevailed not to the utter extirpation thereof, yet has he
thoroughly crazed her best and stoutest Pillars, which being propt up at this
present, with a very few rotten ruin^us posts, for a small season as it were,
seems scarcely able to endure her fatal fall even now prea^ing on apace.

These, even these, yea and many other the like be manifest arguments of Gods
grievous judgment against you: which I suppose you do plainly perceive as
precedent forewarninges of your fatal end, ye Romish Prelate. As for the
success of the sequel which hereafter will ensue, and seems even now to
boad far more bl^stering broyle, I leave here to prognosticate, neither do I
disclose all that I may. This one thing dare I affi^me. Though all the
Monarchs of the world should ^olster you up, yea though Luther had never
written against you, yet the very stones, believe me, would have cried out
against you: and though the same Saxon had holden his peace, yet the very
stones would^ not have been silent. Finally, though ye abound in all pomp and
felicity of the world, and were magnified with as much glory, as our Lord
Jesus refused at the hands of Satan showed unto him long since, upon the
top of an high Mountain: yet your so many, so monstrous mischiefs,
treacheries, frauds, lies, deceiptes, treasons, your so manifold murders,
massacres, spoils, and pillages of people, bloody butcheries, sauadge
slaughter of innumerable Martyrs, your intolerable oppressions, unspeakable
cruelty, unmeasurable covetousness, execrable hautines, and Luciferlike pride,
can by no means possibly escape the just and most sharp scourges of the
almighty revenge.

If our Lord and Savior thought it not amiss in his Gospel to charge so
grievous a clogge upon him, who so ever should displease the least of those
little ones, that believed on him, as that it should be easier for him to be
cast down headlong into the bottom of the Sea with a Millstone about his
neck: what shall be said of them, which do proudely tread upon the necks of
the mightiest Emperors that believe in Christ, which thruste kings out of
their kingdoms, curse Christian Cities and Nations to the pyt of Hell,
procure the utter destruction of all people great and small, devour innocent
blood, consume the bodies of holy ones to ashes, finally, pursue to the very
root all peace, amity, and concord, from out the whole state of Christian
society. We read in the Acts of the Apostles, that Herod, because at the
fawning florishe of foolish flatterers, filling his ears with these words:
Acts.12.
The voice not of a man, but of God: he raised the Creste, and was puffed up
with pride, nor would acknowledge him self to be a man, nor w^ulde give God
the praise, was m^st horribly plagued. Now if it may be lawful to make a
comparison of like examples one with the other, which of these two shall we
say, was more insolently arrogant against the glory of God^ Herod, or
Nicholas Pope of Rome the fif^h of that name, who on a time in a public
Oration solemnly uttered by Ladislaus a King, was contented to accept this
greeting: the words whereof I will set down as the History records them.
Cocleus In the history of the Hussians. 11^ book.
Where (says the King) shall I begin mine Oration? I am not able to
express worthy words wherewith I do adore thee the only prince of
Christians, king of kings, and God on earth. etc. And againe^ immediately
after: I do acknowledge this day the most happy of all others to have shined
unto us, wherein we have obtained from above, to behold, and with sound
judgment, and undoubted faith to woorshippe so mighty and so sovereign a
God, etc.

Not much unlike hereunto was that glorious title attributed to Pope Julius the
second by Christofer Marcellus in a public sermon, Ex Tomo 14. Conc. page
66^.
Thou art our shepeheard (said he,) our Physician, our governor, our honor,
to be brief, thou art an other God on earth, etc. Could ever any more
blasphemous voice be attributed to any person, or vouchsafed of any man, then
that a mortal man should be woorshipped of a man for an immortal God on
earth? which blasphemous speeches were yet so not altogether refused of those
proud Peacockes, and so nothing at all reprehended, that Ladislaus was for
none other cause at all, esteemed and dignified with the title of a Catholic
king.

But what reckon I up one Nicholas, or one Julius, as though this were the
example of one, two, or three Popes only, as though it were not an easy
matter, rather in this one Glass to behold the whole cluster of all the rest
of the same crewe? The Pope^ pride.
who for the most part nooseled up in the same Stye, have not spared to
couple with their unspeakable pride, like unshamefast shamelessenesse, as that
they blushed nothing to offer t^ the mouths of most mighty Monarchs, not
their hands only to be kissed, but their filthy feet also, wherewith they
scarcely dayned to touch the ground: which shame not to rende in pieces the
sinews of Gods laws, and so to embase them, as vile and of no valor in
respect of their durtie decre^s, that they spare not to proclaim the breach of
their Canons, for a special sin against the holy Ghost: ^^. Quest. ^. (...).
which tremble not to challenge unto themselves one self same consistory
equal with God: which command all their actions whatsoever, to be exempt
from all controlment of mortal men: which vaunte themselves to be kings of
all kings, and to bear sovereignty over them as subjects: which enforce Kings
and Emperors to attend and accomplish their commandments: which vouchsafe
their clawbackes not only to call them, but also to woorship them as Lords of
Lords: which can suffer and allow not only themselves to be called blessed,
but their Sea also most heavenly: finally which sit in the Temple of God not
to teach, but to reign^ and to bear rule: to whom suffices not to be named
Ministers or Bishops, no, nor yet Archbishoppes, or Patriarchs, unless
being invested in the universality of all power, they enforce to be subject
also unto their lust and be^ke, of very necessity the universal Church of
God wheresoever over the face of the whole earth, yea and all human creatures
withal, De Ma^^rita^e: ^na.
under pain to be excluded from all hope of Salua^ion, insomuch that they
receive of their own Subjects less obedience, Ex Tomo Council. in oratione
Stephan Patra^^^^^^is.
than themselves do^ owe of duty to GOD himself.

Wherein I know not what I may imagine first, or whereat I may wonder
s^fficien^ly: whether at the prodigious insolency of the Popes, or the too
much drowsy carelessenesse of the other Bishops: who contrary to all
equity and right, contrary to all authority of most sacred Scriptures,
contrary to the approved custom of their ancient predecessors, and prescript
orders of the Primitive Church, would so wilfully admit this so manifest an
injury against themselves, and so per^icious a plague against Christ's Church.
And but that our Savior himself not only by most plain president of his
own life, but also by express commandment had restrained his Apostles from
this profa^e desire of Lordlinesse, and had called them back to an utter
detestation of this worldly pomp, and most humble abacement of mind, with
incredible loathsomeness always abhorring the things which were accounted
mighty and gloriouse in this world: Luke. 1^^
Certes I should less have wondered at this your greedy grasping (you men of
Rome) after this universal title of universal regiment. But now what is there,
I pray you, under the Sun more repugnant to the rules and pre^eptes of
Evangelical doctrine? more contrary to the perpetual course of Chri^ts
meaning, and directorie level of Christ's Religion? more odious to the
mildness of the spiri^e? whose voice uttered in the most holy Books of the
Gospel, if may not obtain any credit and authority with you: let us at the
least ^rie the matter by the testimony, and judgment of the grave Fathers,
and learned Doc^ours of the primiti^e Church. Amonge^t all the which, what one
did ever e^dewe you (Sir Pope of Rome) with this a^hominable, I woul^e say,
honorable title of the universal head of all Christians, wheresoever upon
earth? who ever did yield unto you, the iuris^iction of both s^ordes? who ever
granted unto you that special prerogative of summoning Councels? who ever
limited all the wor^de to be your peculiar Diocese? who ever subscribed to
that fulness of your absolute power over al other Bishops? who did ever
pronounce, or so much as dream, that you should not only be greater, and
better than all other Patriarchs and Kings, and all and every humane
creature, but also far above all councels? who ever so much as in word has
uttered that the higher powers of all Emperors and kings (unto whom the
heavenly Oracle has commanded all and every soul to be subject) should
beg their estate to be authorized at your hands? who assigned you to be
arbiters and judges of purgatory? who has ever at any time lo^ked fast within
the cubbard of your breast all manner of jurisdiction, or ever admitted you only
expositor of Scripture and Lord of our faith?

From amongst the whole antiquity of those reverend fathers before
mentioned, The ancient fathers against the Popes su^remacie.
if you can vouche one credible person, besides them that either have been
Bishops of Rome, or such as be mates of your own mark, ye shall win the
garlande. But if you cannot, as hitherto you have not, then either must you of
necessity relent of your claim, or wholly relinquishe that ti^le, and utterly
disclaim from this challenge of antiquity. And because I will not ouerwhelme
you with multitude of testimonies, which I might lawfully urge against you one
after another: let it not be yrkesome unto you Romans, from amongst a great
number to hearken unto one, to wit, your own only Bishop of Rome
Gregory: Gregory's testimony against the Popes supremacy.
for I suppose none of you to be ignorant of that which he wrote unto John
Bishop of Constantinople, and to other Bishops concerning the same matter,
whereof you mainteyne so hoate a contention: and (if I be not deceived) you
contend about the only and universal prerogative of ecclesiastical
iuris^iction: which you do so unseparably glue fast to that Romish Chair,
that whosoever sit therein, must of necessity bear soueraig^tie over all
other Bishops, and must be reputed and taken for the highest head of the
universal Church. Wherein I pray you behold, ye gentle companions, how
injuriously and unhonestly you abuse both the name of Christ, and the
simplicity of Christians, when as you require us to that, which we can neither
with safe conscience yield unto you, nor, if we did so, you could accept
without great injury to others, and your far greater infamy and shame, as
shall appear by this one witness whom I have cyted, to wit, Pope Gregorye.

Who being on a time, in a Letter sent unto him from Eulogius Archbishopp,
saluted by the name of universal Pope, with great i^dignation rejecting that
glorious greetyng of proud Prelacy, did so not accept of that which was
offered, as that he would not admyt the word of commaundyng: Gregory in his
seventh book the 30. Epistle to Eulogius.
very earnestly requiryng him that from thencefoorth he should never use any
such voice of command, nor any other surname of glorious universality in
any his wrytings: Because (says he) I know what I am, and what you be: for
in function you be my brethren, in conversation my fathers. And so likewise
annexeth this sentence touching the title on this wise, which I do in this
place more willingly set down, because not only the proce^dyng of Gregory
herein might appear, but also the cause and consideration that moved him
theretoo.

Because (says he) so much is derogated from your dignity, as is more then
reasonably yielded to any other. I do not desire to be honored in words, but
in good life: neither do I account that to be honor, wherein I do know my
brethren to be any iotte abridged of their honor. etc. I would wish therefore
all such as with so gaye a countenance of religion do strive so lustely about
the prerogative of the Romish Sea, to have an especial regard and
consideration of the words of Gregory in this place.

My honor (says he) is the honor of the universal Church: Gregory in the
same place.
my honor is the flourishing honor of my brethren: then am I honored aright,
when due honor is not denied to every particular brother. For if your
holiness do call me universal Pope, you renounce your s^lues to be the self
same, which you yield unto me in name of vniu^rsalitie. But God forbid. Let
speeches that puff up to arrogancy, and empaire Christian cha^itie, be
abandoned, etc. And again in another place, writing to the Bishop of
Constantinople, requires him to be well advised what he enter upon, because in
that presumptuous rashness the unity of the whole Church is perverted vpside
down: Gregory in the 4. book the 38 Epistle to the Bishop of Constantinople.
and thereby aryseth a flat denial of the general grace powered upon all
indifferently. And forthwith after: For what else be your Bishops of the
universal Church, but the Stars of heaven, above whom whilst thou
presumest to exalt thy self by proud title of stately souereigntie, what
emplie these words else, but that I will ascend into heaven, and will exalt
my Seat above the Stars of heaven? etc. Adding moreover in the same epistle
no less wisely, then considerately an admonition both to himself, and the
other Bishops. Let us be afraid (says he) to be recounted of that
number, which prowle for the highest Seats in the Synagogues, and gape after
greetings in the ma^ket place, and to be called of men Rabby: For there is but
one master, but all you be brethren.

What could have been uttered by Gregory more distinctly, and more ap^ly for
the purpose? of whose authority if you make any reckoning, as reason is you
should: why may not we as lawfully use the same authority over you, and by
the same words exhort you (ye bre^thren and fathers of Rome) as well as he?
First that no vain opinion conceived of that S^agelyke state make you stand
too much upon the Slippers of reputation, as though the Chair of estate, which
you challenge to be at Rome, shoul^e make a difference betwixt your brethren
and you (for by the place (says Gregory) you be all brethren. Moreover,
that you esteem not so highly of your own honor, as that you become
iniu^ious to the rest which are joined with you in the same fellowship and
equabilitie of dignity: but iniuried they be, by the testimony of Gregory,
when your advancement arises by the abacement of your brethren, and when as
the general grace powered out upon all indifferently is abridged by you. Last
of all, we do admonish you not without cause with Gregory's own words:
That you ^xalt not your state so arrogantly above the Stars of heaven: that
is to say, That ye extol not your selves so loftily with a presumptuous
bravery of superiority above other Bishops, least the old Proverb may
be verified of you at the length, Pro. 17.
whereof Solomon makes mention: He that builds his house too high, seeks
the ruin thereof. But why do I vouch this one testimony of Gregory only,
when as never any one so much of all Gregory's predecessors was ever heard of,
which would take upon him the name of universal Bishop, or the head of
the universal Church?

But lo here a sudden rebounde back again to Saint Peter, not much unlike
the tale whereof report is made by Esope in his fables, of an Ass wrapped in a
Lions skin, looking as a Lion upon other little beasts what (say they) was
not Peter the chief placed Bishop amongst the Apostles? Was not the
principality over the rest, Greg^ry in his 4 book the 38 Epi^tl^ to Lu^o^.
granted him by the Lord himself, whom we do succeed in the same
succession of Sea? Whereof hearken I pray you what Gregory teaches plainly.
Truly Peter the Apostle (says he) i^ the first member of the holy and
universal Church, Paul, Andrewe, and John, what else be they then par^icular
heads of other several Churches? And yet under one head they be all members
of the Church^ And to shut up all at a word. The holy ones before the law,
the holy ones under the law, the holy ones under grace, all these are members
of the Church, appointed to consummate and make perfect the whole body of our
Lord: and there was never any one that durst presume to call him self
universal, etc. Hear therefore, yea hear (ye Popish Prelate) if credit may
be given to Gregory, that besides Christ there is no head of the Church that
ought to be reputed for universal, appliable neither to Paul, neither to
Peter, nor to any other of all the Apostles. And dare you yet challendge to
your self, that, which Gregory dares not yield to the chiefest Apostles,
which also the scripture it self denies unto them? Bid adue to those
vaineglorious titles of proud hautinesse, which do (as Gregory says) buddle
from out that fil^hie puddle of vanity. Let us well consider of the matter it
self.

And because the principal proppe of all your tottering Monarchy consists
in Peter alone: may we be so bold as to parle a few words with you
touching Peter him self: whom to confess, as you do, to be a principle
member of the Church, Peter was neither head of the Church, nor universal
Apo^^l^.
and the first that was called by the name of an Apostle: yet this will we not
grant surely, that he was head of the Church, or the universal Apostle.
The one whereof Gregory does discharge him off, the other the infallible
truth of the sacred Scripture does utterly deny him. For what can be more
manifest, or more substantial, then that true saying of Paul, wherein he
holdly pronounces that the Apostleshyppe of Peter stretched not out generally
over all: Galat. 2.
but was streighted to the bounds of the Circumcised only, limited thereunto,
as it were by specially lotte: and that unto him self authority was given
directly from the Lord to be an Apostle of the Gentiles: which also Christ
himself and the holy Ghost do verify to be true by an undoubted Oracle:
when as leaving Peter in his native Country, he commanded Barnabas and Saul
to be separated unto him, for the work whereunto he had called them? Now
what kind of work was this else, but that they should be sent forth a
far of unto the Gentyles? whereby appears without all controversy: that
this general charge, and oversight of the whole world was not more peculiarly
laid upon the shoulders of Peter, then upon Paul, Barnabas and the other
Apostles. Hereof also came it that to be the Apostle of the Gentyles, was
properly and peculiarly ascribed unto Paul, and not unto Peter by the general
testimony of all men. In like manner Chrysostom making mention of Paul:
Chrys^st. upon Paul's Ep^stle to the Roman^s.
And he took unto him as allotted the universal Province of the whole, and in
him self he bare all men etc, And where is now that special Prerogative of
superiority which you Romish Rutterkins so gros^y rake too your rotten Sea,
under the cloak of Peter's authority. whereupon also you vaunt your self
altogether as unadvisedly? God (says Paul) does not accept of any person:
and will he accept of any place? Paul acknowledged no manner of Superiorie in
Peter above the rest of the Apostles, testifiyng plainly that he auayled him
nothing at al: and that they joined hands as fellows of one society. And
will the successor of Peter be so fool hardy, as to admit no mate in the
ministry of Christ's commission with him? what horrible iugling, lying and
legerdemaine is this? what more then shameless and whorish impudency is this?

But to surceasse those vehement, yet deservedly imputable bitterness of
speech, let us de^le somewhat more mildely: and I will now so frame my ta^ke
with you, not after any clamorous and brawling manner, wherewith nevertheless I
might most iust^y exclaim against you, as against the most sworn enemy of
Christ: but that I may seem too debate with you better then you do deserve,
coldly as it were, and with soft and calm words. The universal Jurisdiction
of the Pope confuted.
And first this will justify against you: That ^ur graunde Captain, and most
worthy Sovereign Author of our redemption, left no such law, custom, nor
President: neither was of any such mind at any time, that in his Church any
of his Ministers should so stand upon his Pantobles, as presuming upon any
singularity of Lordlinesse, should be so bold too enter alone upon any
sovereignty, or stately controulership over the other ministers and pastors
of Christ. John.6.
If these words spoken by Christ his own mouth be true, As the living
Father sent me, even so do I also send you: Then must this also be most true:
that since by this speech he noted no one particularly, therefore ought no
person challendge any such prerogative, as to execute here his office, as his
only Uicar on earth. And yet I allege not this to the end, I would
persuade to disanull, or root out of Gods Church, received and approved
degrees, estates and orders of the Church, nor those degrees of superior
placing in holy Churches discretely delivered from the ancient Fathers,
namely: That in every Diocese should be some one superintendent over the
inferior Churches, unto whom the rest might resort for Counsel and for
avoiding of schisms. But what is this too that maiesticall royalltie of Saint
Peter? or too that prerogative of Uniuersalitie too be resiaunt in one only
Sea, which the Roman Prelate pruneth upon of the whole universal Church we
gaynesay no decent, nor necessary orders in execution of Ecclesiastical
discipline. But these proud peacockes plumes and Luciferlike lofty lo^kes of
this Uniuersall I^rarchie, neither did Christ bring into the Church nor the
Apostles usurp at any time. What means this, that our Lord himself in his
Gospel did urge no one commandment more precisely and more earnestly,
amongst all other precepts and documentes, then too draw the minds of his
Disciples from al desire of glory, and ambition unto most humble abacement,
lowliness, and humility? as when he wills them too be contented with the
lowest places at feasts and banquettes: when as in his own person he washes
their feet, alluring them thereby to follow his example? and again where he
exhorts them to be as mildly minded as little children: Luke.14.
and when as he commands them too shun the first places in the
Sinagogues, John.13.
and stately salutations in the Streates: Matthew. 23.
when as he calls them back so busily, Luke.16.
to abandon the pride and hautinesse of this world: Matthew. 5.
too eschew the mighty things of this world, to embrace the baseness of
the Spirit, and patiently to sustain all injuries of adversaries? When as
Peter also forbad so expressly: That ye become not Lords over the Clergy, and
Paul likewise, not too frame their life according to the fashion of this
world: I have now declared sufficiently, how that the very meaning of Christ,
and the continual course of his discipline in the holy Scriptures, could
never digest that universal and more then kingly ambitious seeking of
superiorite of this Sea. Now would I feign learn what you ean reply against
it: what answer ye can make, sir Pope? and what ye have to allege, yea what
can ye imagine to color this glorious title withal? what? was not Peter (will
ye say) prince of the apostles? what a jest is this? As though the apostles
were not al of one spirit? all of one calling? or as though ye can vouch any
one place in all the Scriptures to justify that Peter was invested in any
superiority of power, above the rest, which either he received at any time, or
which Christ ever gave him? Or as though the times were such in their days,
as would permit the holy Apostles to be so idly disposed, as once to think
or to dream upon any principality, being as then in hurly burly, turmoyled
and broyled with daily fears and continual perrils? Yet I will not deny, but
Peter has been sundry times blazed out with that brave name of Prince of
Apostles, In what sense Peter was calle^ prince of the Apostles.
in many men's writings and Commentaries, wherein I do not altogether condemn
the godly affections of those writers: but I note herein their phrase of
speech, which in my judgment seems to be none otherwise, then as the
usual and daily speech imports, wherein we customably call him a Prince of
his Art, that excels in the faculty which he professes singularly above
others. The Grecians do say the^ Too bear the bell, which do surpass all
others in any manner of science. As if a question be moved, who is the chief
or Captain of the school, some one or other is noted forthwith: yet is he
not therefore a Prince over his fellows, nor his fellows subject unto him.
After the same manner of speech usually and daily in ure, we call Cicero the
Father of eloquence, and prince of the Latin excellency: Peter called prince
of the Apostles, as Cicero was called prince of eloquence, in re^pect of
e^cellencie not of super^oritie.
Homer the Captain of Poetical finnesse, unto whom notwithstanding we
attribute not for that cause, any pre-eminence or state of government in commonweals where they were co^uersant above that which was peculiar unto them.

And yet too return again unto Peter: where did Christ at any time ever
dignifie Peter with any such Title of honor, as to name him prince of the
Apostles? when? before what auditorie? in what Chapter? with what proofs and
arguments can you fortify it too be true? I will make thee (says Christ) a
fi^her of men: Mat. 4.
he does not say, I will make thee a prince of men, or a Lord of Fishers:
neither was this spoken so precisely to Peter alone, but was also in the plural
number uttered to the rest joining them in one, Luke 5.
I will make you fishers of men. And although afterward power were given to
Peter, by name, to become a fisher and a feeder, yet does this make him never
a deal the rather a prince over men^ then transform men themselves into
fi^hes and sheep. John. 21.

Peter made fisher of men not prince of men.


If the Lord had uttered these words in that sense, meaning thereby to
advance Peter to chair of estate: why did he not also give him together
with that universal principality, riches and power, meet for the dignity
and renown of so mighty majesty? But O most famous Prince of princes Peter,
who being so poor a Peter was not able to bless a poor beggar with one
cross of coin, when he craved his alms. Nay rather, O sing^lar man of God,
who as never gaped after any worldly riches, promotion, or pomp, refusing them
utterly as baggage and pelf, so he never affected any Titles of singular
pre-eminence, but despised them always.

We speak not this, as though we were willing to have any iotte of Peter's due
authority empayred, who doubtless was one of the chiefest Apostles: but because
you do so blockishly patche up that mootheaten beggarly cloak of being Prince
of Apostles, too color that disguised visor of your pretensed fullness of
absolute power, and there withal make the whole Church of Christ your bond
maiden and thrall. For this cause thought I good too beat upon this point so
much, not against Peter, but against you for him, and on his behalf. Which
Peter if were now in Rome even at this instaunte, would so nothing at all
acquaint himself with any those braueries, wherewithal you now blaze forth
his arms as that he would more bitterly and chidingly inueigh against you,
then he did once against Simon Magus. Whom as he condemned with his money and
merchandise, so would he much eagerly curse you all in the same bit^ernesse of
speech, Thy money be with thee to thy utter destruction. Acts.8.
For what think^ you, would he accept of those royalties of S. Peter? would
he presume to intermeddle with the two Swords of Civil and Ecclesia^ticall
government, or fullness of Dominion? would he require to be enstalled in the
highest place, as Judge over the Clergy? or would he take upon him so much,
as though it weee not possi^le for him too err, and as though the treasury of
all wisdom and understanding were to be s^ught from him as from out the only
Treasurer thereof, as though the spirit could find no certain and constant
place of abode, but within his only breast^ would he ever endure too be
called or worshipped as King of kings, Prince of princes, or chief head of
the Church? would he ever take upon him too maunt so high, and in such
arrogant wise, as to tread so proudly up on the necks of Emperors with his
feet, as Pope Alexander the 3. did? Pope Alexander the 3.
would he compel kings and Potentates to kiss his hands and feet? would
he vaunte himself to be greater then all Councelles above al churches, and
Lord over all the people of Chri^tendome? would he dare to be so blasphemous
as Hostiensis and the forgers of ^he Decretalles, H^stiensis.
too affirm that God and the Pope had but one consistory? Extrauagan d^
e^ect^ and electi po^^state.
and that the Pope is of power to do all whatsoever God can do, Sin only
except?

What? would he ever be so carried away too beastly scraping of riches on
heaps by right, or by wrong to rake up whole hoordes of mon^y, honors,
possessions, gar^isons of at^endants? to prowle for the glory of this life, for
the pomp and royalty of the world, Miters, Crosses, Pillerz, Hats, Attires,
Passes, precious stones, as these triple crowned Lordings use to do? what is
that most mild disciple of Christ, the very same Peter (I say) and his
companion Paul were alive now, which have so often, by so many their writings
allured us too humble ob^dience of Princes: would they ever have said as Pope
Hadrian did: Hadri^n.
That Emperors do ^e^gn^ by them? or as Clement the 5. in the Council of
Vien^a^ Cl^m^nt. 5^
That the interpretation of all laws was res^aunt within their only breast? or
would they ever have been so monstrously insolent, as having first suttlely
s^ipe their no^ks from out the collers of all privileges and immunities of
civil magistrate, afterward presumptuously ^o enforce Kings and Emperors
under their yoke, and to manage them lik^ bondslaues? advance to chair of
estate, depose, bless, curse, command, countermaund, reward, punish,
banish, restore, throw up, cast down, tr^ade upon with ^^^^hie feet, and
whit^e into the bottomel^sse ^ytte of he^ whom they listed, by their potencie
papal? Finally to^ pass over infinite like ^reache^ies, wo^^^^ Peter or Paul
under color of Catholic obedience, have ever ^umbled together in so horrible
a confusion, Peers and people, kings and their subi^ct^, yea prin^es against
prince^, wi^h such deadly and bloddy battel^, and ^ent asu^rer the communion,
and peace of the Church, with such civil mutines, disordered discordes,
seditious Butles, horrible wars, cruel cursinges as the Romish Ru^^ians have
done, geeuing therein most exe^rable examples of horror to^ to popular and
common in all p^a^es at this present.

For what should I here rehearse the tragical furies of those s^aming
firebra^ds: as of Zachary, ^
who suppla^^ing ye lawful king Chilpe^ick the French, planted Pipyne in place:
Gregory, Pascalis, Innocent 2. Calixte 2. Alexander 3. Celestine 3. and of al
other the rabble of rakebels, whom needs not to name particularly one after
other? For what shall I say of that Innocent the third, who first founded that
Faggotlawe too frye the poor carcasses of Christians, who gathering together a
garrison of Soldiers, with the aid of xii. Abbottes, in most savage manner,
murdered at one time an hundred thousand of Albingenses, or thereaboutes. Of
which number he broyled to ashes a hundred and lxxx persons: not because they
revolted from Christ, bu^ only because they would not yield their necks to
the Romish halter again: when as also he became so treacherous a Traitor
against his own Liege Lord the son of Barbarossa, as to threaten him either
to bereave him of his imperial Diadem, or else that the Emperor should
dispoyle him of his Papal Crown. And afterward to prove his threatenings
true, he procured Otto Duke of Saxon to bid him battle: by means whereof, how
cruel, how many, and how merciless massacres ensued, what slaughter, what
effusion and confusion of Christian blood, people and nations, I mean not here
to stand upon. Thus dare I affirm unto your fac^, Innocent, Thou did never
suck such serpentine poison and woluish bloodthirstinesse from thy predecessor
Peter, nor have ever read any the like horrors committed by any the Apostles.
Saint Paul would never have rebelliously reuoulted against his sovereign, if
he had lived then: nor masked in such mischieues against the godly.

Neither were their successors any better reclaimed of cruelty, to wit,
Honorius. 3. Hon^rius. 3.
Gregory 9. Gregory. 9.
Vrbanus 4. Vrbanus. 4.
who because they would show themselves Curres of the same kind, it is
incredible to report, with what outrageous tumul^es they troubled the Empire
against Otto, Frederick and Manfred, teazing Lantgraue king of Turinge against
Frederick: and joining in Arms with Charles against Manfred. When Frederick
was dead Conrade governed the Empire, Innocent. 4.
whom Pope Innocent the 4. curs^d with Bell, Book and Candle: Conrade being
po^soned by Manfred succeeded Conradine his son in the kingdom of Sicil and
Sweueland: against whom Clement the fourth inwardly sw^lling with venomous
cruelty, Clement. 4.
caused Charles to wage war, to the utter undoing of the said Conradine. Who
after many skirmishes being vanquished, and taken prisoner with Friderick Duke
of Austriche, who came to aid him with his power: upon notice thereof given by
Charles, received this comfort from the Popes holiness, to wit, that they
should be both chopped shorter by the heads. For this was the verdict of the
Pope, most detestable of all creatures, more like a Tygre then a man. The life
of Conradine (quod the Pope) is the death of Cha^les^ the death of Charles is
the life of Conradine. By means whereof it came to p^sse that both those
innocent young noble princes, two most ancient and famous families, kings of
Sweueland and Sicil, were not only overthrown from their kingdoms, but also
most cruelly bereft of life, to the utter extirpation and roo^ing out of the
whole race and po^^eritie at one blow, by one only cankred conceit of a
caterpiller pope.

These t^agedies being finished, Charles enters upon Sicil: the conquest
whereof as was compast with crueltie^ s^ continued but a while in peace and
tranquillity. F^^ ^s by the cursed crampes of that merciless brothel
unmerciful Innocent, the forsaid Charles was allured first to raze out the
whole race of Frederick, with the swallowing sword of furious French: after the
same sort Hadrian and Nicolas. 3. procured the Germans, the Spaniards, and
Peter of Arragon against the same Charles: who putting Charles to flight, and
taking his son prisoner, brought the matter to such pass, as that at the
sound of a bell, All the French in Sicile, young and old, were slain at the
sound of a bell.
above 8000. French (which were at that time in guarrison in Sicil) were
miserably slain, and havoc made of man, woman and child, without pity or
mercy.

And yet for all this could not this Scorpionlike serpent of Romish riot be
any thing appeased, for Pope Martin the 4. takes party again with the French:
Martin. 4^
practices with Philip the French king, to pursue Peter king of Arragon:
commaundes him to invade his kingdom: him self sounds the alarm, and gives
the onset. They rush each upon other as cruel Tigres, gr^edy of the pray: all
hands be embrued with goare: amiddes which hurly burly, skarse one whole year
was over past before ye pope Martine dies. Honorius. 4.
After whose death Honorius 4. the next successor, practiced with Rodolphe king
of Romans, to come speedely to Rome, and receiving at his hands the name, and
majesty Imperial, to chase the French and Spanyardes out of Champaigne,
Calabre, Apulia, and Sicil, and to unite the same to the Roman Empire. By
means of which tumulte of the Pop^, the whole na^ion of Italy, and state of
Germany, had been re^t in pieces, with horrible slaughter of the people, if
death had not snatch^ away that pestiferous Pope betimes. Nichol^s. 4.
What should I rehearse here the furies of Nicholas 4. who because he would
not be altogether unlike his forerunners, was contented to annexe to the
infamous contum^ly of the popes majesty, and to the everlasting reproach of
his own name, this shameless act: To wit, To proclaim the great curse
against the Earl of Tyrol, besides many o^he^ his mischieuouse treacheries
against him: upon none (...) cause, but only, because the Earl would not
yield over his true and lawful inheritance, to the Bishop of Tride^t, who made
challenge thereto contrary to all ^quitie, law, and Justice.

But I can not say whether any one of all the rabble before rehearsed, Boniface.
8.
may seem to exceed Boniface the 8. in pride and in villainies: Who was so
mo^strously puffed up with pride, and beyond all imagination, vnmeasurably
sw^^^en with unshamefast insolency that he shamed not to interdict Philip the
French king, by his legate, fortified with most arrogant bulls, commanding
him, as he would answer the authority Papane, to resign the kingdom of
France to the Sea Apostolic. What more impud^t demand could have been
imagined of the most villainous Pyrate of the worl^? What more currish command
delivered from any, though more mad then a march hare? What action more
resembling the Turkish fury? certes there could nothing have been done, or
devised more disagreeable, and less beseeming an Apostle or the successor of
an Apostle. In good fellowship (pope of Rome) speak even for the reverence ye
bear to S. Peter and S. Paul: Did the Apostle Peter give ever any such
president whiles he lived? Or if he lived now, would he commit any such
outrage, as did Pope Clement 5. Clement.5.
without all regard of shame, who procuring the Emperor Henry 5. to maintain
most cruel battle against Robert king of Apulia^ whiles the two princes were
by the ears, turned his tip pet, and joined in arms against the said
Emperor, on the behalf of the said king? or would Peter have been ever s^ mad,
as with the next Pope following, John the 22. John.22.
by b^ll proclaimed him self father and prince of all Christendom, chief
legate of the high God? or vaunted him self to be of full power and highest
authority able to dispose kingdoms and Empires, where, and upon whom him
listed? Who in the end of his bull gave in special commandment to Lodowike the
Emperor to relinquish the Empire within three months, and to resign the
name and title of a king: not presuming from thencefoorth to reenter upon any
such dignity, without his special license, and warrante: upon refusal
whereof he further charge all his nobles, and estates, as well spiritual as
temporal, to aba^don their king, and compel him to yield his neck, under the
yoke of Apostolical obedience?

I should never skarsly find an end of this beadrol, if I should decipher out
of histories, all that I could, touching Vrbane the 6. Vrbane.6.
Clement, Clement.
Martine the 5. Martine.5
Pius the 2. Pius.2.
Sixtus the 4. Sixtus.4.
Julius the 2. Julius.2.
Paul the third, Paulus.3.
and such like, the number whereof being infinite, I pass over: if I should (I
say) rippe abroad the woeful, and no less loathesome remembrance of al their
cruel tragedies, schisms, broiles, conspiracies, horrible treasons and
rebellions, against kings and Emperors: Massacres, murders, and pillages of
people: practices of war: subversion of Monarchs and nations: the
remembrance thereof would be no less loathsome then tedious. But I leave all
this to a more ample treaty, for the manifestation whereof, according to the
marvelous variety of their treacheries and abhominatio^s, I doubt me, whether
any time, tongue, or pen may suffice. For what mischief has at any time these
many years now, been executed in all Christendom? what treachery or treason
has long sithence troubled, and wasted kingdoms, and Empires: which this holy
famous successor of Peter, has not either for the more part fathered, and
furthered, or been the chief procurer and pillar? I beseech you, tell us
plainly, holy father: What abomination has your Sea been clear of? What
iniquity wanted to fulfill your rage? what destruction did not your practices
procure? What cruelty spared your Consistories to put in execution: how many
slaughters of most innocent Christians, how many flames of skorched martyrs,
how many bloody bucheries of your own natural brethren remain at this
present manifest testimonies of your infamo^s sauadgenesse, and damnable
horror? To pass over in silence meanewhiles, those covert packes of your
pestilent impiety, which for very shame I spare to speak. O most holy, yea,
thrice most sacred successor of ^hapostle Peter: Nay rather, O beastly, and
shameless impudency of an harlot past all shame: O most insolent, and forlorn
arrogancy of a most vile varlet, dare you for shame once take in your mouth
the name of Peter, of Paul, of Christ, or of any of his Apostles, or of the
catholic church by any means? Whose life is not only not correspo^dent, but
the whole state, and course of doctrine, also direc^ly discrepant, from the
lives, and preachings of Peter and Paul: who do practice al ways possible
to shake asunder the prescript law of the Gospel, to change the countenance
of Christ's school, to confound the peace of Christians, and the liberty of
Christian churches: and to deface the life of the godly, with shameful
slau^ders and lies? For what else emporte? whereunto tend these your so many
peevish puppettes in your churches? your so many pelting patrones in heaven? so
many blasphemous brayings in your prayers, and worshippings? so many sowterly
sacrifices in Masses? so many sauadge sacriledges in sacraments? such horrible
bloodthirstinesse in your judgments? such woluishe ravening in your decrees,
but to forclose us all salvation in heaven, and all peace on earth? And yet
after all those your abominations, and cruelties, dare you be so
presumptuously arrogant, as to take once the name of Christ in your mouth,
holding al others in subjection, and challenge to your self only the keys and
authority of lieutenantship by him whom you do persecute in all your actions
of life with fire and sword? And why do ye so at the length sir I beseech you?
is it because like a lazy lurdeine ye loiter in the chair where Peter once
sat?

A trim and skillful shift of lieger de main, The succession of the Pope
discovered and confuted.
I promise you, as though it makes ought at all to the matter, in what place a
man sit, so that he sit in Christ: that is to say, so that he teach sound
doctrine. Or as though because in politic gouernements the civil law has
ordained, that a king should succeed a king in his throane, as he is nearest
of blood, 2. Quest. 7. Omnes.
the same course ought to be retained in ecclesiastical government by like
title of succession? It is not dignity (says one) nor the place of the godly
that makes a bishop, but the good life: nor is every one to be accepted for a
Dove, that can say, peace be unto you. The grace of God is promised to true
holiness and true faith, not to any chair or succession: for the chaires do
not make the church, but be subject to the ordinance of the church. Wherein
consideration must be had, not of the continuance of the place, but of the
sincerity of the successor. For as Chrysostom teaches, The chair dignifieth
not the priest, but the priest dignifieth the chair. The place does not
sanctify the man, Did. 40.
but the man does sanctify the place. He that sitte^h worthily in the chair,
does receive the honor of the chair: but he that sits unworthily, does
commit an heinous injury against the chair. etc. Jerome also vt^ering the like
words almost: ^erome writing to Helyodore.
They be not sons of saints which sit in saints places, but such as do
practice the manners and lives of saints. And therefore their grossenes is
worthily to be scorned, which, as is usually accustomed in state politic, so
in the spiritual kingdom of Christ, do entangle the church of Christ by
human constitutions to a carnal necessity of external succession, and
enforce all jurisdiction so vnauoydeably to Peter's chair only, as that
whosoever sit not therein, be he otherwise never so godly a pastor, may not be
accounted Peter's successor in any wise: and that whosoever sit therein, be he
never so barbarous a brothell, never so swinish a pigge, altogether unlike
Peter in his whole course of conversation, must yet of necessity be suppreame
head of the church, the true and undoubted successor of Peter, as it was
concluded by that detestable decree of the counsel of Constance: The council
of Constance.
then the which what can be uttered more blockish or brutish? As though the
wisdom of God, whose property is, and always has been most free to work
where it pleased, might be poss^bly empaled, or hedged in, by any ordinance of
man, or limited to any certentie of place, as the which by extraordinary
means, utterly breaking or inuerting ordinary courses of things does many
times dispose the riches of his grace, after a certain preposterous manner and
way, beyond all ^ope, and contrary to the opinion of man, namely in things
apperteining to God, not after the appointement of man, but according to his
own good will and pleasure.

On this wise in times past refusing Cayn, Ismael, and Esau and others, to whom
the honor of priesthood and promised seed appertained by right of ordinary
succession, he made choice of Abel, Isaac, Iaacob, to whom the ordinary
succession was not dew. So also rejecting the family of Saul, he translated
the kingdom into the offspring of David. In like manner supplanting the
synagogue of the Jews, he planted the Gent^les in order, contrary to order,
displacing the natural olives, and placing in the wild. And will you so
strictly urge, and choke up as it were, within so narrow a pinfolde, the
incomprehensible, and far outstretched grace of Christ, to one place, and to
one chair: That where all other churches may err, the only Romish Church
may in no wise slip her foot? which also may moreover so replenishe that one
Romish vicar with all her absolute fullness, that she may not emparte any
parcel thereof to any other pastors be they never so godly and true
worshippers of Christ. The ordinary succession prefiteth nothing in the sight
of God.
If the case be such that this ordinary antiquity of daily succession do
avail so much before God, to the obteining of grace: Manasses did long
sithence succeed David, Ma^asses.
Caiphas succeeded Aaron. Caiaphas.
Certes the Jews can con^ey unto themselves far more ancient pedigrees, The
I^wes.
and the same also never discontinued from Abraham, the^ you can fetch from
Peter: John.9.
Yea the Jews blushed nothing at al to urge Christ with the very same
argument: Mat. 3.
crying out with open mouth, Lu^e 2.
we be the seed of Abraham: Abraham is our father etc. But what cou^ter buffe
did the scripture give them for this? God is of power out of these stones to
raise up children to Abraham. And so he did indeed. And is not God as mighty
now, and as powerable to raise up successors of Peter whom he will, and where
he will? yes no doubt: and so he does continually.

What? say they, did not the Scribes and Pharisees sit in M^yses chair, Mat.
23.
whom Christ commanded to hearken unto? He does so command in deed: but
when they teach the truth: neither does he command so, in respect of the
chair, but in respect of the doctrine. Moreover why did Christ and his
Apostles sequester them selves from the self same Jews, Scribes and
Pharisees, if that succession could not err? What say y^u to this, that
Christ him self being rejected of the ordinary priests, who enforced the
self same argument, ought not to be hearkened unto, if your Romish Pharisees
may be credited in their lusty vaunte of succession? Go to, and what shall be
said of the Apostles then, who having no manner of right in ordinary
succession, were the first founders of the church of Christ, and renounced
utterly the ordinary priesthood? To be brief: If to sit in a place, be of
such efficacy and force, I suppose the temple of God be far more honorable
then the chair of Peter. And yet in this very temple of God, Antichriste must
have his chair, according to the testimony of the prophetical scriptures.
Shall Antichrist be therefore called holy Antichriste in respect of his seat?
To conclude: Let it be as forcible as it may for the church, to have what
seat, or what foundation it will, so that it hold fast the lively spirit of
Christ, his holy word and sacraments, by the which it is begotten
sanctified, and made holy.

James.1.
But you will say, Peter taught at Rome: I hear you well, Ephe. 5.
but taught he no where else then in Rome? No resembla^ce betwixt Peter and the
Pope.
Moreover too confess that he taught at Rome, did he teach there as an
Apostle, or else as a Bishop? Let the bishop of Rome unloose me this knotte. But
this is out of all question: If Peter taught at Rome at all, standing or
sitting in a chair, surely he taught always Jesus Christ. But you, holy
father, sitting in the Romish chair at Rome, what teach you, but the doctrine
of devils? Peter did boldly proclayme to the world the manifest scriptures of
God, which he received by divine inspiration of the holy Ghost, being an eye
witness of the things which he heard and taught: But what does your holiness bray
forth else to the people, but fryuolous ceremonies, and fruitless traditions
of men? If Peter came at any time to Rome, he came not thither, unless he were
sent by God, or called thither by men: and then also came too mynister, not to
bear sovereignty: to work, not to skrape riches together: as a trauailer, not
as an idle sitter. But who ever called you to this stately stage of chair
lordelynesse? The state of the chair of the Romish Monarchy^
Goo ye, says the Lord, not into the City of Rome, but intoo the whole
world: speaking not too Peter alone, but to all his Apostles: and preach, not
the ceremonies of the law, not traditions of men, but the glad tidings of
saving health: not to the Romans only, but to every creature. In which
universal embassy Peter together with the rest, of his fellow laborers did
mightily behave himself in the ministry of the Gospel, according to his duty
and the nature of his function: leaving no ^otte of the vttermoste of his duty
undone, whereby in his wandering abroad amongst people and nations, he might
teach all that he might, not only publicly but privately also in every
house: might be earnest in season and out of season: might sow abroad f^^re
and wide, the most ioyefull message, and glad tydinges of peace: might
perform the work of a true Evangelist: might approve himself too be a
trusty servant of Christ: might become an ouersear over the house of Israel,
might receive the words and embassy of God, and the same so received, might
faithfully deliver to the people: might show himself to be salt of the
earth, light of the word: not feeding himself, but the flock: not seeking
his own glory or private l^cre, but the only honor of Christ: not entruding
himself in to the public affairs of civil policy, but serving the Lord:
not exercising sovereignty over the servants of God, nor procuring that
others should mynister unto him, but that after his masters example, he
might become servant to others rather, and in no respect above any other, but
acknowledging al other bishops to be equal with him: and in dignity and name
calling them fellow elders yelding his dew obedience to Princes as being sent
of God: giving unto Caesar things apperteyning unto Caesar: whom also he
disdained not to call by the name of his Lord and Sovereign.

Betwixt the Pope and Peter.
On this wise (except I be deceived) Peter spent his time, which as was a charge
of al others most laboursome, so was there in the world nothing more humble
and base. If we leuel our Popes lives now by this rule and perpendicular: I
beseech you, what one thing do they in Rome now, wherein they may seem not
only not to be Peter's successors, but mere strangers rather, and alyens unto
him. Esaias. 5. 2.
Esaias the prophet does wonderfully commend the feet of the Apostles preaching
upon the tops of mountains, and proclayming peace bringing glad tidings, and
preaching salvation. Now as for these, whither go they? unto what people and
nations flee they as clouds? what peace proclaim they? Nay rather what peace
do they not overthrow? what good tydinges preach they? Nay rather of what
mischief are they not the very authors? what wholesome doctrine teach they?
the Gospel of Christ? nay rather they lock up the Gospel fast in prison^ They
challenge to themselves the property of the keys: but therewith they shut up,
not open the kingdom of heaven: They make themselves treasorers of woonderful,
yea inestimable treasures of the Church, as if they were the only treasorers
of heavenly treasory: And what good or commendable iewelles of price do these
famous iewellers deliver out of these treasories? Forsooth for pure gold,
dross and chafe: Popish pardones for the grace of God: for Christ his most
precious blood, rags and relics of Saints. Peter did gain unto Christ at
one preaching three thousand ^oules: but how do these merchauntes choppe and
change their wares? what gain yield they? nay what loss rather? It was not
without cause that a certain Israelite Prophet seemed so grievously offended
against that sort of sheaperdes, which did feed themselves, and not the
flock: Ezechiel.34.
which clothing their bodies with the woolle, and pampering their paunches
with the milk, made little account of the seely sheep: the weak they
strengthened not: the sick they healed not: nor bound up the broken and
bruised: nor sought that which was lost: but with cruelty and with rigor did
rule over them.

In like manner what do these else then ply their paunches delicately, not
caring what become of the flock whereof not one so much becomes better by
their industry not one restoared to health: not one a title so much the more
learned toward the kingdom of God: themselves teach nothing, nor can
disgeste others that teach soundly and truly: the word of God they deliver
not, but keep it close from the people: they take no pains at al, only they
lie lazilie at home like dumme dogs lu^king in their Laterane, measuring and
apporcioring by ynchmeale as it were all the compass of purgatory, and all
manner the punishementes thereof: where they plundge some poor souls intoo
deep pittes, boiling with fire and brimstone: other some for a few pence they
pluck out again. They appoint special and private Masses to be solempnly
mumbled up in all corners of their Churches: they sit bussing about their
holy mysteries, whyspering in an unknown tongue: the sacrament they blaze
aloft, to the gaze of the people, not to be eaten, but to be worshipped of
them: and the same also in open daylight they carry abroad a procession upon
a white ambling palfray attended with torchelight, belles, and banners, if any
solemnytie or triumph happen to be. With besmeared greasy fingers they
consecrate oil, wax, salt, water, belles, chalices, altars and coapes. They
make open markets of iubiles, Graces, immunities, expectations, preuentions,
Annates, palles, bulls, indulgences and pardons.

What? do they think these knackes to be sufficient warrants toward the
creation of the vicar of Christ? or to the establishing of Apostolic
succession on earth? and that some one wretched caytif, not for any singular
excellency of faith, or virtue, wherein he surpasses others, but for a most
fryuolous title of place, and chair only, wherein he may be enstalled, which
may as well happen to the most doltish ass in the world, as to some worthy or
famous personage, may of right claim sovereignty over the Church of God, for
sitting in that chair only, and therein vaunt himself to be the chief
Prelate? Bishop of Bishops? and head of the whole universal Church? Wherein
he may think it lawefull for him to do what him lusts? through the which
slipping his neck out of the collar of his dew obedience to the higher powers,
he may presume to enforce under his yoke kings, and countries, and thereby set
al nations in vproare, with fire and sword: and usurp more then lordly
controllership over al other Churches, and himself like a tragical king upon a
stage, sitting in a golden chair, crowned with a tryple crown, garnished in a
coape of tyssue, with kingly scep^er in hand, two swords, and a golden Dyademe
beset with pearl and precious stoanes, ride like a lurdei^ (lordling I would
say) upon noble men's shoulders? O swee^^ Saint Peter. Is this to succeed
Peter in Apostleshippe? is this to sit in Peter's chair without any spark of
Peter's qualities? or is it to sit in the chair of pestilence? And what if the
Turk spoiling the Pope of the same chair should sit therein? It is not the
chair, but the good life that makes a man Apostolical.
would the dignity of the place make him Peter's successor forthwith? or what
if the Pope himself, as he sits in Peter's chair, had also now in
possession Peter's fisherboate: should he therefore for Peter's fisherboate,
become any whi^^e the more skilful fisherman? Wherein to my simple con^eite
seems to have chanced too the Pope a matter not much unlike to that, whereof
we read mention made by Lucian, of one Neanthus the son of Pittacus:
Neanthus sonn^ of Pittacus.
who having Orpheus harp, altogether (according to the old proverb) an ass
upon the harp: conceauing a vain and foolish opinion of himself, was
persuaded that immediately upon the sounding of the harp, he should make
wooddes and rocks to run hopping after him. This cockeborrel clown
theref^re w^ndering abroad over hills and dales, and merueling that ^he
woods, and rocks would no^ stir out of their place, at the so^^de of the
harp, but stand still as before immovable, never left stryking, stre^ching,
thumping, and sounding the harp, until at length, he made himself to be
loathed of the brute beasts, with the h^rshe and confused noise, and skraping
the s^rings: and so became a pray to dogs, which tare him in pieces, and did
gnaw his flesh and boanes into gobbets. And what else does this Romish prelate
present unto us with his stately stool, The continuance of succeeding Bishops
in the Church, is no sufficient cloak to coulor error.
whereupon h^e doateth no less fondly frantic, ^hen the seely caytif upon his
harp? For what should let it, but that Orpheus harp may as well make a cunning
harper, as Peter's chair an holy bishop: if we have therein no further
consideration then of the material chair?

But here lo again a fresh reply of a long and never discontinued
succeeding of bishops rusheth out against us: whereby they suck out the very
source, and welspring of their succession even from the Apostles themselves:
and to countenance out the matter amongst the ancient doctors are alleged as
champions of valor, Tertullian, Irene, and Augustine, who do not a little
advance the dignity of ecclesiastical succession. They do yield to the
Church honor in deed: but how? and when? forsooth in their disputations to
confirm the antiquity of the scriptures, against such as did utterly deny
them. Let us also consider the time when they did so: foorsooth even then, when
as the very ancient integrity of godliness, virtue, true religion, and
sincerity of doctrine was resiaunt in the succession of Bishops: and when as
yet the Sea of Rome taught nothing else, but that which was agreeable too the
Catholic doctrine, approved and allowed in Christian Churches. Hithertoo yet
was no cause given why they should make any special complaint against that
Sea: the fundation whereof they had heard say might be attributed too Peter
especially, by^ause they perceived that the countenance thereof auailed much
to the appeasing of schisms. But if Augustine and the other ancient Fathers
were living now, and should hear and see these horrible heresies,
monstruouse maskinges, and peeuishe puppettes, wherewith this holy Sea
ouerwhelmeth the whole world at this present, they would change their note,
and sing a far other manner of song of the intolerable pride and ambition of
this Sea: and would with no less vehemence of spirit, then other godly
mynisters at this present, The ordinary succession of pope^ has bin
discontinued and broken of.
bend themselves tooth, and nail against the same. And yet touching that
beadrol of succession whereupon they brag as never at any time discontinued:
with what face dare these Romish Rutterkynes face it out with a card of ten
as it were, which has been so many years turmoyled with schisms, encombred
with so many chances and chaunges of bishops, each striving against other
for the title of that Sea: where many times three Popes, and for the more part
two Popes have challenged the chair: not unlike lusty gallaunces who be
jealous of their paramoures: in so much that it could not be easily discerned
who ought to be received for the true Pope: that I speak nothing meanewhyles
of al those which by fraud, by symony, by violence, by murders, by
witchecraft, necromancy, and diuelishe practices, I say not, have crept
covertly in, but rudely rusht upon the foresaid succession. To pass also
over, that filthy discontinuance of the same Sea, wherein was chopped into chair
as successor, not John a bishop, but Ioane that shameless stru^pet: whose
successors they must needs confess themselves to be even as yet, if to
derive the succeeding order of successiue Prelates, from the direct line of the
predecessors, be of so great emportaunce.

But of Peter and his succession enough now: whom albeeit we yield to have
sometime sit as Bishop in Rome (which makes not so greatly to the purpose)
yet what is that to the Pope of Rome now? forsoothe Christ gave charge, you
(...) s^a, of his sheep to Peter. This is true indeed: but it was to the end
he should feed them, and not to pluck their skins from of their backs:
But you feed not, but suck the blood of Christ's sheep, and yet require to be
accounted Christ's vicars and Peter's successors? And think you in this so
glorious a light of good learning and Evangelical doctrine, to find such
blo^kish bussardes, whom ye may persuade that your bragges be true,
wherewith ye may be able too bleat? the eyes of men any longer with that
glauering shadow of vain title and name? If you be of that mind: by your
leave sir, you do err wonderfully, if at least the ^ishop of Rome may,
possibly err. But I w^l not say you do err, if you see it not^ but I will
boldly affirm, you are stark mad rather. For what shall I say? do ye not
perceive how your councelles ^ee discovered? da^ ye not feel your crafts,
frauds, disceits, practi^es, robberies, lies, filthiness, crakes, vanities,
errors, blasphemies, d^uises too be l^ide open before al men's eyes? Is it not
apparaunt unto you that men's consciences do now perfectly behold your cankred
malice and cursed conspiring against Christ's Gospel? that I need not mean
whiles rippe abroad your daily murders as well old as new, wherewith your
unquenchable tyranny of sauadge bloodthirstines seems as yet altogether
insatiable. These outragies so many, and so manifest he that sees not with
his eyes, him will I not account so much blind of sight as void of
understanding: he that does not detest them, him may I well judge, to be not
only not acquainted with any partaking of civil humanity: but an utter alyen
and stranger to al virtue, godlynes, and pieti^. Your traiterous treacheries
are more notoriously manifest to al people and tongues, then may any longer be
colored: more execrable then can be borne withal. Your counterfayte horns
these many hundred years now couer^d with clouds w^erw^th you have hidden a
ravening blo^dsucker under the visor of a meek^ lamb, be appara^^ now, yea
believe me, pope, they not only more appara^^ly glis^er in men's eyes, then the
sun shine in midday: but also are become very bables and mockeries in every
man's month: in so much that no man is ^o poor blind but does easily discerne^
no man so blockishe, but does heartily la^gh them to sko^ne.

There was a time peradventure heretofore, whenas these foggy misles of
blundered ignorance did dazel the eyes of men, when as that most happy
faculty of imprinting and reading of purer sciences, most fatal to your
sacred Sea, was not yet published abroad in the world, wherein some place and
time might have been reserved to cloak your palpable darkness. But now
since the gladsome dawning of mo^te resplendisaunt verity discovers it
self, wherewith you may see men's understanding illumined and eyes enlightened
through Gods wonderful bounty and mercy: since remains no foxehole now in
these Regions wherein you may shroude the daseled drowsinesse of your eluishe
errors: The light of doctrine and truth restore^
what other hope may you conceive of those rotten rags of most barbarous
grossenes^e, and loathsome pilfe of filthy superstition, but that ye give
place unto fortune, and abide some better chance? And being convinced with the
truth it self, if ye can not be reclaimed to change your minds, yet for very
shame change your chair at the least, and run away into some desert, and
from thence conueigh your selves into some unknown nations, who have not
hitherto tasted nor been deluded, with those Romish gewgawes, stagelike
statelines, and masking myzemases: you can now no longer deceive bs, as men
that have been more then enough ouerridden and galled with those your
misdemeanors. Perhaps poor Christian carcasses may be pinched with the
crampes of your tyranny. Certes their hearts be now so altogether
estraunged from that common Iuggeler Rome, and from that false fornicator Sea:
as that no hope remains now, for ever recovering them again. And to the end
ye do no longer vainly stroke your selves ye Roman Bishops with false
opinion of assured security: understand ye for certainty, that the world
is turned quite contrary, wherein ye may see the heavenly trompe of the
glorious Gospel prevailing against you, your crafty packing, your false
forged doctrine, your hypocrital holiness, your ravenous raging, your subtle
masking can no longer now creep in corners. The very vnlecred multitude of
Chris^ians does begin now too open their eyes, and too behold the lightsome
brightness of the truth. Gods people is otherwise instructed now then
heretofore, when all the speeches of those Popish Prelates were holden for
Gospel, and when the chief foundation of religion was grounded not upon Gods
word, but upon the Popes authority. But now who can be so witless a
wayward, so senseless a dottard, that cannon easily perceive your error in
religion, your rebelling in conversation, and your pride of life? who also
beholds it, and does not from the very bottom of his heart detest and
abhor you? And herein surely the matter is come to a good issue, That such
a durtie religion is fathered upon so drowsy a dotterell: for such is the
religion, as nothing can be more superstitious, nothing more estraunged from
Christ: Such is your life, as nothing can be more pernicious too the
tranquillity and peace of Christians.

Wherefore since you can in no wise be ignorant of the deadly hatred of all godly
personages, set one fire against you, procured by your own mischievous and
infamous villainies, and which you have long since deserved: What other
Counsel will ye that I give you, but as I said before, to make a necessary
choice of one of these two: either to be of the mind to flee the Country
wherein ye remain now, or to change the religion which you have wickedly
defiled? But being fully persuaded that you will accept neither of them, and
perceiving you too be of that sort, whom neither shame of the world can
drive too your duty, nor fear of God can restrain within the bounds of
modesty, nor any manner of courtesy can reclaim from cruelty, wander on in
your purposed race as much and as long as you will for me: I will give you
^^ee scope to raunge in that Maze of Turkishe impiety wherein ye ruffle: and
too lulle your selves asleep in those brainsicke broils wherein ye triumph,
neither am I any thing at al disquieted with your barking bulls and
bloodthirstie curses, The Pop^s Bull^s against the faithf^l s^ruants of Christ^
which you have vomi^ed out so seditiously against Christian Churches, without
any great danger thanked be God. Nor am I ought terrified with your
accusations as falsely forged, as fraught full of poison, neither moved with
these your filthy slanders and unspeakable raylings wherewith you have
currishely gnawne many Godly Princes, The slanders of the Pope against the
Queen of England^
and of late also backbitten and slaundered the most Sovereign Lady and
Princely Paragon of England the Queens Majesty's person chiefly, then also her
noble kingdom and renowned nation.

WIth infamous slanders laid unto our charge by you (to speak no more now as
of my ^elf, but in the person of her highness: The Oration of Queen Elizabeth
to the Pope.
for so take it now as though not I, but the Queens Majesty called you too
accounte for your shameless impudency against her) if we had received of any
other besides this Roman Antichriste: we would think it not amiss to frame
some more special speeches in defense of our innocence. But as now what
could have been more excellently applied, to the right commendation of our
renown, what could have been more effectually added to the increase of our
everlasting honor, then to be thus accursed of you, being the most cursed
enemy of Christ above all other, with who^ no man can possibly be in league,
unless he be a sworn enemy unto you: neither can any man be otherwise
acceptable unto him, except he be at deadly foade with you? So that for this
cause chiefly above all other, we do yield most hearty and humble thanks
too the high and everlasting Majesty, in that it has pleased him ^o vouchsafe
us this so great and unspeakable honor. For why should we not Judge our
self too be highly honored in this behalf, more then in any thing else
together with other godly and holy ones of my Lord God for this, that t^is
Sebah doe^h so unmannerly rage against us, persecuting us so uncivilly with his
bulls, not so much for any our deserte, as for the defense of Christ and his
Gospel which we do prof^sse. In which kind of cross, whereas two things
occur to be duly considered of each godly Christian: not only what injury
is offered, but also by whom, and for what cause it is sustained: Then as often
as we have recourse to this last point, we are not a little recomforted against
your choleric curses, by the sweet speeches of the gladsome Gospel: Matthew. 5.
Blessed are they that suffer persecution for righteousness sake: and when men
curse you, speaking al evil against you, belying you for my sake^ etc. With
which kind of persecution since ye are now purposed to proceed^ against us,
you could not by any means have uttered any one more manifest a token of true
consolation, and certain assurance of infallible comfort, then by this gross
rankor of mind conceived against us: which does assure us of Christ's
undoubted benignity, high favor and grace powered forth upon us for the same.
For if to be evil spoken of for doing good unto others be accounted for a
princely ornament, even with the most re^owmed Princes: and if there can be no
greater praise attributed too any person then to be slaundered and reproched of
the wicked: then questionles to be maliciously and undeservedly maligned of
this Antichristian Atheist, we think it not so much a commendation meet for a
Princess, as a renown rather well beseeming an Empress, which also we do
plainly confess to be one of the fairest flowers of our floorishing garland.

Well then (ye Prelate of Rome) forasmuch as ye shame nothing after your wo^ted
want of discretion so unadvisedly to scatter abroad all slanderous reproaches
against kings and queens, tell us I beseech you, what that so great haynousnes
may be, that causes you to bray out so indiscreetly against us. We here say
ye have called us in your Bulls, Bondmaiden of all wickedness: and accuse
our kingdom too be the refuge of all Heretics. Good God, what strange and
monstrous shamelesnes is this? Dare this Babylonicall Strumpet be so void of
shame, as to condemn others of wicked life, which when she has thrown out
all manner of cursed speeches and slanders, that her lying choler can imagine,
shall yet never be able too discharge one half of her ugly abominations,
wherewith she swarmeth on all parts most horrible and evidently apparent? For
what common Channel or Sincke can be more unsavory then your life and Court?
But as concerning your own loathsome filthiness, we refer you over to
answer for your self before the high Judge. In the mean time too speak
somewhat for our self, in few words be ye thus satisfied. First, that
neither it is, nor ever has been any our nature or quality, to make boast of
our good life before God, as the Pharisees use too do: for we dare not presume
upon any such innocence: And yet on the other side, we will not so condemn
our conversation before men as we think it when it is at the worst to be in any
respect so stained or blame worthy as yours is. Now when we name you, we mean
not one particular person only, not Pius the 5. nor Gregory the 13, but we
comprehend therein the whole rabble of that rebellions Gallantes altogether:
neither do we simply condemn the whole Sea or succession of Roman bishop?
namely that Sea which in the sweet nurcery of the pure and primitive Church
was ever highly commended and praised by sundry men's writings, and
judgments: such a one as the Poet Ennius makes mention of, L^^ius.
Autentike laws, and sages gray,
Keep Rome in state and civil stay.


But we speak of this Rome, which rules the roast a^ this present, so foully
fallen from the aun^ient steps of her ancestors, from faith, from gravity,
from religious life: not that other ancient Rome long since buried, raked in
grave, and worn out of memory: but a certain chaungeling fr^mshapen Rome,
now of late start up, so altogether unlike too that former, by how much that
first flourished in grau^ty, discipline, virtue and truth: and this other
wallowing and weltring in vanity, riotte, riches, pride, ambition, extortion,
licentiousness, and filthy delights of this world, seems utterly
forlorn, having no spark of remembrance or countenance almost of the
ancient int^gritie, no partaking with Christ: nor any manner of affinity with
Christ's Apostles.

In which Sea, I mean the Sea of this present age, we may easily discern the
usual practices of that Romish Antichriste not unknown too the whole world.
Neither does this holy father therefore rail upon us so barbarously, because
he thinks us to be so licentious in deed, as he slaundereth us maliciously
in words, neither would he reprove us one iot^ the more for that cause, though
we were in very deed much worse then we are: nay rather we should be so
much the more dearly be loved of him, by how much we resembled him nearest
in leawdnesse and looseness of life. But there lurketh an other snake in the
green grass, The cause of the Popes malice against El^zabe^h Queen of
England.
which because he neither discloseth in his Bulls, nor the simplicity of the
godly can easily discern, we will franckly make known to the whole world.
And this it is: If we would yield our person and our kingdom to the Romish
Halter, and suffer the mark of the beast to be sealed upon our forehead, after
the manner of some Princes, and with as great affection as they do: Certes no
kind of inordinate licenciousnesse, were it never so abominable, might be any
such estoppel to bar us out of the number and Beadroll of his dearest Sons
and Daughters: but should be beautified with as much of the Apostolic
blessing, as the dearest dearling of all the crew. Now because we have shaken
of these peevish Papane fe^^ers, and betaken our selves to that Imperial
standarde of true religion, under the which we have chosen to adventure our
life for Christ's glory and honor, rather then to remain in thraldom under
the Pope: Heerof comes it that we be reproched with this foul name, to wit,
a Bondmaide of all treachery: this is it that makes him to boil with so hot
hart-burning against us. And thus much hitherto now of that which you may
conceive either uttered already against you by the renowned Queen of England,
or at the least as much as her highness might justly speak unto you: which
nevertheless if had been set down by her own pen, would have been much
more artificially and princely delivered, if her highness would have
vouchsafed so much to have embased her Majesty, as too deal with such a
monster,

Now I return unto my self, and the public defense of that little Island,
which with cursed mouth you do slander too be the kingdom of Heretics:
expressing herein the very shape and conditions of that froward Phormio in
Terence, who alone marring the whole Action, and for the same cause apprehended
too clear him self before the Judge, became first an accuser of others.
Semblably and with no less shameless impudency this Laterane not Terentian
Phormio accuses them for Heretics and Apostataes. And why so I pray you?
because they have reuoulted from Christ at any time, denied or shronke
cowardly from faith? No, not so, but because they have forsaken that sacred Sea
of Romish Church, wherein they were once settled. Yea, is it so? Shall there
be no Church then, but that only Church of Rome? Shall they be all accounted
to be without the body of Christ, which do acknowledge Christ for their
supreme head? What? is it of more emportance to be slaves unto the Pope, then
to be soldiers unto Christ? No: But they affirm, that there is no Church,
where the Pope is not head. What Church then I pray you, was that in Asia and
Palestine before Peter ever saw Rome? Yea put the case Peter had never seen
Rome in all his life: should there therefore have been no Church at all?
Does the state of Bishops make the Church of Christ to be a Church, or does
the authority of the Church make Bishops? But they say there is no hope of
salvation without the church: I do hear it, and confess it to be true: yet
this is no good argument to prove, that there is no Church at al, except it be
subject to the Pope. I add moreover, That where they say, that there is no
hope of salvation without the Church: How this saying [without the Church, is
no hope of saluation] must be con^trued.
that this saying is to be construed to apperteine to that church only, which
is the very undoubted spouse of Christ, and which is also married unto Christ
her husband, not because salvation is so necessarily tied to the Church, as
though the Church bestowed it of her own mere liberality and bounty: but
for the mutual and immutable coupling together of the head with ye body.
Whereby it comes to pass, that whosoever is made partaker of saving health
in Christ being the head: the same can in no wise be a stranger from the
socie^ie of the Church. And again, neither can such a one be an outcast from
the Church, unless he be first cast off by Christ the head and prince of
the Church.

Which being concluded upon: with what arguments now does this counterfeyte
successor of Peter convince us for outcasts and Apostataes from partaking with
the body, who through faith be engraffed into Christ? Who be not severed
from the true and Catholic faith of Christ? For if nothing else make an utter
separation from Christ, but obstinate rebellion from Christian faith and
Christian conversation: what treacherous rebellion either in our doctrine, or
in our manners can these Romanistes epsy in us, so blame worthy, which may not
much more justly be rebounded upon their own backs? Forsooth (say they)
because we hold not the Catholic faith. The C^thol^k^ fay^h.
Go to then. Since they stand^ so nicely upon this point: let us faithfully
discuss, what manner of faith that is which they call Catholic. If the same be
the Catholic faith which Athanasius does set out in his Creed, Athanasius
Creed.
or which the Council of Nyce did determine upon for inuiolable^ The Nycene
Creed.
From which article of the Creed can you show that they have revolted?

But here again some iangling Iay of this Sea will urge, that because they
hold not the Catholic faith of the Roman Church, The Romish faith.
therefore they hold not the true Catholic faith. Well said. Hereby then I
do perceive that it avails no whitte to be accounted Christians and
Catholics, unless they be Romanistes also. Let us learn therefore of these
Romanistes, what it means to be a Romanist. Truly I believe it is thi^: That
the Pope of Rome must of necessity be accounted for the very and undoubted
universal Bishop of Bishops: the Pope of Rome must be esteemed chief head and
general Lord of the whole Catholic Church: unto whom and unto all whose
commandments, statutes and decrees, all people and nations must be buxam
and bonnaire upon pain of damnation. Is it so in deed? whosoever reteigne not
this faith, though he hold fast and firmly m^in^eyne all other things
agreeable with the holy ordinances of God, and all the Articles of the
Creed, and faith of the Church: shall not the same be adjudged for Catholic?
No, Sir I trow. But if this be true: surely neither the Churches of
Alexandria, of Antyoche^ of ^erusalem, of Constantinople, of Affricke, nor yet
that ancient Church of little Brytaine, shall be reckoned for Catholic. To
what purpose then spoke Basil these words, where making mention of the Church
in his Epistles he says: B^^^^ in his 78. Epi^^le.
The Catholic and Apostolical Church abandoneth etc. When as yet
notwithstanding in that Church of Greece, which he auoweth to be Catholic
and Apostolic, the stately loftiness of Rome had not so highly advanced it
self? And therefore we must needs scrape out of the Kale^der of Catholics,
The Catholic church amongst the Grecians e^empt from the Church of Rome.
Basil, Athanasius, Nazianzen, Tertullian, Augustine, Cyprian, Eusebius,
Theodorete, and all (...) the most famous Bishops of the Greek and Latin
Churches: all which though doubted nothing, but that they were true Catholics,
yet did no one of them profess himself to be a Romanist after this rule.
Neither can the gross ignorance of many learned Fathers be any wise excused,
who first framed the Articles of our Creed unto us. We read in our Cree^ the
holy and Catholic Church, but not the Romain Church.
For if no Church ought to be reputed for Christian or Catholic, but that
which is of Rome: then were those ancient Fathers much to blame, who, in
setting down the Articles of the Creed, did neglect and so lightly pass over
this vpstart Article of the Romish Sea: that where we be commanded to believe
one holy Catholic and Apostolic Church, they did not in like manner command
us to believe the Roman Church withal.

Hereby you perceive well enough (holy Father) into what combersome straightes
and abs^rdities, you have whirled your self by your blind unadvised
rashness. For first^ if no certainty of salvation be to be hoped for out of
the Church, which Church must be without all question that same very Church of
Rome, as you frame your arguments, and that the Church of Rome be none other
but the same which is ^trayned and streighted to the universal commaundes and
decrees of the Bishop of Rome: now then you do exempt out of the privilege of
the Church, not that one English Nation alone, foreclosing them all passable
way to salvation, but together with them also you do exclude out of the number
of the Catholics, infinite other famous learned Clearkes of the ancient and
pure age of the Church, Doctors, Patriarchs and Bishops, yea amongst these
also all the Bishops of Rome as many as were Gregory's p^edecessors. But what
need many proves in a matter of it self so manifest and well known?
Undoubtedly sithence Christ would vouchsafe to lay the first foundation, yea
and to build up that beautiful and everlasting buylding of his own hou^e
upon none other groundwoorke, than upon that cor^er stone of Christian faith,
and Christian confession: And if Paul doubted nothing to recompte the same
faith to be the only and infallible shoot anchor of salvation: by what law
then will he adiudge them as outcastes worthy to be banished from the
Catholic and Apostolic Church, which profess the self same faith of Christ,
that the Apostles and other Catholic Churches did profe^^e?

But the Pope (I suppose) will deny, The only faith and do^trine of Christ
does unite C^risti^^s to the C^u^ch^
That to believe in Christ, and to worship him in heaven as our only head
suffices to true faith and salvation, unless we do withal profess the Pope
of Rome to be chief head of the Church here on earth, and our selves
generally all to be members of the same Church. If it be so: that the faith of
Christ be not suff^cient enough for the faithful unto salvation, except the
pomp of the Pope be propt up together with the Majesty of God: what can be
more agreeable with reason, then to make us here three Tabernacles, Three
Tabernacles.
one to Christ, an other to the Pope, and the third (and good will) to the
Cardinals? To conclude: This also ministers no small cause of maruelling, why
the Pope does not require us likewise to correct the form and words of our
Baptism: for as much as the faith which we have vowed to Christ in our
Baptism, avails nothing to enfranchise us, nor to make us free denezens of
the Catholic Church, except to this necessity of faith, be tied withal an
other tagge of humble obedience to the Pope of Rome: That we correct (I say)
the words of our Baptism, That whosoever be baptized in the name of the
Father, of the Son, and of the holy Ghost, be baptized also in the name of
our most holy Lord the Pope. But if this be true, the cer^entie whereof
cannot be denied: That we were never admitted into the participation of holy
Church in the Popes name, and that the want thereof is no manner of Estoppell
to bar us any way from being united unto Christ as members of his body: how
dare that lying mou^h be so monstruously impudent, as to condemn the servant
of Christ for Heretics to exclaim against us as Apostataes and runnagates
from the Church? to accuse kings and Quee^es to be supporters of Heretics?
Nay rather by what reason or Scripture will he defen^e himself so, that all
the world may not plainly perceive him to be the very self same, whom
Saint Paul in his Epistle to the Thessalonians does by most evident
demonstration forewarne them should come: ^. Thessal. 2.
who sitting in the Temple of God, should keep a stir not as a minister of
Christ, but most arrogantly vaunt himself to be as a God. Which words
sithence do so in all points accord with the life and manners of the Pope,
as that they can not seem to signify any other. Let the Pope be thoroughly
well advised first, how he may be able to clear himself before God, before
he accuse others before men. But an other time shall serve more fit for this
treaty, hereafter more at large God willing.

THE POPE CONFVTED. THE HOLY AND APOSTOLICAL CHVRCHE CONFVTING THE ERROVRS OF
THE POPES DOCTRINE. THE SECOND ACTION.
IT appears manifes^ly enough, I suppose, by the former discourse, that we
have not departed from out the Church of Christ, in that we have sequestre^ our
selves from the Romish Sinagogue. In this present action therefore, now it may
seem convenient that we render the reason that moved us to renounce that
Romish route, and set down as briefly as we may, the very points withal,
wherein we swerve from them. Wherein nevertheless shall not be altogether
amiss to advertise the gentle Readers hereof chiefly, That we entered into this
controversy against the adversaries, not of any set purpose to raise
contention and debate in the Church, nor of any desire to quarrel and contend,
nor yet of any evil affection that we bear to the persons themselves,
against whom we maintain argument: n^ yet for that we would not much more
willingly be coupled with them in one lincke of Christian unity and concord,
if the unity, which they offered unto us, were such as we might by any means
yield unto, without prejudice of the faith and glory of Christ, without stain
of conscience, without manifest treachery and Apostasy, or without unavoidable
danger of the safety of our soul. But the matter being now grown to this
point, that we can by no possible means be at unity with Christ, if we
partake with them, what remains then at the length wherein they may either
justify against us, or allege for further defense in their own behalf? If
they accuse us of Apostasy, or falling from them, let them then first by
plain demonstration make manifest the very nature of right Apostasy. Surely
if those that have severed themselves from the Primitive and true Catholilike
Church, and be revolted from the first founders of Christian faith, from the
ancient Fathers, from the Apostles, from the infallible principles of the
Euangelical doctrine, to an other doctrine, to men's traditions, to foreign
forged novelties of Religion, to worshipping of Idols, to a strange Gospel
altogether unknown to the Apostles, to patter prayers in unknown and
barbarous speeches, may rightly be called plain runnagates, no men in the
world deserve to be called Apostataes in my judgment more properly and truly,
than this generation of Papists brood.

But here again will some one of them reply, that they stand upon a good
ground of possession, not able to be gainesayde, which they hold of the holy
and Catholic Church never discontinued, since the very age and time of the
Apostles themselves: from the which they say, that we being but few in
number, hedgecreepers as it were in corners, through treacherous backsliding,
have (as it were abandoning our native Country, and shrowding our selves in the
hill Auentine) withdrawe^ our selves like rebels. To stop those slanders
again, let this answer suffice: First as concerning the number, whether we
b^e many or few, it makes little to purpose. In the Church of Christ, says
Augustine, consideration must be had of the gravity of the matter, and not of
the number of voices: and it happens oftentimes that the greater number
preuayleth against the better, by number of polles rather, than by trial of
truth: yea Christ himself viewing the number of his flock, Luke. ^2^
pronounces it to be very small, Mat^ 20. 2^^
so also, when he confesses that many be called, Luke. 18.
yet he adds forthwith, that the elect be not many, but few in number: in
so much that he seems to doubt, whether the same son of man shall find
faith in the earth, when he shall come. Yet for all this, if a true computation
may be yielded of men, of nations and people, by the poll it self, of al such,
as with all their hearts do detest the frauds and contagion of the Romish
false religion, there will not so small a number appear in their eyes, as
happly either they conjecture themselves, or at lest ought to make so slender
account of.

But as concerning the Church it self, let them understand and persuade
themselves thus: That wheresoever the true church of Christ is resiaunt, there
we do plead in possession, and justify our true and undoubted tenure therein.
Of which church, they be called tenau^ts in deed by name, but have utterly lost
their whole interest and right thereof. To make the same more plainly
discernable, let us with due consideration make a proportion of both the
churches of Rome: to wit, the ancient and first church there, and this new
vpstart synagogue that is now: A compa^ison betwixt the ancient church of
Rome and the Romish prelates now.
and compare together our popish massemongers that be now, with those
ancient ministers and doctors of that first age, by line and by leuel as they
say. So will it appear easily how much they differ each from other. For how
carefully and reverently did those ancient fathers behave themselves in the
old time in that holy fu^ction of mynistery, which by lawful calling was
committed unto them? The life and conu^rsation of the ancient and Apostolical
^hurche.
whose only delight and endeavor consisted wholly in instructing them that went
astray, in conuincing the stifnecked with the power of the word, in curing the
canker of them that were wounded. To this painful trauail in teaching, was
annexed no less carfulness to lead a blameless life, as that they might
not only vaunte them of an undefiled conscience which might boldly appear
before God, but also that no such blemish might be found in their conversation,
as might be offensive to man: whose whole trade of life was employed not in
idleness, and pleasurable delights, but in the earnest study of holy scriptures
and in the enlargement of the kingdom of Christ. They were shepherds of the
flock, and nevertheless sheep of the flock also themselves not woolues
amongst the sheep: they were not guarded with train of soldiers, but in
mightines of faith, in soundnes of doctrine, in exercise of holiness, in
sincerity of love, not so lofty in glory, as affable and friendly in speech,
finally endued with such a sweetness of manners, and mildnes of mind, as that
they would not willingly endamage their enemies. They ^xecuted nothing with
violence, their only weapon was the sword of the spirit, and power of the word:
they threw none into prison, they drew none to the stake, they polled none of
their possessions or goods, they sauored not of wars, nor breathed out
bloodthirstines, nor teazed me^ to arms, ne set Princes together by the ears
at any time: as they were themselu^s peacemakers, and messengers of peace, so
did they allure al men to peace by all means possible. They never groaped after
ti^les of universality, nor trusted at any time in the confederacy of
treachor^, in seditiouse factions, in conspiracies, nor in craf^y councils.
They never haled scepters from out princes possessions, nor tread ever upon
Princes necks, but lived quietly under Ethnicke magistrates, with an especial
foresight providing always that they mynistred no occasion of sedition:
yelding honor humbly to whom honor was dew, paying tax and tribute, where
tax and tribute was payeable. They used continual exhortation to the nouices
in Christ to humble themselves duetifully even too al Idolatrous magistrates,
Great difference betwixt the bi^hops of the anc^ent, and the new church of
Rome.
and too pray daily for their good preservation to God.

On this wise did those ancient Apostles and Apostolic fathers train the
world at the first, and thereby enlarged the Church daily. To the furtherance
whereof it is skarse credible to be spoken, how much auailed not only the force
of their miracles, but^ with a^ the sweetness of their demeanor, and vprightnes
of life, their cheerful courage in afflictions, their lenity in suffering
injuries, of mind mild and gentle, imagining no hurt to any, and endeavoring
to deserve well of al, raising it self above wordly po^pe, making no account of
this life, and exempt from al encombrance of wordly affairs, to the end they
might the more freely attend the preaching of the word. So also were the
bishops of that most happy age maintained with the only benevolence of the
people, contented with the baseness of their own estate: In the mean time if
there remained any surplus beyond daily necessities, the same was delivered
back to the poor: At what time palaces of prelates were naught else but
treasuries of the poor. For as yet the royalties of S. Peter rolled on no man's
tongue: what shall we say to this, that of that beadrol of bishops many lived so
beggarly, that at the time of their death, skarse one penny could be found to
pay for their grave: as we read recorded of Theodoret? But this kind of men
are long sithence dead and rotten, yea there remains skarse at this day any
sparckles of their manners. The Catte is so altogether turned in the pan
amongst these Romish reuellers, that whosoever will now compare these present
prelates with the first proportionally, and enter into dew consideration of
the licentiousnes of these shauelinges, of their cruelty, ambition, tyranny,
frauds, co^spiracies, loftines, delicacy, idleness, riches, bravery, troops of
attendants, palaces, lauishnes of life, greedines of revenge, shall find the^
more like lordings, then bishops: rather monarchs the^ mu^cks: and shall
skarsely discern whether a man may rightly call the^ preachers or treachors:
Teachers or deceauers: prelates or Pyla^es as Bernard did. Bernard in his
Epistle to E^genius^
And yet after all this how they blush nothing at al to be deemed their
successors, from whom they have so degendred in all actions of their lives, as
that not so much as any memorial at al of that primitive ancient integrity may
be found to shine in the^,

And yet might this somewhat be borne withal, if they would permit us
quietly to enjoy the same doctrine at the least which those ancient elders
and Apostolical founders left behind them to be received of Christian
congregations. But as now even on this behalf al things are so unlike, that
any may well doubt whether their life seem less Apostolic, The life of the
Bishops of Rome may seem less Apostolic then Apostatique.
or their doctrine more agreeable with Apostasy. The nature and nouelty of
which doctrine being altogether so newfangled, as that it carries no
resemblaunce of Apostolical spirit, no likeness of ancient antiquity, it is a
wonder to see, how these fine fellows will not cease in the mean time, to
accuse us of nouelty, as though al antiquity both of the scriptures, and of
the Apostles and most learned fathers did not by all manner of means cry open
wars against them. If this be not true, let them discover unto us, from what
anti^uitie this Laterane transubstantiation and confession (as they term it)
auricular received to be publicly authorized at the first: The Popes
doctrine conninced in nouelty.
both which Pope Innocent the 3. did in that barbarons age thrust upon the
church by force, and power, without any probable reason of the scriptures, but
enacted by the co^spiring decrees of certain evil disposed persons: Again out
of what progeny peeped private masses first: Trentals, yearly obites, that
daily sacri^ice of the Altar ordained for the clensing of sins? the one part
of the communion cut of by the ru^p^ pilgrimages, prayers for the dead, prayers
in an unknown and barbarous lou^g, and mu^bled in a b^adrol by roat? Or from
what au^cie^t brood were broached at y^ first their absolu^ions, pardons,
^^pish bulls, romish stations, continual gaddings to the apostles to^bs,
dedication of temples, shry^ing of saints, con^uring^ of salt and water, of
co^ps, bowg^s, and that endless consecration of such like trumperies: couple
heerewith also m^^kishe vows, rules, shauings, plates, myters, attires,
besmearings, palls, iubiles, and I marvel that circumcision and the sacrifices
of the old law were not likewise chopped in amongst the rest.

But when the Apostolic doctrine displayed his bright beams to the world
first, The nou^l^y of the Popes doc^ryne was in many things unknown to the
ancient fathers.
as it was heavenly, and available for the sauety of the world, so did they
proclaim nothing else, but that which they saw with their eyes, and heard with
their ears, they published nothing but what was foreshadowed before by many
ways, and figures: foretold and agreeable with the oracles of the Prophets. And
where I pray you at the length, have these me^ ever heard with ears which they
debate so lustely of purgatory, of satisfactorie merits, of choice of meats
not to be received with thanksgiving, of matrimony not free, nor granted
indifferently to al men, of images setvp to be woorshipped? or out of what
puddle were plumped first their proud crakes of the absolute power of the
universal bishop, of the Apostolic succession of the Romish Sea, of the keye
that never erred, of the absolute authority thereof which ought to be esteemed
better then al councelles, not to be comptrolled of any person?

The Apostles, which established the principal part of our salvation in the
power of faith, In how many and how weighty matters the Apostolic doctrine
varyeth from the popes.
taught us long ago on this wise, namely: that Christ was our righteousness, our
wisdom, sanctification and redemption. And from whence then received these men
this which they will, and enforce us to believe, that man of his own power
works works meritorious: that we meritte everlasting life even by due
desert? That the blessed virgin may command her son reigning with the father
to grant this or that man's petitions. In the Apostles ty^ne it was decreed by
public authority, and by inspiration of the holy ghost, that it should not
be lawful for any man to charge the Gentiles with grievous tradi^ions: neither
did any man when Paul preached grie^e his brother for eating flesh so that it
were privately, and without offense to the weak brother. And from whence now
have ^ssued these so great fluddes of m^ns traditions^ w^erewith consciences
are cl^gged both publicly and privately, far more rigorous then the state of
the Jews, so that he shall be in danger of loss of life as an heretic,
whosoever shall dare touch an egg in the lent or ough^ else then that which the
Pope authoriseth, yea though sickness or necessity require him thereto? Is any
man so mad as to think these burdeins and clogges proceeded from the holy
ghost? whom sithence it pleased to make churches free in the time of the holy
Apostles, surely it is not likely that he would now alter his good pleasure,
and charge the churches with more grievous burdeins then before. In like manner
in times past Bishops were created by the voices of the people, not without the
consent of Princes and Emperors, and this also upon due examination of
learning and life, according to the institution of the old Canons. Now to pass
over many other things, at the naming whereof godly hearts may tremble for
fear, fain would I have them answer me how this canonical election without
al examination, whithout the peoples voices, and without allowaunce of the
prince, has been poasted over to a few Cardinales, or peradventure sold to
the fa^test in purse: where this took the original of antiquity, or when it
first sprang up.

Therefore to conclude this discourse of antiquity, Tertullianus^
if according to Tertul^ judgment that which is most ancient must be deemed
most true: and again whatsoever is crept up of l^te must be taken for
cou^terfait: and if Irene combat^ng against the heretics of his time, be
adjudged to have don well in that he appealed to the most au^cie^t churches, as
the with drawing nearest unto christ were believed to err lest: finally if we
ought to hold that for autentick with was established by the authority of the
Nicene c^u^cel, Let the ancient determina^io^ stand: if likewise we following
t^eir ^xa^ple, be willing to return to that purest pate^ne of the most ancient
Church, which you have forsaken, and will call back our selves, and al our
ac^ions to the direction thereof, will any man account this in us to be a
departure from the Church, or an access rather to the primitive Church?

But much matter is usually objected here, touching the visible church, wherein
for as much as both good and bad be conuersaunt, they say that the good ought
to be received, and the ill nevertheless not to be rejected for the churches
sake, wherein they abide. We deny not that in ye visible church be always
reside^t both good and evil, so also as we do embrace the good, we do not cast
out the evil rashly for the churches sake. And yet follows no good co^sequen^
hereupon, that they with do shun the company of the wicked in the church, do
therefore reject the church it self. For although in the church, the wicked are
mixed together with the good, yet be not these evil persons the church of christ.
It behooves therefore to make evident now, which be those good ones, and which
be those wicked ones, of whom we^ speak: and here now an ^stima^ must be made
not in respect of their conversation, but in respect of their religion: that so
as o^ the one side we may deem the^ properly good, with teach purely and
sincerely Jesus Christ and the sacraments: so on the other side we call the^
evil, which defile the sincerity of Christian faith, deprave his sacraments,
and under color of the church do persecute the true church of Christ.

Such to have been in all Churches, and in all ages of the Church, even from the
first age of the Patriarchs, Prophets, and Apos^les always until this
pr^sent is more then manifest, which having no spark of true religion, but a
false vysor, of counterfaicte holiness, have abused the name and title of piety
chiefly to overthrow true piety. Of this number were Ismael and Esau in the
time of Isaac and Iacob^ in the time of Joseph his own natural brethren, who
like treacherous traytoures conspire^ the murdering of their innocent brother:
Those also that joined in confederacy against Moses, with Dathan and Abyron,
and many other times: likewise they that joined traitorously in arms against
David their liege Lord and king. Such were the false prophets that withstood
Elias, Michea, Esaias, and the true prophets of God: such were they who when
Jeremy did prophecy, exclamed against him, The temple of the Lord, The temple
of the Lord, when as in deed their speech was naught else but very lies, like
as the scribes and pharisees vpbraided Christ himself that they were the
generation of Abraham, when as in very deed they were the brood of the devil.
Neither wan^ed such like busibodies in the Apostles time, whom S. Paul
worthily reproving spared not to call false Apostles, false brethren, dogs, evil
workmen, enemies of Christ's cross. The Angel in the Apocalipse speaks of
the^ on this wise, Apocal. 2.
they would be accounted Jews, but in very deed they be the synagogue of
Satan. To conclude, with what sort of people has not only Christ's church
but al commonweals also been pestered more at any time, then with such kind
of naughtipackes, which when either can not, or will not walk the right way to
true renown, do forthwith not only seek pilladge of the people, but procure
also the hassard of their souls health cou^terfait hypocrites gloasing and
flattering the vulgar sort of people, and entraping the simple. The like crafty
color used the sect of Mahomet, who because would not seem to be Agarenes,
coined the^ selves the name of Saracenes, as though they were generation of
Sara, and so deceived the people. And the beast mentioned in the Apocalips
being nothing less then a Lamb, Apoca. ^3.
did wonderfully bewitche men under the counterfaict face and horns of a lamb.

But here again happly will some friend of the Romish Church take me up for
stumbling, saying: what a matter is this? do ye on this wise compare so sacred
a Sea to the Agarenes and Saracenes, seeing that these do carry no show, or
any resemblance at all of the visible church? neither ought to be named by the
name of Christians? On the other side though the Patriarch of Rome, be not
allowed amongst you as head of the church, yet can he not be denied to be a
member of the visible church, and to have a place amongst the Christian
congregation. For as much then as this bishop has his place of a Christian in
the Christian church, for this cause surely it does not beseem Christians to
s^quester them ^elues from Christians. What needs longer answer hereto then
at one wor^e to answer with Cicero, Cicero in his Tusculanes the 3. book.
Why should I hearken to speeches, when I see deeds? Certes if he be a
Christian bishop as he requires to be accounted, his offense is so much the
more heinous in this, that under the visor of a Christian, he executes such
outrage so furiously and so sauadgly breathing out slaughter and utter
destruction of Christians, as that no man may doubt, but that this Abadon has
murdered, burnte, and oppressed greater heaps of Christian carcasses, then
any one of all the heathenish sauadge, which proclayme them selves to be open
enemies of Christianity. Yea by so much the more is he to be detested then the
Saracenes, by how much less an open enemy hurte^h in respect of the privy
lurking and domestical Scorpion: whereof the one may somewhat be prevented by
foresight, but this other does ^urther at unawares before any notice or warning
given. Moreover to admit also to be true, that this same prelate has the
place of greatest preeminence not only amongst the Christians, but also in
the very bosom of the visible church, how far forth I pray you, will this
a^ayle, for as much as Antichri^t him self must plant his seat in the
chiefest temple of God, guarded with so great a guarrison of humble
attendauntes, the multitude whereof is described unto us by the prophetical
scripture in these words: Apoc. 13.
And he made all, both small and great, rich and poor, free and bond, to
receive a mark in their right hand, or their foreheades: And that no man
might buy or sell, but he that had the mark of the name of the beast, or the
number of his name. etc. Now therefore if a man do shun and flee from this
poison and venomous contagion, though it be enshrined never so gloriously in
the visible church: it follows not therefore hereupon necessarily, that the
same does utterly renounce the visible church of Christ. Though the Pope with
his crew be part of the church, yet be they not the universal church.
No more is this true likewise, though the Pope with his shauelings and
Cardinals be some part and portion of a visible church, that therefore the
state of the v^^uersall church consists wholly in them.

The Popes arguments deducted from the universality.
But they proceed nevertheless too their subtle ^ophismes. What, say they,
does not the universal church of Christ embrace the faith of Rome every where?
Go to, and what then I pray you? Ergo he that se^ludeth him self from the
faith of Rome, can not choose but renounce the universal church of Christ.
What answer shall I frame better too this subtle sophisme, but too deny both
parts thereof, both the assumption and conclusion? For the church did neither
heretofore always confess the Romish faith that is now to be universal:
neither does the universal church of the whole world confess the same at
this present: as the which groundeth her ankerholde upon the Apostolic faith,
and not upon the Romish faith. Neither we, though we do not allow, but
abrogate utterly all and singular the assertions of the Romish religion being
now in ure, have therefore renounced the universal church. Over and besides, to
yield thus much also, y^ a great yart of the unlettered multitude do at this
prese^^ receive the Romish rags: yet behooves us to have consideration not of
that which the common people do affectionate, but what may be justifiable by
the touchstone of truth. So neither must we regard what the Romish faith is at
this present, rather we must be well advised what the first faith thereof was,
and what it ought to be now also. That person surely which withdraws him
self from erroneous doctrine, chopped into the church through the ignorance and
treachery of some teachers, does not fall away from the church, but rather
^oth seek to salve the soars of the church. If the Pope of Rome and such as
profess them selves to be pillars of the Romish church, will make proof
unto us that their Romish church swarueth nothing from the Apostolic
church, and that their faith withal is not defiled with many filthy and
unsavory dregs and errors: then let them condemn us of Apostasy for our
departure from them. But if they be not able to do so^ yea if they the^ selves
have not by much more probable arguments (renouncing the doctrine of the
Apostles and the discipline of the best approved church) transfourmed them
selves into a certain newfangled doctrine, let the indifferent reader judge
hereof, whether they, or we des^rue most justly to be condemned of Apostasy.

But you were sometime militant in the same church where we be now (will they
say, The Papi^^^^ objection.
) from whence you are now fallen away and departed from us. It is true in
deed. So did your predecessors agree once well and godly wi^h Christ, with
his Apostles, and with the ancient and godly fathers: why have you abandoned
them, and changed your tippe^tes the^? If you may think it lawful for you to
raunge at randon out of ^he true track of religion, wherein you did tread
sometime a right, and to suffer your s^lues to be carried away through rock^s
and ^ragges, why may it not be as lawful for us to call our selves back into
the true way of sa^uatio^ after so many our wa^drings and maskings, renou^cing
al by paths of errors? Now therefore be^hink your selves wel^ whether it stand
with more reason for us that we should return into the right way, or raunge at
randon still with you? We do assure our selves that it is not lawefull for us
to do any other thing, nor tread any other path then we do now by any
means, for as much as the authority of the scripture and the truth of
Christ's Gospel does bind us hereto, with a necessity unavoidable. We were
once of the same mind that you be (I confess it) stragglers I mean together
in the self same couples of errors. What the^? If because we wandered in
errors being young men, shall we not therefore be reformed being grown to
more judgment? But so was Moses conversant once in the family of Pharao,
Abraham in Chaldea, Loath amongst the Sodomites, The children of Israel in
Egypt, Daniel and the Prophets in Babylon, Christ amongst the Jews: Paul with
the Pharisees, Peter amongst fishermen, Augustine a Manychean. All manner of
departures therefore, neither the departures of all persons, ne yet from all
society of companies, ought to be accounted blameworthy. Although we forsake
to be joined in the felloweship of some that are named Christians now, yet are
we not therefore fallen from the visible church. But for as much as in the
visible church be two sorts of men, Two sorts of men in the visible Church.
the one part of the^ which occupy the function of teachers and preachers: the
other of them which with the unlettered multitude be hearers and learners: We
therefore do reprove certain assertions and opinions in some false teachers,
from whom we sequester our selves of very necessity: yet in such wise as we
depart not at al from the visible church, in the which we have our being and
resiancie as well as they: yea we be many times conversant as Christians, even
with our very adversaries within one city, and many ^imes also under one
roof. And although we dissent from the errors of certain particular persons,
yet do we not otherwise but wis^ and will the best that may be to the persons
them selves: and recompt our selves rather forsaken of them, then them forsaken
of us: and are enforced to depar^ from them rather by violence, and plain
thrusting out, then of any our volu^tary willingness: so that to set down the
matter in plain terms, it may be said more properly that we do disagree and
dissent from them, A disagreement not a departure b^twi^t the protestants and
the Papists.
rather then depart from them.

In which disagreement notwithstanding, we do not so altogether re^de in pieces
all the articles of their popes and deuines, nor so altogether condemn them,
as though nothing were sound amongst them: neither do we contend with all that
church so, as though there remained no shape of a visible church in all that
city of Rome: for they have baptism there, wherein they make a profession of
the name of the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost: They have also the law
of God and the Gospel: yea they retain the wo^shipping of Christ, and profess
the same articles of the Creed that we do. They retain also after a certain
sort the sacraments, though they abuse them after a filthy manner. All which do
carry some pretty show of Christianity amongst men: not much unlike as the
old Jews in times past whilst Christ lived, were in possession of the holy
city, wherein the most holy name of God was magnified: in the which they
observed the worship of God together with the laws and ordinances after a
certain outward resemblance: wherein also those that sat in Moses chair
taught many things peradventure not altogether amiss. Whenas neuerthe^esse
under this co^terfaite visor of religion lurked most abominable hypocrisy,
and treacherous treason against God him self. Of whom spoke God him self by
the mouth of his Prophet, You be not my people. Os^c. ^.
Semblably if either the Romish church or any other church whatsoever do
observe orderly and teach sincerely and truly: therein do we not de^^ to
partake with them. But because the church of Rome treading the track of the
old Synagogue has yielded to be lead away blyndefolded into strange unknown
bypathes of doctrine, into most horrible contagion of errors detestable
absurdities, idolatrous worshippings, blasphemies, impieties, sects and
heresies, from the platfourme of most true and infallible doctrine, from the
pure and sincere worshipping of God, and the undoubted squarier of Christian
religion, from the principles of their own profession, from the practice and
meaning of the Apos^les, from the examples and steps of their pred^cessour^:
and have challenged unto it self c^ief, only, and most absolute soueraintie
over all other churches of Chris^e fully fraught with cruelty bloodsheadings
and pillages: he^ein if we do far away sever our selves from their society,
who can be so senseless or endewed with no conscience at all, who seeing so
many and so just causes of departure, will not think that we have rather
departed away too late, then without good occasion? namely sithence we are not
whirled theretoo of any gyddy lightness as it were with a puff of wind, but
enforced of very conscience: not of any desire of nouelty, but of mere
necessity, and not so much of any our voluntary affection, as warranted to
depart from amongst them by special commandment of Gods own mouth?

The errors and filthiness of the Popes doctry^e.
But some one will make a question here, and demand what kind of filthiness,
what co^tagiouse errors do remain in the popes doctrine? Surely if the matter
of it self were such, as that it were altogether in covert, and not openly
manifest in the eyes of al men: I would think that I ought to bestow some large
discourse for the better demonstration thereof. Yet somewhat to relieve the
ignorance ^f the unlettered, let us (if we may) apply somewhat in that behal^.
For I do see very many, that being bewitched with a certain blind admiration of
the popes popeholy religion, are carried away captive into his erroures, for
none other cause, but for that they will not look into the truth, when they may
see it. Therefore removing away those disguisings and visours, let us prye
somewhat narrowely into the things them selves, and let us thoroughly behold
this whole Romish Troiane horse, not what it emporteth outwardly, but what it
crowdeth covertly, and shrowdeth in the very closets thereof. I am not
ignorant, that the name of the church is a very plausible name, that the names
of Christ, Peter and Paul be honorable: that the remembrance of ancient
antiquity is wonderfully well liked of: that the authority of the fathers is
much esteemed: that the vni^ie Apostolic, and catholic consent is of great
valor: and that the keys of the church be of no small authority in deed,
if they be true keys, but if they be not true nothing is more forcible to
deceive. Therefore may not the Romish church think it enough to vouche bare
and fruitless titles: it must justify it self with substantial matter I
make no reckoning at all of their outward portely and ambitious challenge. This
one thing do I seek and crave to know, what the truth it self does make
justifiable in deed. But in seeking, what do I find? to conclude all in one
word: even all things turned topsy turuie: under a lambs skin shrouded
ravening wolves: under the attire of the spouse crept in the strompet of
Babylon: under poor beggarly we^des of Christian name, conquerours, warriors,
vypers, monsters, tyrants, scorpions, enemies of Christ's blood. To be brief
nothing less, then they resemble ou^wardly: and expressing them selves in all
their actions to nothing more near then to the very (I had almost said) Jews
them selves: In this that I name them Jews, let my words be condemned for
vain and utterly void of all credit, if the matter it self do not approve
this to be true by most evident demonstration and proof.

A comparison betwixt the Jews and the Romish catholics.
First like as the Jews put the son of God to death long ago, pretending the
name of God: Even so these under the name of Christ, do hale and draw
without measure, without cause, without mercy, the members of Christ and the
sons of the Church in most horrible wise, with execrable cruelty and
woluishe sauadgenes, to slaughter, to faggot and fire, and to all manner of
unspeakable tortures. The persecution of Christians, by the pope and his
pap^sts
As the old Jews leaving the spirit, did embrace only the letter, which
kills: and converted all their expositions and interpretations to that utter
letter: What do our Romanistes at this present else, then urge, plodde upon,
and exact all things to the only outward letter of the mystical scripture as
to the only infallible rule of religion: They regard only the outward
speeches of the Gospel, but make no reckoning nor any estimat at all of the
Lords meaning hidden under the veyle of words, under figures and parables:
nor what the heavenly wisdom does deliver under them, nor whereunto the holy
Ghost does direct us thereby. They gnawe upon the outward husk and fleshly
exposition of the scripture: but aspire not too the spiritual sense, neither
pearce into the marowe and sinowes of the scripture. It is a wonder to see how
nimble and subtle witted, how earnest and wh^t they be in cold and naked
parings and trifles, and rotten elements of this world^ but in the things
which avail most and be most profitable, they be more blind then beetels, and
skarce luke warm therein.

The ceremonies of the Jews and the Papists compared together.
Amongst the Jews all things were handeled with outward ceremonies and
outward traditions. Such was the state of that time. But if a man will n^we
examine the shape of Papisticall doctrine accordingly and compare it to that
plattefourme: What shall he approve the Papists to be else then very natural
Jews? ^auing that the Jews were exercised in the ce^ pres^ribed unto them by
Gods special commandment: But our Romanists having no such ^^arrant from
God, nay rather being by express testimonies of scriptures commanded to raise
themselves from these corporal exercises, unto the consideration of more high
and heavenly matters, yet contrary to the express direction of the Apostolic
doctrine, they cleave so amazedly to dumb ceremonies, that all things almost
seem to be transformed by them into cold ceremonies: The superstition of the
Romanists in defending their traditions is more than Jewish.
so that on this behalf the state of the Jews may seem much more tolerable,
then the state of Christians. It was counted a great fault amongst the Jews in
the old time, and that also sharply rebuked not without cause, for that being
so immoderately affected to their ceremonies, and traditions, they regarded not
the commandments of God, and esteemed more of men's traditions, than of Gods
commandments. Make a comparison now betwixt these holy Prelates of the Romish
Court, with those Jews: and what shall ye find in the^, that does not only
resemble Iewishnesse in that kind of superstition, but also far and
wonderfully exceed it? For plain demonstration whereof, consider the straight
injunctions for breach of their decrees, the merciless proceedings of their
cruel judgments, the intractable difficulty to obtain pardon for them that
do transgress the Popes laws, that break their vows, and offend in the
decrees and traditions of men, rather then for such as do notoriously
trespass in the commandments of God.

What should I speak of that, As the Jews do look for a worldly Messi^as: so
the Papists do expect a worldly vicar.
wherein this glorious court of Rome does so altogether agree with the Jews,
yt ye shall be scarcely able to discern, whether the Papists be very Jews, or
the Jews very Papists. For even as the Jews did either heretofore long
sithence, or even at this present now, expect the coming of their Messiah,
which being furnished with worldly power, as a most valiant conqueror guarded
with invincible mighty garrisons of stoutest soldiers should with warlike
puissaunce, and dint of mighty sword, by most notable conquest establish for
himself an Imperial throne here on earth: yea such an Empire, as should with
invincible and triumphant earthly pomp, kingly royalty, riches, dominion,
glory, and renown of majesty Imperial, enforce to be subject unto it, all
other Kings and Monarchs of the world: what do our holy Fathers of Rome (I
beseech you) else, then in like fantastical drowsinesse wherewith the Jews
do dream of their fantastical Messiah, forge unto themselves a glorious
worldly Uicar of Messiah, whom they bedecke with gold, beautify with pearl
and precious stones, crown with a triple diadem, vaunce on stately and
princely Palfray, or rather support and carry abroad on men's shoulders, blaze
out with more than kingly an^ Imperial titles, endow with yearly revenues,
tributarie provinces, troops of attendants, highest chair of ma^estical
state, finally the very fullness of most absolute power, and what not?

Like Pope, like Church.
Moreover as they have proclaimed this their Uicar of Messiah, the chief head,
Prince and Monarche of the universal church: after the same shape do they
fashion unto the same their Bishop, a like bishoply church, which least should
not be in all points correspondent to her own head, must be such, as may
glitter and shine in outward pomp, magnificence, and well liking of the whole
world: which being garnished with ^arthly riches and power, made mighty and
forcible with laws, may make both Prince and people stoop at her countenance.
And for this cause to make the state of this their Church more defensible, the
grave fathers have decreed by a very profou^d Prouiso^ that Cardinals,
Patriarchs, and the other estates and Syres ecclesiastical should be advanced
in highest honor, and dignity, should glitter in gold and purple, should
abound in wealth, possessions and pleasures: should flourish in most gorgeous
pomp and power, princely palaces, and courts that by this means they might
beautify the ma^estie of their glorious mother, holy Church, and make her to
shine and seem glorious in the eyes of the world. The very patt^^^e and ^^age
of the Romish Church.
This is that glorious City of God, forsooth, which is b^ilded upon the holy
hills, in the which appears neither wrinckle nor blemish: in the which may
never so little a title of ^rrour possibly be found: which being famous and
raised aloft as a city builded upon an high hill, may be seen of al people a
far of, and ought to be credited of all the Nations of the earth. And
because this shape of a Church can not be seen any where at this present, but
amongst that people and nation only, over whom the Bishop of Rome must be
acknowledged for chief head: hereof must it follow of necessity, That there is
no true and glorious Church of Christ, except this only Romish Church, and
that al other Churches besides, be foreiners, infamous, and no Churches at al:
as the which being not able to derive any certen^ie of their descent and
antiquity, ought not in any respect bear the name of Christian Churches: but
must be accounted rather for dens, and conuenticles of heretics.

And thus much now by the way touching the Church: the treaty whereof, God
willing, shall be set forth with larger discourse in other books hereafter.
This lesson in the mean ^pace will not be amiss to be foretold: That if it
be true that Christ himself did plainly pronounce, that his kingdom was not
of this world: and this also as true, which he does else where affirm, that
the things which do seem mighty and glorious to the judgment of men, are
accounted for vile dross, and abomination in the sight of God: finally if the
estate of the most holy Apostles and Martyrs of Christ, was always such, as it
became rather odious to the world, then accepted, or of any estimation, and
that such as applied nearest to Christ were always despised most: and that the
Disciple cannot be greater than his master: certes it can not possibly be,
that this Church of the Pope, so mighty, and glorious in the world, so
renowned and famous in worldly pomp, and exc^sse, so magnified and fawned upon
with the well likings and alliances of Princes, should have any aff^nitie or
alliance at all with Christ, the only head of the Church, or any fellowship
with the Apostles.

The Papists do play the Jews, in establishing the doctrine of righteousness
by works.
I come now to other parts of the Romish doctrine, in the which the Papists do
seem no less Jewish, then in the shaping and fashioning of their Church, as I
said before. For if the doctrine of Paul be most true, where discoursing of
the reiection of the Jews that sought their justification by the law, he
rendered a reason, wherefore they could not attain thereto: ^om. 9.10^
Because (says he) they sought to be come righ^eous not by faith, but by
works. Let us see I pray you, what else does the Romish religion proclaim at
this day, then that we ough^ to make our way passable to heaven, by
industrious works, and precepts of good life, reposing the whole shoot anchor
of assured affiance, and trust in the same: not because we believe on him that
does justify the sinner, but in doing works of this life which do exclude all
impiety. How shall we say that the great Clearkes and Doctors which teach
this, and such like doctrine, do differ from natural Iewishnesse? If the Jews
seeking to be iusti^ied by works, were for this only cause clean cut of from
true righteousness, according to the testimony of Paul: what hope may they
concey^e at the length to attain true righteousness, which thrusting faith
into a corner, do raise up the whole building of their justification upon
that tickle and sandle foundation of works?

How faith is esteemed with the Papists.
But thou will say, these men do not so altogether abrogate faith, but that
they couple her together with works, by a necessary and an inseparable
conjunction. I do know indeed that faith is peradventure in some estimation
amongst them: yet such an estimation this is, as that they will in no wise
yield unto her, her true dignity and due place of estate. For whereas no one
thing is resiant in us, nor given unto us miserable wretches f^o^ above, that
may make us acceptable unto God, may obtain his favor, may cure our diseases,
may deliver from the fetters and chains of sin, may turn away wrath and
vengeance, may overcome the world, may crush in pieces the horrible tyranny
of death and the devil, may stand boldly and unvanquishable in the face ^f
hell gates, finally which may ouerspreade us poor forlorn ca^^iues, drowned
in the doung and dirt of the earth, with the gladsome sunneshine of heavenly
life, and unspeakable glory of immortality besides this only inestimable
Jewel, namely faith in Christ, in the which all our hope and riches together
with all the promises of God are fast locked up as it were in a certain Arc
of covenant: when as also the self same faith, linked and united together with
other virtues, does not only far surmount al those virtues in her singular
excellency and power, but also of her own force only and alone satisfy and
accomplish all the parts of our redemption, yea and so accomplish the same,
as that where she leads always whole troops of most excellent virtues with
her, Only faith with out works ^o^h accomplish the whole work of our
ius^i^icatio^
needs not nevertheless any their help at al toward the procuring of Gods
favor: I beseech you for the love you bear to Christ: what perverse
peuishn^sse and I know not whether more malicious or shameless impudency of
men is this (I say of the false doc^ors of Rome) which being addicted to the
Romish rags, seem by a certain destiny as it were borne of purpose for the
utter overthrow of Christ's Church) so to embase this same faith in Christ,
even under al other virtues as a very naked, bare and fruitless thing of it
self, O^or^ against Haddon. pag^ 94.
as that they scarcely can find in their hearts to grant her any
commendation in heaven, or any place of acceptance in earth? For what else do
these words of theirs import, wherewith they term this faith only, only
rashness, yea and no faith at al, but impudency, temeritie, O^or in his
Epistle to the Queen of England. page 27. 32.
and arrogancy? Where they affirm the Gospel, whereof we make mention to be
sedi^ious, full of fraud, and deceyte. Moreover, where in all their books and
writings they do so utterly suppress this faith of Christ, as that they dare
presume to say that there is no passable way to heaven, but that which is
purchased with holy works, and most excellent integrity of life: I will
couple herewith, though not out of the foresaid Author, but out of the public
instrument and decree of the late Tridentine Council. In which Council
whereas those gay jolly gallants did most filthily err in many things, yet
played they not the Philosophers in any one decree more perilously, then where
they uttered their Stoicall opinion, in the doctrine of Justification by
Christ. Which being proclaimed unto us, throughout the whole tenor of the
Scriptures to be freely given without all mediation of any other thing,
besides the only promise of God through faith in Jesus Christ our Lord:
contrariwise those gracious fathers do so iumble and wrappe up this grace of
God full of saving health, and freely offered, wholly replenished with most
comfortable consolation and safety, in one hotchpot mingled as it were with
their beggarly byhang decrees, as that they shame not to deny, That the Gospel
is the only and absolute promise of eterternal life without any condition of
observing the law and the commandments of God: and again that our
justification does consist not of the free favor of the Lord, not of gracious
imputation, not of only r^mission of sins: but of holiness, Trid^^^in.
Conc. Ses. 6. cap. 7.
and of renewing the inward man, through voluntary acceptaunce of grace (for so
they speak) and of spiritual gifts, whereby we are not only reputed, but also
are called, and be truly righteous in deed: every man receiving of himself
his own righteousness not by any other mean: ne yet that righteousness
properly, which is of Christ Jesus, but which is proper and peculiar to every
particular person himself: By means whereof it comes to pass, that faith,
unless she be accompanied with hope (as they say) and charity, does not unite
any person unto Christ perfectly, nor is able to make any man to be a lively
member of his body.

Neither are those other fables any whit more sau^^ie which those grave
Tridentine Be^chers have dreamed of works and eternal life. How faith dot^
beget good works.
For although faith (as we confess) be for many great and urgent causes with
charity by a certain necessary and inseperable coupling together of most
absolute society: for what is more ^greeable to conuenience of reason, then
that these which be endued with a through feeling of their renewing in Christ
unto everlasting life, and of their free admission into heaven, should after so
many and so manifold benefits received, not show themselves unthankful nor
disobedient: should not welter in fleshly appetites: should not be carried away
with the tickling delights of this world: should not be drowned in careless
security, nor slumber in sloth: but so fashion and frame themselves, as men
enflamed with a voluntary serious and earnest cheerfulnes of mind, should not
slack any point of most industrious endeavor to serve the Lord faithfully:
should commit no accion whatsoever to the prejudice and hurt of his neighbor.
Admit, I say, that we grant all these to be, as they be in very deed most
true, Faith as opportunity is offered can never cease from doing good, working
always thro^^ love.
and withal confess such an unavoidable and necessary conjunction betwixt
them, that faith neither possibly can nor ought in any wise be sequestered from
godly conversation of life: what the^? Shall we therefore yield over to good
works this most souerain benefit of everlasting life, which the heavenly
Majesty has vouchsafed to be free, by the only free mercy of God, as the
proper and peculiar of^ice of faith? and adnihilate and make frustrate the
grace of God? So that man's obedience shall be an es^oppell to Gods mercy: so
that the law shall foreclose the Gospel, and merit be an hindera^ce, and
prejudice to grace? But where did these famous Clearkes learn this Logike so
to iumble and choppe the very things themselves which differ so far asunder
in their ends and effects, and to make such a confused mingle mangle of them
in one lump as it were without al order, without any respect of choice, as the
Cook s^irreth his pottage about?

Faith in justification is only and alone, but in working is not alone.
What? because faith does always associate her self and is delighted with the
sweet and joyful fellowship of most excellent virtues, and works always
through love, shall she therefore not be alone in justifying, because she is
fruitful and industrious in woorking? or shall she therefore not only, and
alone justify us in heaven, without works, because she is full of works
on earth? Or when she does justify us in heaven before God^ shall this our
justification be therefore said to be ascribed to any our charity? or unto
Jesus Christ? in respect of any reward? or of the only gift of God? for any our
merit or deserving of works? or of the free promise of god? If God do
accomplish the whole action of our justification for his promise sake, with
what scriptures at the length will these Romish Rabbines underprop that their
ruynous relike, shrined in their notable Council of Trent for a matter
unreprovable, whereby they give the world to understand, Tridentin. Conc.
Ses. 6. cap. 16.
That eternal life is to be proclaimed to them that be good workers? Again:
where they give out, that by the promise of God eternal life shall be rendered
to good works as an undoubted reward. But where did God ever make any such
promise, that the heavenly inheritance should be given upon any such
condition as a reward unto them, The infallible do^trine of the Trid^ntine
Counc^ll. S^ssi^ 6 Cap. 7
which shall offer themselves unto the dreadful Assise of the high Judge with
a white stoale (as they term it) of undefiled renouation? For such is the
doctrine of these grave Fathers, which kind of doctrine if be too be admitted
for infallible, I beseech you what need is there of Christ, or his Gospel,
since men may so easily climb up into the kingdom of heaven by works, as
it were by a pair of stayres? yea to what purpose then serves that, which
Saint Paul does so earnestly and so often plod upon, Ephesians 2.
That life everlasting is the gift of God, not of any work, least any man
should boast himself?

Our Lord and Savior Christ undoubtedly did instruct us in his Gospel far
other wise then these Lordly Fathers, as the which has directed the only way
to heaven, not to pass thither by works, but by faith: He that believes in
me (says he) has life everlasting. Again setting down a special mark,
John.6.
promises That he that sees the Son, and believes on him, shall have life
everlasting. And redoubling the same promise else where, John.11.
He that believes in me shall not die for ever. And why rather did he not use
these speeches with these gay woorkemaisters? To wit, that they which did lead
here in this world an holy and upright life full of good works, Everlasting
life promised to the believers.
should thereby purchase heaven.

What then? because all things be ascribed unto faith, passing over all
mention of works: shall we therefore condemn this doctrine as an utter
adversary too works, making no estimate of holy and virtuous living? God
forbid. But these Romanists overmuch sweating and moyling in their Summularies,
Sententionaries, Decretaries, Thomists, and resolutions, and I had almost
said altogether blinded in their Philosophical quiddities do not conceive
aright of the heavenly purpose and meaning of Christ, neither do they
sufficiently enter into due consideration of the purpose, force, and inward
kernel of the Evangelical Philosophy: neither do discern the difference
betwixt the Law and the Gospel, The diffe^ence betwixt the law and the Gospel
as they ought to do. For whereas the whole force of the law consists in
prescribing certain rules, whereby this transitory life may be directed in
holiness and integrity: The use and duty of the law.
whereby may be known what is to be ensued, and what to be eschewed: by what
means Gods wrath kindled against us may be pacified: and how his
punishments and corrections may be mitigated, Wherein the use of the law
consists properly.
and in what wise other inconveniences and calamities of this life may either
be ^urned quite away, or otherwise quallified by petition: And where as on the
other side that other trumpe of Evangelical Embassy sounds a far higher
and more shrill note, nothing so meanly exercised of it self about those
present things which concern this present life, (though otherwise it do
minister many wholesome restoritiues for the good preservation thereof) but
proclaims a far more happy league, and hostage of a better and everlasting
felicity: against infinite and the never ceassing vexations, and calamities,
not of this world only, but which press down and oppress the whole frame of
the universal creation: it rayseth up and gives undaunted courage against
the vnaoydable assaults of death and the Devil, it displayeth also remedy
and a ready conquest thereof: Yea it properly layth down and discovers the
passable way, which does bring us home again unto God: and the means also
whereby we may untwine our souls out of the entangled Laberinth of sins and
convey us too the heavenly glory that never shall have end.

The Evangelical faith.
And because to attain too this so unspeakable surpassing excellency of
immortal felicity, may no possible passage be found else but through the
bowels and blood of Gods own son, and our faith in the same: hereof comes
it that glauncing over the name of works many times, though not altogether
suppressing the use of them, the whole ministry of Evangelical doctrine
does exercise it self chiefly, The preaching of faith.
about those things which may best certify distressed consciences of the
merits of Christ, not of any our deseruinges, of the supercelestiall bounty
of Gods mercy, and of the unvanquishable 2. Cor 3. Who has made us able
minist^rs of the new Testament, not of the letter, but of the spirit.

The fruit and praise of good works.


force of faith. Not because the good works of the godly are mean whiles
nothing available, being performed acording to Gods law: for they profit
very much, not them only to whom they be imparted, but be acceptable also
unto God. By means whereof they procure great commendation not only in the
sight of men, but be many times bountifully rewarded of God, yea even to great
benefit and gain of the authors thereof. Let us therefore grant unto the law
of the Lord her due honor, Psalm. ^5.
that it be holy and immaculate converting souls. Which we do not embase, but
establishe rather. Let the commendable industry of the godly employed in the
exercise of Gods commandments have her proper dignity, her glorious and
manifold rewards in this life, which we do not abridge, but increase and
advance more highly.

For what one thing can allure Christian hearts to pursue the way of good life
more seriously and cheerfully, In what respect good works be auayleable and
what they bring to pass.
then when as being made familiarly acquainted with Gods mercy, they feel and
conceive thoroughly, first and especially their duty toward God, next what
they owe toward their neighbors for gods sake? Or what can be more agreeable
with conuenience of na^urall reason, then that each person ought so to behave
himself toward others, as either by proof he has found god affec^ed toward
himself, or does trust yt in time to come he shall be? Go to, let us imagine
this in our mind, that man's lewdness is grown so altogether dissolute, as
that it will not be inclined to any grateful remembrance of dutiful
requital, nor be enduced to any couenable thankfulness: what? shall we believe
that the dullness of men's natures will be sooner reclaimed with severe
a^steritie of disicpline, and fear of the whippe, and that the Law shall
prevail further with her stern looks, then the sweet and amiable embrasings
of the loving Gospel? but be the matter as it will: yea let us moreover grant
this also: That ^o ^ame the licentiousness of sin is none other way reserved
but the very snaffle and mozeroll ^f correction, what shall we say when the
most bountiful father of heaven and earth gives out in special charge to
power out plentifully upon all flesh indifferently the incomprehensible riches
of his free mercy? shall we speak nothing thereof? And when as the master of
the household is of his own nature so bountiful and liberal (as Ianuensis
reports) shall his steward pinch and be a Niggard? Ianuensis is his book
called Catho^ico.


Finally to reach yet one step further, and too confess as the truth is, that
amongst all the chances and changes of this life, nothing is more honorable,
nothing more excellent then the commendation of virtue: and that they have
performed matter of great valor, which do with rules of good laws, and
precepts of commendable manners endue the minds of men, and reduce them from
vice to tread the tracke of virtue: and ^o admit this also, that in all civil
society this point of doctrine is of all others most necessary: yet do I
demand this one question of these men, what benefit or advantage all those
our travails and laboures^ be they never so holy, may procure us at the
hands of God in all these natural corruptions of this life, which cannot
possibly be altogether reclaimed with any law, nor with any co^mandementes?
You will say that they will avail very much, for we yield to God dutiful
thankfulness, and to our neighbor necessary aid, and thereby many times do
obtain of God honor and estimation not only to our selves, but for the common
weal also, and be many times preserved wonderfully, and rewarded by god, the
most assured rewarder of all godly actions according to the most evident
testimony of the Psalmographe saying on this wise: Psalm. 1^^
For thy servant keeps them, and in keeping of them is great reward. Admit
this I say to be true: Nevertheless for as much as this reward it self and
recompencing of good works does not stretch it self beyond the limited
bounds of this present life, this is also undoubted true that when we have
made a curious collection of all the most famous and most exquisite works, yea
of the best holy ones in the world, yet in respect of the principal fountain
and original cause of justification all this huge heap of our works and
merits do nothing at al avail to purchase immortality of eternal life with
God and his holy Angels, nor to obtain to be raised from the dead^ nor to the
destroying the force of death, and the Devil, ne to the cleansing of our
sinful flesh: nor yet to win that glorious crown of that endless kingdom
in the world to come: To procure those so many (I say) so meru^ylous
unmeasurable benefits, so infinitely and incredibly surmounting all capacity
and reach of our nature and hope, our merits and works be they never so
holy yield not any furtheraunce or benefit at al.

To bring this to pass is the only workmanship of Jesus Christ: From whence
arises the wel^spring of eternal life.
This is the only benefit of the son of God not due too any our deserts,
but a free gift proceeding from his only mere liberality and mercy, and
received of us by faith: not as any recompense of works, but powered forth
oftentimes even into the bosom of the most unworthy, which seem too be
farthest of from all hope: without any regard had of those, which do feed
their own fancies most upon confidence and good opinion of their own well
doing: even of his own free mercy and bounteous liberality. Who as is only
holy, who only as has power of life and death and of al authority in heaven
and earth, so is he only and alone able to be^^ow his graces upon whom he will
being tied to none, nor holden bound to any law. Now therefore since by his
glorious Gospel as by the antentique seal of his everlasting will, he has
delivered unto us so manifest and determinate a demonstration of his
unchangeable will, witnessing thereby, That whosoever bele^ueth in him, shall of
his gift enjoy everlasting life and the glory of his kin^dome: what may godly
ministers do in discharge of their function more duetifully: but by faithful
proclaiming their commission to put in execution the charge committed unto them
by their Lord and Master? What? and will the Pope of Rome with his council of
Trident require us to renounce the Gospel of Christ, and to post over upon
their pelting war ra^m^ the crown of glory, to the law of works which
Christ has already warranted too faith? yea, will they have us so saucie as
to challendge them as a duty, which Christ assured to all of free gift? or
do these holy fathers think it to be reasonable, Iustifica^ion is proper to
faith only.
that we should hearken unto them, rather then unto Christ? Christ does
very plainly and expressly set down in the Gospel: Mark.9.
Thy faith has made thee whole. And shall we say on the contrary part, Thy
works has made thee whole? Christ says, Believe only^ al things are possible
to him that believes. And shall we turning the cart before the horse, yielding
chief pre-eminence to works, promise al things to become possible to them that
work, and not to them that believe only? I beseech you what notable piece of
work wrought they toward the curing of their maladies, which were commanded
but to lift up their eyes only and too look earnestly upon the brazen Serpent?

Finally where the wholesome doctrine of the gladsome Gospel seems to enterlace
here and there many grave and weighty councels to the embracing of most
absolute integrity, and to prescribe many ^ules to allure to live well. If a
man would descend into the due consideration of the end and scope of the
Evangelical exhortatio^s, he shall find nothing yt does more nearely resemble
the meaning and purpose of Christ our Savior, that does approach more nearly to
the direct end of al his speeches, actions, and miracles then this one thing
chiefly above al other: namely, to draw all men to faith and the knowledge of
Christ, as who did very well know that all our safety and righteousness does
depend wholly upon this only faith in him. Paul likewise treating upon nothing
else almost throughout al his Epistles: how learnedly, how industrio^sly does
he urge al his force of skill to acquaint us thoroughly with this doctrine, that
the whole substance of our salvation, and strongest pillar of our righteousness
was grounded not upon the sa^des of ye law, not propt up with the slimie mortar
of works, not raised up with any our sweating or moyling, but promised by the
free mercy of god accomplished by the only workma^ship of Christ, given and
received through our only faith and belief in him: Good works do not procure
a man to be iust^fi^d but be fruits and effects of him that is justified
al^eady.
and yet not excluding mean whiles the works of the law so, as they might not
be always attendaunt upon the man that is justified, as fruits and effects
of faith: but that they should in no wise be taken for the original cause of
justification: and again neither making this cause of justification to depend
so wholly upon faith, as that we might therefore slack any part of our duty in
doing good all the rest of our life. August. de gra^ia (...). Cap. 3.
But to the end we should not be carried away with vain confidence of works,
nor ground our righteousness, which we receive only at Christ's hands,
Romans 4^
else where in the only faith in Jesus Christ. And for this cause Of faith
(says S. Paul) that the promise might be made sure by grace which otherwise
would be always whirled about in unstable uncertainty, if it rested wholly
upon perfection of works: and by the same means would it come too pass
withal, that the promise should be thrust clean out of credit. For if we be
adopted into inheritance by the law, then is faith become void, and the promise
is of none effect^ which the Apostle does with like phrase of speech urge
again in his Epistle to Titus, For i^ inheritance come by the law (says he)
then not of promise now. Titus.3.
And again to the Romans to the same effect: If of grace, then not of works
now: otherwise grace should not be grace^ Objection.
And why so I pray you? is it because the law is so manifestly repugnant
against the promise, or that grace is so dir^ctly contrary to good works, as
that they cannot come togegether under one roof, but the one will stiffle up
the other?

The answers of the Apostle.
Let us hear the answer of the Apostle God forbid: that any man shall thus
think with himself, that there is any such mortal enmity betwixt grace and
good works, as that who so cleaves to grace must forthwith become a deadly
foe to good works: or as though who so take hold of the promises of God, the
same may in no wise walk in the co^mau^dements of the law. For what can be more
familiar together the^ the grace of god, and the fruits of good works? How
faith and good works do agree and disagree each with other.
Who was stronger in faith then Abraham, and who more excellent then he in all
manner of virtues? Grace and good works therefore does not simply differ each from
other, but acording to the diversity of the object, whereunto they be referred.
Wherefore the state of the question must be advisedly and co^sideratly noted.
For the question in this place does not tend heereunto, whether the person that
is already invested in the inheritance of grace, ought to live wel^ but how the
possession of this inheritance may be wo^ne, namely, whether it come of free
gift, to the unworthy, or to the^ that deserve it? by force of the law, or by
promise? for any respect of works, or of the special and only benefit of
faith without works.

Here lo, the shameless sacrilege of the Popes iuggling bewrays it self,
which directly against the authority of Gods word, would under a very s^ye
and subtle, but most pernicious pret^nce of magnifying and establishing the
commandments of God, restreigne against al equity and right, al whatsoever
Christ, his Apostles, and the most evident meaning of the holy Ghost vouchsafed
to endue poor forlorn man with all, of very free and frank liberality for
the incredible comfort and consolation of the godly, to the slippery state of
miserable works. From out which one platfourme very ill fauouredly framed, it
is incredible to be spoken, what rotten ruin^s have ensued, what monstrous
superstit^on, what beggarly and patched religion, and how troublesome a
confusion of doctrine, has heretofore too to long prevailed against Gods
church, yea even to this day does hold captive and miserably entangle the
consciences of the godly.

But you will say perhaps out of this free and vnpunish^d liberty of
doctrine, what will you bring to pass else, but make an open road to sin: but
withdraw honest and well bent dispositions of the godly from ensuing virtue,
and discourage them altogether from godly industry too retchelesnesse and
careless security? and by the same utterly root^ out withal the precepts
and ^ules of all godly laws, all honor and renown, of justice and civil
society, Tully in his or^tion for Milo.
and all force and vygor of Christian discipline? For who is ignorant that hope
of escape from punishment (as one has written) is the greatest bayte and
provocation to sin? The objection is confuted.
To answer hereto at a word, this their objection may in some respect carry a
show of some substance, if in proclaiming this faith in Christ (whereof we
speak) we were so wholly affected thereunto, as that we should not withal
apply worthy and serious exhortations too the practice of most virtuous life,
and the necessary duties of Christian society. When we can not, neither ought
we be unmindful of the words of the Apostle, which says, E^he. 5.
That for such things comes the wrath of God upon the children of
disobedience. Wherefore when we do so much advance those everlasting riches of
Christ and the high magnificence of the divine grace by the prescript rule of
the Gospel, and do spread the same abroad so discernable to the view of the
world, as that we abridge no iotte of our duty and obsequious obedience to be
busily employed in that other part of the law: what cause of just quarrel have
our adversaries to expostulate with us, except they will exact this at our
hands, that in proclaiming the Gospel of grace, we should so enforce the
promise of everlasting life to be dew unto works (as they say,) that in the
mean time no mention at all be made of faith, of Christ, of grace, or of free
promise. For this seems the very butte whereat these delicate fine doctors do
shoot so busily. For proof whereof behold the whole form of the do^trine
which they do profess, and all the preachinges of their monks, and you shall
find that not only the doctrine, but their life and whole course of their
proceedings make no mention at all of faith.

A brief Catalogue of the popish doctrine.
For what else emporte their purging satisfactions, their mass sacrifices, their
general martes of pardons: so many and so tedious pilgrimages undertaken into
far nations, so many and manifold byhangers, procured for prayers and
intercessions, Munkishe vows, purgatory markets, so many orders of Regulers,
clogges of religions, innumerable and intolerable burdens of men's
constitutions and traditions, monasteries builded for the redemption of ^oules
(for so they affirm) Rosaries, Diriges for the dead, nightwat^hinges and other
w^orkes of supererogation partly dew, partly purchased with the penny, and
enterpryses of all sorts undertaken in hope reward? In good felloweship, who
would ever have entered into the order of Frauncis, B^nedict, Bruno, or
Brigitte, who ever heretofore or at this present would be crowded under cowle,
if he grounded the chief shooteanker of his salvation in Christ only and not
in men's merit^s? What one of all that crewe would have suffered him self too
have been pent up in such a loathsome continuance of monkishe austeritie, or
have tied him self to an everlasting restrain^ from mea^es and marriage after
the manner of the Nazarites, if reposing his only affiance upon Christ, he did
not determine upon some other hope of attaining salvation? Finally who would
not with all his heart abhorte and de^est the unmeasurable ^rumperies and
tedious traditions of men, if he did firmly bele^ue that he c^ulde not
otherwise stand assured before the sea^e of majesty, but by only faith which
is in Christ Jesus?

Whereupon that deep divine whosoever he be, seems not to have said
altogether nothing to the matter, who in his books entit^led de Iustitia,
Osor. in his 7. book de Iustitia.
debateth of righteousness on this wise: If faith only (says he) do suffice,
and so all the actions that we undertake be unprofitable and def^led, then is
it a plain cons^quent, that all whosoever do embrace this coun^erfaict faith,
do utterly shake of all endeavor to work well etc. Truly I confess this to
be most truly spoken. Wheresoever salvation is preached to proceade freely
from faith only: It can not otherwise be, but that the who^e desire of works
will wax somewhat cold. But what ^orkes I pray you? forsooth such works as
the Romish Sinagogue ^oth broache unto us. But if the question concern th^se
works, which are prescribed by the most holy law of God, it is so far of,
that faith only may make to relent any iot^e of such good endeavor as that it
will work in them a greater cherefulnesse too do their duties. Too make this
more evident, let this suffice for proof. For if our heavenly father have made
us inheritours of eternal li^e, of his own proper gracious mercy, so that the
possession of heaven become none otherwise ours then as the state of
inheritance is due unto the son directly from the father by the law civil
(as saint Paul witnesses) who does boldly pronounce that we be all the sons
of God through faith in Christ, and heirs according the promise. ^ala. 3.
Now then let this notable Philosopher of righteousness answer me hereunto.
Whether the natural son standing assured of his inheritable estate will be
more negligent to do the will of his father, or some other strange hyreling
waged for money, or enforced through fear of the eudgell.

A comparison betwixt the preachers of the law and the Gospel: and betwixt
the^ which plod upon nothing else then the right^ousnes of the law and works.
Go too, let us compare now the lives and manners of these holy fathers (al
whose preachinges sound nothing else almost, beat nothing else into the ears
of the people, but the only works of the law:) what kind of works do
they busy them selves about at the length, what undefiled chastity is in
their ly^es, what holiness in their conversation, what humility deuoyde of
all haughtiness is in their hearts, what modesty acquainted with no kind of
ambition, what mildness insuffering injuries: how earnest a zeal to
prefer the glory of Christ, how who^^e a love have they to their
neighbors? But it is well, sithence their demeanor such as it is, appears
manifestly enough, and is known of the whole world. For their open patcheries
be not so closely part up in the budget of their confession, but that they be
apparan^ now, and wax ridiculous and odious to all men: ^ertes they can
neither deceive the eyes of the Lord, nor escape his judgment, except the
only faith in Christ plead better for them, then any their gaye wo^kes. Yet I
make not here so great reck^ning of their manners. My whole discourse at this
present is undertaken against them for their erroneous doctrine, and perverse
frowardnes of corrupt religion. Whereof what others judge I know not: for mine
own part when I do consideratly behold and prye into those thick and black
clouds of darkness, into the trashe, chafe, and contagion of their errors,
into the grossness of their doctrine, into the poison of their opinions, into
their impiety of religion, into the laberinthe of their traditions, and into
the monstr^ouse misshapen orders of cloysterers and Regulers: finally when I
do thoroughly consider the lively fountains of Evangelical sincerity and
doctrine Apostolical, troubled and defiled in most filthy manner by the^, and
the chief and only author thereof the Pope of Rome: I become not a little
doutfull in mine imagination, whether the tyranny of the Turk have more
grieuous^y wounded the Christian common weal, or the docrine of the Pope has
been more prejudicial too the Gospel of Christ: whether the Turkishe ^ury,
either the Popes flames and fagottes, or his crafty conspiracies have swallowed
up and devoured more Christians. And yet neither does this mild and catholic
father relent from his cruelty, but rusheth on much more rudely, not only upon
the souls but also upon the very throats of Christians, more horribly raging
with slaughter and but^herie against the faithful, the^ the most ravenous
Turk in the world.

If the cause of this horror were now to be rendered: might we be so bold to
learn of your holiness for the honor of your supersacred myter, (O reverend
father) what reason or matter did first enduce you, or even now yet enforce you
to so great disorder and outrage. What say you? what bring you? what do you
allege, wherein you may worthily accuse us, or wherein we ought not much
rather condemn your fatherhood? what has any of us deserved worthy of these
tragedies, what? have we ever practiced any force against you? or have we ever
lain in wait for your life? have we at any time attempted too despoyle you of
your city or tabernacle? If not, why may it not be lawful for us quietly to
enjoy our poor cotages without your comptrollement? for you endeavor as much
as in you lies, not only to exclude us from out our cities and countries
wherein we remain, but too bereave us our lives also. With the smart of al
which outrages raised by you and your fraternity, as many other nations have
been heretofore grievously punished, so also not long sithence both France and
Flaunders, yea and Scotland also, and of late no^e likewise her near borderer
and neighbor Irelande, to speak nothing mean whiles of her nearest neighbor
England, which seems even at this present to be circumue^^ed with the crafty
underminings of you and your accomplices, and to stand in no small danger,
unless the heavenly majesty prevent your treacheries betimes. For what think
you that your crafty councels though cunningly coucht and packt together, be
unknown unto us? that we understand not what you have done, what you do,
what you shoot at, whom ye seek to undermine, what your devises be at home,
what your driftes be abroad, what you and your confederates whisper together?
And put the case that these your covert conceits be hidden from us, which you
suppress with silence: what? will you so blindfold the eyes of Gods majesty,
that he may not be able to see into your close co^celed villainies and make
them more open then the day light? But I beseech you sir, if the Turk
supplied the place of the Pope in Rome at this present, and would make speedy
provision by all means possible to root us and the whole name of Christians
out: What more horrible attempt could he procure for our utter overthrow? or
if we our selves were miscreantes and Turks, and not Christians, how could you
possibly hate us more deadly? or persecute us more furiously?

But I surcease from farther complaints though justifiable enough against you,
that I may the better prosecute the matters that apperteine more properly to
our purpose: for I do right well perceive whereunto all this your whotte
contention and troublesome broils do aspire at the length. To wit: either
by policy to allure us, or by compulsion to hale us too the doctrine and
faith which you call catholic. Go to, may we know (if it please your
fatherhood) what kind of catholic doctrine this is wher^unto you call us. To
relent now somewhat of that contentious kind of quarreling, and to co^ferre
with you now, not as moved with any malice against you as I may justly enough,
but to debate the controversy, pleading it as it were at the bar against you,
according to the equity and truth of the cause by substantial matter, rather
then frutelesse words. Imagine therefore with your self, holy father, that
you sit not now in your consistory at Rome, as judge of your own cause, but
to be araigned as guilty of the crime before the majesty of Christian princes
in a certain public and general council, before whom you ought long sithence
have been put to your purgation. Come of therefore you reverend and holy
bishop, for ye love and reverence you bear to S. Peter, who coo^ma^deth you to
render a reason of your faith to the^ that dema^d it of you. Tell us fra^kely
and openly what manner and form of faith is that at the length, which you
obtrude upon us on this wise, yt the unlettered may also understand it.

What? will you drive us to this point first, to make us ^o acknowledge the Pope
of Rome for Christ's vicar on earth, and the only lord of Christian
universality?

But this first demand of yours the Lord him self does countermaund, The
supremac^ of the P^pe confuted.
who assigns lordship over nati^ns properly unto kings, assubiecte^h Apostles
to ministry, forbidding the^ al manner of mastery. It shall not be so amongst
you but he that will be greatest amongst you, shabe your s^ruant: Luke 22.26.
what can be more manifest? But against this is a reply urged here of the
person of saint Peter, whom they report to have been the chief of the
Apostles. But what do I hear? did Peter ever arrogate unto him self any
soueraintie over the Apostles? or did he ever affect universal dictatorship
over the congregation of Christians? Or if he had so done, would the Lord have
ever permitted it, who never presumed of any such lordlinesse in him self, nor
could abide it in his other disciples, nay rather did utterly forbid it by
words, by signs, by example, by all possible and manifest demonstrations? And
do you yet after so many, so manifest, and so approved testimonies, dream
still of a princely seignorie over Christ's church?

Invocation of saints confuted.
What is your other demand then? That we cappe, k^eele unto, reverently
worship and call upon he sainc^es and she saints which the Romish Canons
have in their calendar registered for saints, and procure them to be our
proctours and advocates before God? But the holy scripture does direct us but
to one only mediator in heaven, Hebr. 7.
who always lives (says Paul) to the end he may make intercession for us.

Pictures and images of saints.
That we should pro^trate our ^elues before pictures and images? That we should
gadde on pilgrimage to stocks and stoanes? the holy scriptures do call you
from nothing more earnestly.

Uowes of v^maried life.
That shauelings and votaries be restrained from f^ee liberty to marry and
eating flesh on fridayes and lent? The Apostle does call this The doctrine of
Devils.

Masses and s^^rifices.
That we should for the cleansing of our sins flee to masses and propiciatorie
sacrifices? It is horrible sa^riledge directly against the office and glory of
Christ: who only and alone is appointed by the scripture to be the
propitiation for our sins.

Satisfactions ^or ^i^nes.
That by auricular confession and enjoined penance the fet^ers of sin may be
loased, and the fire of purgatory qnenched? The Gospel of Christ teaches an
other doctrine, which will take notyce of no sacrifice nor clensing of sin,
but of the only death and passion of Christ Jesus. And he (says S. John) is
the propiciation for our sins. 1. John.2^
Likewise S. Peter, Acts.1^
That through his name all that believe in him, shall receive remission of
sins.

To the same effect we hear out of the Euangelical doctrine, that we be
justified through faith without works. But the Popes dulcymer sounds
otherwise, which s^eming as it were to yield some little interest of
justifying to faith, yet transposeth the chief perfection thereof unto works.

Christ does make this proclamation, he that believes in me, has everlasting
life. But the Popes prelates cry out, Osor. In his Epistle to the Queen of
England.
That there is none other passable way to heaven, but which is procured with
holy works, and passing integrity of life. Paul does pronounce he is our
righteousness meaning that all be accounted for righteouse as many as bele^ue
in Christ. These jolly fellow^s do urge against him that we become righteouse,
not by the mean of our belief in Christ, but in that we be righteousely
doing works, and yet peradventure they will not deny this, That Christ is our
righteousness: but the mean whereby he does justify us, they allow no^:
Christ by faith, the Papists by works: Christ freely, the Pap^^tes not
without condition of charity annexed. Righteousness by faith.
Whereas Christ doo^h cure us in like manner, Justification free.
as the serpent in old time did heal the wounded, which was done by only
looking upon it: This can not the Papists away withal in any wise.

Moreover whereas we b^e taught by the words of the scri^ture that by one
oblation they are made perfect which be sanctified for ever. One only oblation.
The Pope does deny that there is but one only oblation, unless Christ be
daily offered for a sacrifice to his father in their propiciatory masses.

The Papists supp^r without wine.
Christ instituting his last supper intoo the remembrance of his body and
blood, did distribute to al ingeneral the bread and wine withal, and commanded
the same to be done in like manner. The Pope commands otherwise, to deliver
the people one part of the sacrament only without the wine.

The holy ghost the vicar of Christ.
Christ departing from the earth did promise that he would send an other
comforter, that the Church should not want a comforter to supply his absence.
And dare the Pope, not being satisfied, with the holy spirit of Christ whom
Tertullian called by the name of Christ's vicar, presume to call him self
Christ's vicar, Tertullian de praescrip. aduersus Haereticos. Being taken hence
into heaven to the right hand of the father, he sent his vicar power of the
holy Ghost which might comfort the faithful.
or shall we believe him in his presumption?

Paul does deny them to be partakers of Gods righteousness, which do seek too
establishe their own. And with what edge dare these Romanists, which carue out
their own righteousness so greedily, conceive too partake with Gods
righteousness? The same Paul teaches That Christ is the end of the law unto
righteousness to all that believe. Christ the end of the law.
But let us see this notable famous school of Rome to what end it leads us:
and what way it carries us. The end and mark of romish doctrine.
Forsooth not from the law unto Christ: not from works unto faith: not from
faith unto righteousness, but setting the carte before the horse: even as though
the end of the law were not Christ, but the mark of Christ were the law:
haling us backewarde from faith to works, from the Gospel to the law: from
the spirit and truth, to shadows, to coapes, to annoylinges, to shauings, to
holiwater, to stagelyke gestures, to ceremonies, to rytes, to outward
geugawes: to obseruaunces of places, times, persons and succ^ssions: too men's
traditions and constitutions: too penitentiary satisfactions, from these to
righteousness, and in fine from Christianity too Iewishnes: so that besides
only circumcision, wants nothing to make us appear the disciples of Moses
rather then the disciples of Christ.

The Lord does command us in a certain place to search the scriptures^
because (says he) they bear witness of me. John.5.
The Pope does forbyde that: Not permitting the people to read in their own
house, nor too hear in the Churches so much as the promise made unto them in
their baptism, An unknown tongue does not edify.
but in the tongue which they understand not.

Christ in his Gospel can in no wise digest them which say, Mat. 24.
Lo here is Christ, Lo there is Christ. And what else does the Pope, if not
in words, yet in very deeds? who commands al Christians ingeneral to
become subject too Peter's chair: which chair may be placed no where but in
Rome: as though Christ or Peter do make their aboade no where but in the City
of Rome, or at the least wise more readyly there then else where. Like fable to
this is that other, whereas all manner of woorshipping God aright is not tied
too any he^g^h of hills, or famousnes of ci^ies, and that the heavenly majesty
is most rightly called upon in that place, wheresoever he is worshipped in
spirit and truth. The Pope of Rome does make a far other minglemangle of this
spiritual worshipping god, not only with in^umerable Idols and shapes of
earthly creatures, but skat^ereth the same abroad into manifold and infinite
seats of pilgrimages, Idolatro^s pilgrimages.
stations, hills, temples, and places. As though the only authority of Christ
could of it self avail very little, unless it were underpropped with ruinous
pillars of Saints: or as though Christ were not able to mynister help in all
places indifferently being prayed unto with like affection of religion. Eue^
so they which gadd to Rome to visit the tomb of Peter and Paul, or raunge to
Compostella to see S. James, or which do conceive in their minds that the
Saints be more effectual in one place then in an other, what say they else,
then lo here is Christ, lo there is Christ. If the heavenly father do
require such woorshippers which woorshippe him in spirit and truth, to what
purpose serves so special a prescription of stations, and holy Seas, so great
and tediouse chase and rechace hither and thitherof pilgrims, for devotion sake.

Hithertoo have I disclosed the maskinges of the Popish religion, though not all that I could, yet as many as will serve our present purpose sufficiently enough.
Now that I may be so bold to lead the Pope home too his own person: I will
call him back to the very root of his progeny and stock, even to Saint Peter
himself: whom as he vaunteth to be the founder of his Sea, so will I vouche
the same against him for a witness too confound his doctrine. This therefore
do I demand of this good Sire: whether Saint Peter ought to be numbered in
the number of the Apostles? I perceive he does not deny it. I proceed then,
and demand further: whether Saint Peter were one of the same number of
Apostles to whom it was spoken: Peter the Apostle is denied to have been
bishop of Rome.
Go ye intoo the whole world preaching to every creature. If you grant it, as
ye can not well deny it: I ask now whether the order Apostolic be the self
same estate which bears to name Bishops? If the functions be several, how
could both the estates be given to one self person: The functions of
Apostles and Bishops be diverse.
to wit that Peter should exercise the office both of an Apostle, and of a
Bishop? Then do I desire to know: If Christ did send out Peter together
with the other Apostles into the whole world, how shall it appear, that the
Lord allotted him to some one certain place, where h^e might sit, who
without any mention of place at al, was sent of the Lord to go, not to sit:
into the world, not intoo a City: unless peradventure we ought too recompte
the City of Rome to ^ee the whole worlde^ and that w^oe so sits at Rome may
be supposed to go ab^^^de into the whole world. Not so. But you will say: That
Peter did enstalle Lynus to be Bishop of Rome. It may be so: and what hereof at
the length?

So also did the self same Peter teach ^^ch and long time at Ierusalem^ The
Pope of Rome is falsely supposed to be Pete^s successor.
in the which City James (...) the Just is reported too have been (...)
Bishop by Peter James and John. Yet was no man e^^r so mad to affirm that
James was for this cause Peter's su^cessor. Semblably neither Timothe nor Ti^e
were therefore accounted Paul's successors, because Pa^^e ^ade them both
Bishops^ no more ^hen, i^ the Pop^ of Rome would at this present ordeine
Ar^hbishoppe^, bi^hops or Cardinals at Rome, it should be any way (...) make
them successors of the Pope.

But of the succession has been sufficiently spoken before. How much the
popes doctrine is swarued from the disciplyne Apostolic.
Now because this treaty concern^^^ not the succession of Peter but his
doctrine: let us ^ompare the orders of this Romish sea which is now wi^h the
(...) of Peter delivered then. Which how ^ouly have ^allen from that right
^quarier of Apostolic d^sciplyne, may even hereof appear evidently: That
whe^eas Peter does v^ry gravely and fatherly exhort them that mynister the
word of the Gospel, 1. Peter.2.
that withal ^umblenesse and reverence they should submit them selves too
them who being authorized by GOD do bear rule over them whether they be
kings set in highest authority, or princes, or rulers sent of GOD to govern
the people. Too countermaunde this Canon of Peter, the practice of Rome
commands on this wise, That they submit themselves in deed unto kings,
and to al lawful magistrates so far forth as their commandments be not
repugnant to Gods commandments or the Popes decrees. Out of which obedience
notwithstanding the Popes holiness with his other prelates have so s^ipped the
collar, that I shame to utter how treacherously they have not only shaken from
their shoulders the yoke of their due obedience to kings and emperors, but
also how arrogantly they have been imperiouse over the^, how they have troa^en
upon their necks with their feet, forced them from out their kingdoms, and
translated their scept^rs and crowns after their own l^st and pleasure.

Of the sacraments.
But passing over this and many other enormities, I come now to the sacraments.
In the which whereas many things are chopped in place, to color the credit of
their doctri^e without the authority of the pure and sacred scriptures; amongst
al other, I can not tell how this peruersenes of men being so poor blind in
matters of them self most manifest, has in any our thing bewrayed their
blockishnes more notably, The abominable corruptions of the papists in the
Lords sup^er.
then in the supper of the Lord. Here is such an huge heap of monstruouse
mockeries and peevish shifts of most absurd errors thrust into this one
sacrament, as that the posterity can never wonder sufficiently at the view of
them. For what can be more grossly absurd then to ^ake from out the sacraments
the likeness and mutual resemblaunce: out of which only groundwoork aryseth
chiefly all the whole substance and building of sacraments? what can be more
repugnant not only to all the very true proportionable relation of the
scripture, but also more disagreable too all con^eniency of reason and common
sense, the^ to turn that to worshipping and kneeling, which was delivered for
a thankful remembrance by most agreeable application? what can be more blockish,
then to embrace signs for things them selves? what ca^ be more deuoide of
shame, then to enforce to believe contrary too that which the eyes do see, and
whereof all the Aug. ad Infantes is cyted by Bed^ 1. Cor. 10. That which you see
is bread and wine, which also your eyes do declare mani^e^^ly.
senses have absolute feeling and perseueraunce: for proof whereof is neither
any manner of necessity too be urged, no, not so much as any never so little
probability? I do acknowledge the omnipotent power of Christ in working
miracles. But where did he ever work miracle, or exact a miracle, where the
August^ de trinitate 3. book, cap. ^. Miracles are properly applied too
declare to our senses some supernatural and heavenly power. In the sacrament
nothing is declared supernatural too our senses. Ergo, here is no miracle
wrought by God.
senses them selves bear no witness th^^ it is a miracle? In Cana of Galilee
when he turned water into wine, it was not believed to be a miracle, before the
senses bare testimony thereof. The Apostles did see with their eyes Christ
ryse^ out of his grave, they heard him speak, they felt him wi^h hands,
finally their sen^e perceived him to be Christ before their faith did
apprehende him. Even so we at this present, though we see him not, yet do
believe that he is risen again: but not otherwise, then being ^ndured by the
testimony of the Apos^les which saw him risen, or else we should never have
believed. But now whereas another reason nor any other cause material has made
demonstration, whereas the senses also do utterly gainsay, wheras^ neither
scripture nor Christ himself did ever command to believe, but to eat only:
what extreme madness were it to turn that to matter of faith, and to enforce
a miracle there, where neither^ any cause at al can enduce, nor Aug. in his 37.
Epistle to Dardanus. I am af^aide lea^t we shall seem to do injury to our
senses, when by spe^ches we persuade that wherein plain evidence does without
any difficulty rise above al our power and cunning of speech.
demonstration can discover a miracle? lastly, for as much as nothing is more
figurative or set down in darker figures, The holy scriptures full of Tropes
and figures.
^hen the holy scripture is in explaning the mysteries of faith: what ^rosse
ignorance is this to apply that wholly to the bare letter, 2. Cor. 3.
which ought to be referred to the figurative and tropical interpr^a^ion? I^^n.
6. Flesh profits nothing.
namely, ^^^henes the Apostle Paul does give us to understand that the letter
kills, and Christ also pron^u^ceth, that Flesh avails nothing. Likewise
Augu. de doctrina Christiana. 4 book. 5. chapt. First you must take heed least
ye refer the figurative speech unto the letter. For hereunto apperteyneth
that which the apostle spoke. The letter kills. For when a figurative speech
is so taken, as if it were properly spoken, it ^auoreth of the flesh. Neither
can any thing be called more aptly the death of the soul, then when the
understanding is made subject too the flesh, by following the letter.
Augustine affirms that the carnal sense of the letter is perilous,
especially in the figurative speeches which are uttered in the scriptures, in
so much that no manner of death can be more aptly called the death of the
soul: which is also named by Bernarde, The death in the po^. Now if there be
any place in the scriptures meet to a^mitte a figure: in what one place
through all the whole scriptures may it be more properly applied then in the
mysteries of sacraments? Jerome against Ruf^^ne.
When I call it a figurative speech ( says Jerome) I do show that the
words ought not too be taken as they be uttered, but that it is covered
with some allegorical cloud. As when in the sacrament^s we are said to be
borne anewe by water, and too b^e fed with the body of Christ: who is so
void of reason that wresting these speeches unto the Origin.7. homily upon
Leuit. If literally ye follow the words that be spoken: [except ye eat
the flesh of the (...) of man, ye have (...) life in you] this letter kills.
carnal sense, the meaning whereof is too be construe^ figuratively, will
imagine that we ought too be borne in our bodies anewe as Nicodemus did? or to
be fe^de with Christ's flesh carnally as the Capernaites did? Go to what
better imaginat^on do the unlettered multitude conceive in these days of the
doctrine of their transubstantiation, delivered unto them by their great
Doctors? For on this wise do th^se famous How absu^dl^ the Popish Christ
mak^^s do tu^ne the bread into the flesh and humanity of Christ.
Christ makers enstruct their auditorie: That the bread which was bread before
the consecra^ion, altering the very substance of bread, is no more bread now,
but turned into flesh: and that this also must be believed without all
question, that it is made the everlasting son of God. What can be more
absurd? And how comes this change too pass, I pray you? forsooth because
Christ said: This is my body. For this whole huge Chaos of confused
Transubstantiation is accomplished with these iiii. words by these Christ
makers. What? and did the Lord pronounce no more words, but these four only?
what if he spoke in the Hebrwe tongue, and expressed the whole action in two
words only, after the manner of that nation [ Zoth Guphi?] because the phrase
of that language does not for the most part express the Uerbe [ Est.]

But to admit he spoke four or five words, what? The Papists do^ omit the
circumstances of the words of the Supper.
did he add thereunto no more besides? or did he speak nothing else before
or after, too make the very meaning and purpose of his speeches more evident
and manifest? And why do these fellows omit the circumstances, and not
deliver the whole Scripture withal? why do they chop of the one h^lfe of
Christ's proposition, and suppress in silence the chief part, whereby the
meaning of Christ might appear more forcibly^ For when Christ made mention of
his body, he did not therefore make the b^ea^e his body, Luke.22.
t^^t it might be devoured: 1. Cor. 11.
but (...) a com^^^ndement to take bread first, and to ea^^, The^e words of
(...) This (...) must (...) acc^r^^^^ ^o the cir^^ms^anc^s.
Take ye (says Christ) and eat ye. And foor^hwith making mention of his
body, did say: This is my body, yet not ^mply neuert^elesse, but (...), That is
given and broken for you: To wit, to signify unto them not the very substance
of his natural body simply, but that the crucifiyng of his body and the
shedding of his blood should become our food. From hence bubbleth out all that
welspring of error, That where our Lord and Savior had relation to the
efficacy and power of his passion, the same the Papists do apply too the
only substance of the flesh, as though we were to be fed with the very
natural flesh of Christ: The flesh of Christ does not feed us properly,
but the passion of Christ.
and not rather with the passion of his flesh. But you will ask how the
passion of Christ feeds, which is not eaten: forsooth, in the same manner as
the death of Christ does nourishe us, so does his passion feed us, not after
a fleshly but after a spiritual manner. Pascasius. 43. Cap. Therefore we must
thus think with our selves, not how much is chawed with the teeth, but how
much is received by faith and love. etc.
Not as it is chawed with the teeth, but as it is received into the heart. For
the^ does the death of Christ feed us, when it refreshes us: then is he
eaten, when he is received by faith, and applied too ^ur infirmities.

Now he that is desirous to know with how great force and efficacy the Lords
death works in feedyng and refreshing our souls, shall never ve able to
attain the perseverance thereof with more facility, then by this sacrament,
if he will but enter into due consideration of all the parts thereof. The
fruit of Christ's passion can by no means be more easily discerned th^n by the
sacrament of the Lords supper.

Mat. 26.


For you come first to the Lords supper, wherein you behold what the Lord
took in his hands. Jesus took bread and forthwith giving thanks, brake the
bread which he took: Why would he thus break it? forsooth, to the end he
might give it, and to whom did he give it? not the whole loaf to only one
person perdie, but gave to every one severally a several morsel. And to what
end did he so distribute it? that they should hold it up in their hands? or
reserve it in boxes? N^ verily; but that every of them should eat and drink.
What? with the mouth of the body or no^ There is no question to be made
hereof. For the matter being neuerthel^s of it self thoroughly mani^est, yet
this one thing may be for a sufficient proof, that the outward substance was
the natural substance of bread, and not of his Cyprian de Coena. Our abiding
and incorporation in him is our eating and drinking: whereby we be united unto
Christ, and made his body, not by any corporal but by a spiritual passing into
us. etc.
^ody since the very order of nature ^oeth utterly abhor that Man should
feed upon man's flesh.

I have showed you the outward Action of the Supper. Open now the windows of
your soul, that ye may perceive what deeper my^terie lye^h hidden August
contra Maximinum. 22. Cap. These be Sacraments, in the which must always be
considered not what they be^ but what they show outwardly: because they be
Signs of things being one thing in deed, and signifiyng an other thing.
within, under these external things, and conceive what the Lords purpose
was in this his S^pper. For there is in this Supper one thing object too the
view of the eyes, another thing shut up in a mystery. Now what kind of
mystery this is, the Lords own words do sufficiently set down in these
words spoken to his Disciples. Take ye (says Christ) and eat ye, This is my
body which is given for you. Do this as often as ye shall do it in remembrance
of me. What can be more evident then the interpretation of this supper, if
the circumstances of the words be scanned accordingly? For who is so blind
that can not discern the f^uits of the Lords death and ^assion to be plainly
Gelasius contra Nestor. The Image and likeness of the body and blood of
Christ is celebrated in the Action of the mysteries.
^ignified here, for as much as in the very eating, himself saith^ this is my
body that is given to be slain for you. Otherwise why would he have added
withal, Given too be slain? But that he would set down a plain testimony
of the The death of the body must be considered in the Lords Supper, not the
substance of his body.
death of his body, rather then of any substance thereof to the view of the
Disciples. As if he should s^y: the time ^s now at hand, The Lords meaning
is too be con^i^^r^d in the supper.
wherein my body must be given to be s^^ine for you, not for any mine ^ffence
at all, but for your sakes, which death of mine shall procure euerlas^i^g life
for you: after like sort and ma^er as this bread which I give thus broken unto
you to eat, does pass into your bodies and give nourishment there^o.
Chr^sost. Homil. 83. upon Mat. and Homi. ^0. To the people of Antioche. This
he spoke to show that this mystery was his cross and passion, and to comfort
his disciples hereby.
Take ye therefore this bread which I give to every of you, and eat, and
withal consider herein not the natural bread which feeds your bodies
outwardly, but my body which being given to be slain and crucified for, you
shall inwardly and much more effectually refreshe you too eternal life: ^o^n.^.
For my Flesh, which I will give to be slain for the life of the world is
meat in deed, and my blood is drink in deed. For your bodies do no so much
^iue by the nourishment of meat and dri^k, as your souls be fed within with
the crucifiyng of my flesh, and the shedding of my blood: without which you
can have no remission of sins, no joyful resurrection of your flesh, no
part nor portion of eternal life. Therefore let this which is given you in
this Supper remain for a perpetual Sacrament and remembrance unto you of the
body which I will hereafter give for you: The body of Christ given 2. ma^er of
wai^s both to us, and for us: y^ one in the Supper, th^s other upon the ^rosse:
the one to be cruci^i^d, the other to be ^aten.
For I shall give my body for you into the hands of enemies, the Sacrament
whereof I do here give into your hands.

Whereby thou may perceive (gentle Reader) that here be two things given by
Christ, one unto us, the other for us: the first too be eaten, the last too
be crucified: that one in the Supper, this other upon the Cross. Now if yo^
desire to know the substance of that which was given in the supper, it was
bread and the Sacrament of his body. That which was given upon the cross,
was his body and not a Sacrament. What then will you say? was not his body
given at Supper? Yes in deed Christ's body was given there too the Disciples:
but not for the Disciples bodies, The body of Christ given in the Supper but
not to men's bodies, neither yet corporally.
neither after a bodyly and corporal manner for that corporal body was given too
the Jews not in the Supper, but on the cross: whereupon he gave his body
corporally not too the Disciples, but for the Disciples. Therefore that which
he gave for his Disciples was his body: that which he gave too his Disciples
was the Mystery of his body. Yet was it one and the self same body, both that
of the Supper given to the Disciples: One self same body of Christ was given
in the supper, and upon the cross, yet not after the same manner, nor at one
time nor to the same persons.
and that of the Cross given for his Disciples, but yet not after the same
sort, nor yet at the same time. For upon the Cross it was given too be
slain corporally: In the Supper it was given not to be sla^ne, but to be
eaten, not corporally, to be gnawne with their teeth, but too feed upon it
in the bowels of their souls, namely, after a Sacramental kind of receiving,
not corporal. Therefore it is not denied that the Lords body was both given
and eaten in the Supper: but not the body only, but together with the body,
the Sacrament annexed also withal: whereof the one apperteyneth too the
feeding of the bodies, the other to the fe^ding of the souls. That which is
received into the bodies is both bread and the Sacrament of his body. In the
holy communion neither is the bread only without Christ's body: neither the
body only without the Sacramental bread^
That which is received within in the soul is the very body, not the Sacrament
of his body.

For as m^che therefore as these two do necessarily concur together in the
holy Supper, that the one can not be severed from the other: Let us so join
the one with the other, that we neither separate the ^ody of Christ from the
Sacrament, as the Papists do, which be so thoroughly wedded to the only
substance of the body, as that they leave therein no substance at al of a
Sacrament but superficial and immateriall shadows, I know not what, hanging
in the air, which serve to no purpose. Neither let us so segregate the
Sacrament again from the body, as that we leave nothing in the holy supper but
bare signs.

But in this coupling together of the body with the bread in the Sacrament,
behooves to be well and considerately advised that we may thoroughly perceive
how these things ought to be joined together, and how they ought to be
severed. For neither that, which affects the outward senses, and passes
down into the body of man, is the flesh of Christ: so neither that which is
received in spirit and in the inward man, is bread, but the very body of
Christ. Out of the which arises a threefolde error of men's corrupt opinions
touching A threfolde error of men touching the sacrament of the supper.
The first error is, where men do chop and thruste together the presence of
Christ's body in the Sacrament, as that they suppose both the bread and the
body to be devoured of them with our selfsame mouth corporally, and those we
call Consubstantiators. The second error is of such as be called
Transubstantiators, the other must be conceived inwardly: the one must be an
earthly thing, the other heavenly: the one must express some what, the other
must be expressed by somewhat. The third error is,

But we so join together both the sacred bread and Christ himself in the
holy Supper, that the presence and eating of Christ be spiritual: but the
presence and eating of the bread be corporal: and that this one may be
disgested outwardly by the mouth, and that other conceived inwardly and,
spiritually, in the soul. But here again as many times else I do hear some
of our iangling adversaries whispering against us. What? say they, did not
Christ say, That this was his body? so he said in deed: and what then?
Therefore it can not be, but as Christ spoke that it should be. In deed he
said that it was his body: yet did he not make it his body: neither did he
speak here, Let this be made my body, as he spoke in Genesis, Let there be
light, and light was made: Which kind of speech he would have used
questionles, if he had ever imagined any such transubstantiation as these men
do dream upon. But now using only the word not of Creating nor changing,
but of denomination only, he did report unto them that it was his body, but
did not command it too be made his body, nor enjoined them too believe any
miracle here, but only to ear in remembrance of him. August in John. Tracta.
26. Christ did affirm him self to be the bread which came down from
heaven, exhorting us to believe on him: for too believe on him, is to eat the
living bread.
We! then, will you say, if he did affirm it too be his body, will thou
deny it? or wylt thou condemn Christ for a Liar? Good words, I pray you
good sir: nay rather in deed I do with Christ him self boldly affirm it to
be the self same thing: Cyril. Anathe 11. Do thou pronounce this our
Sacrament to be ma^s foode^ and vrgest the minds of the faithful irreligiously
to gross and carnal thoughts, and do thou practice to discuss by man's
sensual reason, the things which are conceived by only and most exquisite faith.
even the body of Christ, after the same manner ^orsooth as himself did affirm
it and understood it. But af^ter what manner he took it, can you be so
senseless as not to conceive when you hear Christ him self Interpretor of
his own speech? Flesh^ (says he) does not profit at all, my words be
spirit, and life. And do thou cruel Caniball conceive and eat naught else
but the August in Ioh. tract 2^. Why do thou prepare thy ^ooth and thy
belly? Believe only, and thou have eaten. for to believe on him, is to eat the
^read of life.
flesh of of Christ? nor will thou permit one cromme so much of bread to
remain, because it is called the body of Christ? But how many things do
we hear daily called by this or that name, when as in very deed they be not
made the things whereof they bear the names? When the Disci^le whom Jesus
loved was by Christ's own mouth, called the son of Mary: yet will no man be
so witless, as to confess him to be the natural son of the Uirgine Mary.
So also the Prophet does call flesh a flower of the ^^elde: In the Gospel
John Bapti^t is called Elias, Peter is named a Rock, so is he also called
Satan. To conclude throughout all the discourse of the Scripture, what is more
frequent then this usual phrase of speech, and that things he called by
this or that name? wherein notwithstanding is no alteration of nature, but the
properties of things only noted. Neither did Christ otherwise at his last
supper, Theodorete. Christ did dignifie the signs which be seen by calling
them his body and blood, not changing the nature, but adding thereunto grace.
when giving the bread he called it his body, not changing the nature, but
instituting a Sacrament, so that here should be no manner transmutation of
substaunces from out one into another. But that the proprieties should be
answerable ^che with other by a mutual proportion of resemblance. The
rese^blance betwi^t the sacrament and the body of the Sacrament.
For in the bread consideration is had of the nouriture: in the death of the
body, the power and efficacy is manifested. Now the manner of effectual
operation thereof, is figured by the nourishment of bread. Beda in Luca^ cap.
22. Because bread does comfort man's heart, and wine does make good blood in the
body, therefore the bread is compared to the body, and the wine to Christ's
blood mystically.

The ^ustifying of faith is established chiefly in the Sacrament.


For as bread made of corn does nourish and comfort the body, in like manner
Christ's body crucified does end^w us with true and everlasting life. Now
therefore to make bread and wine to become nutritive, it i^ requisite that it
be eaten and disgested. Semblably to have the Lords passion to be effectual in
us, faith must needs come and apprehend it. And for that cause he commanded
to take and to eat: look therefore how effectual the eating of bread is to
the feeders bodies, even so, forceable and auaylable is Christ's passion to the
hearts of the believers. You feed upon bread, and are refreshed: you believe on
Christ slain and risen again for your sake, and you be justified. Who see^h
not here a most ^xcellent application of concurrents to be knit fast ^che in
other? First how that the breaking of bread does discover unto us the death of
his body: how the receiving and eating does signify our faith: and the food
and sustenance does emport our justifying through faith.

And to prove this to be the very meaning of Christ in this Sacrament, the
very words themselves being taken wholly vnmangled together do declare
sufficiently: When as he speaks of the bread which he commanded to eat,
This is my body. But what body? or how his body? forsooth the same which I
shall give to be s^ain for you. Take ye, eat ye. And likewise speaking of the
Cup: This cup is the new Testament in my blood, which shall be shed for you.
Take ye and drink ye. Otherwise to what purpose should he annexe those
words of crucifying and she^ding for you? Or to what end should he
command bread and wine to be^ eaten and drunken, Orige^ in Leu. cap. 7. The
Lord did not put over nor commanded to be reserved til the morrow, the bred
which he gave to his disciples, saying, Take ye, and eat ye.
and not rather to be reserved and kept in box, unless he purposed to make a
plain dem^^stration of the mystical and unspeakable force of his death, in
that eating of bread and wine, not in showing it to the gaze? Even as though he
should in plain words have taught us on this wise: The fruit and efficacy of
the Lords passion.
The crucifying of this my body which must be s^ain for you, and my blood
which I must shed for your sakes, is unto you meat in deed, and drink in
deed, for it shall turn to your salvation and justification as many as believe
in me. And because ye shall never forget this my great love unto you, Take ye
this bread and eat it: Take ye this Cup and drink it, as an assured
testimony of my great and everlasting kindness toward you, that as often as
ye do this, ye may thankfully remember my death and passion until I come.
August. de doctrina. lib. 3 cap. 16. This is a figurative speech, commanding
us to participate with the Lords passion, and thankefully and profitably to
lay up in our most grateful remembrance that Christ suffered his passion
for us.


I beseech you, holy father, for the love of your Catholic faith (if at least
there remain within you any drop of faith toward Christ Jesus) what can
be spoken more manifestly than these words? what can be set down more
significant than the things themselves? what one thing could more aptly or
effectually represent the heavenly and supercelestiall power of the Lords
passion, then the eating of bread, Gelas. co^tra Eutichetem. The substance of
bread and wine does not cease: and without doubt the image and similitude of
the body and blood is celebrated into the action of the mysteries.
and drinking of wine, which is our daily and usual food? And will ye so
ungently now dispoyle us of bread from out the Sacrament, and leave us nothing
but bare and empty forms, pescoddes and chafe of elements wher^with Swine
are usually fed, not men? In which doing what do ye else then pull up by the
roots the whole Sacrament out of the Church? for what use may there be of a
Sacrament here without the taste and use of bread? And if Augustine did truly
deny those to be worthy the names of Sacraments, Augus^^n in ^is 22.
Epistle to ^oniface.
which bear no resemblance of the things whereof they be Sacramen^es: what
likeness at the length will appear here, after the substance of bread (which
may be resembled to Christ's death) is once taken away? And what is this else
then not to place the body of Christ in the Sacrament, There can be no
sacrament of the body at all without bread.
but to thrust out of the Church altogether the Sacrament of Chris^es body?
Unless perhaps ye will say, that the body of Christ is a Sacrament of it
self: or else that bare forms of elements only, void of all substance should
suffice to make a Sacrament: Then the which what can be spoken more absurd, or
ymagined more monstrous? In good f^llowship, gentle Reader, can thou think
such men, as do coin these monstrous and drowsy devises in the Sacraments to
be sound witted, or rather not to be quite frantike and mad with these
intricate myzmazes of error.

Let this suffice now touching the substance of the Sacrament which our
adversaries do very s^iffely maintain to be the body of Christ: The outwa^de
substance of the bread.
neither do we gainsay it much. For we confess together with Augustine and
other ancient fathers, that the same which Christ did vouchsafe to deliver by
the name of his body, is after a August. de ciuit. de^. li. 18 cap^ 48. After a
certain manner do all things significant represe^t the properties of things
which they do signify.
certain manner the body of Christ. Even so we do also con^esse that the bread
is the very thing which he gave to his disciples to be ^aten. But here rises
the difference. For we agree not in one about the manner, how his body is eaten.
They be so wholly ^ixed to ye body only in these holy mysteries, as that they
lean therein no substance of bread at al, which is a point not of error, but
of amazed blockish^es. we do conclude that in the bread and wine is simply and
properly the very material part of the Sacrament, The bread is the Sacram^nt
of the body, that is to say: The bread is after a sacramental manner the body.
yet so as we do not expel the Sacrament of the body. And therefore we do
affirm that after a sacramental manner it is the body of our Lord, not bread.
But if we respect the gross and elemental mat^er which is delivered to be
eaten and drunken, we say it is bread, but not called bread: so also that it
is called the body, but is not the body in deed. And in very deed, if it
had not been bread, Christ would not in any wise have given forth that it
should be eaten corporally, because to ma^e man's flesh and man's blood under
whatsoever show it be shadowed, to seem agreeable for table meat, is not only
forbidden by the prescript law of God, as is said before, but also most
loathsome, and abhorred of nature it self.

Of the thing it self which is signified by the Sacrament.
It remains now, sithence we have treated of the matter of the sacrament,
that we speak now of the thing it self, which is signified by this Sacrament.
And for as much as all Sacraments (which according to their proper natures, are
defined to be visible Bernard. de sanct^ Mart. A Sacrament is called an holy
sign, or ^n holy secret
signs of invisible grace) are said to be of the nature of those things which
the Grecians call (...), and with us be named Relatiues^ can any man doubt
hereof, That the body of Christ can not possibly be the Sacrament of it own
self? As the father is not a father of himself, but of the Son: as it
proceeds not of the Son to be called son in respect of himself, but of
the father: so can it not possibly be, but that in the Sacraments two distinct
and several things must concur (as Irene witnesses) to wit an earthly
thing, Irenaeus aduersus Valentinia^os. lib. 4. cap. 34. The earthly bread
receiving denomination of the word of god, is no more common bread, but is made
a Sacrament, which consists of two things, earthly, and heavenly.
and an heavenly: the one whereof must represent a likeness and a sign, the
other must be signified. For wheresoever a sign is, there of necessity must
somewhat be signified. Here therefore that which supplieth the place of the
sign is the bread without all question. The Sacrament The thing of the
sacrament.
That which is signified by this sacramental sign, no man will deny to be
the body of Christ. In the one whereof is contained the Sacrament, in the
other the matter of the Sacrament. Whereupon ensues an unavoidable conclusion,
That either the body of Christ crucified for us (being the very thing of the
Sacrament) is not the very Sacramental sign that is eaten in the Supper: or
else can not by any possible means be the self thing which is represented by
the sign. Therefore that which we do eat with our mouths, is bread, but that
which is Basil in Psalm. 33 Because our Lord is the true bread, and his flesh
meat in deed, it is necessary that the delight which is received by the
eating of that bread, should through our taste become spiritual unto us.
understood, is the flesh. The first whereof we receive with our mouth, the
other with our Spirit. And for the same cause Jerome does call it spi^ituall
flesh: whose authority Peter Lombarde cyt^th in the same cause: Lib. 4. did.
8.
saying. The flesh and blood of Christ mu^^ be understood two manner of
ways, either that which was crucified, or that spiri^uall and heavenly f^eshe
whereof Christ spoke himself: My flesh is meat in deed, and my blood is
drink in deed. Why it is called by Jerome the spiritual flesh of Christ.
Neither can there be any cause rendered, why Jerome should call it the
flesh of Christ, other then because we do receive it with our spiritual
mouths, and not with our fleshly mouths, for if it were not so: wh^ does not
know that the flesh of Christ given for the life of the world, wheresoever
it be, is not spiritual, but in the very nature thereof naturally carnal.

But Peter Lombarde does deny that any crumme of the bread at all does
remain besides bare forms, Lombard^^ assertion.
which only do reteyne the names of the natural things which they were
before. What? And did Christ therefore feed his Disciples with Mathematical
forms and names of things without the very natural things themselves. No,
say you, but under those shadows and accidents of bread and wine the very
substance of flesh and blood is received. And why does Jerome then call this
by the name of Ambros. de mysteriis. Christ is in that Sacrament, because it is
the body of Christ. Therefore it is not corporal food, but spiritual. Whereupon
the Apostle speaking of the figure thereof: Because our fathers did eat the
same spiritual food. For the body of Christ is spiritual. The body of Christ
is the body of a divine spirit. De consecr. did.
spiritual flesh of Christ? ought it therefore be called the spiritual flesh
of Christ, because being shrouded under outward cloakes of forms and shadows
it delivers it self into our bodies? And what if this visible Sun being
ouershadowed with clouds and rackes, do not appear plainly to our sight,
whereas notwithstanding it does enlighten the whole world on all parts
thereof, shall we therefore call the Sun a spiritual Sun, because it is
bidden with thick and dark clouds? Go to then, where is now that similitude
or likeness that is required in all Sacraments, Lombard confuted.
to wit, of the sign, with the thing signified, if you will leave unto us no
substance at all except of the body and blood only? What then? Shall the body
of Christ be both a sign and a Sacrament of himself? No, say you: but that
visible form of bread, which is made a Sacrament of two things, because it
signifies bath: to wit, the true body, and the mystical: and does
represent the express Ambros. de Sacrament. lib. 4. cap. 4. Even as thou have
received the likeness of death, so do thou drink the similitude of blood.
likeness of both the things. Go to. Let us hear our master of sentences
opinion in this matter, what manner of similitude this is, and how it is
expressed. Because as the bread, says he, does nourish the body more than any
other grain: and because wine does comfort more than any other grape: Even so
the flesh of Christ does comfort, cherish, and make glad the inward man. This
is well said, Lombard, in d^^de. But how will you now agree with your self
th^n? Lombard against himself.
As the bread say you, does nourish the body. But how shall the bread refresh
or nourish the body, if ye leave us not so much as one crumme of bread in
the Supper? How shall the visible form of bread now, Take away the
similitude, and it can be no sacrament but take away the bread and then all the
si^ilitude cease. ^rgo, Take away the bread and there can be no Sacrament.
without bread, be a Sacrament of two things, and carry the liken^sse of
both? For if the likeness of a Sacrament consist in this, that it is said to
refreshe and nourish: questionless the bread must needs remain, or else the
visible form without bread can be no Sacrament, nor shall carry any likeness
at all. For what nourishment can bare superficial forms void of al substance
yield? or what likeness can there be in these in respect of the flesh of
Christ nourishing the inward man?

What answer will Lombarde make here? he will crowde under his trope an^
Grammar figure Metonymia. Metonymia, a ^igure whereby one thing bears the
name of another. Lib. 4. did. 8.
Wherewith it lyketh him well to sport himself in his own ^orged fourmes, but
will not suffer us to deal with a^y trope at all in substaunces by any means.
The fourmes, says he, do retain the names of the things, wh^reof they were
substaunces before: namely bread and wine. What do I hear? Were these mere
accidents at any time ever called by the names of the things then, when as they
contained the substances of bread and wine: and why should the very same
severed now from the other retain the names of those things, which are said
they neu^r held before? But it was bread, that is to say as you cons^er it^
Bread was present before the Consecration. Be it so. And what hereof then?
After the Cons^cration remains no substance of bread an^e more. Why so, I
p^ay you Lombarde? How know you this? By what argument do you prove it? By
what authorit^e do you believe this? Who commanded this to ^^e believed? who
did su^der the substance of bread from the forms? With what words? in what
instant of time? what should move him to do so? who ever discerned any
rending asunder of substances or any passage ^^ansub^^an^iarie? But you deny
that we ought to b^leeue our hands and eyes being blinded altogether here,
enforced thereunto by the authority of the word: whereunto the senses must
yield and be subject of necessity: If the senses must be credited in
establishing the accidents of br^ad and wine: why should not the same senses be
believed also in affirming the substance of bread and wine which we do see.
Be it as you say. But what shall we say then mean whiles of these forms
and she^es of bread? Do ye think that these also be fled away together
with their substance, or that they rem^ine ^^ill? What else but that they
abide still: A good fellowshippe then tell us how know you this? Forsooth,
because you do see it. Go to then, and what niceness of arguing is this, O
fine man? you do see the forms severed from their substance, and do
believe. We do as plainly behold the substance it self with our eyes, and
shall we not believe the thing that our eyes do present unto us? If your
p^rspectiues do not fail you in your accidents, why shall our eyesight in so
manifest and evident a demonstration rather beguile us? Or if you be of opinion
that the words of Christ must b^^ so thoroughly believed wherein he said,
This is my body, t^^t the senses may not be credited: I see no cause,
Lombarde, why it should be more lawful for you to trust the testimony of
your eyes in comprehending the forms, then for us to res^ upon the judgment
of our eyes in conceyuing the substance, which we do see and plainly discer^e.

Neither do we for this cause credit the words of Christ less: because in
the outward Sacr^m^nt we mistrust not o^^ ou^ward^ senses altogether. A
double ^rror of the Pap^sts in the matter of the sa^ram^nt.
We kno^e that it is true, and without all question that Christ spoke of his
body: yet mu^^ not therefore the other be ^o ^ecessarily fi^^e, which our
eyes do present unto us of the remaining substance of bread. But Lombarde
supposes that Christ's body can not be in the sacrament, unless the natural
body be present: and that the body can not otherwise be present, except the
bread be absent: and that there can be none other manner of change, but whereby
the substance of bread should be turned intoo the person of the son of
GOD. But we confess both too be true: namely, that it is the body of Christ:
and that withal the bread cease not to be bread: so that neither the words
of Christ ought to be discredited, nor the senses deceived in their plain
beholding of visible things.

But ye will say: An objection out of Ambrose being wrongfully taken.
For as much as the power of the heavenly word is of such efficacy, as that it
made Heaven, Earth, the Seas and all that is contained in them of naught, how
much more easily shall this woorking word be able too change that substance
of bread which our eyes do see intoo the body of Christ: The woorking word.
namely, when as we do hear the Lord himself by express words
testifying the same too be his own body?

First, touching the omnipotency of Gods word: The refutation of the
objection.
I were very wicked, if I would not agree with Ambrose, that this is most
true, that the same most heavenly creator of Heaven and Earth did make al
things which we do see of naught by the most mighty force of his word: All
whatsoever was created, God did create by the power of his word. Ergo god does
change the bread into^ the person of the son of God.
But amongst all that meruelouse frame of visible things, what did that
heavenly word at any time bring forth, but that he willed should be
subject to the view of man? as when he commanded that light should be
made: immediately light was made, and apparent too the eye. The earth was
commanded to bring forth her grass and leaf, that al men might see it.
Lastly: The Argument is denied.
Let us make man, said he, after our own likene^se. Of all these things the
heavenly Majesty made not any one, but he left too be evidently disceruable
and the woonderful woorkemanship thereof to be plainly beholden. In like
manner whereas in the Gospel are many miracles extant wherein appears most
singular excellency of Christ's Godhead, yet in all these did he work no
miracle so covertly at any time, but he made it apparauntly manifest too all
men. In this sacrament now what one thing did the Apostles w^onder at as a
miracle? or what transubstantiation of bread did they ever believe? or
delivered over too others too be believed? And will you fyr Lombarde retyring
back too Iewishe fables hale us back from the spirit wherei^ we began,
unto the flesh? and will you persuade us to this newly forged substance of
the Son of God filed from out the substance of bread, whereof neither your
self see any token, nor are able to express any demonstration?

But you pass and repasse too Christ's words again. That is to say, The
words of Christ must be considered, not according too the letter, but
according too the true sense and meaning of the sentence.
to the bare letter of the word, and like a Cowarde flee altogether from the
meaning of Christ. As concerning the words themselves, we do easily agree
with you that the words are not ineffectual, nor set down by Christ in
vain. But sithence Christ did speak and put in accion many sundry things in
this Supper, what one syllable somuche of all his words and accions do you
allege, Lombarde, out of the which you may be able too cayne unto us this
ugly counterfaite transubstantiation? No transubsta^tiation can be gathered by
the words of the supper.
First, Jesus took bread, and brake it: Here as yet ye see nothing altered.
The same bread being so taken he commands his Disciples to eat. Wha^ do
these words ^mporte else as yet then bread? but that which he infers upon
the premises saying That to be his body. I beseech you what else did he mean
by these words then to give the elements the denomination of his b^dy. For
proof whereo^ I appeal to the Grammar rules by that which he added
afterward [ given and broken for you] Who does not perceive here that
thereby not the substance of the body, but his Hesychiu^in^ Leuit. lib. 1.
cap. 2. We do eat this meat receiving the memory of his passion.
death and passion is to be understood: which suffering should be bread, and
food for all people in the world and as it were an everlasting banquet
according too that prophetical promise in Esaias the Prophet the 25. chapter.
Esaias the 25. ^hap. And in this mountain shall the Lord of hoastes make unto
al people a feast of fattlings eue^ a feast of near and fined wynes, and of
fat things full of marrowe, of wynes fined and purified, etc.
And for that cause least the remembrance of his passion should wax out of
mind, he commands it to be done in the remembrance of him: and by the same
memorial to show the Lords death until he come again. Whereby may appear
without any difficulty that the natural body is no^ eaten here, but the death
of his body signified and the remembrance thereof celebrated: not the bread and
wine turned into flesh and blood, but a sacrament of our redemption to be
instituted in bread and wine. Lastly having now finished al things on this
wise, and having acc^mplished the work of our redemption, when as he prepared
himself to ascend up again intoo heaven, it remains to know of you,
Lombard, why he would Why would Christ convey away his body into heaven in
the open sight of his disciples, but that they should ^ease to look for him
any more here on earth.
take away hence the pres^nce of his natural body in the open eyes and sight of
his disciples, Aug in. Joan. tracta. 27. When ye shall see the son of man
ascend up where he was before: truly even then shall you see, because he
does bestow his body not after the manner that ye think. Certes then shall ye
understand it that his grace is not thereby consumed with teeth, etc.
but because they should cease to seek any more for his corporal presence on
earth. And do you notwithstanding proceed in your course, Lombard, to hold
fast the body of our lord under the forms of bread and wine with is far away
carried from hence intoo Heaven? nor will ye vouchsafe bread to be bread, nor
Christ to be Christ, unless ye shape us here an earthly Christ on earth,
and set it forth to the gaze of the people to be ydolatrously worshipped?

The objection of the adversaries.
But here will some one object again: what? and do you leave us nothing in the
sacrament but bread and wine, and will you spare the people naught else but bare
signs only? And what shall become then of the omnipotency of the word?
Where is then that woorking word wher^of Ambrose makes mention? The
effectual force whereof if were so mighty, too make things too begin to be
that, which they were not before, how much rather shall they be forcible too
make things to be which are already made, and to be converted into other
substaunces?

An answer.
Let brabbling slander be set aside. GOD forbid there should be any so
profane an absurdity in so sacred a mystery, that any man should speak or
think that there is naught else delivered unto the people but bread and wine
and bare signs: and that any man should be so fond too think that Christ's
words were uttered in vain, as the which do mynister nothing profitable in
the sacrament, nor work nothing auayleable. Yes truly very much: for what
can be more woonderful, what can be more heavenly then too make of an earthly
thing a sacred Beda in octauis Epiphaniae. The creature of bread and wine is by
the unspeakable sanctification of the holy Ghost transposed intoo the
sacrament of the flesh and blood of Christ.
sacrament? then to change the creatures of bread and wine in such wise, not
that they should become bare and fruitless signs, but that they should be
tra^sposed into the sacrament of the body and blood of Christ by unspeakable
sanctification of Gods spirit: so that they are not too be taken now for
common bread and wine, but too be dignif^ed with the name and place of him,
whose image they represent by Gods institution. What say you now, Lombarde? Do
ye not see what and how mightily the heavenly majesty of Christ has brought
to pass here in this holy supper.

Do ye not conceive a wonderful force of a miracle wherein Christ has given
you a memorial of his passion and his own flesh, not under a bare sign, but
under an honorable sacrament: not under the name of bread and wine, but under
the August. de Consecrat. did. 2. Thi^ is it, that the heavenly bread, which
is the flesh of Christ, is called after his manner the body of Christ, whenas
in deed it is the sacrament of Christ's body.
name of his own body and blood: that has given I say a sacrament for thee to
feed upon, not to fill thy Rabanus Maurus lib. 1. Cap. 31. The sacrament is one
thing, the efficacy of the sacrament is an other thing. The sacrament is turned
intoo the nourishement of the Body. By the efficacy of the sacrament the
honor of everlasting life is obtained.
^elly, but to feed thy soul. What? does this seem matter of small emportance
with you, that Christ himsel^e is delivered unto you under a sacrament? for
what expec^ you here else? what do ye look for else in this sacrament, then a
most perfect example and most absolute demonstration of your savior, expressed
unto you by a certain peculiar institution: wherein you do plainly perceive no
more bare and Cyril. cathechis. mistagog. 4. Do not esteem it as bare bread.
The bread of the Euchariste is no more bare and naked bread.
common bread now in that respect nor to that use and purpose as common bread
is usually taken, but as it were an heavenly bread, Chrysostom. sermo. ad
Infantes. The bread is removed by the substance of Christ's body. That is to
say: That it become nothing in respect of the body.
sanctified by the heavenly grace of words, changed out of his old nature and
use into the body of Christ by a certain mystical representation?

But you yield in the sacrament no bread nor wine at al: but whatsoever
mater^al or substantial part the bread does p^ssesse, the same you do wholly
change into the natural and bodyly substance of Christ. What answer
therefore think ye we ought too make too Ambrose, Ambros de sacr. lib. 4.
cap. 4.
whose words as be of greatest emportance, so be they most manifest? That
they be, says he, the same that they were, and be converted into an other
thing. Ambrose does confess them too be the things that they were: and will
you make us believe that they cease too be the same which they were? Origin
writing too the same effect: Origin upon Mat. cap. 15.
The bread, says he, which is sanctified by the word of God, touching the
matter and substance thereof, goes down into the belly, and is thrown out
into the draught, etc. If that be bread which after sanctification goes down
intoo the belly, according too the testimony of Origin, with what face will
Lombarde deny it to be bread? Again on the other side if according too
Lombardes opinion, there remain no crumme of substance at al, whereof then
shall that be a substance which Origin does ascribe to the bread. Now let
the Pope himself be vmpier here and judge whether we ought rather credit
Origin or Lombarde.

A^gu. de consec. distinct. 2. Hoc est quod. etc.
Too the sam^ effect may Augustine be produced a wit^esse of antiquity not too
be rejected. The heavenly bread, says he, which is the flesh of Christ, is
after this manner called the body of Christ, being in very deed the sacrament
of Christ's body, etc. If it be a sacrament of the body, how is it the very
body? Again if, because it is called the body of Christ, it be therefore
Christ's flesh, what should let, but that by the same argument Peter should
be Satan because he is called Satan? Moreover if the nature of sacraments
be such as too be called by the name of the things which they signify: I
beseech you Lombarde take away the substance of bread, what shall be left in
the accidentary fourmes, that may either supply the name of a body, or
represent the likeness of a body in any respect?

Rabanus Maurus somewhat a later writer then the other, agrees with them in
this point: Rabanus Ma^^^s lib. 1. cap. 31.
The sacrament, says he, is turned into the nourishment of the body. Bethink
your self now, Lombarde, what Iren. lib. 5. The substance of our flesh is
nourished and increased by the bread, which bread is the body.
nourishment may be in fourmes and colors, where abides no substance of
the things which be received.

Furthermore what can be more manifest then the words of Chrysostom?
Chrysostom. in oper^ imperf^ ^om. 11.
who does in most plain terms deny that the natural body of Christ is in
the holy vessels^ but affirms that the mystery of his body is contained
therein.

What can be more autentique then the authority, or more plain and evident
then the judgments of Theodoret, Macarius, Gelasius, Tertullian, Basil? which
discoursing upon the Eucharist do with most approved consent and testimony
affirm, some that the very substance, some that the matter of the bread does
remain, some do say that it is a body but Origin. in Mat. cap. 15. And thus
much of the typical and symbolical body, etc.
typical and symbolicall. But of forms, of bare apparaunces of
transubstantiation, not a word as yet, no not so much as one syllable was
heard of in all that purer age of these writers.

I should press to much upon you, Lombarde, if I should turn al upon you
that I could, out of the ancient records of the fathers, which arm in arm
as it were bending against you, do affirm the body of Christ to be in the
holy mysteries in such wise, as that they seclude not meanewhiles bread from it
own substance, but from the common and usual use thereof only translate it
into an other end, and supernatural condition by a certain mystical and
sacramental means: not that it should be no more bread for us to be eaten: but
that it should no be common, bare and simple bread. That is to say, that it be
bread still, and the same bread also the body of Christ withal: Bread indeed in
substance, but in the respect of the sacrament, use, likeness, and Chrysostom.
ad Caesarium.

Before the bread be sanctified, we do call it bread^ But by the
sanctification of the divine grace, and the prayers of the Priest, it is
delivered from the name of bread: But is reputed worthy too be called by the
name of the body of Christ, though the nature of bread remain still, etc.


denomination the holy body of Christ.

Therefore that which we receive in our mouth, is natural bread: but in
respect of the eating, this nature is not regarded of us, but raising our
hearts much more high even intoo heaven, yea unto the heavens of heavens as
Chrysostom. 1. Cor. hom. 24. Ascend therefore up even too heaven gates, and
there enter intoo dew consideration, nay rather not the gates of Heaven, but
of the Heavens of Heavens, and there shalt thou see that whereof we do
speak.

Chrysostom. in Genes. Hom. 24. When the eyes of faith do behold these
unspeakable treasures, they do not perceive these visible things indeed, but
only the difference betwixt these things.


Chrysostom reports, it does meditate upon far more excellent matter.

And hereof came it that the ancient writers did so usually extol the
magnyficence of this sacrament with such excellency in old time. Wherein they
were many times rapted intoo such a wonderful vehemence of hyperbolicall
speeches, as though the bread and wine were in very deed matter of naught, and
that nothing else should seem to be made account of in the celebration of the
supper but the body and blood of the Lord only: As in very deed these dead
elements be no better worth in respect of the body which they do represent.
But what hereof then? Shall the elements of bread and wine be therefore no
part of the sacrament, because the consideration of the Lords body does
possess the principal parts, and holds the whole soul attentive and fast
fixed upon it? Or shall Christ be therefore said too have transposed the
substance of bread and wine intoo his natural body really, because he has
changed the same intoo the sacrament of his body?

Or by what argument will our adversaries make this their assertion
justifiable? There was n^ cause why Christ should change the substance of bread
into his flesh.
For if God and nature do bring to pass, no one thing in the whole frame of
creation without great cause. It remains that we may be made acquainted too
what end, for what cause, to what use or to what purpose, Christ should make
this Metamorphosis, That thrusting away bread from out it own substance, he
should deliver over his true and natural flesh in deed, but invisible, to be
devoured carnally, with the carnal mouth of the body, under invisible forms.
But here again startes up our Lombard a gods name, A threfolde reason wher^by
Lombard establ^sheth his transubstantiation. li. 4. did. 11. ^^. 5^
and will render us a tryple cause of this great mystery: to wit, why the Lord
would so liberally bestow his natural flesh and blood to be devoured, not
after a fleshly manner, but under an other kind naturally and in deed but
inuisibly. First because faith should obtain a more excellent Gregory whom he
vou^heth. Secondly, because the mind should not abhor that which the eye
might behold: for that otherwise ^he strange devouring of raw flesh.
Thirdly, because nothing should be seen here tha^ might be offensive to the
unbelievers, or that might mynister occasion to the infidel to scorn and
deride it.

Lo^bards reasons discovered and refuted.
You have heard now the pretty poppet reasons patch^ up in the chief shop of
Lombards divinity. It remains henceforth that we search the very depth of
them. And first where as he reasons of the merit of faith, The first reason
of Lombard.
I will not deny but that in matters of faith man's reason is not of any such
capacity too attain thereto. For the excellency of faith is conversant in
those things properly which the fleshly eyes can not see, or which have been
known by the scriptures to have been already past, either which are promised
shall come in after time. Moreover I am not offended with that no less
ancient then true proposition of Gregory, where treating of the Lords
entering unto the disciples, (the gates being shut) he does deny that faith
ought to have any merit, where man's reason ca^ make proof by experience. For
we do confess and believe this to be most true, that which the scriptures
have delivered touching the gates being shut, and of the Lords entry in. But
where did the scriptures at any time make never so little a motion of the casting
away of bread, of the essential presence of Christ under empty forms or of
transubstantiated elements? Blessed be they (says Christ) which have not
seen, yet have believed. This is true I confess: but it follows not
therefore that all things which are not seen with the eyes, ought to be
believed. Neither do we not therefore relinquishe the reach of man's reason,
because we do not yield to all manner trifling imaginary co^ceiptes.
Whatsoever is commanded by the prescript word of God, the same we do firmly
and faithfully believe, and thereunto with most forewarde and ready faith do
submit all manner force of man's reason. But who ever gave any such
commandment to believe that which you have forged touching that most
senseless absurdity of transubstantiation? In matters of faith man's reason
has no place Ergo. Transubstantiation must be believed though it be quite
against reason. the Argument is denied.
or by what authorized word of scripture at the length will you make
justifiable by writing or by meaning that we ought to adore, though our eyes
see not, that your conterfaict person of the son of God shapen out of bread
and set out to be adored and eaten of us? Faith therefore wants not her
merit, in things that ought truly to be believed, which by express and
undoubted au^thoritie of the word be to be justified. But to believe ^he things
which are no^ grounded upon the w^^d, which are no where, nor were ever
instituted by God, but drowsily devised by fond and foolish vanity of man's
idle imagination, is no matter of faith at all, but amazed ^rensy rather, nor
has any merit at al, but is extr^eme wickedness.

So also is that other absurdity no less ridi^ulous, The second reason of
Lombard^
which he does infer touching the infidels, least oc^asion be given, says
he, to the infidels to laugh it (...) scorn: Why should the infidels deride it
I beseech you Lombard^ you do answer, because it would breed great offense
to the unbelievers, who without all question would loath and scorn the
Christian religion, if (...) should ^e^ the blood of a slain man in the
sacrament. Go to then: Ex August. de conse. did. 2. sub figura. There is
nothing more reasonable for us the^ to receive the likeness of blood, that so
both the truth may not cease, and that no occasion be given to the Paga^s to
scorn us, because we drink the blood of a slain ma^^
does this seem to be the cause why ye Lord should deliver his body and blood
not after a fleshly manner, but under an other form, lest if the Pagans should
se^ it, they should conceive matter to laugh it too scorn? for this seems
your allegati^n with y^^ seem also to have ^on^ed ^onningly out of August. very
well^ And what shall we say then to the Apostles them selves? were they Pagans
and unbelieving also? why did he not give the cup of his blood to his Apostles
in his proper nature and kind, where was no danger at all to procure any
mockage? or if he were willing to hyde his blood under a sacramental form:
answer I pray you, what cause was there why the Lord should vouchsafe the
delivery thereof by forms, rather then by material bread? Besides this as
concerning the Paganes, if Christ did fear the scornings of Paganes so much,
I desire Lombard to tell me thus much again: If some one Pagane should
happen too come now into your temples, and behold your massinges and
maskings: what greater occasion can be ministered too move them to laughter and
skorning, then when he should see the whole swarm of Papists in most humble
wise to fall groueling on the ground, too lift up their hands too heaven,
and to knock their breasts at the heauing up of one poor piece of bread over
a shauelings head? I beseech you sir: would he not say that they were all
the pack of them stark mad? Nay rather do not the Jews, Turks, and
Infidels, daily say even so at this present? And I know not whether by any
one action more then by this kind of massing, it is come too pass that the
same Jews, Turks and Infidelles, taking occasion of offense, do as yet
hitherto so obstinately absteyne from the participation of our faith.

But we are choked here with a very hard boane by the which as through the
words of Augustine picked out I know not from whence, August. de cons. dict.
2. cap Sub figura.
who too avoid the scorns of unbelievers, does teach that we do receive
the likeness of blood in such wise, as that the true body nevertheless does
mean whiles abide unremovable: Ex citatione. Lomb. lib. 4. did. II.
which words as they prejudice our cause nothing at all, so do they in no
respect avail our adversaries. For to admit that the likeness of a
sacrament is given unto us in the sacrament, yet is it no goo^ consequent
forth with, that the very real and natural blood is given in deed. Or if it
might be admitted that the same might be given so after a certain manner: yet
the truth of the thing it self does represent it self unto us after the
same manner as the likeness is presented unto the eyes: but by an other mean.
Now if you will know what mean that is, Ambrose will set it down unto you.
Ambros. De s^^cramento. li^ 8. cap. 1.
You do receive the likeness of the sacrament, says Ambrose, but you do
obtain the grace and power of the nature it self. In which words you do
see both the likeness, and the truth also of the Lords body withal
expressly set down: the one whereof must be present, yet so that the other be
not wanting. But if you demand further how it is not wanting, and if you be
not satisfied with Ambrose: then shall Hilarie explane it unto you much more
effectually, who writing of the true presence of the body in most excellent
words on this wise: Hilarious De co^sec. did. 1. 2. Corpus Christi.
The body of Christ (says he) that is received of the altar, is a figure,
whiles the bread and wine be outwardly seen: but it is the true body, when
the inward faith does apprehende the body and blood of Christ etc.

I come now to the third fine reason of Lombard which is alleged touching
the loathing and horror. The third reason of Lomb. li. 4 did. 11. cap. 5.
For thus he speaks. And for this cause also, that the stomach should not
abhor that which the eye did see, because we do not accustom our selves to
devour raw flesh and blood. Go to, and what follows then? therefore
because it is not lawefull too devour Christ with teeth, for this cause his
pleasure was too deliver unto us flesh and blood in a mystery, etc. I do
perceive what you speak, Lombard, and allow thereof: but how will you now
agree with your self? for you deny it too be lawefull too devour Christ
with the teethe: And how then is he not devoured with teethe, if ye
establishe an essential nature of his body really in the sacrament? you say
that he delivered us his flesh and blood in a mystery. This is truly spoken
in deed, but how shall these Iermaines lips hang together: that the body
of Christ is given in a mystery, Lombard does not agree with him self.
and with all in very deed, to be devoured and not to be devoured, with teeth
and not with teeth? For if in the Greek tongue a Mystery is all one in effect
as in our language, a sacrament: And if the sacrament be a sign of an holy
thing: now he that gives his body in a mystery, what does he give else, then a
sign of his body? notwithstanding, I am not ignorant of al these your iuggling
and caffling which you frequent about sacramental signs, under the which you
maintain sturdely that the true and undoubted body of Christ, though not
apparent to the eyes, yet is contained and eaten really and substantially by an
invisible mean. I beseech you Lombard, what reason has this your divinity,
or rather drowsy slumber, to call us to a supper, to prepa^^ feast, to set
down in a dishe the very real substantial and whole fleshly body of Christ,
whereof the gueste that is invited can not perceive nor see either form or
substance? But you will say, that the mystery of the whole sacrament
consists in the same, to wit, that we should not dout that the substance of
the body is most truly present and eaten also bodily and really, though we
see not the thing it self that we do eat: but you fall here into the elenche
logical called Petitio principii^ For how shall this appear that the Lords
pleasure was that we should eat the same which we do see?

It was ^one to this end, say you, that the stomach should not loath that
which the eye did see. Admit this to be true, that this spectacle of the raw
flesh of a slain man be as you say, very grievous and loathsome to a queysie
stomach: Yet does it not follo^e forthwith hereupon, that the body of Christ
is contained under an other form really, because it is set forth in his own
^orme, should become loathsome therefore. Neither is this kind of arguing
suff^cient enough as I suppose: the eye can not beh^l^e the raw flesh of
Christ in it own kind and form without horror. Ergo Chris^es raw flesh is
swallowed up really and sub^^antially under the form of bread. The loathsomnes
of eating i^ not taken away by the accide^ts.
When as both assertions be a like false and to be abhorred whether you affirm
that we eat up the lively raw substance of Christ's flesh in it own kind,
or under any other form whatsoever, least the stomach, say you, should
conceive horror at the thing which the eye does see: especially if it see raw
flesh of a slain man. Go to, and what if it see not raw flesh: and what if
the eye saw sodden or ros^ed flesh, yea no flesh at a^l: and the mind
nevertheless were certified that man's f^eshe were hidden c^uertly within?
would not the mind loath it and reject it? I appeal here even too your
self, Lombard, what if any man would inuit you being blynde^ or other wise
buddewynked of both eyes to raw^ flesh as in that horrible banquet prepared by
Thyestes, would ye eat it? What if he should do the like under a gobbet of
sugar, or under the cover of any other thing whatsoever should thrust into
your mouth the flesh of your father, or of some other your dearest friend,
either sodden or raw, would ye wittingly and willingly eat the same? I think
you would not. And why so I pray you? whether because you knew it to be raw,
or because you did know i^ to be the flesh of man? For to devour ra^e
flesh, is beastly: certes too eat man's flesh is not manly, but brutyshe, and
sauadgely under what form so ever it be covered and hydden. Wherefore this
loathesomnes does not consiste in the rawenes, but in the very humayne flesh:
not in the beholding, but in the nature of the thing it self: not in that
which the eye does behold, but in that which the heart does conceive. For if
according too the old proverb, the wolf will not devour wolves flesh, nor
the dog dogs flesh, is there any man being of any manly nature that
would not abhor to be fed with man's flesh under whatsoever form it
were shrouded? or do ye think that Christ did ever conceive any such matter,
as when he held the bread in his hands, wherewith he determined to feed his
disciples, would therefore exclude bread quyte out of doors, to the end he
might gorge the mawes of men carnally with his natural flesh, being both
raw and alive, contrary to nature, without any necessity, without all cause,
altogether unprofitable and John.6. The flesh profits nothing.
frutelesse?

Wherefore you do not by this means exclude lothsomenes from out the sacred
mysteries, Lombard, when you turn the fourmes of bread and wine into the
flesh of Christ: but you choppe a loathsomnes in rather: so that now this
supper may seem not honorable but horrible, if so be that excluding bread and
wine this be true that you speak, that there remains now nothing to eat
but the substance of flesh and blood, Lombard is injurious to the sacrament
two manner of ways
which substance nevertheless ye will not vouchsafe to be seen in it own
kind, but under an other kind. Wherein ye become two manner of ways injurious
to the sacrament coupling together therewith a twofolde absurdity. First
because you defraude the fourmes and accidents of bread of their true and
proper subject. Secondly, because you do in like manner rob the very natural
substance of the body of his proper accidents, so that now there remains
neither any substance of bread at all, nor any form of a body: on this wise
the Poets (as it seems) were wont to describe their Chymeres.

Nevertheless this is not spoken to that end, as though we would banishe
Christ clean out of the sacrament, or that we might seclude our selves from
partaking with the holy body of Christ in this heavenly Supper: But for this
reason chiefly, yt this holy Communion may be cleared from all gross
absurdity. If you will demand by what means. Ambrose will answer you very
learnedly, who will tell you that ye drink out of the holy cup, not blood it
self, but the Ambros. de sacra. lib. 4. cap. ^. As thou have received the
likeness of his death, even so thou do drink the likeness of his precious
blood, that there may be no loathsomeness of blood.
likeness of blood, and rendering the reason why: because it shall breed,
says he, no loathsomeness to the stomach. And again in another place he
does bear us witness, that we receive the Sacrament in a likeness. That
which Ambros. lib 6. cap. 1. You do receive the sacrament in a similitude, but
you do attain the grace and power of the true nature.
Ambrose does verify of the likeness, others do affirm in a figure, in a
mystery, in a Type, in a memorial. Moreover the same Ambrose writing of the
Eucharist says: It is the memorial of our redemption. And because we be
enfranchised by the death of the Lord, we do signify our mindfulnesse of
the same death, in eating and drinking the Lords blood which were offered for
us. And again in the same place. The blood, says he, is a testimony of
Ambros. 1. Cor. ca. 11. The testament is performed with blood, because the
blood is a testimony of Gods liberality. In the Type whereof we do take and r
eceyue the mystical cup the blood.
Gods great liberality, in the Type whereof we do receive the mystical cup
of the blood to the preservation of body and soul. Where he calls the
Myst^cal cup, a Type. Now who is so unskillful that knows not that a Type
does signify nothing else than a form, a likeness, and an example? Agai^e
who knows not what great diversity there is betwixt likeness, and truth it
self, and that they be so contarie each to other, that they cannot agree
together by any means. Whereby you may learn two things, The Papists can
never take away the horror from the holy supper, except they first grant the
bread whole and sound.
Lombarde, both that the horror is taken away, and that the substance of
bread and wine abides nevertheless still vnempaired.

All which being thus concluded upon, as appears by plain demonstration
before: all that your lying and false assertion infringible, as you term it,
is become windshaken altogether, wherewith you mainteyne so stout a combat
for the kingdom of accidents, and your transubstantiation, as that ye leave
no place nor space for bread and wine in the Sacrament, but calling all back
to visible fourmes, plant all your whole battery of the material part of the
Sacrament upon these buttresses of shadows only. Transubstantiation of the
doctrine of sacramental forms in the Lords supper is described.
Which fourmes though retain still the names of the things, which they were
before, yet do ye deny them to be the very things themselves. Whereupon if
at any time the names of bread and wine do occur in the holy Fathers of the
Church, the same ye teach to be understood on this wise. To wit, that they
be called bread and wine, not in respect that they be so, but because they
were once so: and that the very substance thereof is gone far away, and that
therein is naught resiant now that is elemental, besides the only names of
elements, and empty fourmes only of bread and wine, the names whereof they
do reteyne still, but have utterly lost the very substaunces themselves: and
do conteyne naught else now besides the natural and substanciall body of
Christ, by the which body neither be the fourmes affected, nor does the body
affect the fourmes.

Lo, this now is your gay divinity in describing the Sacrament: the which
how agrees with the Scriptures, with the judgments of the ancient Fa^hers,
with the antiquity of the purer primitive Church and with faith it self, nay
rather how far and wide it is dissonant and di^crepant from all truth and
reason, it shall not be amiss to discover in few words, for I think it
not convenient to use many words herein. And first when we hear that saying
of Paul, 1. Cor. 11.
Let a man prove himself, and so let him eat of that bread, and drink of
that cup. etc. May any man be so boyde of reason to affirm this to be
spoken touching the fourmes and not the material part of bread and wine? for
what shall we say? may any man ymagine that to eat, to break, to eat of the
bread, to drink of the cup, is to be referred to empty and bare shadows
of bread and wine only, and not to the natural bread? In the Decrees is a
certain ^entence extant, vouched out of Hylarie, whereof we made mention
before. De consecra. did. 2. corpus Christi.
The body of Christ, says he, that is received of the altar, is a figure
whiles the bread and wine are apparently seen with eyes: but it is the very
body, when the inward faith apprehends it for the body and blood of Christ.
etc. To the same effect, and in like plain phrase of speech writes Cyprianus:
Cyprian. lib. epist. 6.
The Lord says Cyprian, did vouchsa^e to call wine by the name of his blood,
the liquor which was enforced by the press out of the grapes and clusters, and
made into wine, etc. For what shall we say? do we easily wring accidents of wine
out of grapes and clusters, and not rather the very substancial liquor of wine?
What? when you heat out of Origin: Origin in Mat. cap. 15.
Not the matter of bread, but upon the bread the word was spoken, which is
profitable to him that eats in the Lord not unworthily. And above al other
chiefly, what will you answer to these words of Gelas. who w^^ting of the
Sacraments of bread and wine. How that we are by the same made partakers of
the heavenly nature, yet does boldly pronounce that the substance of bread and
wine do nevertheless remain still. Besides these when ye read also the words of
August. August. in John^ Tract. 26.
And we receive this day visible food. etc. What, I say, when on all sides
your ears do fully conceive the voices of the most choice learned fathers
touching the visible meat, the bread which is broken, the wine which is crushed
out of the grapes, the matter, and the substance of bread and wine: when as
these so many authors whom I have cited, do as it were thrust into your mouth
bread and wine: do you notwithstanding not receive bread nor wine? and are ye
yet so poreblinde as not to see ought else here but phanatical superficial
shadows only, and accidents of bread? Surely that queysie stomach of yours
deserves in my conceyte to be continually fed with those delicate cates of
accidents.

But because I will not oppress you with testimonies I surcease here. This one
thing I demand: sithence these visible kinds whereof ye speak, do hold yet
the names of the things which they were before: I would feign know, whether
together with the names they do retain the effect and operation of the same
things wherein they be said to feed, and to nourish, yea or nay? Whether the
operation of bread remain in the Sacrament together with the kinds and names
of bread, yea or nay.
If ye say, yea: certes ye feed your guestes very finely, that so feed them
with colors and shows of accidents not much unlike, as if because Pepper is
black, therefore a man should say it is hot in the mouth: or because salt is
white, therefore it does savor and season victuals.

But if ye say, nay, what consonancie of likeness shall there be betwixt the
Lords flesh and this Sacrament, which you fasten wholly to shadows: seeing that
shadows have no force at al to refresh, and withal seeing ye leave us no
substance of bread whereupon we may feed? For what shall we say? No
likeness betwixt the accidents and the body of Christ.
does not the flesh of Christ nourish the inward man no more substancially,
then the outward forms of bread and wine do nourish the body? Surely ye
have discovered us very dainty delicates, whereby the body is neither fed,
nor soul refreshed. For whether the inward soul do receive no more comfort
of the flesh of Christ, then our outward bodies nourishment of visible
forms, I leave to other men's judgment, how well we are like to be fed.

Besides this also remains yet another try^^ing toy of most vain
distinction, to wit: Lib. 4. did. 8.
Of the Sacrament, and not the thing: The Sacrament only.
Of the Sacrament and the thing: The Sacrament and the thing.
Of the thing and not the Sacrament. The thing, and not the Sacrament.
Of which division there is not one member so much that is not altogether
rotten. First whereas he places the Sacrament in certain empty and
Metaphis^cal forms removed from the thing it self, therein he does no more
digress from all conueniencie of reason, and the judgment of the ancient
fathers, than most blockishly vary from himself. For discoursing a little erst
of the nature of a Sacrament, he affirmed that it ought to be of such
efficacy, as might be able to refresh the bodies of them that did receive it.
But these fantastical forms removed from the things, do not refreshe the
body. Ergo they be not the Sacrament in any respect. Again, whereas he
says that these visible kinds be the Sacrament only, yea and a Sacrament
also of a double thing: because they signify both, and do carry an express
likeness of both: this is also of both parts false. For first the thing that
is neither bread nor the body, nor a thing, but a Sacrament of a thing only:
not a creature, but the accident of a creature, nor is any substance at all,
how can it possibly be, that the same thing which is not any thing at all,
may seem to be a Sacrament of some one thing, and of some substance, The
visible forms cannot be the Sacrament of a double thing: to w^t of the body,
and of the mystical body.
yea and that also of a double thing? Or what kind of likeness at the length
may there seem to be betwixt these monstrous forms, and the body of
Christ, either natural or mystical, in the one whereof we do receive
nourishment? in the other unity: sithence in forms there is neither any power
to refreshe body or soul, nor any union or kni^ting together of parts and
members? Moreover wher^as the same Lombarde does affirm that the natural
flesh of Christ is the Sacrament of Ecclesiastical union: how will he agree
with himself. An argument against Lombarde who does affirm that the natural
body of Christ is a Sacrament of his mystical body. that is to say, The church
Whereas now he does abide by it, that these visible forms be the Sacrament
of that conjunction? What monster will this bugge whelpe forth at the length?
That cannot be contented to have littered his visible forms for a Sacrament of
a double thing: unless he must also whelp^ forth unto us a double Sacrament
out of the same empty paunch of forms? But perhaps this great master of
Sentences was so busied about coining of new Sentences, that he had quite
forgotten the old Proverb: to wit, That it behooves a liar to be always
fresh of remembrance.

So hitherto now what is the Sacrament only, and not the thing, you
understand well enough I suppose. In the second place now steppeth forth an
other as far fetched a riddle conned out of the brain pan of Sphynx her
self very deep and dangerous to be assoyled. What thing is that thing of
the Sacrament, and the Sacrament of a thing, and how it is both according to
Lombard.
Namely, what thing that may be, that is both the thing, and withal the
Sacrament also. If thou can not undo this tarring iron, gentle reader (for I
know thou art not able of thy self to attain to it) this deep riddlemaster
will discover it unto thee. For he will tell thee that it is the flesh of
Christ, which being both a substance in respect of the visible form of bread,
under the which it is contained and signified, is also the Sacrament of the
mystical body, in as much as it signifies the mystical unity of the Church
forsoath, and represents the express image thereof. O marvelous nimble
wit, fined in the very bottom of all Lombardie. But from whence is this
express image of this Sacrament derived, whereof Lombarde makes mention?
Forsooth out of S. Paul: First, 2. Cor. 10.
where he says, We be many one bread and one body: Then next out of
Augustines words: August. de Sacramentis f^deli^m. Look into August. co^^ra
Donatist l^b. 7. cap. 50.
The Church, says he, is called one bread and one body. For this cause, That
as one loaf of bread is made of many graynes, and as one body is made of
many members: so the Church is united and knit together of many faithful
through the coupling or mutual knot of love. As concerning S. Paul, the whole
and natural deriuation of this similitude is derived not from the body of
Christ^ but from the bread only. Now to admit this to be true, that there
is no small resemblance betwixt the true body and mystical body of Christ:
yet does not every similitude make a Sacrament, though every Sacrament do
contain some certain similitude. But from whence has Lombarde pyked out this
that he teaches, that the true natural body of Christ should be the
Sacrament of his mystical body? Is it because it does set forth the
likeness thereof? But there be many things in the frame of creation, that
resemble each other, yet be they not Sacraments. If no Sacraments ought be
received into the Church, but such as the Lord himself has instituted, let
Lombarde tell us, where the Lord did ever institute or deliver his natural body
to be a Sacrament of his mystical body. Moreover, when he has showed it,
how shall he honestly avoid as great an absurdity, to wit, to clogge the
Church with eight Sacraments of very necessity? Eight Sacraments hatched out
of Lombards divinity.
For if the Church be possessed of six Sacraments, besides the Sacrament of
Eucharist, and that out of the same Sacrament of Eucharist also two other
Sacraments do spring up: the one whereof must be a visible form containing
and signifying both the true and mystical body of Christ: the other must be
the very natural body, which must bear the express image of his mystical
body: then must it needs follow, that by this means the Church shall be
enlarged with eight Sacraments.

The thing, and not a Sacrament.
In the third place comes in now to entreat of an other special note of
that which is the thing and no Sacrament. Wherein to admit likewise that which
Lombard disputes of the mystical unity of the Church, and of the many members
of one body: yet does not this unity belong any thing at al to the thing of
the Sacrament. Neither was this supper ordained to any such end, that it should
note unto us the unity of the mystical body, but that it should be a
memorial of the natural body that was delivered to death on the cross for our
sakes. Which the Lord himself does verify to be true in most plain and
evident speeches: The substance of the Sacrament is not the unity of the
mystical body, but the death of his natural body.
Take ye, says he, Eat ye: this is my body that shall be delivered for you.
Therefore the very material substance of this Sacrament is not the church, but
the natural body crucifi^d and slain for us. Neither will any man confess
that the Church of Christ was crucified for us. Besides this albeit this unity
have some place in the holy Supper, yet is this blockish and false which he
teaches, that the Sacrament of this mystical body is resiant in the natural
body of Christ: for as much as S. Paul does apply this mystical union not to
Christ's body which was crucified for us, but unto the elements of bread and
wine. We be many one bread, says he, and one body. As much to say, One loaf
many grains: one Church many members. Which similitude of the Apostles, if
must be so necessarily combined to the sacramental bread, as Lombard himself
does affirm, what conueniencie will here be of a similitude betwixt grains of
bread, and the members of the Church, if this Papists brood will vouchsafe us in
the Sacrament neither bread, no not so much as one grain of bread?

But here^ I trow, Lombardes divinity will help at a pinche, calling us
back again from the substance of bread unto the body of Christ under
forms: Lib. 4. did. 8.
for thus he speaks. This body, says he, has a likeness with ye mystical
thing which is the unity of ^he faithful. etc. But Saint Pa^l contrariwise
does d^duce all the proportion of this similitude from the bread: saying, We
be many one bread, and one body of the Church. Whereupon take here and
Argument, Lombarde, framed by us against you taken out of Paul and Augustine.

As one Loaf of bread is made of many Grains, and as Wine is brought forth of
many grapes: An argument against the assertion of L^mbarde.
so the body of a perfect Church is combined together in perfect conjunction
out of many persons of them that do believe. The sacram^nt was not instituted
to signify the union of the Church.


But there be no grayn^s nor grapes in the visible forms, nor in the natural
body of Christ.

Ergo All this similitude of the mystical union of the Church is deduced not
from bare forms, nor from the body of Christ, but from the bread and Wine
only.

Every Sacrament is instituted by Christ expressly to make a plain
demonstration of some certain thing. An other Arg^ment.


The body of Christ in respect that it consists of many members, is not any
where instituted by Christ for a Sacrament to signify the union of the
Church.

Ergo The union of the Church is not the thing of this Sacrament whereof
Lombard makes mention.

Every Relative has his Correlatiue answerable unto him, The third A^gument.
which can be but one answerable to one.

All Sacraments, as they be signs of things significant, be Relatiues.

Ergo The visible form as it is a Sacrament by Lombardes doctrine, can not
be a Sacramen^ of a double thing.

Lombardes threefolde error.
Wherefore herein appears a threefolde error of Lombarde, Frist where he
makes the visible form to be the Sacrament of the true and mystical body of
Christ. Secondly, Lombardes viii. Sacrament.
whereas he sets down Christ's body as an eight Sacrament to signify the
union of the Church, considering that Christ did never institute his body for
a Sacrament, nor gave it at the Supper too any such end that it should
signify any union. Thirdly, where as he makes the self same union of the
Church such a thing, as should be answerable to both Sacramental signs as
the proper correlatiue of both signs. Which of all other cannot possibly be:
for as much as to have a double correlatiue answerable to one only Relative is
a most gross absurdity.

Behold now, ^riendly Reader whatsoever thou be, how wickedly these Divines
do rake out of the Sacrament all substance of bread, thereby too choppe in
their horrible sacriledges: for if this mystical union of the faithful be the
thing of the Sacrament: and if bread be not the Sacrament of this thing, but
the natural body of Christ borne of the Uirgin, as they stiffly contend: Then
it follows hereof of very necessity, that the Church ought to be by so
much the more honorable then the body of Christ, by how much the signs are
less valuable then the things to the which they be applied.

An Argument.
Signs be of less value then the things whereof they made significant.

The natural body of Christ is a sign of the ecclesiastical unity according
to Lombarde.

Ergo The natural body of Christ is of less value then the Ecclesiastical
unity.

Which being a matter horrible to be uttered, yet this does so much the more
aggrauate the horror, that these choppers and chaungers do so change the
substance and natural vigor of the Sacrament, which ought be ascribed
properly to the Lords death and passion, from the power of Christ's passion,
to Christ's union: from the body of Gods own son, to the Church: as thoug^
the holy memorial of this sacred Supper were institut^d to none other end,
then to certify the union and lovely society of the Church. When as the
Lords meaning did reatch to a far higher mystery in this institution of the
Supper, which may be made most evidently apparent by the very words and
circumstances of the words of the Supper. For when the Lord did command to
take and eat, he does not say, this is my mystical body, that shall fructify
and increase out of many members of the Church: But this is my body, that
shall be given for you. Whereupon if I might now argue in the schools of
Divines, I would on this wise proceed against mine adversaries.

The thing that is properly signified in this Sacrament, An argument^
is the only flesh of Christ given for us.

The power of the unity and society of the Church was not delivered for us.

Ergo The union of the Church o^ght in no respect be called the substance of
the Sacrament.

Therefore this doctrine of Lombarde is false and utterly to be abandoned, The
visible form is not a Sa^rament of a double thing, no not so much as a
sacram^n^ of any thing.
wherein he affirms that this visible form is a sacrament of a double
thing. And albeit I will not deny that this mystery of Ecclesiastical union and
christian con^unction is a matter of unspeakable excellency, and to have
singul^r likeness and relation to bread, as S. Paul testifies: Ye^ Paul
^eacheth no such doctrine, to wit: that the sacrament was instituted to that
end, or that the ^lements of bread and wine were delivered to be eaten and
dru^ken for this purpose, namely, to express this mystical ^^ion: but that it
should allure us to an other mat^e^ rather: to wit, to the very body of
Christ which should suffer for us, that is to say should represent the
passion of Christ, which does truly quicken us, make us too fructify and to
grow up.

Therefore the estate of this Sacrament does require that the Sacrament it
self, and the thing of the Sacrament als^ be both of this na^^re to comfort
and to nourish: There be two things that be eaten in the Lords supper, the
one corporally, the other spiritually.
for otherwise how can the thin^ significant agree with the thing signified,
unless ^he nourishment of the one be answerable too the nourishment of the
other? Now this is without al question, that nothing can nourishe unless it
b^^ first eaten. Wherefore as there be two things that ^oe nourishe, so must
there be two things that must b^e eaten. In the one whereof is the Sacrament
of the body: in the other the very thing it self is delivered: namely, the
passion of his natural body: And as they both nourishe, so they must both be
eaten. The bread feeds: the flesh of Christ crucif^ed feeds: but after an
other manner. The bread feeds corporally, the flesh feeds spiritually. That
one, the natural body: this other, the spiritual part of the soul: the bread
feeds this present life, the flesh feeds unto the everlasting life to
come. For as the life of the body does grow and increase by daily bread and
food, even so the spiritual life is preserved by the passion of Christ. Which
the Lord himself foreseeing before, did utter these words of himself not
without great consideration: My flesh is meat indeed, my blood is drink in
deed, giving us to understand, that by blood he did mean the blooddy
Sacrifice of his own flesh. Therefore as there is two kinds of man's life: To
wit, earthly and heavenly: so have they both their proper food. The earthly
life is preserved with food and bread: the heavenly life is obtained with the
death of Christ. And for this cause nothing c^ulde have been more Rabanus
Maurus.
commodiously handled, then that the Lord should deliver the bread and wine
for a memorial of his passion, The natural bread may conveniently be called
the body of Christ, because it does comfort the heart.
because of the agreeable application of the mutual resemblaunce.

And hereof aryseth all the substance of this Sacramental Action, whereby
bread and wine do obtain too be called by the name of the body and blood:
not because the things themselves do alter their substances, but after the
v^uall phrase of speech, which is commonly frequented in all languages almost,
and chiefly above others in the mystical Scriptures: Namely, that things
August de Ciuitate Dei. Lib. 8. Cap 48. All significant things do seem after
a certain manner to bear the substance of the things signified.
significa^t should obtain too be called by the things which they do
signify. Which being most manifestly to be approved by innumerable testimonies
of the Scripture, is above all other most justifiable, in this one Sacrament
chiefly: where the name of the body is attributed too the bread, but not the
substance: none otherwise in very deed, then as by like phrase of words is
set down in the book of Genesis: ^enesis.41.
where seven ears of corn are called Seven Years: Esaias 40.
Flesh, Heye: Seed, the Word: a Field, the World: Matthew. 13.
the heavenly Father, an Husbandman: John.15. John.10.
Christ named a Uine or a Lamb: Math. 15.
the Apostles called Salt of the earth: Peter, a Stone: and John the Evangelist
not only called of Christ's own mouth, John.19.
the son of the Uirgin, but accepted of the mother of Christ as her son by
the Lords commandment: Yet will no man be so mad for this cause to affirm
that under the figure and form of this Disciple he either became truly and
naturally her son, or the Uirgin his natural mother: for it is one thing to
be called a mother by name, an other thing too be a na^urall mother in deed.
After the same manner fares it with the Sacraments: August. contra Maximinum.
Cap. 22. For these be the sacraments in the which is not always noted what
they be, but what they signify, because they be signs of things being in
substance one thing, but in signification another.
in the which must be considered, not what they be, but what they be called,
and wherefore they be so called. For even amongst us in our daily and usual
spea^hes, as also in the Scriptures chiefly many things are many times
beautified or described by strange Beda citans August. 1. Cor. 10. In the
sacraments, one thing is seen or named, another thing is understood.
names, where notwithstanding no alteration is made of substance, but the
reason and cause that moved the holy ghost to name it so is noted. After the
same manner Christ does call bread his body: not meaning thereby to
transubstantiate the substance of the one into the other (neither was it to any
purpose at all to have done so) but to express the power of his passion: for
this cause therefore he took the Gelasi. contra Eutichetem. The substance of
bread and wine does not depart away

Chrysostom. ad Caesar. The nature of bread does remain in the sacrament.

Theodoret. Christ does not change the nature of bread.


bread and cup of wine, and called them his body and blood, which he would give
for the sins of the world. Neither did he only call them so, but also did
deliver them in his last supper to be eaten and drunken in steed of his body
and blood. In like manner before Supper he vouchsafed by a like Figurative
phrase of speech too call his own August. Epist. 23 ad Bonifacium. The
heavenly bread whicb is Christ's flesh, is after his manner called the body of
Christ, being in very deed the sacrament of Christ's body.
flesh meat, and feeding bread from heaven. But least any man may fail in
the property of words I think it good too hearken unto Augustines cou^salie
who discoursing upon the 33. Psalm of David, w^erin it is said, that David did
change his countenance before Abimelech (alias before Achis) he does transpose
this figurative speech of changed countenance, to y^ words of Christ uttered
touching the supper of his body and blood For as David is said to have
dissembled in countenance before Achis the king, seeming outwardly otherwise
then he was inwardly: After the self same manner of speech the Lord himself
treating of his flesh and blood, does seem in Augustines judgment, as it
were changing countenance before Achis (to wit, an ignorant king) to express
one thing in utter show of words, and to conceal an other thing in a
secret mystery before the Capernaites (to wit a gross ignorant people.)
Whereupon Augustine commands us to Augustine in Psalm. 33. There is somewhat
shut up here: Knock, and stick not in the letter, because the letter kills,
but seek for the spirit, for the spirit does give life. August. upon the
foresaid Psalm. When our Lord Jesus Christ spoke of his body^ Except a man
eat my fles^e etc. his disciples, that followed him, did loath that speech,
and not understanding his meaning, thought the Lord spoke some hard thing, as
they speaking with Achis. How is this? because he changed his cou^tena^ce,
therefore he seemed to the^ as though he had been mad, but he seemed only to
the king Achis that is to say, to the folishe and ignorant, therefore he sent
the^ away, and departed from the^. For they did not conceive the true meaning
of his words in their hearts, because they could not comprehend him.
knock here because there is some hidden thing shut up in this place: and not
to stick too much to the letter which kills, but exhorts us to raise our
selves too the spiritual sense, which does give life. Because the spiritual
understanding, says he, does make him that does believe to be safe.

And proceeding forward in the same comparison: wherein he compares Achis the
king, That is to say, the kingdom of error, with the Capernaites: and David
with Christ, he infers on this wise: when our Lord Jesus spoke of his
body^ except ye eat my flesh, and drink my blood: the disciples did abhor
this speech because they understood it not.

For the Lord in the change of his countenance seemed unto them to be half
frantike, when he spoke of eating his flesh: therefore they supposed that the
Lord seemed besides himself, knowing not what he spoke and as it were half
mad. But he seemed so to be unto Achis the king, that is to say, to fools, and
to ignorant men: and therefore he forsook them and went his way: or rather
they forsook him, because this speech seemed very hard unto them: when as
notwithstanding the speech was not hard, but they rather hard and dull of
understanding, not the speech. Who if had not departed from him but abidden
still with the Apostles, he had instructed them plainly how they should have
conceived the sense of the words: as he Augustine in Psalm. 98.
taught the other Apostles, when he told them, It is the Spirit that
quickneth, for the flesh profits nothing: My words which I have spoken
unto you be spirit and life. As though he had said according to the
interpretation of Augustine, Understande ye my words which I have spoken
spiritually. This body which you see, shall ye not eat, nor drink that
blood, which the Jews shall shed out of my side I have delivered you a
certain Sacrament, the same being spiritually understood will quicke^ you.
Whereby no man can be so blockish except he be altogether void of sense, August
contra Aduersar. Leg. and Prophet. Lib. 2. Cap. 9. We men do receive the
Mediator of God and men Christ Jesus, giving us his flesh to be eaten, and his
blood to be dru^ken with the heart and mouth of our faith.
what the purpose of the Lord was in the Action of this Supper: and how he
would have our hearts and minds affected toward these mysteries, with what
Basil de Baptis. What profit have these words? forsoth^ that eating and
drinking we become always mindful of him who was put too death for us and rose
again.
mouth and by what instruments he would have us too receive this bread of
his body. Whereby his purpose was to make plain demonstration unto us of the
spiritual efficacy of his Ambrose (...) 1. Cor. 11. Because we be made free
by the death of Christ, being mindful thereof, we do by eating and drinking
signify his flesh and blood which were delivered for us.
passion, and our faith on him: which he could not have done by any so fit
similitudes, as by setting down these chief and p^incipall stays and
supportes as it were of this present life, which do serve for the daily food
and necessary nourishement of the body.

I have hitherto now manifested a cause sufficient enough, except I be
deceived, that moved our Lord to institute this sacrament of his body and
blood in bread and wine: Namely, to represent the power and efficacy of his
most ghostly and comfortable death, not only to our faith and remembrance, but
to our senses also by a most apt similitude. Which similitude being not able
to be made consonant by any means without bread and wine: hereof therefore
comes it to pass, that reteining bread, we do admit here a necessary
figurative speech: A figurative speech necessary in the Lords supper.
whereby we do most truly call bread by the name of Christ's body, and the
body of Christ by the name of the bread of life. For if it might be lawefull
for Lombard too use this kind of speech, In Sentent. li. 4 did. 12. There is
the true breaking and partition which is made in bread, that is to say, in
form of bread. And again in the same place, The breaking and portions are made
in the sacrament, that is to say, in the visible form, Lo^bard And in the same
place. * Where part of the body is, there is the whole. etc. But Augustine
says otherwise in his 57. epistle. Every greatness is less in the part, then
in the whole.
bread, that is to say, in form of bread: in the sacrament, that is to say,
in the visible form: Again, wheresoever part of the body is, there is the
whole, etc. which can not be spoken of any man without a figure: Why then shall
it not be as lawefull for us by the same figure to affirm that bread is the
body of Christ, that bread does signify the body of Christ as well as
Lombarde can wink in his own proper conceit, and say, The visible form is
bread: the form, that is to say, the bread does signify the body of Christ.

It remains now that you (holy father) with your cowled cloysterers render us
a cause likewise, why ye drive the bread out of the sacrament like a
runneaway. Why in this case you will not admit a figure in any case. The
cause is sifted out wh the Lord in his supper did institute a sacrament of his
body
For this is your doctrine, that in the sacrament no bread is eaten, but the
very body of Christ simply, naturally, and really. Go to, what was the cause
at the length why the Lord him self should either deliver unto his guestes
his own natural flesh to be devoured, or why do ye suppose that we ought to
believe the same to be true? you will answer, that he did it to the end
he might feed our frail, weak, and unclean flesh with his most holy
flesh. Of the very same opinion were the Capernaites wandering in the same
mismaze long before your days: and being offended as Cyrill reports with the
words of the Lord, Cyrill Catechis Mystag. 4. The Jews not conceiving the
words of Christ spiritually being off^nded went backward, because they
imagined that they were called to the devouring of man's flesh.
reuol^ed from him. The same answer therefore which they received of the
Lord, be ye satisfied withal at this present. The flesh says he, profits
nothing at all: that is to say, Christ did not mean here his natural flesh
simply, which being borne for us, crucified for us, and risen again, does
profit very much in deed, but he did mean of our eating his body. A
comparison betw^^t the papists and the Caperna^^^s.
According to which kind of eating, if Christ do plainly confess that his
flesh is altogether unprofitable, will you ground all the commodity and
profit of the sacrament in the eating of his flesh? And after this will exact
of us also that forsaking the very meaning and open exposition of Christ him
self (who does testify that his words be spirit and life) should accept this
your childish grammatical construction of the fleshly devouring natural
flesh for sound and catholic divinity?

But here again will some one of you step forth like a tall fellow, and
say, when the Lord spoke those words of his body, he uttered no syllable or
term of signifying. Neither did he speak thus, This does signify my body,
but did profess simply without all figure, this is my body. But this
trymmetra^^ne so nicely conned out, Augustine will easily unloose unto us. Aug.
contra Adimantum cap. 12.
Who writing against Adimantus, does amongst other rules recited in the nature
of a sign recko^ up this same very speech in the Gospel. An objection. Christ
said not, this does signify my body, but this is my body. Ergo, simply it is
Christ's body. August. does answer, Paul said not the rock does signify
Christ, but the rock was Christ. Ergo The rock was Christ naturally.
The Lord, says Augustine, do^ted nothing to say, This is my body, when he
gave a sign of his body. Uerily, if he gave a sign of his body, he could not
choose but give somewhat wherein he might signify his body, although there
be no word significant expressed. In like manner neither was any word
significant uttered by the Apostle when he spoke of the Rock, August. de
Ciuitate Dei. lib. 18. Cap. 48. Because after a certain manner all things
significant do bear the names of the things signified. As this speech of the
Apostle, the rock was Christ, when as notwithstanding it did signify Christ.
as the same Augustine witnesses: for the Apostle said not, the rock did
signify Christ, but the rock was Christ, when as nevertheless no man ought to
doubt of the Apostles meaning herein, not that Christ was a very rock or
stone in deed, but that the rock did signify Christ. Or if these jolly
fellows will not be satisfied with this answer of Augustine, then let
Ambrose answer for Augustine: Who setting down the matter plainly by the
word of signifying: Because, says he, we be delivered by the death of the
Lord, being myndefull hereof we do in eating and drinking signify the flesh
and blood, which was crucified for us.

But if all the speeches which Christ used (which are every where very
plentiful in figures and parables) must be leueled according too this plain
rule of the letter, then let us in our entry at the Church door, worship the
door, because in like utterance of speech the Lord said: I am the door, if
any man do enter by me etc. Where appears no sound of any word of
signifying, whereby he might manifest unto us that he was not a door in deed,
but did signify a door. But in this place I see you forsake your grammar
construction, and shrowde your selves under a figure, and not without cause.
And what scrupule is it, I pray you that may let us to use a figurative
speech as well here where he says. This is my body? Or why should you be
more squemishe at a figurative speech where we are said to eat Christ, then
where we are commanded by the scriptures to put on Christ? Paul does instruct
the Galathians on this wise. Gala^. 3.
Al ye that be baptized, have put on Christ: and here you acknowledge a
figure: Christ teaches us, that he is the food of our life, and commands
us to eat him, affirming that to be his body, and here ye can take no notice
of any figure. And why so I pray you? or what reason does enduce you to this,
that in putting on Christ you will seem altogether spiritual, Christ is
none otherwise eaten in the supper, then he is put on in baptism.
but in devouring Christ altogether fleshly and carnal, preparing your minds
there, and here only your teeth and belly?

But I understand what scrupule this is that so much alters your diet. It is
because in the words of the supper a certain special commandment is set
down by Christ, whereby we be commanded to do this in remembrance of him.
Go to, and does this seem cause sufficient enough, why rejecting the figure,
you should run away from heavenly divinity, to boyshe grammatical
construction, from the spirit to the letter, from life to the belly? Why then
when S. Paul does not only make us to be clothed with Christ, but also
commands us to put him on? When as also he commands us to take the sword
into our hands, which by express denomination he calls the word of God,
and faith the Buckler wherewith he charge too be furnished, Figurati^e
speeches.
shall we therefore stricktly conuer these commandments of the Apostles,
after the natural phrase and simple manner of speech leaving the spirit? May
I be so bold (holy father) to demand of you, when the blessed virgin is
commanded to take the disciple of Christ for her son (as is before
mentioned) shall we therefore take him for her natural son borne of her
body? Men are counsayled too gelde them selves for the kingdom of God: what
shall we therefore follow the fond example of Origin in the carnal
construction of the letter? The Lord him self does else where command to pluck
out the eye, if it offend, likewise to cut of the right hand, and the right
foot, if they offend: the same Christ also does by express words forbid,
that none of his disciples should seek to be saluted by the name of Lord or
master, and that none of his servants should press up to the highest
places and seats in meetings together, is there any one of all your holy crewe
that will therefore mangle his body, and cut of any his members or pluck forth
his eyes at this commandment of the Gospel? or will any of you think it
matter unseemly for a bishop to bear rule over others? I think you will not:
for you will say, it were a very absurd matter to be done. The absurdity of
the lite^al exposition of the speeches and mysteries of Christ.
Now which of these seems more absurd unto you, either to cut of the hand
or foot from the body, or to take the eye forth of the head, then to devour
at one morsel a quick living man, whole and sound together with hands,
feet, eyes and skin flesh, blood, bones, yea, his guts also, nails,
sinowes and muscles, and to swallow him down into the panche.

And yet notwithstanding, may not all these so many and so monstruouse
absurdities which you see plainly with your eyes, and which the very course of
nature can in no wise digest, prevail with you to call your Cyril. ad obiecta
Theodoreti. Our sacrament does not affirm the devouring of a man, nor lead
the minds of the believers irreligiously to gross imaginations.
gross and fleshly fat imaginations to the spiritual understanding of these
words? wherein if you can not find in your heart to credit your own senses
and reason, nor to yield to your judgment (holy father) yet ought the
authority of Augustine not so lightly be regarded, who in his book de
Doctrina Christiana, discoursing upon the manner of discerning the properties of
words, whether they be properly spoken, or figuratively, amongst other his
rules he sets down this for a special note, namely: August de doc^rina
Christiana li. 3. cap. 10.
that where any speech will seem to command sacrilege, or an heinous and
wicked thing, the same speech, should be construed for a figurative speech. And
least any man should cavil here that this note does not appertain unto the
Euchariste, let Augustine be hearkened unto, being the expositour of his own
words, who does apply this chiefly too those words uttered of eating
Christ his flesh and drinking his blood: August In the for^^a^d book. cap.
^6.
In which words of Christ, says Augustine, because a wicked thing seems to
be commanded: hereof he concludes on this wise. It is a figure therefore,
says he, commanding to participate with the passion of our Lord Jesus, and
sweetly and profitably too lay up within the closettes of our remembrance that
Christ's flesh was wounded and crucified for us? What can be more manifest then
these words of Augustine? what more autentyke then his authority? which if
we yield unto to be truth in deed, then either mu^^ you abandon this new
framshapen poppet of Papisticall transubstantiation, or incur the blemishe of
horrible wickedness, and withal yield over to many other gross absurdities,
quite against nature and kind, whether ye will or no.

For what more execrable wickedness or horror more dete^table may a man not
only commit, Wick^dnes in eating the Lords body.
but imagine more unworthy the precious body of our Lord, then in bidding bread
and wine adieu out of the sacrament, to supply in place thereof Christ his
natural flesh, to be torn with teeth really and corporally, to be deu^ured
flesh, Aug. epist 5^. He that says that the body of Christ is at one instant
of time both in heaven and ear^h does vtte^ly co^founde and dissolve the nature
of Christ's body.
blood and bones, to convey it so into the stomach, and to swallowe down man's
natural blood? moreover in resp^ct of nature it self, what can be uttered
more grossly absurd and more unreasonable, then to say that one and the self
same Christ may sit in heaven, according to his natural and bodily presence,
and at the self same time too be handled with hands on earth? that the
substance of one self body is limited at one self time in one certain
place, and to be contained in infinite places: that as touching the person,
Christ is but one, but has two kinds of bodies: the one whereof must be only
local, and all the rest of his bodies not local: to be in a place, and yet to
fill no place certain: Absurdities in the Popish transubstantiation.
to be a true and natural body of a natural man, and yet to be neither round,
nor broad, neither short nor thick, nor long, neither to have in it self any
proportion or distaunce of members, Aug. in sermon ad Infantes. Christ did lift
up his body into heaven, from whence he shall come to judge the quick and the
dead: there he sits now at the right hand of his father. How is the bread
his body? and the cup, or that which is contained in the cup his blood? The^e
things brethren, are therefore called sacraments, because in the^ one thing is
seen, and an other thing is vnder^^anded.
to wit, no distance from eye to eye, from eyes to ears, from head to feet:
but where y^ eyes be, there also must be the ears, where the arm is, there must
be the leg, finally the heel, hand, head, and foot must be al one me^mber,
and every of the^ supply others place, and altogethers to be one body of
Christ full complete, and of all parts absolute in ten thousand diverse
places at once: and yet all these must make up but one only body? And in this
doing I pray you, what is else done, then according to the heresy of Eutiches
in establishing the divinity of Christ too overthrow mean whiles the truth
of his humanity utterly, and to choppe together into one confuse mixture God
and man, heaven and earth altogether?

Aug. Epist. 57. ad Dardanum.
Of which matter let us once again hear what Augustine says. Do not dout
(says he) that the man Christ is there now, from whence he shall come
again: imprinte in thy mind and believe steadfastly the Christian faith, that
he is risen again from the dead, ascended into heaven, sits at the right
hand of his father, and shall come from thence, not from any where else, too
judge the quick and the dead in the very same form and substance of body, too
the which he has given immortality, and from the which he has not taken
nature away. According to this nature, he is not to be imagined to be
dispersed every where. For we must be very circumspect herein, least we do
establishe the divinity of his manhood, that we utterly take away the truth
of his body. For it is no good argument to say, that as in the nature of the
Godhead, he is every where as God: likewise we have our being, our life, and
our moving in him, yet are not we therefore every where as he is: for he is
after one sort a man in the godhead, and after an other sort a God in the
manhood, after a certain peculiar proper and singular manner. For this one
person is both God and man: and they both one only Christ Jesus in all places,
as he is God^ but as he is man in heaven. etc. You have now a plain
demonstration of Augustines judgment, touching the sacrament of Christ's body,
no less evident in words and in reason manifest, then autentick in substance
and authority. Unto whose testimony if naught else were added, I would surely
think our selves sufficiently furnished even with this one, to overthrow all
the gross absurdities of that Popish doctrine.

But lest we may not seem to produce as it were this one alone from amongst
al other writers, but rather one ou^ of many: we do not here so much vouch
Augustine himself, as in the name of Augustine specify the general faith, and
common consent of the learned fathers in Augustines time, and in the same
Augustine the antiquity of the doctrine touching that matter, to be
considered. For what else did the general agreement of the Church proclaim
publicly abroad, what do their wrytinges purport unto us at this present,
what do their books testify else, then the very same which we profess at
this day delivered unto us from those our first teachers? amongst all the
which the nearer any one lived to that ancient age of the Apostles, so much
the further did he dissent from that newfangled toy of transubsta^tiatio^, I
should rather have said d^ousy dream. The truth whereof being justifiable by
many sundry proofs, will yet appear much more abu^dantly in this, that not one
so much of all that primitive and purer age did ever speak word of any such
adoring of the sacrament, of any such transubstantiation, reseruatio^, carrying
abroad, of any such byhangers and fourmes without a subject, or of excluding
the substance of bread: but al ingeneral with one voice do proclaim that bread
and wine is a sign of Christ's body and blood: A sign.
some call it a figure, A figur^^
others an exemplar, others a type, A type.
some a likeness and token, A likeness. A token.
many a memorial, A memor^al.
and al with one voice confess too be a sacrament of the body: A
represen^a^io^ A sacrament.
of some the body is said to be represented by the bread, of many too be
showed, of others too be signified, and many also too be figured.

Tertullian does by express words say, Tertul^ contra Marcion. l^b. ^^
This is my body, that is to say, this is the figure of my body: and in an
other place: O^ig^^.
Christ did call bread his body. Origin also no less expressly. The church
offreth up the shows of the body and of the blood. Nazianzen has these
words. Naz^^nzen.
Concerning the table whereunto we do resort, or concerning the times and health
and salvation which I do with my mouth receive from him, etc.

Ambros. de his qui initiantur, cap. 9.
Ambr. says thus. Before the blessing of the words, other kinds are named:
after the blessing, the body of Christ is signified. And in an other place: In
the type whereof we do drink the mystical cup of his blood. Chrysostom
also as plainly: Chrys^ in Epist. ad Habr. hom. 17.
that he might daily show forth unto us bread and wine for a similitude of
Christ's body and blood according to the order of Melchisedech. Chrysostom. in. Mat.
^om. 83.
And again. If Jesus did not suffer death, whose memorial then, and sign is
this sacrifice? Cyprian says, Cypria lib. 2.16
the people is understood in the water in the wine, blood is showed forth.
Epist. 3.
What ca^ be more manifest then the words of Gelasius? Gelas. contra Eu^ychetem.
In this action of mysteries (says he) is celebrated the Image and similitude
of Christ's body and blood. Theodoret. Christ does not change the nature of
bread, but puts theretoo grace. Theodoret. Dial.
Again in his second Dialogue. 1. Dialog. 2.
For the mystical signs do not go forth from their nature. What shall I
need to cite Bertram who making a true report of the usage of his time,
Bertr^^.
does remove neither bread nor wine out of the sacrament, but establishes the
presence thereof by these words. The bread and wine is figuratively the body
and blood of Christ. And immediately after: The body of Christ, that is
celebrated in the Church by a mystery, is after a certain manner the body of
Christ, and this manner is in a figure and an image. I pass over here Ba^il
who calls bread an exemplar. (...)
Join with the foresaid writers Macarius, Macar. hom. 27.
who testifying most manifestly of the bread and wine. The bread (says he)
and wine is an exemplar of his ^^eshe and his blood, and they that communicate
of the apparaunt bread do eat the flesh of the lord spiritually. Let us now
hear Irene speak^ng of the bread not being cast out, but sanctified. The
elemental bread, says he, taking denomination of the word of God is no more
common bread, Iren^ aduersus Valentinia. lib. 4 cap. 34.
but is made the Euchariste, which consists of two things, earthly and
heavenly: and immediately after in the same place, what is understood by the
heavenly thing, but sanctification which comes by inuocating the name of God?
And by the earthly thing, which comes forth of the earth, but natural bread:
which also feeds our bodies as well as any usual bread. And again in his 9.
book. When the wine powered forth into the cup, and the bread being broken
does receive the word of GOD, it is made the Euchariste of the body and blood
of Christ, from the which the substance of our flesh receaueth repast and
nourishment.

Of the same judgment is Iustine the holy martyr living in the very time and
age of Irene, Iustine the holy martyr.
who writes on this wise. The Deacons do distribute to all that be present to
make them partakers of bread, wine, and water, The br^ad and wyn^ which pass
intoo the no^rishment of our body are c^lled the Euchariste.
over the which thanksgiving has been pronounced, or else they carry it to
those that be absent. Now this nourrishement is called amongst us the
Euchariste, of the which may no man be made partaker, unless he be joined
with us in one and the same faith and baptism, and live after the example of
Christ. For we do not receive this as common bread, (...)
or common wine: but as Jesus took upon him flesh and blood for our
salvation sake, That is too say over the which thanksgiving and prayers have
bin pronounced.
after the same manner we also receiving this Sacramental food, by the which
our flesh and blood is nourished by concoction, are taught that it is the
flesh and blood of Christ that ^ook^ flesh upon him for our sakes.

I could allege many sentences besides these out of Athanasius, and more out
of Cyril. some out of Epiphanius Dydimus and others many more, al which i^ I
should re^ken up particularly, I should skarse make an end of vouching
testimonies: I mean the ^estimonies of that ancient and primitive purer age.
By the which may be seen plain without all ambiguity that those visible
forms and byhangers of bread without any manner of sub^^aunce was never heard
of as yet: and that the body and blood of Christ was so distributed^ in the
communion, as that both bread and wine did nevertheless remain always in
this sacrament amongst them: finally that the body and blood of Christ was so
contained under the denomination of meat and drink, that the Church had
always a sacrament, The Church has the sacrament of the body always, but
has not always the body without the sacrament according too that saying [You
have not me always.]
of the body, but not always the body without the sacr^ment, if therefore we
have not the body always without a sacrament: then may any man easily perceive
by the very denomination of a sacrament what he ought too conceive of the
self same body, for as much as the sacrament of the body is one thing, and the
very body of the sacrament is an other thing, the one whereof may be called by
the others name, but can not possibly be one and the self same in substance.
For as his most blessed mother having delivered Christ out of her womb, is
said properly and truly too have brought forth the very natural body of
Christ naturally, Christ is otherwise borne into the world, otherwise eaten in
the world.
not the sacrament of his body: even so likewise this holy sacrament of
Christ's body, which is produced and made by the only word of GOD without
mother at al, is called a body by a spiritual construction only, but can not
rightely be called the substantial and natural body which issued forth of the
virgin, and in the natural sense thereof. For although Christ be one and the
selfsame in person wheresoever he be, yet is he not every where according to
the natural substance, which he received of his mother, neither is he eaten as
he was borne, for he was borne a natural man in deed, but he is eaten not
otherwise then by a mystery significant. In mysteries similitudes of things
are contained, but not the substance themselves properly. In the mother the
word was made flesh: In the Euchariste the flesh of the word is made our
food, I say our food, Aug. in. Joan. tract. 95 This bread does require the
hunger of the inward man.
not of the mawe nor of the belly but of the mind. Whereupon this meat is
called every where by the ancient ecclesiastical fathers, and that not
without cause by spiritual meat: as the which is not applied too the food of
the bodies, but which does satisfy the hunger of the inward man. For as the
hunger which hungreth after Christ is not the hunger of the outward body,
Cyprian. de coena domini. This bread is food of the mind not of the body.
but of the inward man: even so the flesh of Christ avails nothing too the
ease of belly hunger: but all the commodity thereof serves for the
nourishement of a better life. Otherwise why would the Apostle Paul have sent
back the hungry belly communicantes to their own house where they might feed
at full, Aug. in. Psalm. 103. Again in Joan. tract. 26 cap. 6. Why do ye
prepare tooth and belly? believe and thou have eaten Psalm. 103. This is the
bread of the heart, be thou hungry and thirsty in the inward man.
except he had supposed that in that holy assembly some higher mystery had
been handled besides feeding the belly?

Which being true in deed, verified with so many proofs, so many manifest
evidences of witn^sses: Rab. Maur. lib. 1. cap. 31. The sacrament is turned
into the food of the body. By the power of the sacrament we do obtein life
everlasting.
what will these Romish counterfa^cts bring forth to shadow their fren^y and
to defend their drousy heresy of transubstantiation? For if they do so
stricktly restrain the sacred body of Christ, which without all question
sits now in heaven, into and within the sacrament, that there shall remain
no place nor any substance at al of bread swee^e nor leauened besides a thing
of naught only, and shadows of accidents, what shall that be then, which the
ancient fathers do with so general agre^ment call a sign, a Sacrament, a
mystery, a type, an exemplar, an image, a seal, a similitude, and a figure of
the Lords body and blood? What is that wherewith our bodies be fed and
nourished as Iustine reports? Are we nourished with forms and bare
byhangers of accidents? What is that, the fragmentes whereof the Deacons did
in old time carry unto others, Nicephor. in hist. eccl. lib. 17. cap. 15.
and the broken pieces whereof (if any remained after the communion the priests
did give to boys that went too school too eat too their breakfaste: The
custom of bestowing the fragments in Justinian his time.
which custom was frequented in the church in the of ^yme Justinian as
Nycephorus reports? If in that first age of the Church those ancient
fathers had but ymagined in their minds that they did eat the natural body of
Christ altogether without bread really, may any man think with him self that
they would have yielded so little reverence to Christ their savior, as that the
Priests should have been permitte^ not only too devour the body of our
Lord so broken in pieces, but also too deliver boys gooing too school the
crustes and cromines of the leauinges for their breakefastes?

By the which you see (holy father of Rome) unless you have lost your eyes and
see nothing, what the doctrine and opinion touching the substance and faith of
this sacrament was then in that old ancient age amongst those Catholic and
godly ancient fathers: and how far this your new vpstart chaungeling of
^ra^substantiation does differ not only from al ancient antiquity, but also
from the truth of the scripture it self, which many of your own frate^ny,
Impes of this later age did not only very wisely forsee, but very frankely
confess as your self do know well enough. For I suppose the name of the Author
or the words of the Author at the least be not unknown unto you, who albeit
never durst deny transubstantiation himself: yet feared nothing ^o v^ter his
judgment thereof freely: Eras^in Ann. in 1. Cor. 7.
The Church (says he) did but very lately set down the determination
touching transubstantiation: The Church did lately determine of
transubstantiation.
for before that, it was thought sufficient that the true body of Christ was
contained really either under consecrated bread, or by any means else, but
afterward when the church began to look more narrowly into the substance
of the matter, and to enter into more exact consideration thereof, it gave
forth a more resolute determination of the same, etc. To the same effect
almost writes also John Fisher bishop of Rochester not the least Apostle of
the Romish church, who in his book entitled A Defense for the King of
England, discoursing upon transubstantiation and the use of the sacrament,
comes at the last to this conclusion, to wit, that Tra^substantiation is
grounded more upon the authority and determination of the church, then can be
justifiable by the scriptures of God and the Gospel. Wherein he did not amiss.
For who does not know that in that first nourcery of the Primitive Church,
yea, and many hundred years after: When transubstantiation began first.
whenas Bid, Bertram, and Rabanus Maurus were living in the world, even unto
that unlucky hatching of Hildebrande and Innocent the thi^de, not so much as
this name Transubstantiation was ever heard of, until at the length in a
Council hold^n at Laterane in Rome the solemn edicte was established of
banishing the substance of bread quyt^ out of the sacrament. The ^aterane
council under Pope Innocent the thi^d. Anno 1216.
For if at any time before that council the church had defyned any certain and
grounded doc^rine touching the same: how falls it out the^ that there is such
a continual falling ^ut amongst the^ that followed after in diversities of
opinion and judgment about that transubstantiati^n, which some of them do
stoutly maintain, some do utterly deny it: some do by conjecture think that
others will not grant unto: some others have supposed, some do so deliver out
that the substance of bread and wine does remain. Lombard. lib. 4. did. 10.
Lombarde himself does think that there is a certain enterchaunge, but what
manner of enterchanuge that is, whether formal, or substantial or of some other
fashion, he dares not of himself determine any certainty. Gabriel.
Likewise Gabriel Biel sticking fast in the same quauemyre unable too vnwelde
him self clean from out the same, is feign at the length too set down by a
plain denial, that in the whole Canonical scriptures can not possibly be
found in express words, whether this transubstantiation does begin by
enterchaunging of any somewhat into the body, or do without enterchaunging
begin too be the body with the bread: the substance and accidents of bread
remaining still. What shall we say to this, that even by the testimony of Pope
Innocent the third his own mouth, were some persons known that did affirm,
that as the very accidents of bread did remain after consecration, so also
did the very substance of bread remain withal. Whereby appears manifestly
that before that late council of Laterane, was no certain doctrine established
touching transubstantiation. To the like effect writes Nicholas Cusanus.
Nicol^us Cusa^us exercitationum. lib. 6.
Some of the ancient fathers, says he, are found too have been of this
mind, that the bread is not transubstantiated, but is invested with a certain
substau^^e of more high valor.

O notable groundwoorke of transubstantiation, perdy builded upon none other
platte form then upon so brittle a fundation as that ridiculous decree of
the Romish Church being so late an vpstarte, as the which was not so much as by
name only ever heard of or known, which never peeped abroad into the
world, before Satan being let loose out of Hell after the thousand years of
his captivity, was permitted too raunge openly abroad, and too defile all
things with abominable stenche and corruption. For on this wise did Satan
after he was let loose begin his first practices, very near the time
wherein Hildebrande, or not long after him Innocent the third began too prop up
their Ierarchie over the world. O Sacred and Catholic doctrine of
Transubstantiation issuing from so gracious a stock forsooth, and grafted in
such an holy and seasonable a time. O neat and fine forgers of fraud: of
whom notwithstanding, if any man will demand for the first Original of y^
their doctrine, they will not be ashamed to fetch the pedigree thereof, even
from the very Apostles themselves, and too deduce the auncientie of this their
transubstantiation even unto Melchisedech: not much unlike too their near
Cozens the Gebaonites, which too color their falshoode showed forth their
old shoes: so do these Romanists make a show of the authority of their own
Church, and the same advance alof^ as it were Gorgones head before the eyes
and ears of the unlettered multitude with very solemn protestations. Wherein
their fraudulent gu^le had not been altogether amiss, if that the holy
Scriptures had not long before discovered unto us that same gracious Church of
theirs, which they glorify with the title of Catholic, to be none other then
that abominable strumpet of Babylon.

And yet for all this, these Gentlemen spare not too claim hold of Christ
himself also, as an especial Patron of their error: but not much unlike
their own great graundsire Satan, who long since gave assault upon the same
Christ in his own person with the words of Scripture synisterly wrest after
the bare sense of the letter: and as the Jews do at this present hacke the
Prophetical Scriptures of the old Testament of whom Jerome makes mention:
Hieronymus. lib. 3. Na^^. Cap. 17.
Who following the bare construction of the letter, says he, slew the son
of God. The self same almost may seem very aptly appliable unto them, who
following the bare letter of the new Testament, do change the Sacraments
into Idolles, do extinguishe the spirit of the Scripture, and do crucify
Christ with the Jews a fr^she in his members again, besides this also
because they do not perceive sufficient sauetie enough set down for them in
the scriptures, they run by heaps to the chief Fortress of Gods omnipotent
power. What? say they, did not Christ affirm in plain words: The Papists
arguments deduced from the omnipotency of God.
This is my body? shall we doubt that he was not able to perform that which
he spoke? If Christ would vouchsafe upon his departure from hence to leave
behind him, too his dearly beloved Spouse, some special token or remembrance
of him self: and if he were of ability too leave insteede of that token
himself wholly with his Spouse, did he lack power too perform that which
he spoke by word? Roffencis contra Oecolampadium. Lib. 3. in Prooe^nio.
or shall we abridge the credit of his power? I do know that the Omnipotent
power of Christ's Godhead is able to do very much: but I know also that this
Omnipotency does always concur with his will. Therefore the state of the
question here is not what Christ was able too do, An answer to the
argument touching the Omnipoten^ie of Christ's Godhead.
but what he willed too be done. Neither is the controversy here touching
the ability of perfourming, but of the very Action it self. We do read set
down in the Gospel on this wise: The word was made flesh: where
notwithstanding the word did not therefore put of it own nature, because it
clothed it self with flesh. Let us now hear what these do teach, The
bread, say they, is made the flesh of Christ? How so? on such wise
forsooth, as leaving the forms only, there may not remain one crumme of
bread so much. Go to, how shall this ^peare too be true? Because he that
spoke the words, is Omnipotent, say they, therefore it may be so, because
he said it should be so. What do I hear? will they forthwith ^etermine
the channge too be therefore made, because it could be made? After the fame
manner was the old Heretic Praxeas wont to frame his arguments in old time,
whom Tertullian answeryng not unaptly: Tertullian aduersus Praxeam. If we use
these presumptions so disorderly in our talking, we may imagine what we
list of GOD as though he did it because he was able too do it. But we may
not therefore believe that he did all things because he was able too do all
things, but we must enquire whether he did it or no.
but after this manner (quoth Tertullian) may any man imagine what he list
concerning God, as though he did it in deed, because he was able too do it.
Therefore if these Romanistes would frame their Arguments like good Logicians,
they must deduce the conclusion, not from that which GOD was able too do, but
from that which he willed too be done. For the power of GOD, is his will:
and not too be of power in GOD, is not too will: for whatsoever he willed,
the same also was he able too do, and did it in deed.

We do not therefore extenuate here the singular and incomprehensible power of
Christ in working miracles: so also neither are miracles to be new coined
where no miracles be now: Forasmuch as miracles are wrought not for the
behoof of the believing persons properly, but in respect of the unbelievers,
nor are at any time usually frequented, but for some great and urgent causes,
or some notable necessity, too strike a terror into the hearts of the
beholders, whom a man is willing to win to the faith: I would very feign
learn then of these men, what cause or commodity may be alleged in this
Action, why the Lord sitting with his Apostles should by the Omnipotency of
his power transpose the substance of bread intoo the substance of his own
flesh too be eaten. Namely, since neither the Apostles did need any such
miracle, being already before established in faith: yea though they had needed
it, yet did the Lord very gravely forewarne them, that his flesh should not
profit them any whit at all? Moreover neither was any of them carried into any
amazed admiration, or strange adoration of any thing done by the Lord in that
Supper. Besides this also neither do any of ye Evangelists make report of any
miracle wrought here, but do describe the manner and story of the action
simply, without al astonishment of the beholders. And by what faith I pray you
may we conceive in our minds a miracle of hidden transubstantiation, where no
thing appears too any man's sight that we may wonder at, where no degree of a
miracle may either appear to the senses, or be comprehended by reason? But
you will say, that the senses may not be credited here: be it so: so neither
may no credit be given too every drowsy dream of every doting Dotterel: but
our imaginations must be guided by the right line of Gods word. And in this
same very word of God, if any thing occur either figuratively or doubtfully
spoken, as the natural property of the very speeches them selves is always
too be observed, so that construction of words is to be shunned of all
others chiefly, which is prejudicial too the sincerity of the whole
Scriptures, and which throws men down headlong into open and horrible
impiety. And what can be more horribly wicked, then to destroy the true and
natural humanity of Christ, and too draw Christ himself maugre his head
into blemish of offense?

Both which must needs ensue upon this, A double impi^e^^^ in
transubstan^iation.
that these transubstantiators do forge unto us. For if that holy body of
Christ, which in the nature of his manhood is of the same metal that our
bodies be, even by the very law of natural humanity is contained with all
the proportion thereof within one only precinct of heaven, if I say, these men
may disperse abroad the same body in many places, at one instant of time,
placing it in no certain place: doubtless Christ never brought with him this
nature from out the Uirgin Mary, forasmuch as to be in infinite places, at one
instant of time, cannot in any respect agree with the nature of humanity, but
is proper and peculiar to the Godhead only. And by the same reason shall the
truth of the Scripture lie, which has made no difference betwixt the
humanity of Christ and our humanity in the things which properly
apperteine too the properties of August Epist. 57. ad Dardanum. The Lord gave
immortality to his body, but did not take away humanity from it.

The same August. contra Faustum Manichaeum. Lib. 20. Cap. 11. Concomitance
has no place in the Sacramental presence.

August. contra Faustum Manichaeum Lib. 20. Cap. II. Christ according to his
corporal presence could not be in the Sun, and in the Moon, and upon the
Cross, at one time. Christ shall come again, even as he was seen to ascend
up into heaven, in the same form and substance of flesh, unto the which he
has given immortality, but has not taken away humanity.


manhood, sin only excepted, neither does that their foolish and most
doltish shift of concomitance as they term it, help the^ ought at all. For
to admit this to be true, that wheresoever the glorious body of Christ is
present that his Divinity is not absent there: yet does it not hereupon follow
by the same kind of arguing backwarde, that his corporal presence is always
coupled together personally with the presence of his divinity.

The second (...) of transubstantiation.
An other kind of impiety appears in this, that Christ shall be enforced by
this means to commit manifest transgression against the holy commandments.
For it this heavenly banqueter did set before his guestes none other manner of
substance too be eaten and drunken, but the very flesh and blood, of the
same natural body, which he took of his mothers nature, then could he not
choose but incur a just reproach of crime, Christ is prou^d a trespassor of
the ^^th^^^ law, if he had given his blood to be drunken.
nor by any means avoid the guilte of breaking his fathers commandment,
since the law it self not in one place only, ne yet obscurely commands by
especial words, you shall not eat the blood with the flesh. And again in an
other place, Genesis 9.
Whosoever he be that eats any blood, I will even set my face against that
person, and will cut him of from amongst his people. Moreover yielding the cause
thereof, he infers forthwith: Because the life of all flesh is in the
blood. Leuit. 17.
Whereupon I have said too the children of Israel. None of you shall eat the
blood of any flesh, whosoever eats it, shall be cut off. And afterward
likewise in Deuteronomie repeating the same again and again, Deuteronomy. 12.
he says: Only be sure that thou eat not the blood, for the blood is the
life: therefore thou may not eat the blood with the flesh.

Now therefore what manner of ^uersion not observation of Gods law is this?
what a disagreemente and unlikeness is this betwixt the old Testament and the
new? That which the father forbids, the son commands: that which not
only nature does utterly condemn, but also the fathers commandment by most
special law has abolished, shall Christ the son of God the most severe keeper
of the law bring the same again into use? God forbid, he never did it he
never willed it, he never thought it, neither was he able to commit so gross
an absurdity without great prediudice of the law and nature it self, neither
do thou imagine ever any such thing in thy mind, gentle Reader. Christ^ did
neu^r bring in any such enormitie, but the Pa^ists a dete^table and sauadge
kind of people, altogether contrary to Christ's meaning, and contrary too all
law and rule not only of all nature, but of Scripture it self. They do gnawe
upon the woord^s as upon the flesh of the letter, which if be construed in
their right sense, nothing can be more heavenly: but if carnally, nothing c^n
be more damnable. But if we will needs be so precise about the words of
Christ^, Why then by the same Argument of Christ's omnipotency, let us turn
Peter into a Rock of Stone^ and a Stone into Christ, and Christ's flesh into
Table meat. For neither when he called bread his body, which he would give
for us (noting thereby the power and eff^cacie of his passion) did these
words tend to that end, to institute some transmutation of Creatures by any
hidden miracle: or that departing out of the earth with his body, to leave his
body behind him, (or else why should he command it too be eaten, if his
will had been too have it reserved for a token?) but Christ did understand
by these words an other manner of thing, being matter of far greater and
deeper mystery. For he delivered a Sacrament which being understood
spiritually does give life: Augustine. in Psalm. 98. This body which you see,
s^all you not eat, nor drink that blood which they shall shed that shall
crucify me: Behold I have delivered you a mystery, which being spiritually
understood, does give life.
but being carnally vnderstoode^ does kill. For flesh (according too the
testimony of Christ him self) does not pro^ite any thing at all.

But how can it be ap^ly said that this most holy flesh does pro^ite
nothing at all? What? did not the flesh of Christ borne for us, baptized for
us, and slain for us, profit? Yes truly very much. But our treatise here
concerns not the very substance of his flesh, nor yet his heavenly Actions
in the flesh, but only our fleshly eating of his natural flesh in this
Sacrament, which should avail us naught at all too eternal life, t^ough we
eat thereof with our mouths a thousand times: whereof the Lord himself
meaning to advertise the Capernaites not altogether obscurely, who did wrest
these words to the carnal and fleshly sense and meaning of eating, said unto
them these words: John.6.
My words are spirit and life. The flesh does not profit at all.

How these words of Christ [the flesh profits nothing] ought to be
vnder^tood.
Which words do tend too this construction at the last: You do conceive of
these words which I spoke touching the eating of my flesh too too grossly
and carnally, and far otherwise then my meaning is: for I did neither speak
them in any such sense, as that I would inuit you to the devouring of my
person: for what can be more absurd? Neither did I take upon me this flesh
too any such end, as too fill your throats and belies therewith: For what
commodity should thereby redownde unto you? that was not my meaning, but too
the end I should give the same to be slain for your sakes: which slaughter
of my flesh being apprehended of you spiritually by faith, and inwardly
disgested within your hearts, shall refreshe you much more effectually, then
Moses refreshed your bellies with his Manna: for it shall revive you with a
lively life, not perishable and temporal, but eternal: and it shall satisfy
your hunger, not that hunger which will be hungry again, but which shall
replenish you being full fed with everlasting felicity in such wise as that
you shall from thence forth never be hungry any more. Whereupon those his
words are not without cause called spirit and life, not wherewith he turned
bread into flesh, but where^ith he represented the efficacy of his flesh
which was slain for us, and of his blood which was shed for us, under the
mysteries of bread and wine: And on this wise in deed the flesh of Christ,
not in that sense as it is eaten, but in that whereby our faith is reposed in
him, is become altogi^her profitable unto us.

It seems unto me now, that I have spoken sufficiently of this matter, if I
an^exe one thing more. Whereunto I would very feign hear what answer these
Laterane bread flesh makers will make: who think it not sufficient to turn
bread and wine into a Sacrament of the body and blood by the divine power of
the word, unless by a certain kind of Alcumie they pour forth substance
of things from out one substance into an other, The Popish Alcumie.
and so produce out of the substance of bread and wine, a certain contrary
nature of man's flesh and blood, and make thereof some certain quinte essence.
And go to now, to yield thus much to their Alcumistical change, to wit,
that nothing remains in the Sacrament besides the only substance of the
body and blood: I come now not to enquire in what mynute of time, in what
instant of pronouncing the word this transubstantiation takes his first
commencement of being created: For the Popes themselves cannot yet agree upon
this point. This thing do I demand. After that this same body of our Lord
being once devoured by us, Uerie gross enormities and ab^u^d impossibilities
proceed ^ut of the doctrine of t^a^subs^antiation.
does pass once down into the bowels, and rests within our bodies, whether
it remain whole there without all kind of disgestion, or whether the
substance of that flesh do grow through natural concoction into and
increase the substance of our flesh? If they grant this: it must needs then
come to pass thereby, that the undefiled and pure flesh of Christ swallowed
vy us, and converted into the substance of our mortal and corrupt nature,
O^i^en. c ^. ^5. in Mat. The sanctifi^d bread according to the materi^ll part
thereof does pass down into the b^lly, and is thrown out into the draught.

C^pri^^ ^e coe^a. But our coniu^^tion with him does neither con^ound the
persons, nor unite the ^ubstanc^s, but does make our a^fections agreeable, and
couple together our wills.


must become one and the selfsame flesh with our corru^t flesh. For D^m^s. de
Orth. side. li. 4. ca. 14.
as bread and wine (according to the test^mon^e of Damascen) by eating and
drinking, is transposed into the body and blood of the person that eats and
drinks: even so the flesh and blood of Christ, if they be received really,
as they term it, into our bodies, must needs be transubstantiat^d and united
into our own flesh and blood. Hereof therefore must it follow of very
necess^^ie, that the ^lesh of Christ being now made our flesh shall be
sinful flesh, which were horrible to be spoken, yea not only sinful: but
also as our flesh does corrupt and wax rotten withal, so the same
corruption must of necessity happen unto the flesh of Christ as well as into
ours (if according to D^mascene, we be concorporate and made one body with
Christ) which is quite contrary to that mystical prophecy of the Psalmy^t,
whereby we are taught that Christ his most hol^ flesh is dignified with ^uch
an especial est^te and condition, that it should always continue free from
all manner of corruption, Psalm. 15. Thou shall not give thy holy one to see
cor^uptio^. etc.
not to infer here any mention mean whiles of that which cannot be
gainesayde of them that are daily conversant with their sacred ^akes. I mean
even those cakes also that be so curiousl^ kept in Pixe for a season, after
they have blessed them: which holy cakes vsu^lly wax mo^ldie and rotten, and
shi^er to dust being scarce touched with their fingers. Wherein either the body
of our most blessed Sau^our mu^t suffer this v^speakeable injury, or else it
mu^^ needs be confessed, that this their framsh^pen chaungeling
Transub^tantiation must be matter ridiculous, matter of naught, or surely no
matter at all.

Behold here (if it may please your holy fath^^hood) somewhat uttered
concerning many parts of your doctrine. Wherein you see nothing sound almost,
nothing clear, yea nothing that is not of all par^es de^iled wi^h monstrous
errour^. And yet after all these so horrible and vns^eakeable blasphemies do
you require to be accounted for a father and a principal so^^raine of the
Church? Whereof no man that knows you, may wi^h sa^e conscience acknowledge
you for so much as a reasonable member. And is your shameless impudency
crawled so aloft to the top gallant, yea above al whoor^sh shamelessness?
moreover does your insolent arrogancy so far exceed all impudency, that ye
shame nothing at all^ with more then Turkish cruelty to hale harmel^sse and
in^ocent sheep of the Lords flock, as every of them is most sound, and of a
most vnde^iled faith, to the stake, and to condemn them for Heretics? and
with them also no less infamously accuse kings and Queens as accessaries,
harborers, recettours, and supporters of Here^^es? Whereas your self mean
whiles swa^ming on al par^s with so many, so monstrous, and more than
her^ticall ^rrours do so ex^crably exceed all the whole crew of Heretics,
and do so alone like an Ar^hringleader surp^sse al other Her^tikes, The (...)
the A^c^heritike o^ all he^etiqu^s.
that (to speak at a w^^d^) ^his your Papisme can s^eme scarc^ ought else then
a plai^e canker and ga^ing gulf, devouring and swal^owing up all true and
Christian religion.

B^t I surc^as^ now, and make here an ^nde of cont^nding with you alb^it this
is not a ^o^^^ntion, but a de^^nce rather, not entered into of any unadvised
temeritie, but undertaken upon great and vrg^nt caus^ and n^c^ssit^e. Wherein
if we shall seem^ to have desen^ed our cause so^what more eage^ly tha^ may
se^me agreeable with the l^nitie of ou^ na^ures, or to have repr^u^d you
somew^at more bitterly then you would willingly hear of, pleases it your
holiness to accept these speeches as not uttered by us, but to be the very
words of truth it self. Neither do we silly faithful members of the
universal Catholic Church complain against you, but the Scriptures of God do
maintain our quarrel herein, and in our behalf do bend their whole force
against you: the very voice of the Lord, 2 These. 2. Whom Christ shall consume
with the breath of his own mou^h.
the very breath of Christ's own mouth, together with the whole army both of
Christ's Church, and of heaven, and with these also all the holy company of
heaven, do not only urge this disputation against you, but also do join in
league preparing all togethers greater forces against your triple royalty. For
the self same will either utterly root you ere it be long from out that
maiestical Sea, which you do against al equity and right usurp most
injuriously: or else you must of fine force throw into utter exile the self
same Scriptures, and banish withal Christ himself, and his Apostles, from out
all and every Church. I do know that the Church is molested many times, with
many great and grievous assaults and conflictes of encounterings: and many
times infected with diverse noisome diseases and stench of contagious
corruptions: to the clensing and curing whereof, I think it needful to
apply mild and gentle manner of speeches and conference, If any man will be
contencious, the Church of God has no ^uch custom.
as becomm^th modest and mild dispositions. So earnestly always has our
affection loathed that cap^ious snatching and quareling amongst the learned.

But yet this your pes^iferous poison of impiety (holy father of Rome) linked
with such savage phalarisme, wherewith you have not only de^iled the very
welsprings and purest source of all Christian religion, but also utterly
spoiled and defaced it, is such, that it cannot be cured now with any mild
potion of medici^able restoratiue. You have forced the afflicted estate of
tormented Christians to such a lamentable extremity with your horrible crampes
and execrable cruelty, that you are not now any more to be confuted with
arguments as an heretic, but as Antichrist himself the most butcherly
bloodsucker of Christians, to be abhorred and accursed with the general
detestation of all the godly: insomuch that whatsoever person be not from the
bottom of his heart, your professed enemy, can in no wise be in league with
the glory of Jesus Christ.

For as much therefore as the matter is come to this pass: An exhortation to
the Pope.
and that your tottering state stands in worse case now than any man can
express: what better provision may you make for your self, or what more
wholesome counsel may I give unto you, then that ye reclaim your self
speedily, and return again betimes? Whither shall I return, will you say?
Return, Roman ruffler, from whence you are fallen. Return to humility, to
the which you be called. Return again unto the charge whereunto you are
appointed. If the Lord have called you into his Uineyarde, he has called you
to toil and labor, not to scrape riches together: to ministry and
submission, not to maistrie and soueraintie. Bestow cost, and dress the
Lords vineyarde therefore, do not spoil and moyle the Uineyarde. For it is
no Uineyarde of yours, which though were your own, yet ought you not root and
turn it up with such boarishe savageness. For it is the Lords Uineyarde and
not yours: Who if have waged you amongst other his woorkemen, return
therefore to your work, and hold you contented with your place, and vaunte
not your Peacockes tail more than becomes your plumes: and be satisfied with
your penie, whether you come in the first hour, or the last hour of the day:
one kind of payment is due to every woorkeman alike. There is no prerogative
amongst woorkemen. The Lords benignity is extended to al alike. Therefore if
you be wise, let your Romain Sea content you, because you are placed in Rome:
and permit others that be overseers over others, to govern their own
provinces. And would God the Lord would once vouchsafe imprint such an heart
in you, as might earnestly and seriously ponder these things, and that you
might return from whence you are fallen. The time was when this your City of
Rome was famous and noble, replenished with most worthy woorshippers of
Christ: adorned with excellent wits and most commendable conversation of
life: notably magnified with the blood of glorious martyrs: most abundantly
flourishing with godly and learned Bishops: who employed all their industry
and endeavor to none other end, then to the public peace and tranquillity of
the Church.

Restore again this peace unto us (holy father) if you may, and this you may
easily do, if ye will depart from that proud primacie, which you now stand
upon altogether against all Gods law, against all man's law, and quite
contrary to the example of all the ancient fathers. Lay down that perverse
imperious obstinacy: veil low your stately topgallant, and shake off that
unwieldy clogge of Lordlinesse, which you have undertaken, the weight whereof
is able to ouerpeyse, I say not your shoulders, but the strongest shoulders of
the stoutest man in the world. Let errors give place to truth. Let human
glory assubiect it self to the glory of Christ. Let the Romish Broker call
back again his Romish counterfeyt trash, which he has foysted into the
Church without any warrant of the Scriptures, I mean Masses, Sacrifices,
Satisfactions, Pylgrimages, Image-worshippers, false doctrine: Monkish vows,
Purgatory merits, Routes of Regulars, combersome clogges of consciences. Let
him p^^mit Kings and Monarchs to enjoy their own soueraintie over their
Kingdoms and territories, and to amend their errors. Let him restore general
Councels to their ancient liberties, without the which can no sure means be
found for establishing the truth.

For what can be more auayleable for the maintenance of the truth, then that
where Religion is free, there also should all voices be free, and such
Councels summoned, which should be lawful, not a stolen Council: where
matters might be decided by free voices, not by extort speeches: by upright,
and sincere, and freer determinatio^s of the learned, not by procured
affections, not by practices of confederates, nor by the foreiudgements of men,
but by the only authority of God: and where the best approved and ancient
orders of the fathers might be observed, that it might be lawful for every
person to utter freely what he thought without fear, without peril, not where
all must be measured after the lust of one person alone. But now where all
men are enforced to swear unto the words of one man, and all voices rack^e
to satisfy the appetite of one person, which person so rules the roast, that
no man shall be admitted to be present, but such as shall think as he
thinks: and that it shall not be lawful likewise for any to determine
ought, but which shall be consonant to his will. What success, I beseech
you, may any man surmise to be hoped for in such Councels, but such as shall
tend to the breach and dissolution of the liberty of the Church? And shall
seem not to advance the glory of Christ, but to enhaunce the only tyrannous
loftiness of man's ambicious Lordlinesse, to the utter ruin, overthrow, and
rooting out of all sincere and most pure Religion. By reason whereof it
behooves you, holy father of Rome^ to take so much the more especial regard,
that veyling that proud bonnet of greediness to bear soueraintie, and
altogether abandoning this strange never heard of novelty of heathenish
ambicion, ye reclayme your self wholly to that ancient, and more moderate
humility of the most ancient, most true Catholic and Apostolic Church.
Examples be extant every where, which may endure you to be better resolved.
Whether you enter into dew consideration of the life of Christ, what can be
more mild? or whether ye behold the platte forms and proceedings of the
Apostles, what can be more contrary? more repugnant? and more unlike the
course of your Court? Let us come one degree lower to the next succeeding age
after the Apostles, what shall a man find in those grave fathers of the
Primitive church, that is not altogether discrepant to these your outragies and
disorders? But to make no long rehearsal, we will for examples sake, put you in
remembrance of one man alone, a very godly person, namely, that notable
ornament of the Church Cyprian, whom I thought good to vouch by name at this
present, not so much because you should read his words, Cyprian writing to
Iubaianus of the baptism of Heretics.
as that by him you might learn the manner of the ancient discipline, and the
most excellent integrity of that age. For in his Epistle written to Iubaianus,
he makes this report. We, says Cyprian, as much as in us lies, do not
conten^e with our companions, and our fellow Bishops, with whom we do join
in godly concord and Christ's peace: especially for that the Apostle says: If
any man amongst you be thought to be contentious, we have no such custom, nor
yet the Church of God. The love and charity of the mind, the honor of mutual
society, the bond of faith, and the uniform agreeableness of Priesthood,
is preserved amongst us in patience and lenity.

Moreover the same Cyprian in his Preface which he prefixed before the council
of Carthage: Look^ Aug. de Baptismo contra Donatistas lib. 3. Cap 3. vouched
out of Cyprian.
It remains now that every of us particularly pronounce what we think,
foreiudging no man, neither rejecting any man, though he think otherwise then
we do. For neither has any of us taken upon him too be a Bishop over
Bishops, nor has enforced any of our fellow Bishops too any necessity of
obedience by any tyrannous constraint for as much as every bishop is endued
with his proper peculiar judgment according too the freedom of his own
liberty and power, as that he may not be judged of an other, how then may
him self judge any other person. But let us all depend upon the judgment of
our Lord Jesus Christ who only and alone is of power both too appoint us
superintendentes in the government of his Church, and to judge us according to
our usage and proceedinges therein. etc. Here now have you set down before
your eyes a president (if I be not deceived) not unfit, and a commendable
image of ancient and Apostolic modesty, which floorished long sithence
amongst our graundesyres, the first and principal guides and capteynes of
Christ's Church. Untoo the which rule of humility if you could address that
your intolerable hawty courage: (which you might easily do if ye would) and
wo^lde frame your self too march in order amongst your other fellow Bishops:
certes these troublesome commotions and disordered factions of most pernicious
vproares, wherewith the peace and concord of Christians is so lamentably
shaken and rent asunder at this present, would easily be quailed, or for the
more part would surely grow much more calm. But these thick clouds cease
not as yet too threaten daily far more dangerous tempests: and from whence
they proceed, I know not, except they grow from out these stinking bogges of
that Romish riot only, and those pestilent drugges of Papisticall doctrine,
which would once content it self too be reformed, and reduced to the rule
of Euangelical simplicity, there would be no hurly burly in the world now,
no outrageous factions would molest oppressed commonweals at this present.
Al which enormities would easily, and at once be silent and calm, if you
alone would vouchsafe too be quiet. Albeeit why do I exhort you heerevntoo,
that am sure shall little or nothing prevail with you? for may any man conceive
by ymagination of mind that you will become in any respect other then you have
yet hithertoo always been, one whom either fear of God may break, or
charity bend back again, or whom reason or any wholesome counsel may ever
allure too amendment? And would God we could obtain so much at your hands
by our earnest requests, loving aduertisementes, or by any other way else
whatsoever. But because I do see your minds so thoroughly bent against the
speeches and voices of all men, I surcease hee^e to deal any further with you
(O holy father) and leaving you now in the plain field, I will turn the rest
of my communication too others, even too all those whosoever the church of
Christ does possess for industrious and faithful embracers of true pyety.

An humble petition too the Princes and the peers and states of Christe^dom.
But above al others chiefly I do appeal unto you, O ye renoumed prin^es and
noble potentates and peers of the world, upon whom Gods divine liberality
has powered forth this prerogative of supplying his place in all manner of
affairs civil, politic, and ecclesiastical: for I am thoroughly persuaded
that it apperteineth unto you to foresee that Christian commonweals suffer no
damage nor detriment, and to provide that nothing may be committed by
violence and fraud, that may obscure the glory of Christ, that may overthrow
the peace of the people, or prejudice their sauety. Wherefore I humbly beseech
you, for the love you bear to the state wherein the Lord has advanced you, to
bear chief souereignty here on earth, be ye careful again and again,
that the fraudulent practices of the enemies prevail not more then your power
and authority. You can by no means forget the treacherous troubles wherewith
this Calidon boar has moiled your nations, with what an unmerciful slaughter.
with what a monstrous butchery he has devoured the seely flock of the Lord
these many years now, with how incredible calamity he has oppressed your
sobiectes, and how horribly iniuriouse he has behaved himself against your
own persons, states, and seignories. For amongst the whole order of your
puissant estate, what one Prince has been of long time now so mighty in
power, in whose kingdoms the Popes practices could not prevail further then
your renown and authority, The Popes power over princes against al equity and
right.
in the which he has not devoured more of your own subjects with faggot and
tortures, then any of you durst preserve from his tyranny? In the which he
has not enjoyed more friendly hearts and more faithful subjects then you your
selves have? but why do I speak here of your subjects, whenas I do see none
more humble and obedient vassalles unto him, then your selves? For when you
punish them, whom he commaundes you to punish: when you commit to fire and
flame at his commandment and lust, whom he condemns too the stake: when
you do more eagerly and more straightly exequute the laws of his inquisition
more then your own laws: when ye bid battle to your own subjects without
any cause, without any their fault, or misdemeanor by the only iustigation and
procurement of the Pope, seeking the sackes and blood of your friends, for your
deadly enemies sake, herein what seem you else then bondslaues too him, whose
souereignes and Lords behooved you to be?

Which albeit may seem it self matter most detestable and most unworthy your
excellent renown, yet I will not much impute the same too any your cowardyse,
as to your tymorousnes, rather ne yet so much to your tymorousnes, as too the
general ignorance of those barbarous times. For I do know by what crampes and
pernicious practizes they crept into the hearts of princes at the first:
Namely, under the beautiful countenance of the Church, with a false vysor of
religion by crooked conueyances wrything and wresting the testimonies of holy
scripture hither and thither: with which bugbeares blazing Gorgones head as it
were, they had so undermined all the most mighty potentates of the world, that
they might easily induce them to believe that all things were well and godly
achieved, whatsoever were undertaken by the commandments of those holy
fathers, which could not err by any means possible. And even heerehence lo
stepte forth upon the stage the first prolocutor of all this whole tragedy.
But this present age no we requires other manners: Neither could the old
proverb be more truly verified at any time so much as now, to wit Truth
is the daughter of time. For what so cloudy ignorance can possibly ouerwhelme
the senses of any sensible man so much as that in this so manifest a sunneshyne
of Euangelical glory, he can not easily conceive by ymagination, that this
ecclesiastical monarchy of the servants of Christ was never erected by
Christ the founder thereof, ne yet ever at any time permitted of him, but many
times forbidden, and most grievously rebuked every where. Yea it would be matter
of no great difficulty too deli^er by manifest demonstration from out their
own records and registers, the very first time and chief original Author
under whom this pompouse pride of pontifical Lordelynesse began too grow into
some credit. Namely, sithence we read i^ History written by Platina their
own Countryman and domestical witness on this wise. Boniface the third,
says he, a Roman borne did obtain of Phocas the Emperor (yet not without
great contention) that the Sea of the Apostle Peter (which is the head of al
Churches) should be so called and reputed of al men: Platina upon the life of
Boniface in the year of our lord. 511
which sovereignty the Church of Constantinople did travail to procure unto it
self. Whose challenge many Princes favored meanwhiles and affirmed, that the
chief Sea ought to be resiaunt in that place where the chief state of the
Empire was at that time.

By the which it may easily appear unto you what you ought too do. For if the
chief foundations of this Sea be grounded upon no law nor ordinance of God,
as is declared before, but propt up by man's appointment only: what shall let I
pray you, why that stately chair, which received no prerogatyue of
superiority from God, but only from you at the first, should not stoop now
again and lay down these Peacocks plumes by your general assent and
commandment? If being carried on the blind side long ago, your selves were
the first donors of this primacy, altogether against the will of christ: what
more notable exployt may you bring too pass at this present, then to revoke
back that gift (as AEsopes little birds did sometimes plume away their own
feathers from the chattering crow) which was either extorted from you against
equity and right, by treachery and mischief, or procured by fraud and
villainy? For why being now better advised and endued with more heavenly
understanding may ye not more rightfully supplant that, which without cause ye
did of old time plant unlawfully? albeit why do I say that you may, A Rule of
the cyuil law. The free borne does not loase his freedom, neither does he
prejudice the cause of freedom^ which does bind himself to be a bondsman by
writing.
sithence very necessity exacteth it of you as of duty, unless ye had rather
become slaves to this false counterfeit Pope, then servants to Jesus Christ.

Wherefore awake ye most puissant Princes and most renoumed Potentates, let
your wisdom raise it self out of this slumber at the length. Repulse this
outrage and impudency. If the due^iful consideration of your honorable estates,
and of every of your particular liberties may little prevail with you, yield
you thus much yet at the least to your Christ, unto whom ye owe all that
you have, that ye take compassion of his poor distressed Church, that ye
deliver the lives of your subjects from bloody butchery, and their consciences
from heathnishe impiety, and that ye willingly faster not within the bosom of
your commonweals woolues whelps too the rauenouse devouring of the same.
Your whole natyue country does humbly beseech you, the whole society of all the godly does desire you, yea with salt tears does request you that ye will
once at the length after so many and merciles slaughters and flammes of the
godly, vouchsafe too open the vowelles of your mercy toward the preservation
of the truth, toward the safe keeping of simple innocency^ toward the free
deliverance of sound doctrine which has been long enough now oppressed:
that being so by your boun^eous consideration freed from al fear, they may
be recomforted and recover courage again. It lies in your honors too
assuage these frantic and furiouse tumultes. For performance whereof we do
not require you to rush upon the common enemy, and revenge the butchery of
your subjects with force of arms. There has bin of warlyke invasions more
then ynough^ there has been too too great an effusion of Christian blood. But
the request that our humble petition makes to your honors is this, which will
nevertheless redounde in each respect as glorious too your estimation, as
profitable for the general sauety of all the godly. Namely, that of your
authorities royal and imperial, ye will vouchsafe too let be proclaimed a
general Summons for a general council, according too the example of your
famous ancestors, which assembly may proceade to the exact determination and
voices of the best learned and grauest fathers, with such uprightness and
integrity, as that the same council may be no less free, then general. A
Challeng for a general council, wherein ^he whole state and cause of the Popes
authority may be decyded by free voices of the learned.
In the which let the Pope of Rome be enforced too justify his monarchical
chaleng and doctrine by due authorities and good proofs of doctrine: Who if
be able to iustif^e by sufficient testimonies of holy scriptures, let him
enjoy his souereignty: but if he fail in his proofs, let him have his
deserte. In this so forlorn a calamity of al things what can be demanded of
you either more commodiouse, or more commendable for your royal minds? but if
there remain no hope of such a general council too be assembled: yet that
every of you with in your several dominions at the least will not disdain too
put that in ure which ought have been accomplished in that general council:
namely: that erroures may be amended^ that the pure and lively welspringes of
true and sincere doctrine may be restored too their ancient integrity
(abandoning and banishing intoo utter exyle all manner pilfe, dregs, and
patcheries of the Romish riot) that your subjects may freely frame their
conuersations and consciences according too the holy direction of sacred
scriptures, and not after the Popes decrees: and that it may be sufficient for
the same subjects too be subject too their own natural and liege Lords and
Princes only. For else I see nothing whereunto this Romish Reueller may be
employed with in any your Provinces, unless it be to stir up seditio^s and
vproares. In case the state of the christian commonweal were such at this
present, as it was of old, when the church being as yet green was in
subjection under the authority of Ethnic princes, then might the aid of
Bishops be implored for the ordering of the matters apperteyning to the
church. But now sithence it has pleased the heavenly majesty too vouchsafe
those same princes, whom he has called intoo his Church, too become
Christians, as the which do no less dutyfully mynister unto Christ, then the
Bishops them selves: I see no cause too the contrary why the same Christian
princes which bear sovereignty in states politic, should not also bear
souereignty in the congregation of Christians. So that there may seem no cause
to remain now why this pontifical monarchy should so presumptuously usurp
any such prerogative in any their dominions, that ought not to become subject
to the laweful Magistrates in every of their several provinces.

An exhortation to the common people of Christendom.
And thus much hithertoo touching the request, that I thought good to solicit
your most excellent majesty's. That which now remains to be spoken, I will
turn too the residewe of the people of Christendom as many as be brethren and
joint Cytiziens with me, coupled together in one and the self same fellowship
of Baptism al and every of whom I do likewise pray and beseech that they
take heed again and again, that they suffer not themselves too be haled
backwarde from the truth by any subtle, slye, inveigling nor any gloriouse
title of names be they never so plausible. As there is nothing more safe and
more souereignable then sincere religion, which does display abroad direct
too the right way of the true undoubted salvation, so does there no thing more
easily deceive and wound more deadly, then counterfeit hypocrisy creeping
under the covert of false feigned holiness, and her cozen german Solemn
superstition: Even as that lying Prince of darkness does never deceive more
dangerously, then when he puts on the vysor of an Angel. So that so much
the more vigilant and careful we must be, lest being circumuented with rash
and temerarious foreiudgement, more then enduced by stayed consideration of
mind do we embrace false doctrine for the truth, Antichrist for Christ, 1.
John.4.
the slaying fleshly sense of the letter, for the spirit and truth Prove the
spirits, Ephesians. 4.
says Paul, Matt. 10.
whether they be of God, 1. These. 5.
and be not carried away with every blast of doctrine. Whereupon the matter it
self does require this point chiefly in deed, that with the Evangelical
simplicity we join serpentine prudence, which may be able too discern
spirits, which may prove all things, which may hold fast that which is good,
which understands aptly to distinguish betwixt light and darkness, betwixt
falsehood and truth: finally that may be so simple that we offer fraud to no
man, and withal be so provident that we may shun the suttletie of the
guylefull. Now this will be brought to pass without any great difficulty, if
setting parcialitie and greedines of affections apart, we depend wholly upon the
mouth of our heavenly master, not upon men's decrees, nor upon consent of
multitude, ne yet upon common custom of times and people: and if we do so
reclayme our whole hearts to the scriptures, that, as Hillary does give
counsel, we suspende our understanding upon the words of the Lord, and not
imagine that to be written which our selves have taken hold of, before we
read it with our own eyes, nor that we attribut^ so highly to the
imaginations of our own fancies, as that with toothe and nail we defend
that which we have once entered upon: but that we search first by careful
inq^isition those things which we do hold. And therefore we be commanded to
search the scriptures, unto the which it behooves to assubiect al our
determinations altogether, and not to wrest the scriptures to the fancies of
our own imaginations. There may be many and sundry persons so grossly
blockishe and so bluntishe of judgment, who will allow of nothing at all, but
that which they have received of their forefathers, and which by old custom
has been frequented: as though the forefathers could not possibly err, or
as though truth were wont to be the mother and not the daughter of time. Which
order if we shall be enforced to observe, to wit, that we accept of nothing to
be safe and sound in matters of religion, but that which has been
privileged by custom of elder years after this rule, surely neither Paul nor
Peter, neither any one of the Apostles at all, should ever have been a
Christian, neither shall any the Turks hereafter be converted into our faith,
being so many years enured and nooseled up in their own errors.

Go to now, I would feign learn of these fellows that do so stoutly stand
upon the imitation of their forefathers, Customs of time and imitation of
forefathers is neither to be allowed of al, nor in any respect, nor yet in all
things.
what answer they will yield touching Antichriste: whether he is yet to come,
or when he comes, where they will say his kingdom shall be planted? If
they will affirm that it shall be in the Church: what seasons of that
church whiles Antichrist bears swaye, will they describe unto me, whether
it shall be the church of truth or of error? And how can it otherwise be,
but that as long as Antichrist reigns and possesses the hearts of men, the
truth must be suppressed for a season, and error must possess the greater
part of the church. And where will these men place the church of Christ then?
Whether mounted aloft upon the top of a hill, which shall be famous and
glorious in all men's eyes? or shrowding close in some corner rather: when as
persecution surrounding al places with horror, the woman clothed with the
sun shall be feign to flee into the wilderness: when the saints must be
overcome: when the strumpet being drunken with the blood of the saints shall
triumph in her majesty: where shall now become this public, I say, this
public everlasting victory of truth, which many persuade them selves to enjoy
in the church? What shall become of that church which can not err, when the
saints shall be slain in the church? when that false Prophet shall rule the
roste every where? when he shall defyle all places with the blood of the holy
ones? when as also the very elect shall be in great hasard to be seduced?
finally when as so merciles a gulf shall swallowe up the godly, that the very
horror of the peril shall procure the end of all evils long before the
determined time? when as the child of perdition shall be shryned in the temple
of the Lord? all which if we see plainly accomplished alr^ady, and that it
can not be denied but that Antichrist has sitten long sithence in the Temple
of God, and with all is revealed: what mad men, are they now that go about to
persuade us toothe vsages of the fathers, and custom of the times which were
subject unto the tyranny of Antichriste? which also brag so lustely upon
their pontifical Papane succession, never empayred nor vndiscontinued since
the very age of the Apostles, in as much as Antichriste has reigned so many
years now in the Church of God? See the book^ of John Fra^cisce Pi^us
Mirandul^ called Staurostico^, concerning the signs of the cross falli^g
lat^ly from heaven, from the Germans ^n the time of Maximilian the Roman
king. Anno 1501.

And also again 1504.


But if they will deny, that this enemy of Christ is not as yet come, O
miserable and to much forlorn estate of seely Christians. For if within these
few years, since the time that Crosses were fastened first upon the
garments of Christians, namely in the time of Maximilian the Emperor, so
incredible havoc has been made of Christian martyrs, by the only butchery
of the Pope of Rome, as is skarse credible too be believed: Certes if so many
thousands of Christians have been swallowed up and devoured with so many,
and so monstruouse tortures heretofore for Christ and the Gospels sake in
these peacible and calm regimentes of Christian princes, what shall poor
Christians expect to befall them hereafter under the tyranny of Antichriste?

Which being, as you see, more manifest then the sunneshine in midday, pluck
up your hearts therefore you men and brethren and fellow soldiers in
Christ. and according to your wisdoms atchieue an enterprise worthy your
wisdoms, not whereu^to unadvised custom does entise you, but which truth it
self does sweetly persuade you: have regard unto not that whereunto better
and more considerat times do provoke you: that ye may not seem to be more
willing to wander in the wayward course of their errors, then with these to be
endued with sounder understanding and knowledge. For here is matter of no small
emporta^ce and peril (believe me) ha^dling, in hand, yea, so much the more
dangerous, by how much the more your insufficiency to attain the knowe^^dge
of the truth is supported by great abundance of supply and help. For albeit
your forefathers did err in old time, yet is their excuse more colorable
then yours: If they, being at any time carried away by subtle practices of
their Popes, were affectionated to fables, according to the barbarous
grossness of those days, either because they were not instructed more
soundly, or because those helps and aids of books and good literature, was
not as yet extant from out the Printers shoppes, or else because that child of
perdition was not yet revealed: this may be less cause to marvel of your
forefathers ignorance: yet them selves also be in that respect somewhat the
more pardonable. But now in this so clear and orient a glass of discovering
all things, so many helps and aids of speaking and hearing, being already
prepared for your behoof: sithence now the spirit of the mouth of Christ
has discovered, displayed abroad, and portrayed out this Antichris^e in his
very liniamentes and lively colors as it were, so that the eyes of all men may
plainly discern him: and that there can not be any man so blind, except such
a one as will of set purpose close his eyes fast, but that he must needs
manifestly discern this horrible traitor of Chris^e. Certes no man can
possibly bear any zeal or favor toward him, but he that will be a
notorious crea^hour in deed, and will likewise partake with him in the self
lake of perdi^ion. And for this cause the Angel in the Apocalipse does with so
terrible a threatening call us away from him, Apoc. 17.
denouncing the cup of Gods wrath and of eternal destruction to all them,
whosoever did receive the mark of the beast in their forehead or hand.

By reason whereof, behooves us to be so much the more earnestly industrious
to attain by diligent search, First, what and what manner of beast this is:
next, to shun all his acquaintance and familiarity with our whole bodies and
souls, whereby no man may ^out or be ignorant hereof, to wit, in how
perilous a case they stand, who cleave so obstinately to their predecessors
s^eppes, that they allow that thing only, not which is true in it self, but
which has been embraced by the well liking and custom of men. Which sort of
men, if any remain amongst us, I do most heartily desire, that, if they will
not vouchsafe to hear or read our wrytinges and books, they will yet at least
hearken unto Cyprian. Who speaking of custom says on this wise, that where
truth is absent, custom is naught else but an old age of error. Or at least
let them hearken unto A^gustine, who preferring truth before custom. Aug. de
vni^^. baptis. li. 3. cap. 8. did. 8. Ver^^^^.
When truth is revealed (says he) Let custom give place, let no man prefer
c^stome before reason and truth, because reason and truth does always exclude
custom. Finally let them hearken unto Christ him self, who only is to be
harkened unto, who has said, I am the way, the truth, and the life: but
never said I am custom.

Therefore we may not respect what has usually been accustomed, but what ought
to be done: not what has been done of old, but what is well done. Neither
ought truth of religion be measured by continuance of time, not by number of
years, but by substance of arguments: nor by Chronology, Chronology
Chronicles of time.
but by s^unde divinity, not by computation arithmetical, but by weight of
reason substantial. And therefore Augustine said very well, namely, that in
the stablishing of faith and authority of doctrine in the church ought no
account to be made what men say, but what the Lord him self only says in
his word. Which when Ambrose likewise agreeing, calls all things Ambros.
li. 2. De viduis. We do rightfully condemn al things which Christ has not
taught, because Christ is the way to the faithful. Therefore if Christ did
not teach that which we teach, we judge the same to be detested. etc.
new, whatsoever the Lord Christ has not taught, and affirms that the same
ought of right to be condemned, because, says he, Christ is the way to the
faithful. Whereupon Cyprian does admonish not unfitly: Let us not regard what
any of our forefathers thought good to do before time, but what Christ has
done first, who is before and above all others. Ciprian. did. ^. Si solus.


But because here comes place to treat of antiquity, upon the which the
Romish religion does vaunt it self so gloriously, let these honest men
therefore bring forth their books, that they may by good proof justify once
at the length in deed y^ which they magnify so mightily in words. For I do
hear what they braye abroad with open mouths, to wit, that the bounds
prefixed by our forefathers in old time ought not be removed: and that their
church is such a one, as being established by the space of many years now, by
ancient custom of the forefathers, by allowed authority of continual custom
and consent of most ancient fathers, even from the first beginning of the
primitive church, has ever hitherto enjoyed vndiscontinued possession. Go to,
and what fathers be they a Gods name, whose bounds they ^rie out ought not be
removed? Surely if under the name of fathers they mean these first fathers the
Prophets, Christ him self, and the Apostles: we do retain the same their
bounds inviolable as well as they: if they understand the order of fathers
next unto them, The Papane Monarchy has no manner war^a^t of time or
antiquity.
namely Origin, Tertullian, Cyprian, Augustine, and others of the same sor^:
truly this may not be denied, that very many things, which be delivered by us,
are ratified with their agreeable consentes^ But because these same fathers did
as men fail in some points, we do by their own commandment refer our
selves over to the sacred ^ountaines of holy scriptures, which must be believed
without all exception.

But if under that name of fathers they will point us to their popes and
skulles of shauelings and mu^kes: we make no reckoning of the^ at al. For it is
out of all ambiguitie, by whose instruction most of the^ did speak. Amongst
the number of whom, if any happened to be of sounder judgment, yet could they
not pearce into the bowels of the truth, either through the unlucky darkness
of that age, or through the cruel tyranny of other. But if they mean the
fathers, to wit, the grandfathers and great grandfathers of this later age, I
do answer, that there never wanted in this age some, sithence this Romish
An^ichriste began first to crawle alofte, that did both write, speak, and set
them selves against those wolves, but being either surprised by violence, or
seduced by general error, could not vn^wyne them selves out of tha^ laberin^h
of darkness.

You have heard now, good men and brethren, most faithful citizens of the
church, and inhabitauntes of the Christian common weal as much as I thought
good at this present to speak, and necessarily too advertise you touching the
Pope of Rome and his imperial lordlines. And I dout not but it is apparaunt
enough unto you, how the top gallant of this See, has climbed up to all her
stately power and lof^^nesse at the first, without all warrant of Gods law,
without any just reason or ground, but clean contrary to the express words
of Christ, contrary to the natural and lively purport of the Gospel, contrary
to the most ancient canons, and contrary to the public liberty and freedom
of the church. You do understand, if you will make a just co^putation of the
years, what ^ime, and by whose practice this notorious Monarchy was erected
at the first, by what policies and driftes, by what crafty kind of
deceiuablenes, and hypocrisy, by how manifold flippery devises, it crawled up
unto so monstrous a mass by little and little, and being mounted aloft, and by
process of time enthronized in state, into how incredible a mountain of
soueraintie, it has swollen and pufte it self up. You do see how wickedly
and treacherously the Pope of Rome and his dear dearlinges the Cardinals,
have not only raked up that kingdom, which they do most injuriously deteigne,
but also to what end and with what affection they maintein the same at this
present, not that truth may reign, but that true religion may be brought to
naught. You do see that, as long as this Monarchy may bear universal
controllership, there is no place of refuge, left for sincere religion, for
freedom of consciences, nor yet for free counsel and sound advise in
Churches.

You do see that from the very first time that this detestable and deadly
ambition of bearing rule, burst out an open Road into the church, with how
many and how merciles ^laughters Christendom has been rent in pieces, and
into what narrow straightes it is pen^ up at this present, with how many and
manifold conquestes, with continual success almost, the sauadgenesse of the
Turk has prevailed against us. You do see, that nothing can be preserved
from the bloody butchery and broyling of Christians, wheresoever the Pope is
received: neither can I discern any end of all ^hese mischieues any where,
unless these proud Prelates will content them selves within their own
limits and listes, and yield over the royalties and all their authority of
soueraintie to Monarchs and kings: and them selves resume again that which
is their own, namely the function of preaching: teaching not the things that
are of men, but which are of God: seeking not the things which are their own,
but which are of Jesus Christ. If this could be obtained of them with their
good wills, nothing could be more honorable: But for as much as we may not so
much as hope for any such thing at their hands: the remedy hereof reboundeth
back unto you, chiefly and above others to you that are princes, that every of
you according to your ancient generositie, authority, and piety, do first
pacify this troubled estate of religion within your own dominions, restore
that which is crazed and ruinous, and reform that which is defiled and
corrupt. Next it touches you that be Bishops and Pastors, that every of you
direct your particular flock carefully, soundly, and godly toward the
kingdom of God. Last of all, it concerns you that be subjects, that every
of you do dutifully acknowledge your humble obedience to your own Princes and
Magistrates in the Lord.

Here then you see that you be forewarned and admonished, who nevertheless
for your singular and most excellent wisdoms need not any our admonition.
Therefore I make an end here, both of speaking and admonishing: if I may be so
bold to add hereto this our protestation. If any man be able to produce one
word so much out of the authority Evangelical, whereby the Lord Jesus did
yield any manner of soueraintie or preeminence to his disciples, I do not
gainsay, but they may yield the^ selu^s to the Popes authority whosoever will.
But if there be nothing in the whole scriptures, that the Lord him self does
either more carefully advise, or more earnestly forbid, then that any of his
disciples by seeking any preeminence at all, should raise him self above any
his fellows, restraining the^ by all manner of means from all manner of
superiority whatsoever, provoking them to the humble example of his own
humility: Do you then deliberatly and maturely determine in your hearts now
whether you will rather march under the standard of the Lamb him self, your
grand captain to the goal of everlasting felicity, or receiving the mark of
the beast, throw your selves headlong into unrecoverable perdition together
with this most arrogant popish Prelate. The Lord Jesus, even the same
supercelestiall peacemaker of heaven and earth, enspire your hearts and minds
with the spirit of his grace in the things that belong to his peace, unto the
glory of his name and the preservation of his church: the same Lord Jesus also
increase your honorable estates, and preserve you in all the way of truth for
ever and ever. Amen.

FINIS.
IMPRINTED AT LONDON AT THE three Cranes in the Vintree, by Thomas Dawson for
Richard Sergier. 1580.


