News out of France.

ON THE FIRST OF this month of March.

Wherein is set down, the retiring of the Prince of Parma, and the great loss
that he has received in the same.

Also a true report of a great Galley that was brought to Rochell on the sixth
of February last.

French royal fleur-de-lis

LONDON Printed by John Wolf, and are to be sold by William Wright. 1592.

News out of France, on the first of March. 1592.
THe Troubles of France growing from a popular discontent of sundry ill
affected persons toward their natural Liege king, in that he seeks to
withdraw them from man's traditions to the purity of the gospel, shows not
only the long sufferance of God toward the wicked, but his just punishment
upon stubborn and headstrong Nations, that hearken not unto the voice of the
charmer, charm he never so wisely. Yet the sundry victories the French King
has had against his enemies, discouers not only the equity of his cause, but
assured testimony that God will pull down the plumes of such rebellious
subjects as resist the Lords anointed.

A manifest instance of the which fell out of late, by a great victory the
French Kings forces has had against the Duke of Parma which was in this
manner. The Duke of Parma entrenched himself strongly by Noue Chastell not far
from Deep, whereof Mounsieur de Vitrey was Governor, and there in warlike
manner fortified himself with Baricados and other muniments to withstand the
sudden invasion of his enemies: yet neither so warily, nor so strongly, but
the kings forces played upon him so hard, that what enforced by the Kings power,
whose valor was more then his multitudes, and drawn on by a mutiny of the
french companies that were with him, who could not brook the imperious
government of the proud Spaniard, he was constrained to break up his trench
and retire home-ward as well as he might for his own safety. For though he
had sundry Squadrons of the French that were both the Kings professed enemies,
and of the Leagar: yet the French Gentlemen being somewhat haughty of
themselves, did with the more impatience suffer the insolence of the
commanding and ouer-weening Spaniards. Where upon the Duke of Parma grew
offended, and for that special reason retired, as he did manifest in a letter
sent to Mounsieur de Villiers governor of Roan for the Leager, the contents
whereof are these.

I came to aid you, but I could not perform what I intended, for that I cannot
assure my self of the French, who (as I am not their master, so they will not
obey me, which occasion mooues me thus suddenly to depart: but I mean to
return again shortly, with greater forces and more strength, and such as
shall obey me. Wherefore, I pray you continue steadfast, and be of good
comfort. Yet had there not been a more special reason, happily he would have
taken order both to have quieted the French gentlemen, and have gotten more
supplies to have counteruailed the Kings power: but God who is called
therefore, the Lord of hoasts, because he has victory in his hand to
suppress and conquer at his pleasure, stretched out a mighty arm against the
Duke, and as he punished Pharao with plagues for his disobedience, so he sent
a greeuou^ scarcity, darth, and famine amongst the dukes forces, not only for
victuals, which though they were extremely scant, and that the soldiers were
so pined and almost weakened even to the death, that the gnawing of their bowels
began to breed the bloudie-flixe amongst them: but their greatest plague was,
that there was no provision for his horse, neither prouand, hey, stubble, nor
straw: in so much that as much hay as is sold in England for 4. pence, was
worth there even at the Dukes own hands 40. shillings, which famine lighting
amongst the horses, bred such mortal contagion amongst them, that such as
died not (as there perished daily multitudes of them) had strange and sundry
diseases, especially there grew out of their sides great swellings like wens,
which going in again, straight killed them, and being dead, their flesh so
stunk, that it bred a mortality amongst the soldiers. Whereby we may see the
just judgment of God, that kick against the prick, and resist a manifest
truth, unto the maintenance of their papisticall and ceremonious religion.

The Duke of Parma driven thus to retire, sent before him to take up a
convenient place to lodge his men in: some 400. horsemen, and 800. footmen, but
Mouns. de Longueuille hearing how they marched, although his power was but
small, yet upon a zeal to God, his Liege and Country, with a determined
resolution set upon them, and in short time, discomfited them, and put all of
them to the sword. Which news being brought to the Duke of Parmas ears, he
began straight to doubt of himself, and after consultation had for his beter
safety, he retreated in one night seven leagues, and so he concluded to
pass over the river of Soan at Amiens, and his company to get over the river
at Abeuille, making such great have, that in the way he left behind many
Charets and Waggens: in some place four, in other six, and other whiles ten:
to the number of 200. and more: rather yielding such luggage a pray to the
enemies then any more of his forces should be impaired. The King hearing of
the Duke of Parmas retire, or rather sudden escape (to shadow his flight with
more honorable names) leaving Roan sufficiently blockt up with troops and
men of resolution to leager it in his absence: amongst whom Mounsieur de Giury
was one. Then in his own person marched forward after the Duke of Parma,
accompanied with a brave troop of horse, with intent to fight with the Duke if
by any means he might chance to meet him in his journey.

After the Duke thus had made his retire from Noue Chastell, Mounsieur de
Vitrey the governor thereof yielded both it and himself and all his soldiers,
to the number of a hundredth to the mercy and favor of the King, who received
him with all acustomed clemency. Beside that, most part of the French Gentlemen
that were of the Leager, whether touched in conscience that they strive against
their lawful Sovereign, or doubting that God will so favor the kings forces
that his enemies shall go by the worst, as daily they do. Well howsoever
moved I know not, but they make continual suit to the king to have a passeport
to withdraw themselves to their houses, promising never to bear arms any
more, except it be in his Majesty's service, and always and in all places to
be ready to execute any thing his Highness shall command them: but how the
king accepts of their suit, we have not as yet any certain intelligence: where
we may note that although they have continued long mutinous against his
Majesty, yet at last, the touch of their own guilty minds makes them in a
tremblinge form of obedienc^ sue for favor at his hands, whom so
contemptuously, they have hitherto rebelled against.

Of these French gentlemen that had been with the Duke of Parma, three hundred
very well horst, drew themselves toward Roan, and by the way were all
overthrown and slain.

Further when the king was removed with some of his forces to follow the Duke
of Parma, they of the Faulcon which is a Castle situate near unto Roan, did
come forth with two hundredth horse, to give an attempt upon the kings power
that was left behind, every man promising to himself, large spoils out of
the kings tents, but it fell out contrary to their expectation, for Monsieur
de Giury, being by some secret espials, forewarned of this, was not only in a
readiness to receive them, but laid diverse ambushes to circumuent them,
placing some shot so cunningly and closely, that they found as sharp
intertainemente as might be, for the kings power brake out upon them before,
and the shot so galled the horse on the other side, that of two hundred, there
escaped away alive, but seauenteene persons, to the great encouragement of the
kings part, and the dismay of them in Roan. Thus does the Lord help the cause
of the righteous, and breaks the iaw-bones of his enemies, and brings his foes
to confusion, Farewell.

FINIS.
THE TRVE REPORT OF a great Galley that was brought unto Rochell, upon the sixth
of February last. 1592.

depiction of a ship in full sail

LONDON Printed by John Wolf. 1592.

The true report of a great Galley, that was brought to Rochell, on the 6. of
February last.
IF we enter with deep consideration, to censure of the late prosperity of
the Spaniards, or rather hard fortune inflicted upon them by God for their
manifest opposing themselves against the truth and his Gospel: we shall find
that their sundry mishaps presageth their fall to be near, and that their
sins being ripe, wrath cannot long be deferd. But as Silo, so their pride shall
vanish like a smoke, and their ruin shall be like the destruction of those
five Cities, wherein five righteous persons could not be found out. The wealth
of Tire, the glory of Sidon, the pomp of Sodom could not save them from
incurring the fatal judgment of Gods wrath, because they had eaten sower
grapes, and their childrens teeth were set on edge: so that they delivered
sins to their posterity, and displeased the almighty from generation to
generation. even so, the Spaniards gilden mines, their hauty stomachs, their
honors, their worldly glories, no not the prayers of their Cardinals, Abbots,
Moonks, and Friars, their Agnus dei, their holy water, and such trash, cannot
withold the wrath of God from them, while any said, they kick against the
prick, and are manifest persecutors of his truth and religion, but he drives
them on by degrees, to feel the danger of their forewarned destruction: and
to show you an instance what happened to them of late, it fell out thus.

In Brittanie the King of Spain had two great Galeasses and four Galleys, the
which he appointed to keep the seas upon the coast of Brittanie, and so along
from S. Malo to Rochel. Of these in November last returned into Portingall the
two Galeasses and one Galley. Of the three Galleys that remained, this that was
brought into Rochell was the Admiral, this galley had five and twenty oars
of a side, and to every oar was chained five slaves to row them, and was left
Admiral for those which remained behind. She being very well provided, both
of victuals, ordinance, and other furniture of war, having within her both
mariners and soldiers about 500. men, some Spaniards, others Portingals, but
the greatest number were of Spain. But their imperious commandings (as the
Spaniard is most insolent) drew these two nations to a secret tumult and
private mutiny, especially seeing rancour yet remained in the hearts of the
Portingals, for their late abuse offered to their king Don Anthony, and a
mortal hatred fretted the mind of the Spaniard, least the Portingall might in
time make recovery of their losses. Envy thus burning in both parts, it grew
unto such a controversy, that the matter was feign to be taken up by the
chief Captain and other principal Gentlemen and officers in the said Galley.

The Captain being a Spaniard, and his Ancient being Portingall, upon this
special mutiny that grew thro^gh unknown grudges, dealt so with persuading
reasons and fair speeches, that between them two, they appeased the brawle,
and set down a present order for punishing of the chief offenders: so that
presently there were hanged three Portingals, to the great terror and
affrighting of the rest. They in the Galley, looking when any of the
Spaniardes should be hanged for the same offense: but seeing no intent meant by
the Captain, to the punishment of the Spaniard, the Ancient-bearer took it in
very il part, and the more, that the Captain uttered some words of disgrace
against the Portingals and their king. The want of execution, and the
opprobrious speeches used to himself and the state of Portingall, made the
Ancient to murmr, which the Captain perceiving, drew to Bell Isle, there to
provide better for his safety: but the Ancient being as politic as he was,
prouidently proved to take occasion as fitted his turn, first to deal with
the Mariners, who were the rather pliant to his motion, in that they were
Portingals: so that he wan them easily to the resolute execution of his
purpose, which was to be revenged fatally upon the spaniards: having thus
brought the Mariners to his contented determination, he then broake with the
Turks, and the other slaves that were in the Galley, promising them their
liberty if they would stick to him, and follow his advice: the poor, whom
servile bondage had deeply tormented, being in a second hell upon earth, and
glad to be delivered from his thraldom, agreed all in one simpathie of mind,
and joyfully prayed and wished for fit and convenient opportunity. In this
hope it so fell out, that they came to Bell Isle, according unto the chief
Captains determination, where he with diverse other Spaniards of most account,
went on land thinking themselves to be safe when they were there arrived, going
merrily to their friends to be frolic. The Ancient careful, taking time by
the forehead, seeing the most of the Spaniards to be a sleep by wearines of
some service: they had before delivered ares unto the slaves which were Turks,
Portingals, and french men, therewith to unloose and break their chains when
some of the Spaniards perceived that weapons were delivered unto the slaves,
they began to be fearful and suspicious of some present mutiny. But while
they were in this dumpe, they were presently set upon by the Ancient-bearer,
Portingals, Turks, and Frenchmen his confederates. The Spaniards desperate,
seeing flight could not help them, stuck to their tackling, and fought
lustily: but the Auncient-bearer armed with revenge, buckled himself to the
skirmish and though he were sore wounded, yet he slew threescore persons, and
with the help of the slaves, put all the Spaniards to the sword, and so
hoising sails, bent their course toward Don Anthony their King in England.
But as they were in this hope, the wind came about and blew contrary, so that
they were fain to put into the hay of Rochell. On the sixth day of February,
where after discourse made of their present fortunes, they were well
entertained of the French. The Auncient-bearer offering in his name, and the
rest their service to the King in these his wars against the Leagars, granting
in form of a free gift their Galley, ordinance, and all other provision. The
bark had store of ordinance of great value, in so much that diverse which were
aboard on her, said: that she had store of field pieces, all cast in brass,
which were carried into Rochell to the Kings use. Above the rest, there was one
thing wondrous and worth the noting, that the Lantern that gave her light,
was valued worth 500. pound and few or none such being ever seen in
Christendom before, it was given to the French king for a jewel. Then if the
Lantern were of such cost, the wealth of the ship is more easily to be
coniectured. Beside she had great store of wine and other victuals, so that it
was imagined, that this spring she should have made for new-Hauen in the
river of Roan. But now she lies tied within the chains of Rochel, There came
out of her great store of people, among the which were many spanish women or
gross widows. Besides it is reported, that in great bravery the Portingall
is gone to the French King, and all the Turks and other slaves vncommitted and
set at liberty, to the great joy of all good christian hearts, that joy to
hear, either the controversy or confusion of the Spaniards. Thus you hear
how God delivered the Portingals and poor slaves from thraldom by a private
mutiny, as he overthrew the pride of Babell, whereby we receive this comfort,
that as GOD cherishes his chosen people, so he will confound the devises of
such as are opposed enemies to his truth and glory.

mythological beast's head


