THE REQVESTS PRESENTED UNTO THE FRENCH KING, By the General Deputies of the
Reformed Churches of FRANCE.

Together with his Majesty's Answers thereunto.

LONDON. Printed for Nathaniel Butter and William Sheffard. 1623.

To the King.
Sir,
YOur most humble and obedient Servants and Subjects of the RELIGION, thoroughly
informed of your Majesty's Royal inclination to re-establish the ruins of
your poor people, have charged the general Deputies, which it has pleased
your Majesty to grant them, with infinite wishes and acclamations to be vowed
unto the assured settling of this so much desired Peace, to the end that for as
much as they find themselves penetrated with so celestial a benefit, they may
seek the continuance thereof, with the constancy of their submissions, and by
the only recourse, which they have unto your Clemency and Justice, they may
give a notable testimony, that they aspire unto no assurance or refuge more
availeable against the violence of such as trouble them, and that oppose the
power of your Laws, then with most humble requests and supplication, to invoke
the firmness of your inviolable Word, and the observation of your so
authentical Briefes. For seeing that the outrages which are done them do
strike directly at the reverence of your Protections, and devide that which the
Peace and their obedience ought to join under the felicity of your
Commandments, they earnestly beseech your Majesty, to weigh their most humble
remonstrances in that balance of equity, which makes your Scepter so just and
redoubtable, and that you will be pleased to cut off with the sword which God
has put into your hand, the violent infringements of your gracious
concessions, to the end that relying in a true confidence on the wisdom and
goodness of your holy administration, they may be always retained within the
fidelity and true obligations of your pure and entire service.

I.
Wherefore to enjoy a full effect of your justice, they most humbly beseech
your Majesty would be pleased to send into your Provinces, personages both of
the one and the other Religion, endued with that affection which is requisite
for the Peace, to the end they may the more profitably put your Edicts and
Declarations in execution there, and take order in all places for the
supplications, and necessities of your people of the Religion.

Answer.
THe King has deputed and dispatched away Commissioners, as well Catholics
as of the pretended Reformed Religion into the Provinces where they are judged
necessary, for the execution of his Majesty's declaration of the 20. of October
last.

II.
ANd imparting your compassion and clemency to those of your Towns, which
have rendered you such obedience, that thereby you were pleased to grant us the
Peace, your Majesty is most humbly brought to ordain, that the garrison which
for many months has been with so much oppression at Montpellier, may be
withdrawn from thence, according to your Royal promises, and in regard of the
misery and mortality which is in the Town.

Answer.
AFter satisfaction has been made to that which was ordained by the
Declaration of the 20. of October last, his Majesty will take order for the
contents of the present Article.

III.
ANd that conformably to the particular Brief, which it has pleased your
Majesty to accord unto, nothing may be innovated in your said town of
Montpellier, and expressly in that which concerns their Consullships; and that
also the innovation made concerning the Consullship, called de Mer, may be
repaired, considering the obedience which is rendered unto you there, in the
demolishment of the fortifications, in which labor the inhabitants continue
with great charge, care, and diligence.

Answer.
THe Election of the Consulls de Mer, of the said Town of Montpellier, having
been made according to an Arrest contradictorily given in the Chamber of the
Edict of Castres, nothing can be altered or changed therein. As for the
Election of the other Consulls of the said Town, his Majesty's intent is, that
it should be done with the ordinary forms, and according to the liberties and
privileges thereof.

IIII.
YOur Subjects of the Religion also for to take away all occasion of distrust
and fear, having given satisfaction to your Majesty's pleasure, concerning the
razing down of the Forts of the Isles of Olleron and de Re; may it please your
Majesty in like manner to ordain, that the Fort erected before your Town of
Rochell may be demolished, as it pleased your said Majesty to promise.

Answer.
Upon hearing the report of the Commissioners, which his Majesty has sent to
the said town of Rochell, his Majesty will take order for that which is
contained in the present Article.

V.
ANd as God is all mercy, so like unto him, whose image you bear, may it
please your Majesty to grant unto a great number of persons, of all ages,
detained for being in the last War, or for Religion, in your Galleyes, with
nakedness, rigor, and insupportable usage, their pardon and liberty; and the
same liberty to all others that are prisoners for accusations, depending upon
the times and affairs of the said troubles, whether they be found judged or
no; which favor, pardon and liberty, is accorded unto them by the 73 Article of
the Edict which it has pleased you to confirm.

Answer.
His Majesty will deliver the prisoners of war, detained at this present in
the Galleys; and for those which are accused of particular crimes, he will take
order by the ways of Justice.

6
Your Majesty, by your Letters of declaration of the 24 of April, 1621, has
willed that your Subjects, which remain in your obedience, shall enjoy the
grace and concessions granted unto them, as well by your Majesty, as by the late
King, Henry the Great, of glorious memory: Nevertheless, the last year 1622,
they have been wholly deprived of the money which your Majesty was accustomed
yearly to cause to be distributed to them, by Monsiur du Candal the
Commissioner for it, whereby their poor Churches are in particular so
disaccomodated, that they are constrained to have recourse unto your Majesty,
and beseech you (as most humbly they do) to appoint a stock of money unto the
said du Candal for the said year, at leastwise for the entertainment of the
Pastors of the Provinces which remained in your obedience, and which were feign
to borrow for to buy themselves meat, and to supply their other necessities.

7
Likewise, they most humbly beseech your Majesty, that according to the Grant
you were pleased not long since to make unto your said Subjects, you would be
pleased to ordain, that the said du Candal may be furnished with good and
valuable assignations, for the entertainment and relief of their Ministers
during the present year: and for the pensions of the parties of the petit
Estate, which it shall please you to erect; as also for the entertainment of the
places which it pleased you to leave in their guard; And that all these
assignations may be paid in such manner as it has pleased your said Majesty,
and the said late King to grant unto them by the Briefes which they have had
heretofore.

Answer to the 6. and 7.
The Kings affairs not permitting him to satisfy the suppliants for that,
which concerns the time past, his Majesty for the time to come will cause
good and valuable assignations to be delivered to the said du Candal for the
relief and entertainment of the said Ministers, as also for the payment of the
pensions contained in the petit Estate which he means to erect. As for the
Garrisons, the Brief of the 24. of October last shall be observed.

8
And forasmuch as there rests great and notable sums unpaid of the
assignations wherewithal the said du Candal was furnished in the years 1620.
and 1621, which the Receivers and Farmers upon whom the said assignations were
laid, keep still in their hands, they most humbly beseech your Majesty to
ordain that all delays set apart, he may be satisfied the said remainders.

Answer.
The said du Candal presenting his request to the Council, order shall be
taken for him therein.

9
The Churches of the Province of Gex having enjoyed entertainment for their
Pastors out of the Ecclesiastical reuennues of the said Province, until the
year 1601, and for many years after, under the late King Henry the great, and
till such time as it pleased your Majesty by an Arrest of your Council of the
5 of December 1612, to take away the said Ecclesiastical lands, and in
exchange thereof to ordain that 3600 livers should be paid them yearly, the
said sum of 3600 livers to be leuyed upon the 45000 livers of augmentation,
granted to those of the Religion, which money was paid them by the said du
Candal until the month of October, 1621: May it please your Majesty to
command they may enjoy the effect of the said Grant and Exchange, and to that
end cause necessary assignations to be given to the said du Candal, as well for
payment of the arrerages, as of that which is to come

Answer.
The King will take order hereafter, for that which is contained in the present
Article, according as is abouesaid.

10
May it please your Majesty also, to extend your liberality so far forth as
to furnish your subjects of the Religion in your city of Paris with a stock
sufficient for re-edifying and reestablishment of their church and other
buildings for the place of their exercise, which were burnt, demolished, and
the most part of the materials carried away in the popular tumult that happened
in the year 1621, notwithstanding that your said Subjects kept themselves
within the terms of obedience, and thereby under your Majesty's safeguard and
protection.

Answer.
His Majesty referres the re-establishment of the said Church to the care and
diligence of the Suppliants.

11
And after the same manner entreating your subjects of the said profession in
your City of Tours, may it please you Sir to furnish them with the sums
which your Majesty, of your grace granted unto them for the re-edifying of
their Church; the Site and place whereof, may it please your Majesty to
continue unto them, as that which was adjudged them by the Commissioners, after
hearing of the whole Clergy, the Courts of Justice and the City, and also was
bought, built, and peaceably enjoyed by them, until the troubles of the year
1621, in the possession whereof, they were not only maintained by the Edict of
98; but also by those of the years 1610 and 1612, and more especially by your
Majesty's last declaration.

Answer.
The Commissioners deputed for the Province of Touraine, shall take order that
the Suppliants may have a commodious place for the exercise of the pretended
reformed Religion. As for the re-establishment and re-edifying of their Church,
his Majesty referres the care thereof unto the Suppliants.

12
The same request is made unto your Majesty, for the re-edifying of the Church
of Bourg, in the place which they of the Religion were possessed of, by the
judgment and ordinance of the Commissioners, but now are kept from enjoying it.

Answer.
The Commissioners which are to be sent into Bresse, shall take order for that
is contained in the present Article, so far forth, as shall stand with reason.

13
Pleases your Majesty to be informed, that the inhabitants, professing the
reformed Religion, in your Town of Villemur, are molested in the liberty of
their Consciences; deprived of all exercise of piety; excluded from public
office, and greatly ouercharged by the Garrison there. They also of Fontenay le
Comte, are chased away and interdicted from Preaching and Prayer, neither can
they have their Church again, which is even quite ruined, nor is their Pastor
suffered so much as to enter into it, nor are they permitted to bury their
dead, but contrariwise endure all excess of charge and taxations, and upon
their complaints are sent away to your Council: Whereupon may it please you,
Sir, to deliver them from such oppressions, and letting them enjoy the fruit
of the Peace, ordain the re-establishment of their Religion, their Churches,
their Pastors, the surety of their Sepultures, and whatsoever else
appertains unto your Justice in other their grieuances.

14
May it please your Majesty in like manner to ordain the said re-establishment
of the Exercise at Lusson, where it is denied unto them of the Religion,
contrary to the publication of your Declaration, although they carried
themselves in all obedience, and that the said Exercise has been continued
there for 55 years together, even during all the time of the last wars, and
government of Monsieur Roches Baritault.

15
They of the Religion also are disturbed in the said Exercise at Talmont, the
Cannon having been planted against them, upon their assembly to hear a
Sermon. Likewise at Surgers, the Lady of the place has forbidden to Preach
there, although it was permitted them all the time of these last troubles: So
in like sort at Baignols, at S. Gilles in Languedoc, at Figeac in Quercy, and
at Vic in Armaignac, from whence Monsieur Testas the Minister was expelled, and
dares not return thither, nor can be therewith any safety: wherein your
Declaration being violated, may it please your Majesty to command the
re-establishment of the said Churches, and of the said Testas; as also that of
the Church of Quilleboeuf and the Pastor thereof, who a long time has sued to
be restored.

Answer.
To the 13, 14 and 15 Articles, the Commissioners are particularly charged to
see that the Suppliants may receive satisfaction touching their demands,
according to the tenor of the Edicts and the said Declaration.

16
And whereas the Catholics of your Town of Poictiers have imposed the sum
of 1200 livers upon those of the Religion, for the entertainment of a guard
which they used in these troubles, and whereinto they would not admit any of
the aforesaid Religion, may it please your Majesty to discharge them of it, as
of an imposition that is not reasonable.

Answer.
The 16 Article shall be communicated to the Mayor and Sheriffs of Poictiers,
that upon hearing of them order may be taken for it.

17
Further they beseech your Majesty to ordain, that the Edict of Exchange
touching the Churches of your Sovereignty of Bearne, may in all points be
effected, as it pleased you to accord, by the Brief given at Montpellier. And
that the Exercise of hte Religion, and the Ministry may be restored in your
Town of Nauarrins. That in consideration of the Cession of other Churches,
they of the Religion may be maintained in the possession of the Churches, bells
and Churchyards, which was granted them by the Commissioners, or by the
Parliament upon their report. That the Colleges and Academies may be
re-established there, with payment of the stipends which were formerly allowed.

Answer.
The King will cause that to be carefully accomplished and observed, which was
accorded to them of the pretended reformed Religion, by the Brief of the 24.
of October last.

18
And because Justice is that which most imports your Authority, and the
conservation of the Peace; May it please your Majesty to ordain the speedy
re-establishment of the Courts of Justice equally compounded of Catholics, and
those of the reformed Religion, in places and Towns where they were wont to
be. And that during the time of attending the effect of the said
re-establishment, the Courts of Parliament may be interdicted from taking
notice and judging of causes appertaining to them of the Religion: And that all
appeals, either verbal or written, interiected by them before Judges, or
Commissioners, that are to give Arrests and judgments, may have the like
effect, as if they were relieved by Royal Letters, according to the 45 Article
of the Edict, and the 6 of the Conference at Nerac.

Answer.
His Majesty intends that the Court of Justice of the Edict of Languedoc, which
only remains vn-re-established, shall be restored as soon as may be in the
Town of Castres, according to the said Declaration.

19
By the 6 Article of the Edict, and the 2 of the particulars, and other answers
made to the Requests, they of the Religion find themselves to be justly
discharged from contributing to the constructions and reparations of the Church
and the dependances thereof, as a thing contrary to their consciences.
Notwithstanding which, the Catholic inhabitants of Arnay le Duc sue to your
Council for leave, to impose generally on the Commonalty, as well upon those
of the Religion, as upon themselves, the sum of 6000 livers, to build a Church
for the Capuchins, which would be neither reasonable, nor conformable to your
Edicts: Wherefore, may it please your Majesty, to declare all your subjects of
the Religion to be quit, and exempted from payments, and contributions of the
like nature, and that the said second Article of the Particulars may be
executed.

Answer.
It is granted.

20
It is well known, that during these last troubles, they of the said Religion
have suffered much violence from their contraries: As in the town of
Romerantin, where the place of their Exercise in the suburbs of the said town
was twice burnt. But that which is yet more strange is this, that since the
Peace which it pleased your Majesty to grant unto your said Subjects, the
Church which had been built long ago in your town of Iergeau was quite pulled
down, and the demolishments carried clean away, by means whereof they of the
Religion are deprived of their Exercise: Wherefore they most humbly beseech
your Majesty, that in reparation of so notable an infraction of your Edicts and
Declarations, you will be pleased to ordain, that the said churches may be
re-edified, and the Exercise re-established in the said towns of Iergeau and
Romerantin.

Answer.
The said Commissioners deputed for those places, have in charge, to take order
for that which is contained in this Article.

21
Your towns of Saint Foy and Bergerac, most humbly beseech you, Sir, that you
will be pleased out of your singular bounty to discharge them of the
oppressions, which with so much excess they have suffered a long time, letting
your said town of Bergerac fully enjoy the benefit of your inviolable
promises, by hindering so many innouations, and the building of the Cittadell
there, which is now erecting no withstanding that your Subjects of the Religion
have maintained themselves in the firmnes of a most humble subjection and
obedience toward your Majesty, thereby laboring to deserve the effect of the
said Royal promises, their liberty, and the peaceable exercise of their
Religion.

Answer.
His Majesty will write unto my Lord the Duke of Espernon, Governor and
Lieutenant general in Guienne, to take order that the Inhabitants of the said
towns of Bergerac and Saint Foy may be relieved, and favorably entreated upon
all occasions that shall present themselves: and to see that the men of war
in the said places, may live in such order, as they may receive no kind of
oppression from them.

22
And lastly, for the easing of your people of the Religion, for the settling of
them in a sure confidence and further confirmation of the Peace, which you have
vouchfased to grant them: may it please your Majesty to raze out all the market
of diffidence that are yet remaining, and for that one to discharge the many
Garrisons that still continue in the lower Languedoc, and other Provinces, under
the command of such as are not very well affected to your said subjects of the
religion: that so there may be no retardment of the effects of that obedience,
which both they will and ought to render you, as well in the demolishments you
have ordained, as in all other things which it shall please you to command them.

Signed Montmartin Deputy General. Maniald Deputy General.

Answer.
The King will take order herein, as he shall see it to be best for his service.

Signed LOVYS. And a little lower, Philipeaux.




FINIS.

